Ayssi comensan las paraulas de Albucasim .	Thus begin the words of Albucasim.
O, filhs, pus yeu he a vos complit aquest libre, le qual es le derier de la sciencia de medicina, per le compliment de lu so consequit la fi en lu, e per las exposicios de lu, e per las declaracios de lu, es a mi vist que yeu complesca aquel a vos am aquest tractat, le qual es partida de la operacio am ma, so es cyrurgia.	Oh, children, now that I have completed this book, which is the last of the science of medicine, for the completion of which I have labored to its end, and through its explanations and declarations, it is clear to me that I have composed this treatise for you, which pertains to my surgical operations.
Quar la operacio am ma es prostrada en nostre regio e en nostre temps de tot privada, entro que fort leu peric la sciencia de lu, e le vistigi de lu es ostat; e no romasero de lu sino alcunas petitas descripcios en les libres dels Antics, les quals mudero las mas e endevenc ad aquels error e heyssitacio entro que son clausas las entencios de lu e es elonguada la forsa de lu e l’art.	For our operation of the hand is practiced in our region and in our times as almost entirely private, although it is a science greatly needed, and its practice has been obscured; and only some minor descriptions remain in the books of the Ancients, which they modified to correct errors and hesitations that have closed off understanding of it and weakened its force and art.
E es vist a mi que yeu vivifique aquela am ordenacio de aquest tractat en aquela segon la via de exposicio e de declaracio e de abreviacio; e per que vengua am las formas dels ferramentz de cautheri e dels autres instrumentz de la obra cum sia per addicio de la declaracio, e per preparacio de lu, la qual causa es necessaria.	And it is evident to me that I should revitalize that part of this treatise in accordance with the way of explanation and declaration and abbreviation; and for the sake of adding the forms of the cautery tools and other instruments of the work, which serves as an addition to the declaration and preparation thereof, a necessary cause for this.
Mays la causa per la qual no es atrobat bo artifex am la sieua ma en aquest nostre temps, es quar la art de medicina es longua, e que cove le sieu actor denant aquo esser excercitat en la sciencia de anotomia la qual recontec Gualia entro que sapia les juvament dels membres e las formas de aquels, e la conjunctio e la separacio de lor; e haia la conoyssensa dels osses, dels nervis e dels lacertz, e·l nombre de aquels, e la egrecio de lor; e de las venas pulsatils e de las quietas, e dels locs del eyssiment de lor.	More the cause why a good craftsman does not apply his hand well in our time is that the art of medicine is long and that its practitioner must be trained in the science of anatomy which Galen knew well enough to understand the youth of the members and their forms, and the conjunction and separation of them; and had knowledge of the bones, the nerves, and the arteries, their number and their diseases; and of the pulsating and quiet veins, and of their places.
E per aquo ditz Ypocras que am u nom es mot, mays en l’obra petit, e majorment en la art de la ma.	And for this Hippocrates says that in name is little, but more in the work and especially in the art of the hand.
Mays nos ja avem dit de aquel en l’introit de aquest libre; quar qui no es scient aquo que li avem dit de anotomia, no es evacuat que no caia en error per la qual siran mortz les homes, ayssi cum yeu he vist trops de aquels, quar alscus son formatz en esta sciencia e gettan se de aquela ses sciencia e ses experiment.	More we have already spoken of this in the introduction to this book; for who does not know what we have said about anatomy will not be free from error due to which many men will die, as I have seen too many of them. For some are formed in this science and proceed from that same science and its experience.
Quar yeu vi un metge folh e enperit aver incidit un apostema escrophilos en le colh de una femna, e incidic alcunas arterias del colh per que fluic gran sanc entro que la femna cazec morta entre las mas de lu.	For I saw a physician who, being foolish and ignorant, incurred an apostematia scropholosa in the neck of a woman, and injured some arteries so that great blood flowed out, causing the woman to die among convulsions.
E vi un autre metge que pres que el traguera una peyra d’un home le qual avia procesit en sa etat, e la peyra era gran, e venguet a lu e trayssec aquela peyra am un tros de la vesiqua, per que aquel home al tertz dia es mort.	And there was another doctor who almost drained a stone from a man who had suffered in his condition, and the stone was large, and brought it to him and dried that stone with a piece of the bladder, so that that man died on the third day.
E yeu ja apelat fuy a estrayre aquela, e vi que per la grandesa de la peyra e per la disposicio del malaute conogui subre lu que morira.	And I have already called for the extraction of that, and I see that due to the size of the stone and the position of the patient upon him, he will die.
E vi un autre metge le qual prenia stipendic de un duc de nostra terra per cyrurgia, e endeven a un crastrat negre le qual era deves lu fractura en la coyssa de lu; e perparec le metge am la sua ignorancia, estrayssec la fractura, sobre la plagua, am pulvinas e astelas am forta strectura, e no layssec a la plagua espiracio.	And there was another doctor who took payment from a duke of our land for surgery, and he arrived at a blacksmith who had suffered a fracture in his thigh; and because of the doctor's ignorance, he extracted the fracture, over the wound, with pillows and splints of strong structure, and did not allow the wound to breathe.
E aprop le desliet segons los sieus desiriers, e aprop le relieg, e aprop le leyssec per alcus jorns e comandec que nos deslies le liament; e estec ayssi entro que la coyssa e·l pe foro apostematz, e pervenguet a perdicio.	And then the dislocation according to his desires, and then the rejoining, and then the letting it rest for several days, commanding us to loosen the bandage; and we stayed like this until the thigh and foot recovered, and proceeded to our detriment.
E yeu fuy apelat a lu, e aparelhegui a desliar le liament, e conseguida es tranquilitat e enayssi amermet de sas dolors.	And I was called to him, and prepared to dislodge the stone, and peace and attempt to alleviate his pains was achieved.
Mays empero ja corrupcio era confermada en le membre, per que no pogui refrenar aquela, e no cessec perambular la corrupcio en le membre entro que·l malaute peric.	But however, corruption was confirmed in the member, because I could not restrain that, and did not cease to walk the corruption in the member while the illness persisted.
E vi un autre metge le qual perforec un apostema cancros, e fo ulcerat aprop alscus dias, entro que foc magnificada la malicia de lu am lo senhor de lu.	And I saw another doctor who incised an oncotic abscess, and it became ulcerated over several days, during which the evil increased in it with the lord of it.
La qual causa es quar le cranc caut es pur de humor melencolic, lahoras no cove que pervengua a lu am ferr de tot, sino que sia an membre le qual suffertes que de tot fos hostat.	The cause is that the disease is purely of melancholic humor, and does not reach everywhere, but affects only the member that suffers from everything being hostile to it.
E per aquo, filhs, necessari es a vos que la operacio am ma sia devisada en dos devesios: so es en operacio a lu qual es associada salut, e en obra am la qual es perilh en las majors disposicios.	And for this reason, my children, it is necessary for you that the operation be devised in two divisions: one where the operation is associated with health, and another where the work is perilous in the major dispositions.
E yeu ja he exsitat aquo en tot loc de aquest libre en le qual venc opperacio en la qual es error e temor; per que necessari es a vos que guardetz aquo e layssetz aquel, per que les folhs no atrobo via a parlar e a vos desonestar.	And I have already existed here in all parts of this book where the operation is filled with error and fear; therefore, it is necessary for you to guard this and leave that, so that the leaves do not find a way to speak and deceive you.
E donc prenetz las vostras armas am sollicitut e am proteccio de Dieu , e les vostres malautes am falicitat e am fermetat.	And therefore take your weapons with diligence and protection of God, and your patients with felicity and firmness.
E usatz de la milhor via per la gracia de Dieu perdusent a salut e a lausabla successio, e laysatz las malautias terriblas de difficil sanacio, e ostatz las vostras armas de aquo que vos fa temer, per so que ysitatio en vostra fe e en le vostre nom no vos evasisca: quar mays es remanent a la vostra gloria, e pus aut en le mon e en derier a las vostras sanctitatz.	And use the best way by the grace of God seeking salvation and laudable success, and lay aside the terrible illnesses difficult to cure, and let your weapons be of what fears you, so that sitting in your faith and in your name you are not deceived: for more remains to your glory, and rather in this world and after in your sanctity.
Gualia ja diyssec en alcunas sieuas monicios:	Galia already has been dissected in some surgical texts:
“No mediquetz malautia mala, per so que mals metges no siatz nompnatz”.	Do not treat illness falsely, so that bad doctors will not be named.
E yeu ja he devesit aquest libre segontz tres capitols.	And you should now have dedicated this treatise according to three chapters.
Comensa la divisio del libre, e primier de la primieyra partida.	Begin the division of the treatise, and first of the first part.
Le primier capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, en las formas dels instrumentz e en les ferrementz dels cauteris, e de aquo que necessari es en la opperacio.	The first chapter ordered of the foot, concerning the forms of the instruments and the tools of the cautery, and what is necessary in the operation.
La divisio de la segonda partida.	The division of the second part.
Le segon capitol, de siccio e perforacio, e de ventosas, e de plaguas, e de extractio de sagetas e de semblantz ad aquelas, tot capitolat e ordenat de las formas dels instrumentz.	The second chapter, on drying and puncturing, and on cups, and on blisters, and on the extraction of arrows and similar things, all categorized and ordered by the forms of the instruments.
Divisio de la tersa partida.	The division of the third part.
Le tertz capitol, de restauracio e de dislocacio, e de curacio de torcio e de semblantz ad aquels; capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, e de las formas dels instrumentz.	The third chapter, on restoration and dislocation, and on the cure of sprains and similar conditions; a chapter ordered by the head between the feet, and by the forms of the instruments.
De cauteri am foc e am medicina aguda e rememoracio de la opperacio.	On the cautery with fire and with sharp medicine, and recall of the operation.
Am aquel comensa le tractat de tot le libre.	With that, the treatment of the entire book begins.
Cove que yeu digua la qualitat dels juvamentz de aquel cauteri e dels noccumentz de lu, e en qual compleccio sia prohibit cauteri.	Know what I will say about the quality of the coals of that cautery and its effects, and in which conditions the use of a cautery is prohibited.
Donc dic que·l sermo de la qualitat del juvament de cauteri e del noccument de lu es sermo lonc e prolixs, e subtil per sciensa, e secret amaguat; e ja de lu a parlat gran multitut de savis, e de lu se son desacordatz, et a mi abasta un petit dels sermons de lor, temen perlonguacio.	Therefore, I say that the discourse on the quality of the cautery coals and its effects is long and prolix, subtle by science, and hidden in secret; much has already been said about it by wise men, and they are divided in their opinions. It suffices me to touch on a little of their sermons, fearing length.
E donc dic que cauteri comfereys a tota compleccio universalment la qual es am materia o ses materia, exceptat dos compleccios, las quals son compleccios caudas ses materia .	And therefore say that a cautery is applied to all compositions universally which are of flesh or sinew, except two compositions, which are compositions of sinew.
En la compleccio cauda e secca am materia se desecordero; quar alcus dyssero que cauteri es juvatiu ad aquela, e les autres dyssero le contrari de aquel, que cauteri no es convenient en malautia la qual es per qualiditat e per siccitat, quar natura del foc es qualiditat e siccitat, e enconvenient es que malautia cauda e secca am aquo que es caut e sec sia sanada.	In the sinewy and dry composition, the flesh will desiccate; for some said that a cautery is beneficial for that, while others said the opposite, that a cautery is not appropriate in malaise which is due to quality and dryness, for the nature of fire is quality and dryness, and it is inappropriate that such malaise, being sinewy and dry, be healed by that which is cautery and dry.
E diysec aquel que ditz le contrari de aquel, que per cauteri es fayt juvament en tota malautia cauda e secca que ve en les cors dels homes, quar quan tu comparas le cors de home e las humiditatz de lu a la compleccio del foc, atrobas le cors de home freg.	And say that those who say the opposite, that by cautery one is cured in all sinewy and dry malaise that comes in men's bodies, for when you compare man's body and its humors to the composition of fire, you find man's body humid.
E yeu dic per le sermo de aquel, que esperiment aquo ja a mi alscunas vetz a descubert.	And I say according to the saying of that, which I have already experienced many times myself.
Mays empero no cove que vengua sobre aquo aquel que ja es exproat e excersitat en le capitol de cauteri per derier exercici, e a conogut la diversitat de la compleccio dels homes e la disposicio de las malautias en lor meteyssas, e las causas de aquelas, e·ls accidentz de lor, e l’espasi del temps de aquelas.	But I do not consider that it comes to those who have been extensively trained in the Capitol of Cauterization by long practice, and who know the diversity of human composition and the disposition of maladies in their varieties, and the causes of those, and the accidents related to them, as well as the duration of those.
Mays en las autras compleccios, no es sobre vos temor, e majorment en las malautias fregas e humidas, quar ja totz les metges se son acordatz sobre aquels, e no so desecordatz en le juvament am cauteri en aquelas.	In other complications, it is not about fear, and especially in wet diseases, for all doctors agree on those, and are not divided in using cautery in them.
E sapiatz, filhs, que del secret de curacio per cauteri am foc e de la bontat de lu, so sobre cauteri am medicina comburent, es quar le foc es simple, la accio del qual no perven sino al membre le qual es cauterizat e no notz al autre membre am lu ajustat sino am petit nocument.	Understand, sons, that the secret of curing by cautery with fire and its goodness lies in the burning medicine, for fire is simple, its action reaching only the member being cauterezed and not affecting other members much except with slight harm.
Mays la accio de medicina comburent perven ad aquel en les membres le qual de lu alunhat, e fort leu fa venir en le membre malautia de dificil sanacio e fort leu ausit.	But the action of the burning medicine reaches that member from which it is distant, and strongly causes in the affected member a disease difficult to heal and quickly makes it worse.
Mays le foc, per la sua sublimitat e de la sua substancia bontat, no fa aquo sino que superfluisca E ja es a nos conogut per experiment e per longitut de servitut de studi am l’art sobre le veritat de las causas; e per aquo yeu so excusat de la longitut del sermo E si no fos que no es legut al mieu libre en aquest pausero a vos secret amaguat am le foc, e la qualitat de la operacio de lu en les cors e de la sieua expulcio per la qual expellis las malautias, am sermo philosophic demostratiu, le qual siria acuit en las vostras pessas.	But fire, by its sublimity and the goodness of its substance, does not cause anything other than to superfluously consume. And we are already familiar with this through experience and long service in studying the art concerning the truth of causes; and for this reason, I excuse myself for the length of my discourse. If it were not that this is not written at liberty in this pause, and that you secretly hide your knowledge about fire, and the quality of its operation on bodies and its expulsion through which you expel diseases, then this discourse would be a philosophical demonstration, which would benefit your minds.
E sapiatz, filhs, que els se desacordan del temps en le qual es convenient far cauteri e pausan le milhor temps de primaveyra.	And know, sons, that they disagree about the time at which it is convenient to make a cautery and when the best season is spring.
E yeu dic que cauteri es convenient en tot temps, per so que le nocument per le temps accident es submergit en le juvament de aquo que am le cauteri es atirat, e majorment si le cauteri es per dolors o de dolors necessaries, fortz e fistinas, las quals no suffertan tarditat per so que es temut de aquelas que vengua malicia, que es major que petit nocument entrant per lo temps.	And I say that a cautery is convenient at all times, because the damage from the accidental season is submerged in the youth of what is burnt by the cautery, and especially if the cautery is for pains or necessary pains, strong and fistulas, which do not suffer delay because it is feared of those that come evil intentions, which are greater than minor damage entering through the season.
E aysso no catz en vostras pessas, o, filhs, aquo no estiman sino le poble vulguar e les fols metges, so es que ad aquela malautia que es sanada per cauteri no es redicio tot temps, e pausan aquel consequen.	And thus they do not place a cautery on your feet, or, sons, they only consider the common people and the unskilled physicians, for they believe that the ailment that is cured by a cautery is not effective at all times, and they avoid such a consequence.
E la causa no es ges ayssi quo els cuydan per aquo, quar cauteri no es sino en loc de medicina la qual altera la compleccio e esicca las humiditatz las quals son causa per que veno las dolors.	And the reason is not that they care for this, for a cautery is nothing more in medicine than a means to alter the composition and dry the humors which are the cause of the venous pains.
Mays empero cauteri superflueys sobre la medicina per volicitat de la sua valitut e vertut de la sua operacio e grandesa del sieu senhor.	But nonetheless, a cautery can be superfluous in medicine for the sake of the speed of its efficacy and the virtue of its operation and the greatness of its lord.
E es possible que la sua malautia retorne en alcuna hora del temps, segon la compleccio del malaute e la locacio de la sua malautia, e la vertut de lu, e aquo que es preparat en le cors de lu de la agreguacio de las superfluitatz en lu, e aquo que es pervengut a lu en la sua acquisicio en viandas e semblantz de aquelas causas; sino que la malautia en la qual sia aministrat cauteri sia malautia subtil en membre de paucas superfluitatz e humiditatz, ayssi cum cauteri de dent per dolor e semblantz ad aquel, possible es que en lu no retorne aquela dolor, mays aquo se fa en petitz.	It is possible that their illness returns at some point in time, according to the complexity of the disease and the location of their illness, as well as their virtue, and what is prepared in their body through the aggregation of superfluities within them, and what is acquired by them in food and semblance of those causes; but the illness in which a cautery is administered is a subtle illness in a limb with few superfluities and humidities, just as a tooth cautery for pain and similar to that, it is possible that such pain does not return, more so when this is done in small amounts.
E mays sermo vulgar es que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, e es sermo dreyturier, no ad aquo que els entendo en lu, quar els crezo que no es curacio que aprofieyta am medicina ni am autra causa aprop cauteri.	It is more common to say that a cautery is the last remedy of medicine, and it is a surgeon's saying, not what I understand by it, for I believe it is not a cure that benefits either medicine or any other cause except the cautery.
E la causa es en contrari de aquo; e la entencio que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina no es sino quan administram las manieyras de curacio en alcunas malautias, e aquelas medicinas no conferieysso, e aprop en la fi de la causa aministra hom cauteri, e aprofieyta ad aquela.	And the cause is contrary to this; and I understand that a cautery is the last remedy of medicine only when one administers the methods of cure in some illnesses, and those medicines do not work, and near the end of the treatment, one administers a cautery, which then benefits that condition.
E lahoras de aqui cat16 que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, no segon la entencio la qual entendo les vulgars e trops dels fols metges.	And at this point, the last remedy of medicine is the cautery, not according to the understanding which I understand the vulgar and too many of the foolish doctors.
E diyssero les antics que cauteri am aur es milhor que cauteri am ferr, e no diyssero aquo sino per la equalitat del aur e sublimitat de la sua sustancia.	And the ancients said that a cautery made of gold is better than one made of iron, and they did not say this only because of the equality of gold and the subtlety of its substance.
E diyssero que le loc de cauteri no fa brac, cum aquo no sia absolutament vertat, quar yeu ja he aquo proat e he atrobat que aquel no fa aquo sino en alcus cors ses les autres, e cauteri am aquel es bo e milhor que am ferr ayssi quo els diyssero; mays empero quan tu fas cauteri am foc am de aur, no es a tu declarat, quar es egnit segon la quantitat que tu vols per la rugor de l’aur, e quar prepara a recebre freg; e si ajustas sobre lu ignicio se fon l’aur per le foc, e caso en le foc alcunas laminas per que le artifex catz per la occupacio de aquel.	And they said that the place for a cautery does not burn, since it is not absolutely heated, for I have already tested this and found that it does not heat all bodies equally, and a gold cautery is good and better than one made of iron as they say; but when you make a cautery with fire on gold, it is indeed so, for the gold ignites according to the quantity you want due to the corrosion of the gold, and prepares to receive fire; and if you adjust over this ignition, the gold melts by the fire, and settles in the fire with some sheets so that the craftsman can cut through its occupation.
E per aquo es fayt cauteri am ferr deves nos pus leugerament e pus propdanament a rectitut de operacio.	And for this, when making a cautery of iron, you should use it more lightly and more properly according to the correctness of the operation.
E yeu ja he ordenat aquest capitol en le cauteri segon capitols, et he ordenat aquels del cap entro les pes, per so que aleugo le demandant aquo que vol de lu.	And I have already ordered this chapter concerning the cautery according to other chapters, and I have ordered those of the foot within, so that I delay the one requesting what they want from me.
De cauteri de dolor de cap per frigiditat e humiditat.	Of the cautery for headache due to cold and humidity.
Le capitol primier.	The first chapter.
Aquesta cauterizacio confereys a la humiditat e frigiditat sobre le servel accident de la qual so doas causas, so es causa de soda e multitut de flux raumatic, apelat corissa, del cap a las partidas dels huelhs e de las aurelhas fluent, e multitut de dormir, e de dolor de dentz e del guolayro, e universalment de tota malautia que ve per fregiditat, ayssi cum paraliticament, sodo e apoplexio, e semblantz en aquelas malautias.	This cautery treats cold and humidity over the servant accident of which there are two causes, causing soda and much traumatic flux, called corissa, from the head to the parts of the hollows and the ears flowing, and much drowsiness, and tooth pain, and the gullet, and universally all illness that comes through coldness, thus as paralytically, soda and apoplexy, and similarities in those illnesses.
La forma de aquesta cauterizacio es aquesta, que primieyrament comandes al malaute que sia evacuat am medicina lacsativa le cap mondificant, per tres o per quatre nueytz, segon que exhigeys la vertut del malaute e la edat de lu e la sua costuma.	The form of this cautery is as follows: first, I command the patient to be evacuated with a laxative medicine on an empty stomach for three or four nights, according to the power of the illness and the age of the patient and their habits.
E aprop comanda li que raza le sieu cap am razor, e aprop fay aquel sezer entre las tuas mas sobre una banca cayrada e que pause las suas mas sobre le pietz sieu.	And then command him to shave his head with a razor, and place that razor between your hands on a leaning bench so that he places his hands on his own foot.
E aprop pausa la razit de la tua palma aprop le pous sobre la razit del nas entre les huels sieus.	And then pause the razor from your palm near his mouth between his palms.
Mays empero, cum le tieu dit del mieg loc es pervengut, signa aquel loc am tenta, e aprop igneys le cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma:	More over, since the correct location has been determined, mark that location with a probe, and then heat the olive cautery of which this is the form:
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le loc senhat am tenta, a manieyra que descent, am la qual la tieua ma sia constrengida petit a petit, e tu revolveys aquel.	And then place that cautery over the marked location with a probe, in such a way that it descends gradually, and your hand is gradually constrained, and you rotate it.
E aprop leva la tua ma leugerament e reguarda le loc, e si veses ja del os esser descubert alcuna quantitat del cap, ayssi cum la quantitat de gra de errs, lahoras eleva la tua ma, e si no torno la tua ma am aquel ferr, am autre de aquel, si es enfrigidat, entro que sia vist del os aquo que yeu he dit a tu.	And then lift your hand slightly and look at the location. If you see any part of the bone being revealed through the flesh, as much as an err (a small amount), then lift your hand. If not, return your hand to that iron or another, if it is cooled, so that what I have said about it can be seen on the bone.
E aprop pren un petit de sal e disolveys aquel sobre le loc e leyssa aquel per tres jorns.	And then take a little of salt, dissolve it in that [solution], and leave it there for three days.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto enbegut en boder e leyssa aquel sobre lu entro que sia destrusida la scara del foc.	And then place it on the wound in the groin and leave it there until the scar of the burn is destroyed.
E aprop cura le loc am anguent tetrafarmacon entro que sia sanat.	And then treat the area with an ointment of tetrafarmakon until it is healed.
E ja diyssero que quant la plagua roman uberta, tant mielhs geta le brac, per que es milhor e mays juvatiu.	And they also say that when the wound is opened wide, it heals better, because it is better and more beneficial.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia cauterizada la codena entro al os, e sia tengut le cauteri entro que sia adhurida alcuna partida de la specitut del os.	And some of them say that the knee should be cauterized inside the bone, and that the cautery should remain until part of the bone tissue is burnt.
E aprop sia ras aquo que es adhust del os, e aprop sia curat.	And then scrape what is attached to the bone, and then treat it.
E diyssero autres que am lo cauteri pervengua al derier, entro que enprema en le os forta enprecio entro que le os caga, e aquesta es la forma de alphecati petit:	And others say that the cautery should reach the marrow, pressing firmly on the bone until the bone cools, and this is the method of Alphécat:
E estiman de aquel loc expiran la vapors del cap.	And they estimate from that place exhale the vapors of the head.
E sia tenguda la plagua uberta per lonc temps, e aprop sia curada entro que sia consolidada.	And let the wound be kept open for a long time, and then cure it before it becomes consolidated.
Mays a mi no so vistas aquestas doas specias de cauteri de tot, sino en alcus homes segon via de temor; e layssa aquel, deves mi, milhor es am salut, quan es; quar le cap es develitat per solucio de continuitat de lu ayssi cum havem testificat en les autres membres, e majorment quan le cap del malaute es de freul natura.	But I have not seen these two types of cautery for all, except in some men according to a way of fear; and leave that one, my advice is, it is better to be healed when possible; because the head is developed by solution of continuity of the skull as we have testified in other members, and especially when the head of the patient is of foul nature.
E la specia de cauteri primieyra es mays salva e milhor deves mi; e de aquela husi e am aquela obra am salut.	And the first type of cautery is more safe and better, my advice; use that one and do that work for healing.
Capitol segon.	Capitulum secundum.
Del cauteri del cap.	On the cautery for the head.
Quan en tot le cap accideys dolor cronica e longua e aquo es en le malaute prolonguat, e usa de gerras e de cochias e de capipurges e de emplaustres e de guatz e de cadels e de gualinas e de semblantz, e majorment si ja es cauterizat am un cautere le qual recontam e no aprofieyta a lu deguna de aquelas causas, lahoras considera quar si le cap del malaute es de fort creacio en la sua natura; e no es freul et atroba mot gran freg, lahoras aquel cauterisa am autra cauteri dejos aquel un pauc.	When chronic and long-lasting pain occurs in the head, and this has been prolonged in the patient, and they use various treatments such as powders, seeds, cap purge, plasters, poultices, cats, bandages, and similar remedies, and especially if the head has already been cauterized with a cautery which does not improve the condition for any of these causes, consider whether the head of the patient is of strong constitution in its nature; and there is no foul or great cold, then this cautery should be reconsidered. Leave that one for another cautery and use it only slightly.
E aprop cauterisa aquel sobre le corn del sieu cap am cauteri entro que la codena es partida.	And then cauterize that on the top of his head between where the vein is divided.
Incisa la codena e sia descuberta del os la quantitat la qual havem recontat e cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en la partida deriera del cap en le loc le qual es apelat vas, — e es aquel loc en le qual es pausada ventosa.	Incise the vein and the quantity of the opening as we have counted, and cauterize that with a cautery at the back of the head in the place where it is called vas, — and this is the place where suction is applied.
Et alleuja la tua ma en aysso, e no descobras le os, quar le malaute per aquo atroba mot gran dolor diversa de la dolor de totz les autres cauteris del cap.	And lift your hand here, and do not uncover the head, for the patient finds great pain from this different from the pain of all other head cauterizations.
E yeu diyre aquest cauteri en son loc, quar cove que·l cauteri am le qual so cauterisatz les corns del cap e le occiput es pus subtil cauteri que aquel am le qual es cauterisat le mieg loc del cap; e aquesta es la forma de lu.	And I will say this cauterization in its place, for know that the cauterization with which one cauterizes the horns of the head and the occiput is a finer cauterization than that with which the middle part of the head is cauterized; and this is its form.
Capitol ters.	Head complete.
De cauterisacio de emigranea no-antiqua.	Of the cauterization for new migraine.
Quan endeve en la partida del cap dolor sodo, o es stenduda dolor entro al uelh, sia evacuat am medicinas le cap mondificantz, e sia aministrada l’autra curacio, la qual yeu he dita en las devesios de las malautias; e tot no aprofieyta, lahoras cauterisacio en lu es en dos manieyras: o cauterisacio am medicina acuta comburent, o am ferr.	When there is a sharp pain in the back of the head, or a prolonged pain in the temples, medicinals should be applied to the head to relieve it, and another treatment, which I have described for diseases, should be administered. If this does not help, then cauterization can be performed in two ways: with a burning acute medicinal substance, or with iron.
Mays cauteri am medicina comburent es que tu prenguas una dolsa de alh, e escorgas aquela e abcindas las extremitatz de lu de amdos les caps.	May a cautery that burns in medicine be that you take a piece of aloes, and soak it there and bind the extremities of it from both ends.
E aprop incideys le loc de la dolor en la templa am una lanceta lada entro que sia en lu feyt loc dejos la codena, entro que sia occultada.	And then apply the spot of pain on the temple with a lancet laid gently there and make the cut where it is to be hidden.
E aprop strenh sobre lu am stopada per descent constreccio, e layssa aquel per le spazi de tres horas; e aprop deslia le e tratz le alh, e laysa la plagua per dos o per tres jorn, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto submergit en boder entro que le loc fassa brac.	And then strengthen the place where it is stopped by descent compression, and leave it for the space of three hours; and then remove and cut the aloes, and leave the wound for two or three days, and then cover over the spot submerge in balsam until the area heals.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then treat that wound with ointment until it is healed.
E si tu voys, fe aquo am alcunas medicinas comburentz las quals yeu he scriutas en le douse tractat de medicinas comburentz.	And if you wish, use those wounds which some medicines burn, the ones I have written about in the second treatise on burning medicines.
Mays la cauterisacio am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: igneys per cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	May the cautery be performed in this manner: heat it with fire, of which this is the form:
e es apelat claus clavilhs, quar le cap de lu es ayssi cum forma de clavel en le qual es alcuna curvitat, e·n le mieg loc de lu es eminensia petita.	and it is called a key lock, because the head of it has the form of a clove and in the middle location there is a small projection.
E aprop pausa sobre loc de la dolor, e rete la tua ma — per que no sia adhurida la arceria la qual es dejos — e revol le ferr petit a petit am velocitat.	Then place your hand over the location of the pain, and hold it back—so that the artery which is left is not burned—and slowly rotate the small iron bit.
E si la quantitat de lu que es adhurida per la specitut de la codena ayssi quo la maytat de lu, e elava la tua ma per so que la arteria no sia adhurida la qual es dejos, per so que no vengua flux de sanc.	And if the amount that is burned due to the strength of the cauterization is as much as its size, lift your hand so that the artery which is left is not burned, so that there be no flow of blood.
E aprop enbibeys coto en aygua de sal e pausa aquel sobre le loc, e layssa aquel per tres dias; e aprop pausa coto mulhat am boder, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Then immerse it in salt water and place it over the area, leaving it for three days. Then place it near a warm place, and apply ointment until it is healed.
E si voys, cauterisa am la extremitat del cutellari segon cauteri, e guarda te de incisio de arteria en aquesta emigranea propriament no-antiqua.	And if you do, cauterize at the tip of the knife edge according to the cautery, and guard against cutting the artery in this new migraine.
Capitol quart.	Capitulum quartum.
De cauterizacio d’emigranea antiqua.	Of the cautery treatment for old headache.
Quan tu curas emigranea am aquo que havem dit de la curacio precedent, e aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias, e no aprofieyta la curacio, e vezes per la malautia que no abasta a lu aquo que havem dit del primier cauteri am medicina o del cauteri am foc, lahoras cove que tu igniscas le cauteri cutellar entro que sia albificat, pus que significas sobre le loc de la dolor am linha de longuesa de la qual sia la maytat del dit, o quays aquel; e depausa la tua ma per una veguada e strenh aquela entro incidiscas la arceria e pervengua entro al os.	When you cure a headache as we have said in the previous treatment and as we have said in the divisions of diseases, and if the treatment is not effective for the disease that does not respond to what we have said about the first cautery or the cautery by fire, then you must heat the surgical cautery until it becomes white-hot. Place your line over the site of the pain along its length, or where it may be. Then hold your hand for a moment and strongly apply the heated cautery to penetrate into the artery and reach the bone.
Empero necessari es a tu que guardes de la continuacio de la mandibula, la qual es mauguda deves la masticacio, e que le lacert no sia adhurit e le nervi le qual mau aquela, e que no s’endevengua espasme.	However, you must be careful with the continuity of the jaw, which is affected by chewing, and ensure that the tendon is not adhered and the nerve which supplies it is intact, to prevent spasms.
E si es sobre la custodia e cautela de flux de sanc de l’arteria que es abciza, quar en la abcizio de lu es temor, e majorment ad aquel le qual ignora aquo que fa e no es studios e esproat; e layssa la operacio en lu al comensament.	And if it concerns the care and precaution of the flow of blood in the artery that is amputated, for in its amputation there is fear, especially for one who does not know what to do and is not studious and hesitates; and leaves the operation at its beginning.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio del regiment de flux de sanc accident de la arceria segon la sieua manieyra, en le sieu loc de aquest libre.	And I will recall the treatment for the flow of blood事故，根据其方式，在此自由之地的相应位置。
E si veses de aquesta malautia que no abaste aquest cauteri e veses le cors del malaute tollerable, cauteriza aquel en le mieg loc del cap ayssi cum havem recontat, e cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And if you see this illness in someone who does not tolerate this cautery and you see the body of the patient tolerable, apply the cautery in the middle of the foot as we have recounted, and cure the wound until it is healed.
E si voys, aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le capitol de streccio de arceria am cauteri havent dos cotels, e es milhor cauterizacio aquesta e mays conferent.	And if you see, apply the cautery which we have said in the chapter on the strengthening of the artery with two knives, and this is a better and more effective cauterization.
Capitol .v.	Chapter V.
De cauterisacio de las dolors de aurelhas.	On the cauterization of ear pains.
Quan en la aurelha ve dolor per freg e es curat am causas lacsativas e am l’autra curacio la qual he dita en la divisio, e no es remauguda la dolor, lahoras igneys le cauteri, e es aquest le qual ha nom puncta, del qual aquesta es la forma:	When there is pain in the ear due to cold and it is treated with hot applications, and another treatment as I have said in the division does not relieve the pain, then apply the cautery, which is called puncta. This is its form:
E aprop puncta aprop la ignicio, e sia menat al enviro de tota la aurelha ayssi cum roda es revolguda, o en le circuit de quascuna essemps si la dolor es en quascuna.	And then puncture near the beginning, and extend it to the vicinity of the whole ear as if a wheel is turned, or in the circuit of each place if the pain is in any part.
Alonga te am le cauteri de la razit de la aurelha pauc a pauc pus que aias senhat le loc am tenta.	Lengthen the cautery from the rim of the ear gradually placing it where you have tested the location.
E si le cauteri de detz puntz en tota aurelha, e quays aquela, e aprop cura les locz entro que sian sanatz.	And if the cautery with ten points around the entire ear, and cool it, then quickly cure the places between as they heal.
Capitol .vi.	Capitol. vi.
De cauterizacio de turtura.	Of the cautery for the tortura.
Turtura la qual es curada e am cauterizacio no es sino de las specias las quals veno per flecma, segon que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias.	Tortura which is cured and treated with cautery is none other than due to the species that the vein carries, as we have said in the divisions of ailments.
Esquiva cauterizacio de la specia que endeve per siccacio o per spasme del nervi.	Avoid cautery for the species that flows due to dryness or spasm of the nerve.
Quan tu curas aquela specia de turtura am jerras e capipurgi e guarguarismes, e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas le malaute am tres cauteris: la i deves la razit de la aurelha, e·l segon un petit dejos le sieu templar, e le ters deves la conjunccio de doas labias.	When you cure that species of tortura with jerras, capipurgi, and guarismes, and your cure does not agree, then when you cauterize the maladie, you should make three cauteries: the first on the rim of the ear, the second a small one in its temple, and the third on the junction of two lips.
E pausa lo tieu cauteri per le contrari de la partida malauta, quar mollificacio no ve sino en la partida que apar sana.	And place your cautery on the opposite side of the affected area, for softening effect occurs only in the part that is healthy.
E la forma de cauterisacio es que cauterizas aquel am le cauteri en le dreyt de la extremitat de la aurelha pus sobirana un petit sobre le corn del cap, e en le templar autre, la longuesa del qual sia segon la longitut del dit pous, e depausa la tua ma am cauteri entro que sia comburida la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena.	The method of cautery is to apply the cautery on the outer side of the ear near the tip of the ear, placing a small piece of cloth over the top of the head. On the temple, the length of which should be according to the length of the affected part, and then place your hand with the cautery within until the quantity of the material of the codena is burned.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri, e es specia del cutellari, la forma del qual es denant mesa.	This is the method of the cautery, and it is specific to the barber-surgeon, whose form is given below.
Mays empero pus subtil es que aquel un pauc ayssi co vesas; e cove que cotel en lu de superflua groceza un pauc.	However, more subtle is that you should add just a little as you see fit; and cut away a small amount to avoid unnecessary crudity.
E aprop cura le loc am aquo que es denant procezit entro que sia sanat.	Then cover the area with what is given and proceed to treat it until it is healed.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter VII.
De cauterizacio de apoplextia antiqua.	On the cautery treatment for old apoplexy.
Quan apoplextia es antiquada e curas aquela am aquo que havem dit e no confereys la tua medicacio e le malaute no ha febre, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris: sobre totz les corn del sieu cap; e am cauteri e le mieg loc del cap, ayssi cum havem dit; e am cauteri en le coguot.	When apoplexy is old and you have cured it as we said before, and there is no fever in the patient, then cauterize that area with four cauteries: over all the horns of its head; and with a cautery on the middle part of the head, as we said; and with a cautery on the neck.
E la manieyra del cauteri es fayta segon que es desus dit.	The method of cauterization is done as described above.
E ja es cauterizat sobre la boca del estomac; e es mays derier; e aprop sia curat am aquo que procezeys.	And it has already been cauterized on the opening of the stomach; and it is more towards the rear; and then it is cured as you proceed.
Capitol .viii.	Capitol. viii.
De cauterizacio de obblivio fayta per flacma.	Of cauterization for oblivion through flame.
Cove que sian donatz al malaute en le comensament jerras grans e pilulas le servel mondificantz.	Cover what is given to the patient at the beginning with large stones and pills of the service purgative.
E aprop ras le cap tot del malaute e pausa sus le coguot de lu emplaustre de cetre descrit en le tractat dels emplastres.	And then wrap the head of the patient entirely with plaster and place it on the neck as described in the treatise on plasters.
E pausa aquel alcunas veguadas, quar aquel es manieyra de cauteri.	And pause that for some beats, as that is a way of cautery.
E fay aquo segon aquel meteys orde le qual ja he dit.	And do this according to the method and order which I have already said.
E donc si per aqueles sanat bo es; e sino, lahoras fay a lu tres cauteris en la deriera partida de sieu cap, les quals sian deysendentz de la partida pus sobirana del cap entro a la partida pus dejos del col.	And therefore, if these good methods help; and if not, then make three cautery marks on the rear part of his head, which should be descending from the upper part of the head to the lower part of the neck.
E pausa entre quascun cauteri la grossetut del dit, e aprop cura lo cauteri am aquo que es procedit.	And pause the duration of a finger's breadth between each cautery, and proceed with the cautery as previously instructed.
Mays si tu vos addicio e le malaute es aquo tollerant, lahoras fay a lu cauteri en le mieg loc; e si voys major addicio, lahora cauteriza aquel sobre les dos corns.	But if you add more oil and the patient can tolerate it, then make the cautery in the middle location; and if you add a greater amount, then cautery that area above the two horns.
Aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat; e sia le cauteri olivar segon la forma denant donat.	And proceed with the cautery while it is healing; and let the cautery be in the shape as shown previously.
Capitol .ix.	Capitulum ix.
De cauterisacio de parazili e de mollificacio de tot le cors.	On the cautery of piles and the soothing of the whole body.
Cove que tu procesiscas en mondificacio del cap am jerras e am aquo que havem dit; e aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap, e am cauteri sobre totz les corns del cap, e am cauteri sobre la deriera partida de lu, e am tres cauteris sobre les spondils del col.	Cover that you process in modification of the head with stones and as we have said; then raise the head of the patient, and place a cautery there on the middle part of the head, and a cautery on all horns of the head, and a cautery on the back part of it, and three cauteries on the vertebrae of the neck.
E si es necessari en la malautia de mollificacio del cors de trops aquel e les malautes tollerantz e la malautia es fort, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e dererament am cauteri entro que sia comborit de la codena mot de lu, e aleva la tieua ma.	And if it is necessary in the illness of softening of the body for more and the gout is stubborn and the illness is strong, then place a cautery there with four cauteries on the vertebrae of the back, and behind that with a cautery where it is combined from the main spine of it, and lift your hand.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat, e aquest sia cauteri olivar.	And then cure that where it is healed, and this be an olive cautery.
Capitol .x.	Capitulum.
De cauterisacio de epilemcia.	On the cautery treatment for epilepsy.
No es cauterizat le epilemtic sino aquella epilemcia es per flecma.	No is it cauterized the epileptic, but only if the epilepsy is due to phlegm.
E donc cove que mondifiques le cervel de lu al comensament de lu am yeras e am l’autra curacio la qual havem dicta en la divisio quan le malaute es gran e es tollerant la exceperacio de las medicinas.	And therefore modify the patient's pulse at the beginning of his artery and the other cure which we have mentioned in the division when the illness is great and resists the exception of medicines.
E si es enfant le qual no sufferte las medicinas, lahoras aministra guarguarissmes e mastiguatoris le servel mondifican, denant aquo per motz dias, am bonifficacio de las viandas.	And if it is a child who does not tolerate the medicines, then for several days beforehand, the assistant modifies their diet and administers guar gums and masticators.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en le mieg loc del cap segon la manieyra precedent, e am autre cauteri en le occiput de lu, e sobre quascun corn del cap sieu cauterisa.	And then over the head of the patient, and then cauterize that spot on the middle part of the head according to the preceding method, and another cauterization on the occiput, and over each horn of the head he cauterizes.
E si le malaute es fort e es tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteris les quals he ditz, en havent paraliticament e mollificacio del cors sobre les spondils del col e les spondils del dos.	And if the illness is strong and resists, then cauterize those spots as I have said, while maintaining paralysis and softening of the body around the vertebrae of the neck and the vertebrae of the back.
E sia cauteri olivar segon qu’es precedit.	And use olive oil cauterization as previously described.
Mays si le malaute es enfant, lahoras pausa cauteri subtil segon aquesta manieyra.	But if the patient is a child, then use a subtle cauterization according to this method.
Capitol .xi.	Capitol xi.
De cauterizacio de melencolia.	Of the cautery for melancholy.
Quan las causas de melencolia so humiditatz corrompudas e flacma gros, lahoras cauteriza aquel am les cauteris les quals havem ditz en le havent paralisi.	When the causes of melancholy are corrupt humors and large flames, then use the cautery as we have said in the chapter on paralysis.
E si la causa de melencolia es superfluitat declinant a melencolia, e le cors del malaute es humit, lahoras da ha beure aquo que mundifica le cervel de lu segon aquo que ha precedut en la divisio.	And if the cause of melancholy is excess moisture declining into melancholy, and the patient's body is humid, then have him drink what purifies his brain according to what was mentioned in the division.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop fay tortora decentment fayta de li sobre le cercle, e aprop depausa aquela en le mieg loc del cap.	Then place your hand on the patient's head, and properly make a torcortura (a circular incision) on it above the middle of the head.
E le malaute sia sesent cayrat, e sia tengut de tota partida.	And the patient should be bathed and kept from all sides.
E aprop pausa liniment; et es pus digne de boder antic de ovelhas.	Then apply a liniment; it is most worthy of being used as a remedy for sheep.
E escalfa aquel sobre le foc per calefaccio temprada per mesura, le qual le dit sufferta quan es mes en lu.	And heat it over the fire for a moderate warming, which the patient can bear when it is more intense.
E aprop vuo’ aquel en le mieg loc del cap de lu en le cercle, e leysa lu entro que sia enfregidat.	And then place something in the middle of his head in the circle, and let it be fumigated.
E fay aquo am le malaute en tota semmana una veguada, am le autre regiment de lu bo entro que sia sanat; o si vols, cauteriza aquel fazen petitz puntz segon lo mays de lu, sino que tenguas la ma am un cauteri ayssi ordenat: aquesta es specia de cauteri la qual humecta le cervel am equalitat.	And do this to the patient every week once, and follow the other regimen until it is healed; or if you wish, make a cautery there by making small points according to its size. Otherwise, keep your hand on an ordered cautery: this is a type of cautery which moistens the brain in equal measure.
E aprop pausa aquel coto enbegut en boder o en grays de gualina.	And then place that cauterized area on the edge or in the folds of cloth.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter XII.
De cauterisacio de aygua descendent en le huel.	On the cautery for water descending into the heel.
Quan a tu es declarat le comensament de aygua en le huel per les senhals les quals yeu he ditz en la divisio, lahoras comensa e dona en beure al malaute aquo que mondifique le cap de lu, e guarda aquel de totas humiditatz.	When the beginning of water in the heel has been declared by the signs which I have said in the division, then begin and give to drink to the patient what modifies the humor, and keep that free from all moisture.
E fay aquel suzar en banh en degu per alcus jorns.	And let that sugar be immersed in wine for several days.
E aprop comanda a lu que raza le sieu cap, e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap; e aprop cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre dos templas si es le comensament de ysement de aygua en dos huels, o de la un latz si es comensamen de l’aygua en un huel.	And then command him to raise his head, and cautery that point in the middle of the head with a pointed cautery; and cautery that point with two cauteries on the temples if it is the beginning of scalding water in both hands, or of one burn if it is the beginning of water in one hand.
Incideys am cauteri totas las venas e arcerias las quals so dejos la codena; e sian les cauteris en aquela lonh en la latitut de las templas.	Apply the cautery to all veins and arteries which are left without a seal; and let the cauteries be in that length along the temples.
E guarda te de fluxs de sanc quan es cauterizat; e si veses de lu fluxs de sanc, osta le am alcuna medicina, la qual es a tu possible.	And guard against fluxes of blood when it is cauteryed; and if you see fluxes of blood, apply some medicine which is within your reach.
E yeu vindre am savieza la qual es en extraccio de arcerias e am abscizio de aquelas e cautela de fluxs de sanc.	And I will bring with me wisdom which is in the extraction of arteries and in their ligation, and caution against fluxes of blood.
E alcunas vetz es cauterizat en le cervitz dejos dos osses am dos cauteris dererament produzitz.	And sometimes the neck is cauteryed leaving two bones with cauteries deeply produced.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter XIII.
De cauterizacio de lacrimas antiquas.	On the cautery of ancient tears.
Quan lacrimas dels huels so antiquas assuduament e per las venas e arterias las quals so en le loc manifest del cap defora e es verificat que aquo es superfluitatz frejas flecmatiquas, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri le qual havem recontat en le capitol de comensament de aygua cazent en les huels, e am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos templas, e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos osses.	When tears from the eyes are ancient and through the veins and arteries which are in the manifest place of the head above, it is verified that this is excess phlegmatic fluid, then cauteryize that with a cautery as we have recounted in the chapter of the beginning of flowing water in the feet, and cauteryize in the middle of the head and two cauteries on the neck leave two temples, and two cauteries on the neck leave two bones.
E si indigeyses de addicio, lahoras cauteriza aquel en tot latz de la coa del huel sobre la extremitat del sobrecilh am petit cauteri.	And if you suffer from addition, then cauteryize that on the entire length of the vein in the eye at the outer corner of the eyebrow with a small cautery.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter XIV.
De cauterizacio de fetor de nas.	On the cautery for the foulness of the nose.
Quan tu medicas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no aprofieyta la tua medicacio, lahoras tu aparelha e dona en beure al malaute las cochias per tres noytz; e aprop ras le cap de lu, e cauteriza le am cauteri migier am cauteri olivar.	When your treatment for what we have said in the division is not effective, then you prepare and give to drink to the patient three times the decoction of wormwood; and place a cautery on his head, and cauteryize with a medium-sized cautery over an olive branch.
E aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri clavelh am dos cauteris sobre les dos sobrecilhs dejos les cabels un petit.	And then sear that spot with a pointed cautery on both supraorbital areas, leaving the hair a little.
E guarda te de la arceria que no incindas aquela.	And guard that the artery not be burned there.
E del cauteri clavilh aquesta es la forma.	And of the pointed cautery, this is its form.
Capitol .xv.	Capitol. XV.
De cauteri de mollificacio de palpebras dels huels.	Of the cautery for the softening of the eyelids of the foot.
Quan la palpebra del huel es mollificada per malautia o per humiditat, lahoras cauteriza aquela palpebre1 am un cauteri am aquest cauteri lunar; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When the eyelid of the foot is softened due to gout or humidity, then sear that eyelid with a cautery like this lunar one; and this is its form:
E si vos, cauteriza aquel sobre les dos sobrecils un petit am dos cauteris en tota partida, e sian elonguatz de las timporas.	And if you, sear that spot on both supraorbital areas a little with two cautery points entirely, and let them be long from the temples.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la quantitat del sobrecil.	And let the length of each cautery be according to the size of the supraorbital area.
E no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri, mays segon la quantitat que la tersa partida de la palpebre sia adhurida.	And do not press too hard with your hand on the cautery, but according to the amount that the free edge of the eyelid is adhered.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter XVI.
De cauteri de la palpebre del huel quan les pels so convertitz a las partidas dedintz e punho le huel.	When the skin is converted to the inner parts and hand of the eyelid, use a cautery.
Quan les pels del huel son convertitz a las partidas dedintz ayssi que pungo le huel, cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, quar cauteri o es am fer o es am medicina comburent.	When the skin of the eyelid is converted to the inner parts, I must probe the eyelid. The cautery in such cases should be used according to two methods: either by applying a hot cautery or by using a burning medicine.
Si am cauteri de lu am foc, comanda al malaute denant aquo que leyse les sieus pels ayssi cum aquels les quals les mundan, entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz; e si punho aquel deves le lor naysement, lahoras tu strenh les huels de lu am una benda per so que no sia maugut entro que·ls pels sian nascutz.	If the cautery is hot, command the patient to look away from where the skin is burned as if they were gazing at those who clean their skin, keeping it prolonged and equal. And when probing, you should grasp its root; then strengthen the eyelids with a bandage so that it does not stick until the skin has grown back.
Donc cum siran nascutz e engualhatz, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop senha sobre la palpebre dels huels de lu am tenta, am senhal le qual sia segon la figura de fulha de merta, e sia le comensament del senhal prop dels pels.	Then, when they have grown and equalized, place the head of the patient's probe in their temple, and then press over the eyelid of the affected side, marking it with a mark shaped like the leaf of a laurel, which will be the beginning of the mark relative to the skin.
E aprop pausa coto enbegut en album de huou o en mucillatge de ptilli sobre le huel.	And then place something hot in a bag or on a poultice over the affected area.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu.	And then heat the cautery, of which this is the form.
E aprop cauteriza sobre la figura la qual as senhada, petit a petit, em motas veguadas, entro que sia comburida la superficia de la codena la qual es ayssi cum fuelha de mirta, tota aparent propriament.	And then cauterize over the figure which is marked, little by little, in stages, while the surface of the wound, which is like a bay leaf, is being burned entirely appropriately.
E senhal de sanetat de la tieua obra es que tu vegus la palpebre de l’huel ja esser contrayta e·ls pels de lu esser elevatz deves la punctura del huel.	And a sign of recovery from your work is that you see the eyelid of the affected area already contracted and the skin around it elevated due to the puncture of the wound.
E donc eleva la tua ma e laysa aquel per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eredicada la scara.	And then lift your hand and leave it there for three days, and then place it over the wound between the burns to allow the scar to heal.
E aprop cura aquela am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then apply ointment until it is healed.
Mays si retorna per les pels alcuna causa aprop lor naysement e la palpebra es mollificada, lahoras fay autra vetz le cauteri sobre aquel tot ayssi cum avias fayt primieyrament.	But if for some cause the skin returns to the area near its origin and the eyelid becomes softened, then make another pass with the cautery over that area as you did at first.
Mays si les pels so en la palpebra dejos, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que sia elevada al sieu loc natural e sia engualhat e que les pels no punhan le huelh.	But if the skin is on the eyelid, then cauterize it there where it is elevated to its natural place and make it equal so that the skin does not remain uneven.
Mays le cauteri am medicina comburent aquest es que comandes al malaute que leyse les pels entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz, e aprop sia fayta de carta de drap la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	But the cautery for medical burning commands the patient to extend the skin where it is to be made equal, and then make the shape of a mulberry leaf from linen cloth.
E aprop pren de sabo conogut e de caus viva ana unc. i, o quays aquo, e aprop mescle3 aquelas causas be, e fay aquo am festinacio per so que no sia enfregidat; e aprop expandeys de aquo sobre la carta la qual es fayta ayssi cum forma de fulha de mirtra, e pausa aquel sobre la un huel od amdos; e pausa dejos le huel coto enbegut en album de huou, e el cap del malaute sia en le tieu se.	And then take a known soap and fresh fat, one pound or as much as is needed, and mix these fats well, preparing it without rubbing; then spread this mixture over the linen cloth which is made thus in the shape of a mulberry leaf, and place that on the skin or both; place the remaining part cut into small pieces in honey, and position the patient's head at the center.
E pausa le dit sobre le medicina e prem aquela un petit e no la mauguas entro que lo malaute senta la mordicacio de la medicina, quar mordicacio es en lu ayssi cum de foc.	And place that on the medicine and press it slightly so that the patient feels the bite of the medicine, for the bite is like that of fire.
E donc cum percevera aquo que el atrobo mordicacio, lahoras leyssa la medicina e mau aquela am le tieu dit; donc cum cessa la mordicacio, lahoras remau la medicina he lava le huel am aygua; e lahoras considera si vezes la palpebra ja es levada ayssi cum es lavada deves la costriccio am foc o am incisio, quar lahoras esta be; e si no torna sobre aquela de la medicina sobre le loc en le qual no ha empremut la medicina e no se denigra entro que sia engualhada la tua operacio e sia contrayt le huel.	And thus, when you observe that the inflammation is biting, then remove the medicine and press it at the center; as soon as the biting ceases, replace the medicine and wash the area with water; then consider if the eyelid has already been lifted, and if so, apply heat or incision, for then it is good; if not, return to applying the medicine in the place where it did not bite, ensuring that your operation remains equal and contracts the area.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eradicada la codena de la adhustio, e aprop cura aquel am enguent deafinicon o am autre entro que sia sanat.	And then place your hand over the groin area between which the root of the adhesion is to be removed, and cure that with an ointment or something else in which it is healed.
E es necessari a tu, deves la tua operacio que guardes am pervigil diligencia que en le huel no caia re de la medicina, e si la palpebre aprop alscus dias es mollificada e alcuna causa dels pels punh en le huel, lahoras itera la tua medicina sobre aquel loc le qual de la palpebre es mollificat, e propriamen ayssi quo as fayt al comensament, e aprop enaviro lu entro que sia sanat.	And you must, with due diligence, ensure that no error in the medicine occurs during your operation. If the eyelid becomes softened or some cause of skin swelling appears on it within a few days, then repeat your medication on that place where the eyelid has become softened, and proceed in this manner as you did at the beginning, and soon let it heal completely.
E aquesta es la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	This is the way to treat a cataract.
E sapias que les huels dels homes son diversificatz segon la magnitut e la parvitat, e donc segon aquo es fayta la tua contraccio.	And know that the eyelids of humans are diverse in size and shape, and therefore your incision should be made according to this.
E no sira amaguada la via de rectetut ad aquel al qual es studi en aquesta art.	And the way of making the incision should not be hidden from him who studies this art.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter XVII.
De cauterizacio de fistula que es en le lacrimal de l’huel.	On the cautery treatment of a fistula in the lacrimal duct of the eyelid.
Quan tu curas fistula am aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquela segon aquesta manieyra: comanda al malaute que pause le cap sieu en le tieu se, e tengua le cap de lu alcun ministre entre las tieuas mas en tal manieyra que no sia maugut ni agitat am le sieu cap.	When you treat a fistula as we have said in the divisions of the ailments and do not apply your treatment, then when you cauterize it according to this manner: command the patient to place his head on your thigh, and let another minister hold the head of the patient between your knees in such a way that it is neither hurt nor agitated.
E aprop pausa coto enfus en album de huou o en mucellage de ptilli sobre le huel de lu.	And then place the hot iron on the flesh in the thigh or over the swelling of the boil above the hip.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then heat the cautery, and this is its form:
le qual sia conquau, ayssi cum es forma de cana o de pena de voltor, de la una extremitat am la qual es fayta lo cauteri.	which should be cylindrical, as is the form of a cane or a bird's feather quill, from one end of which the cautery is made.
E si voys, sia penetrant entro a la autra extremitat.	And if you wish, let it penetrate into the other end.
E si vols sia sort ayssi cum tenta.	And if you want, let it be drawn out like a needle.
Mays empero aquel que es concau es milhor a la tieua obra.	Yet, however, that which is concave is better for your work.
E aprop prem la fistula si es uberta, e tra de lu sania et exsicca aquela.	And then press the fistula if it is opened, and draw from it clean and dry that which comes out.
E si no es uberta, lahoras obre aquela e extratz la poyredura de lu.	And if it is not opened, then open it and extract the pus from it.
E aprop pausa sobre lu le cauteri le qual sia be ignit, e te am aquel la tieua ma un petit deves le cauteri del huel a la partida del nas, per so que no erre la tua ma o le malaute sia enquietat, e lahoras pausa le cauteri en le grays del huel e corrompas aquel.	And then place the well-ignited cautery over it, and hold your hand a little below the root of the nose to prevent your hand or the patient from moving, and then place the cautery on the cheeks and destroy that area.
E donc si al comensament del tieu cauteri perve entro al os, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera le cauteri una veguada o dos, si mestiers era; e layssa aquel ayssi per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre aquel coto am boder e enviro lu am enguent exsiccatiu entro que sia sanat.	And so, if at the beginning of your cautery it goes into the mouth, that is good; otherwise, then reapply the cautery one or two more times if necessary; and leave it like this for three days, and then place a border around the area and apply an ointment that is dry until it heals.
Mays si eran passatz xi dias e no es sanat, lahoras pausa sobre lu medicina aguda corrosiva entro que l’os sia descubert e sia ras segon que conveneys en le sieu capitol.	But if it does not heal after ten days, then apply the sharp corrosive medicine until the bone is revealed and is scraped as you see fit in your chapter.
E es autra manieyra de cauteri de fistula la qual alscus primiers diysero: enten al loc de la fistula e fen aquela e aprop pausa en aquela fissura camaen subtil del qual es la forma de lu: E fon en aquela la quantitat de i unc de plom fundut; e te la tua ma am camaem am bona retencio, e no sia maugut le malaute per so que le plom fundut no pervengua al huel de aquel; e cove que pausas sobre le huel del malaute coto enfus en album de huou o en aygua, quar plom adhureys le loc de la fistula e sana aquela per sanacio meravilhora.	And another method of cautery for a fistula, which some first doctors will say: locate the place of the fistula and do it there and immediately pause at that fissure like a thin form of it. Then put in there the quantity of one ounce of melted lead; and hold your hand like well retained, so that the bad humor does not enter the hole where the melted lead does not penetrate; and continue to pause over the hole of the bad humor as in album of hoot or water, for lead adheres to the place of the fistula and heals it by a marvelous cure.
E si la fistula es sanada am aquo que havem dit del cauteri e de la curacio, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari aministrar trauc del nas e reduzir la fistula al cors del nas segon que vindra en son loc propri.	And if the fistula is healed as we have said of the cautery and the cure, that is good; and if not, then it is necessary to administer a draft from the nose and reduce the fistula to the body of the nose according to what will come in its proper place.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter XVIII.
De cauterizacio de la fendedura des potz.	On the cautery for the fissure of the foot.
Motas veguadas accideysso fissuras en las labias, e majorment en las labias dels enfantz.	Warts often cause fissures in the lips, and especially in the lips of children.
Donc cum tu curas aquelas fissuras am aquo que nos havem dit en las divisios e no aprofieyta la tua cura, lahoras igneys le cauteri petit cutellar segon aquesta forma que s’ensiec:	Then when you cure those fractures as we have said in the divisions and your cure does not improve, then heat the small surgical cautery according to this form that is taught:
E sia la conquavitat de lu segon la subtilitat de cotella.	Let the cavity of the wound be according to the subtlety of the knife.
Aprop pausa aquel init cuytadament en aquelas fissuras entro que·l cauteri pervengua al preon de las fissuras.	Then place that hot instrument in the fractures until the cautery reaches the depth of the fractures.
E aprop cura aquel am cerotz entro que sia sanat.	Then cure that with cerote until it is healed.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XIX.
De cauterizacio de fistula en la boca.	On the cautery treatment of fistula in the mouth.
Quan en la razit de uvula o en le paladar o en las razitz de las dentz endeve apostema e aprop fa brac, e aprop es rompuda, e aprop es antiquada, e corr brac e es fayta fistula, e aprop tu curas aquela e no aprofieyta a curacio, lahoras cove que tu igniscas cauteri segon la quantitat que sia receubuda en la fistula, e aprop met aquel ignit en le trauc de la fistola, e te la tua ma entro que pervengua le ferr ignit al preon de lu, e al derier de lu fazen aysso una veguada o dos; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que nos havem dit de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	When in the root of the uvula or on the palate or in the roots of the teeth an abscess forms, and then breaks, becomes old, and forms a fistula, and your cure does not improve, then heat the cautery according to the quantity received in the fistula, place that heated cautery into the tract of the fistula, and keep your hand there until the hot iron reaches its depth, and do this one or two times; then cure that with what we have said about the cure until it is healed.
E donc si la sania es abscindita e es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari de descubrir le loc e hostar le os corrumput segon que vindra en son capitol.	And if the abscess is incised and healed, that is good; otherwise, it is necessary to uncover the area and set the corrupted bone as will be described in its chapter.
Capitol .xx.	capitol.xx.
De cauterisacio de las dentz e de mollificacio de las angivas.	Of the cautery treatment of teeth and the softening of arteries.
Quan las angivas son mollificadas per humiditat e las dentz son maugudas, e curas aquelas am medicinas e no confereys, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra aprop aysso, enayssi que tu pauses la quanula sobre la dent e entromet en aquela le cauteri ignit festinantment, e te la tieua ma un petit entro que·l malaute cente la calor del foc a la razit de la dent esser pervenguda.	When the arteries are softened by humidity and the teeth are decaying, and you have treated those with medicines without success, then place the patient's head in warm water, and shortly thereafter heat the cautery to the form of which will be described below. Try to hold the cautery over the tooth while inserting it into the area, ensuring that the patient feels the heat of the fire at the root of the tooth so that the warmth reaches the tooth.
E aprop leva la tua ma, e aprop itera le cauteri alcunas veguadas segon que vols.	Then lift your hand, and repeatedly apply the cautery several times as you see fit.
E aprop le malaute huompla la sua boca de aygua de sal e tengua aquela per una hora, e pueys stupa aquela, quar la dent mauguda es fermada e la gengiva mollificada es strenguda e la humiditat corrompuda es exsiccada.	Then the patient should rinse their mouth with salt water and keep it there for an hour, then spit it out, as the decayed tooth is sealed, the softened gum is tightened, and the corrupted humidity is dried up.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI.
De cauterisacio de dolor de dent.	Of the cautery for tooth pain.
Quan dolor de dent es per fregiditat, o en lu es freg o verm, o no comfereys la curacio am medicina, lahoras cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am boder de vacas, o cauteri am foc.	When tooth pain is due to inflammation or there is a boil or abscess, and medical treatment does not bring relief, the cautery in that area can be performed in two ways: either with a bull's gallbladder cautery or with fire.
Cauteri am boder es que tu prenguas boder de vacas e bulhas aquel en culhe de ferr , e aprop pren coto e envolopa le sobre la extremitat de la tenta, e aprop enmergeys aquel am boder bulhit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolorosa festinantment entro que sia enfregidat.	The bull's gallbladder cautery is when you take the gallbladder of a bull and fill it with hot oil, then wrap this around the end of the lancet, and immerse the filled gallbladder in hot oil, placing it over the painful tooth rapidly before the oil cools.
E aprop itera aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la vertut del foc pervengua a la razit de la dentz.	And then repeatedly apply it several times before the heat of the fire permeates the pulp of the teeth.
E si voys, submergeys lana o coto en le boder desus dit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolent, e pausa sobre aquel ferr ignit entro que·l ferr pervengua al preon de la conquavitat de la dent.	And if you do, soak some wool or cloth in the bull's gallbladder mentioned above, and place this over the painful tooth. Then hold the ignited iron over it until the heat reaches the root of the tooth's cavity.
Mays empero la cauterizacio am foc es que tu atendas a la quannula de eram o de ferr, e sia en le cor de lu alcuna grocesa e la acuitat del foc no pervengua a la boca del malaute.	Moreover, however, the cautery with fire is such that you attend to the small opening of skin or iron, and in its core there must be some coarse material so that the sharpness of the fire does not reach the mouth of the patient.
E aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra, e pausa aquel sobre la dent e te la tua ma entro que·l cauteri sia enfregidat; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas quar la dolor sira remauguda o en aquel dia o en l’autre dia.	And then shape the cautery as it will appear, and place that part over the tooth and put your hand inside to ensure the cautery is well lubricated; and do this a few times to prevent the pain from worsening on that day or the next.
E cove que per empressio de aquel cauteri que·l malaute umpla la sieua boca de bon boder e tengua aquel per una hora e aprop scupa le; e aquesta es la forma del cauteri.	And ensure that through the impression of that cautery, the patient opens their mouth wide and maintains it for about an hour; and this is the shape of the cautery.
E cauteriza am qual que tu voys extremittat segon que a tu es possible.	And cauterize where you wish to stop according to what is possible.
E aquesta es la forma de la cannula:	And this is the shape of the catheter:
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter 22.
De cauterizacio de extrophulos.	On the cauterization of exostoses.
Quan extrophulos so de flecma e de humors fregas e no so hobedientz a digistio per medicinas e tu voys la digistio de aquelas leugerament, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri conquau la forma del qual es aquesta seguen, havent dos extremitatz hubertas per que yesca le fum deves le cauteri per l’autra extremitat, e pausa aquel ignit sobre aquel apostema una veguada, e autre si indigeyses de aquel, entro que pervengua al preon del apostema.	When hernias are caused by phlegm and humors that are not obedient to digestion through medicines, and you see the digestion of those lightly, then you apply the cautery to cover the form of which this follows, having two ends open so that you let the smoke issue from one end and the other, and place that ignited over that abscess for one minute, and another if you feel it necessary before it reaches the root of the abscess.
E si l’apostema es pauca, lahoras pausa le cauteri segon la quantitat del apostema, e aprop leyssa le per tres jorns e pausa sobre lu coto enfus en boder entro que sia remaugut aquo que·l foc ha comburit.	And if the abscess is small, then place the cautery according to the quantity of the abscess, and let it be for three days, and keep it over the hot spot between the time that the fire has burned out.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent e tentas e draps entro que sia sanat.	And then cure that with ointments and dressings until it is healed.
E la forma de la cannula o deu cauteri a tal es comveyter.	And the shape of the catheter or cautery is as follows.
Capitol .xxiii.	Capitulum XXIII.
De cauterizacio de rauquiera de votz e de constriccio de ale.	On the cautery for hoarseness and constriction of the throat.
Quan las humiditatz veno sobre le quanal del pulmo, e majorment quan aquo es am fregiditat de compleccio, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia evacuat al comensament am medicinas laxativas, e aprop cauteriza aquel deves la razit del golayro en le loc depremegut.	When the humidity of the wind affects the canal of the lung, especially when it is due to complex coldness, then it is advisable that the patient be treated with laxative medicines at the beginning, and afterwards cauterize the vein in the compressed area.
E guarda te que no pervenguas am le cauteri al golayro ni no comburas de la codena de lu sino un pauc.	And be careful not to apply the cautery too strongly on the vein nor burn the ligament of the leg, but only slightly.
E cauteriza aquel am autra cauteri deves la junctura del col en le derier espondil de lu.	And cauterize it with another cautery at the junction of the neck in the lower part of the spine.
E·l cauteri de lu sia clavilh sego la maniera precedent.	The cautery for the leg should be applied according to the previous method.
E aprop cura aquel am aquo que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And afterwards, treat it with what was prescribed until it is healed.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter 24.
De cauterizacio de malautia del pulmo e de tos.	On the cauterization for lung disease and cough.
Quan tos e malautia de pulmo so de humiditatz fregas e le malaute no ha febre ni tisic e es malautia antiqua, lahoras cauterisa aquel am dos cauteris sobre la furcula en les locz depremegutz leontz e buoytz; e am autra cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz entre dos mamillos; e sia le cauteri clavilh segon la forma precedent.	When cough and lung disease are caused by cold humidity, and the patient does not have fever or tuberculosis, and it is an old lung ailment, then cauterize the leg with two cauteries on the depressed areas of the furcula (wishbone); and with another cautery in the middle area of the foot between the two mammary bones; and apply the leg cautery according to the previous form.
E si vols, sia la tua cauterizacio punctan am le cauteri que es apelat puncta, la forma del qual precedeys en la ponctacio de dolor de aurelhas.	And if you wish, let your cautery point be made with the cautery that is called a puncta, the form of which you precede in the punctation of ear pain.
E sian puntz entro cays ad aquels; e aprop cura aquel am aquo meteys que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And make points inside the wound to those areas; and then cure that which you have placed inside as it heals.
E ya sia le cauteri haventz tres ramps quar cauterizacio es am aquel: am una veguada podes far tres cauteris segon aquesta forma:	And let the cautery have three spikes; for this cautery, you can make three points in one go according to this form:
Capitol .xxv.	Capitol.xxv.
De cauterizacio de titillic que es le cap del ajutori.	On the cautery for titillic, which is the head of the helper.
Quan le cap del ajutori es dislocat per causa de humiditatz lubricas e no es fermat en la hora del sieu retornament deves la sua dislocacio entro que sia a lu aquo costuma de retornar, e aprop per un petit movement es deslocat ayssi que s’endeve, ayssi cum nos havem testificat, lahoras cove que primieyrament redusiscas la dislocacio, e aprop le malaute sia reversat sobre le sieu dos o sobre le latz sa; e aprop eleva la codena la qual es en la partida dedintz del citillic a las partidas desus am les ditz de la tua ma sinistra, si la junctura es dislocada a las partidas dedintz.	When the head of the helper is dislocated due to lubricating moisture and does not return within the hour, you must return its dislocation before it naturally returns. Then, by a slight movement, it dislocates again as it attempts to return, just as we have testified. First, reduce the dislocation, then place the patient's foot on their back or on their side; then lift the heel which is in the inner part of the ankle with your left hand, if the joint is dislocated towards the inner part.
E aprop igneys le cauteri havent dos caps; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then heat the cautery having two heads; this is its form:
E aprop cauteriza la codena entro que penetre aquela entro al autre latz; e vindra la figura de cauterizacio lahoras de iv caps cauteris.	And then cauterize the vein where the humor penetrates into the other side; and the figure of the cauterization will come when of two cautery heads.
e so aquel subtils segon la quantitat de tenta; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	and it should be subtle according to the quantity of tissue; and this is its form:
E alcunas veguadas es ajustat segon aquest comte i per que son les cauteris .viii.	And sometimes it is adjusted according to this count and for why the cauterizations are VIII.
E aprop pausa sobre le cauteri porys cuytz am sal, e aprop fay adherir le malaute a trenquilitat, e lo membre no sia maugut per alcun temps entro que sia confortat.	And then place your hand on the cautery for a while with salt, and then attach the patient to a bed, so that the limb is not swollen for some time until it is comfortable.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas desus e tart es fayt aquo, lahoras cauteriza sobre le muscle am cauteri clavilh o am motz cauteris puntan, quar la junctura es confermada e la humiditat es romauguda e le malaute es sanat.	And if the dislocation is above and the treatment is done here, then cauterize over the muscle with a clavilh cautery or with pointed cauteries, so that the joint is confirmed and the humidity is relieved and the patient heals.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter 26.
De cauterizacio del stomac.	Of cautery of the stomach.
Quan veno en l’estomac freg e motas humiditatz entro que aquel extrazo de la sua compleccio e so multiplicatz raumases a lu, e si tu continuas las manieyras de curacio e no confereyso, lahoras cove que le malaute sia sobre le sieu dos ressupinat, e extenda las suas mas e las suas coysas, e aprop cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris: an un cauteri dejos le pietz per la quantitat d’un dit am cauteri clavilh, e am dos cauteris dejos del dos costatz del cauteri, entro que vengua la figura de cauteri triangulada; e elonga entre els que no sian ajustatz que faran poyredura.	When pain in the stomach is caused by moist humors that extract themselves from its composition and multiply within it, and if you continue with the methods of treatment and they do not relieve it, then you will find that gout has settled on his back, extending its hands and other things. Then cauterize that area with three cauteries: in one cauterization place the foot with the width of a finger using a nail cautery, and in two cauteries place them on both sides of the cauterization, so as to form a triangular figure; and keep the ones not aligned separate, which will cause suppuration.
E si la profunditat del cauteri la quantitat de les dos terses de la grocesa de la codena.	And if the depth of the cautery is the width of two-thirds of the thickness of the cord.
E sia la figura del cauteri segon aquesta forma ses addicio, E si vols, cauteriza am gran cauteri en le mieg loc del estomac segon aquesta forma; et aquest sia un cauteri segon la forma de cercle segon aquesta forma:	And let the shape of the cautery be as shown in this addition. If you wish, cauterize with a large cautery in the middle of the stomach according to this form; this should be a circular cautery as shown in this form:
E sia cauterizat l’estomac punctan ad aquel que de aquest cauteri es spaventat: e es que tu senhes sobre l’estomac punt segon la quantitat que voles am tenta, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en les puntz; e aprop cura aquel am la curacio qu’es precedita entro que sia sanat.	And let the stomach be cauterized with puncture where someone is scared by this cautery: and you hold over the stomach with a puncture according to the quantity you want to try, then immediately cauterize that with the cautery in the punctures; then cure that with the cure that comes before it until it is healed.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter XXVII.
De cauterizacio del fietge fret.	Of the cauterization of the inflamed hip.
Quan endeve en le fietge dolor per fregiditat o per humiditat o per grossa ventositat entro que de la sieua normal compleccio sia getat per egressio superflua, e es curat le malaute am aquo que havem dit e no comfereys, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e senhes am tenta tres cauteris segon aquesta forma et aquesta quantitat meteyssa sobre le fietge dejos dels ipocondres, la hon perve le decubit de home.	When there is pain in the hip due to coldness or humidity or excessive windiness such that it has deviated from its normal structure through superfluous discharge, and the patient is treated as we have said without success, then you should cause the patient to lie on their back, and hold three cauterizations according to this form and this quantity over the hip below the ribs, with one along the spine.
E sia l’espazi le qual es entre quascun cauteri segon la grossetut del dit, e sia le cauteri segon la longitut del cors dreyta.	And let the space between each cauterization be according to the thickness of the finger, and let the cauterizations be according to the length of the body straightened.
E no compremas la tua am le cauteri mot.	And do not hold the cautery too long.
E si la quantitat de aquo que es adhurit la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena, e no y sia pus ajustat; e si le malaute stant sobre les pes de lu; e si no es estant, lahoras sia jassent, le qual ja ha extendudas las suas coysas, e eleve les sieus brasses.	And if the amount of what is applied equals the size of the swelling of the affected joint, and it is not adjusted further; and if the patient is standing on their feet; and if not standing, when lying down, which already has extended its parts, elevating its knees.
E es aquesta la forma del cauteri:	And this is the form of the cautery:
E a tu es possible que cauterizes aquestz cauteris am cauteri cutellar, quan es am tu subtilitat e prudencia en l’art.	And you may apply these cauteries with a surgical cautery when your subtlety and prudence in the art are sufficient.
E guarda te que trop no procesiscas en la cauterizacio, e sia adhurida la specitut de tota la codena per que sia adhurit tot le cors e pervengua entro als budels, quar la codena aqui es subtil; e sapias aquo.	And be careful not to overheat the cautery, ensuring that the application reaches only the affected joint and does not spread to the entire body, as the joint here is delicate; know this.
Capitol .xxviii.	Capitol.xxviii.
De perforacio de apostema del fietge am cauteri.	On the puncture of an abscess on the sole with a cautery.
Quan endeve excitura o apostema en le fietge e voles saber si aquel apostema es en le carn del fietge o en la tunica de lu, lahoras si es en la carn del fietge, le malaute atrobo gravitat e dolor ses acuitat.	When there is an inflammation or abscess in the groin and you want to know if that abscess is in the flesh of the groin or in its covering, then if it is in the flesh of the groin, the patient will experience a greater gravity and intensity of pain.
E si es en la tunica del fietge, am la dolor es acuitat gran e vezes que ja afatiguatz les metges la cura de lu.	And if it is in the covering of the groin, then the pain will be intense and often causes great fatigue to the doctors treating it.
Donc cove que·l malaute sia enversat sobre la sieua cervit; e aprop senha le loc de l’apostema am tenta; e aprop igneys le cauteri le quel es asemblat a rag, la forma del qual a precedit en l’autra pagina.	Then make sure the patient is lying on their side; and place the location of the abscess correctly; then heat the cautery which resembles a rod, the shape of which was shown in the previous page.
E cauteriza am aquel i cauteri entro que tota la codena sia comborida, entro que pervengua al ciphac, entro qu’en yesca sania.	And cauterize it in such a way that the entire chain of wounds is charred, until it reaches the center, until it becomes healthy.
E aprop cura aquel per curacio dels autres apostemas entro que sia sanat.	And then treat that by the method of curing other abscesses until it is healed.
E no cove que de aquesta forma de cauteri use sino aquel del qual le estudi en l’art de medicina es prolonguat, e en las mas del qual motas malautias an conogut; mays aquest am esperiment alcunas veguadas sia ardit sobre aquesta operacio, mays empero leyssa aquela deves nos, e es miels.	And ensure that only those who have studied this method in the art of medicine use it. In most cases, they will know the defects of other cauteries; however, from my experience, some times this cautery works well for this operation, so I recommend using this one instead.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter XXIX.
De cauterizacio de plauresi.	Of cautery for the thigh.
Diyssero les antics cauteri de las razitz de aristologia a plauresi frega segon aquesta manieyra esser fazedor, e es aquest que tu prenguas de las razitz de aristologia longa secca una razit pun longua que es trobada, e sia de la grossetut del dit.	They said that the ancient cautery for the thigh should be made according to this method: take from the leaves of Aristology a long, dry twig, which is found to have a thickness similar to that of a finger.
E aprop submergeys aquela en oli e eysen aquela al foc, e aprop cauteriza per un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre la continuacio de la furcula am le col; e am dos cauteris petitz dejos guidazi, un pauc declinans a la partida que es dejus la barba, e am dos cauteris en aquo que es declinant entre la quinta costa e la cizena, declinant un pauc a las partidas detras; e am autre cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz; et am autre sobre l’estomac, et am tres cauteris de las partidas detras; et am un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre las dos spallas, e am dos cauteris dels dos latz del pietz, dejos le cauteri le qual es entre doas spallas.	And then immerse that in oil and heat it on the fire. Then cauterize with a cautery in that place which is between the continuation of the furcula and the neck; use two small cauteries to guide, one slightly inclined towards the part below the beard, and two more cauteries that are inclined between the fifth rib and the sixth, inclining slightly towards the rear parts. And another cautery in the middle of the foot; and another on the stomach, and three cauteries behind. And one cautery in that place which is between the two shoulders, and two cauteries on both sides of the foot, leaving the cautery between the two shoulders.
E no cove que compremas la tua ma am le cauteri, ans sia en le manifest de la codena en obra.	And make sure that your hand is on the cautery, not off at the handle.
E ja diyssero alscus antics que so alscus dels homes les quals uson de cauteri de ferr semblant a ray e igneysso aquel, e meto aquel en aquel loc le qual es entre las costas, entro que pervenguam am aquel ad aquel apostema e sia foragetada sania, ayssi cum havem dit en l’apostema del fietge.	And some ancient doctors said that certain men use a cautery resembling a ray and ignite it, placing it in the area between the ribs until we reach the abscess and the healthy tissue is free of disease, as we have said regarding the abscess of the thigh.
Mays en aquesta perforacio am cauteri no es ses temor, quar hu mor tantost ho accideys en le loc fistula a la qual no es sanacio.	In this puncture, there is no fear with the cautery, for if it happens so, you will quickly encounter the location of the fistula which does not heal.
Capitol .xxx.	Capitol.
De la cauterizacio de la melsa.	Of the cautery of the abscess.
Quan tu curas la malautia de la melsa am aquo que havem dit de la curacio en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cauteri en lu es segon tres manieras, las quals totas son dreyturieras, de las quals la una es que fassas tres cauteris o quatre linhan segon la longitut de la melsa segon la figura dels cauteris del fietge, la figura dels quals ha precedit.	When you treat the illness of the abscess, as we have said regarding the treatment in division and do not change your treatment, then applying the cautery to it is according to three ways, all of which are correct. One way is to make three or four lines according to the length of the abscess, following the figure of the cautery for the thigh, the figure of which has been shown previously.
E sia entre quascun cauteri la grossetut d’un dit o un pauc mes, e la manieyra del cauteri sia la manieyra la qual havem dita en le cauteri del fietge engualment.	And the distance between each cautery should be the thickness of a finger or a little more, and the method of the cautery should be the same method we have said for the thigh cautery.
E no compremas la tua ma am le cauteri; e le malaute sia eves sobre lo sieu dos.	And do not hold your hand on the cautery; let the patient lie on their back.
E es autra manieyra de cauterizar, so es que tu igniscas le cauteri haventz dos vertimentz, la qual causa havem dita en le capitol de dislocacio del muscle, e elava la codena la qual es en le endreyt de la melsa la hon perve le jazer del malaute sinistre.	And another way to cauterize is that you ignite the cautery with two wicks, which we have said in the chapter on dislocation of the muscle, and elevate the chain which is in the middle of the seam letting the juice of the left patient flow through.
E sia la tua elevacio am la qual elevas la codena segon la longuesa del cors, per que sian faytz cauteris segon la latitut del cos.	And your elevation should be such that you raise the chain according to the length of the body, so that the cauterizations are made according to the width of the body.
E aprop entromet les dos vernimentz, ignitz mot, en aquel entro que am aquels penetres la codena de la autra part.	And then insert the two wicks, ignite them, placing one in the middle where they penetrate the chain from the other side.
E aprop extrayt le cauteri; e donc son faytz quatre cauteris.	And then remove the cautery; and thus it makes four cauterizations.
E si voys, cauteriza am cauteri havent tres vernimentz.	And if you use, cauterize with the cautery having three wicks.
E aprop tu cura le cauteri pus que aia laysat de getar brac per trops jorns, quar mays es comferent que las autras causas precedentz en la curacio.	And then you should cure the cautery more thoroughly since it has been left to burn for too many days; this is more effective than the other preceding causes in the treatment.
Capitol .xxxi.	Capitol XXXI.
De cauterizacio de ydropici.	Of the cautery for dropsy.
Cauteri no catz en ydropici sino en alcinte3 propriament.	Cautery is not used for dropsy but for the ankle properly.
Quan tu curas le ydropic am las manieyras de curacio las quals havem ditas en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que aquel cauterizes am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic e am un cauteri sobre l’estomac, e am autre cauteri sobre le fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa, e am dos cauteris entre les spondils del dos, e un cauteri en lo dreyt del pietz, e am autre cauteri sobre l’estomac.	When you treat the dropsy, use the methods of treatment we have said in the division and do not deviate from your treatment. Instead, apply the cautery at four points in the circuit of the swelling, and one on the stomach, another on the flank, another on the navel, two between the vertebrae of the back, one on the right side of the foot, and another on the stomach.
E la quantitat de la profunditat del cauteri sia propdana a la spicitut de la codena.	And the depth of the cautery be approximately that of the thickness of the skin.
E aprop layssa le cauteri ubert per so que gete brac per lonc temps.	And leave the cautery open so that it heals for a long time.
E no evacuas le malaute de curacio aprop le cauteri am aquo que cove per que sian agreguadas a lu doas entencios, e sira festinada a lu am ajutori sanacio.	And do not evacuate the bad matter of the treatment near the cautery where it should be added to two intentions, and it will be sped up with auxiliary healing.
La forma del cauteri am lo qual es cauterizat lo ventre sia clavilh segon que la forma de aquel es desus precedent, e es aquel am le qual es cauterizat le dos sia olivar segon qu’es precedent a la sua forma.	The shape of the cautery with which the abdomen is seared should follow the form of that described above, and it is with this cautery that the two olive-shaped areas are seared according to what was previously mentioned regarding their shape.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter XXXII.
De cauterizacio de pes e de las coyssas.	On the cautery treatment of feet and thighs.
Quan les pes so apostematz en ydropitz e so repletz de aygua sitrina, cove que cauterisas les pes sobre le dos del pe in nocrati aquo que es entre le auricular e le anular, e eleva la tua ma am le cauteri e no torses aquel; e aprop eleva la tua ma, e no retornes aquela de tot, quar l’aygua satrina rezuda.	When the feet are swollen and filled with yellowish water, you should sear the feet over the inner part of the foot between the base of the toes and the heel, and raise your hand with the cautery without twisting that area; then raise your hand further, and do not return it completely, for the yellow water will drain.
Es le cauteri segon aquesta forma: E aprop fay sobre las doas coyssas dos cauteris, e en quascuna coysa sia feyt cauteri am la extremitat del cauteri cutellar.	The cautery should be done in this manner: And over each thigh, place two cauteries, and on each thigh make the cautery at the end of the surgical instrument.
E sia le cauteri segon la longitut de la coyssa: i dejos le denolh e l’autre jos le mieg loc de la coyssa; e sobre quascuna coyssa dos cauteris.	And the cautery should be according to the length of the thigh: place one end of the cautery at the top of the thigh and the other end in the middle of the thigh; over each thigh, use two cauteries.
E layssa la plagua uberta ses curacio per lonc temps per so que alcuna aygua resuda de lu.	Leave the wound open for a long time so that no water seeps into it.
E aprop cura le am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas.	And then treat the ailments which we have said.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter XXXIII.
De cauterizacio de cos de ventre.	On the cautery of the abdomen.
Quan cos de ventre es per freg e per humiditat entro que debelice las vertutz, so es la vertut digestiva e retentiva, las quals so en l’estomac e en les budels, e es curat aquo am las manieyras de curacio e no confereys, e vezes le malaute suffertan cauteri de vertut exhiberant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am gran cauteri sobre le sieu stomac segon que a precedit en la cauterizacio del estomac, am le cauteri del cercle e am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic subtils, am cauteri clavilh subtil; e am cauteri sobre le alcatin sobre alozis gran, o am dos cauteris.	When the abdomen is affected by cold and humidity that penetrate into its weakness, it has the digestive and retentive virtues, which are in the stomach and in the intestines. This condition is treated according to the methods of treatment and you do not apply any other remedies; sometimes the patient suffers from a cautery of virtuous exhibition, so cauterize that area with a large cautery over their stomach as previously described in the cauterization of the stomach, using the ring cautery and four cauteries around the circuit of the subtle fibers, using a fine stylus cautery; or use one cautery on aloes wood, or two cauteries.
E si vezes las humiditatz exhuberants e le malaute aquo tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le pentenilh e sobre les budels, e fort leu ajustant dos cauteris sobre l’estomac e prop dels inguonas, quar es curacio perficent de juvament de la qual no erras.	And if sometimes the excessive humidity and the patient tolerates it, then cauterize that area over the pentelich and over the intestines, and strengthen it by applying two cauteries to the stomach near the inguinal region, which is a perfect cure for youth from which you will not err.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Capitol XXXIV.
De cauterizacio de emorroydas antiquas.	Of the cautery treatment for ancient hemorrhoids.
Quan so en la natura derier emorroydas antiquas o una de humors grossas fregas o de humiditatz corrompudas, e son curadas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no confereys la tieua curacio, lahoras cauterisa am tres cauteris sobre le pus dejos spondilh del dos petit e petit triangular, e am cauteri desus le ombelic cays per dos ditz.	When they are in the nature of ancient hemorrhoids or one of thick humors or corrupted humidity, and they are cured as we have said in the division and do not confer your own cure, then cauterize three times on the tip of the two small ones, forming a triangular shape, and with one cautery above the navel by two fingers.
E si doptas que l’estomac de lu sia enfregidat e la vianda de lu no sia degerida, e la cara de lu vezes apostemada, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre l’estomac am gran cauteri segon que es precedit; e am un cauteri sobre fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa de lu am cauteri clavilh, e leyssa le cauteri per alcun temps ubert, e aprop cura lu entro que sia sanat.	And if you suspect that the stomach of the patient is inflamed and the food they ate was not digested, and their face appears feverish, then cauterize that area on the stomach with a large cautery as previously described; and with one cautery on the side, and another on the armpit with a pointed cautery, and let the cautery remain open for some time, and soon cure them once they are healed.
Capitol .xxxv.	Capitol XXXV.
De cauterizacio de atheyl aprop la abscizio de lor.	Of the cautery treatment near the site of removal for hemorrhoids.
Quan tu abscindes atheyl, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri que es asemblat a ray.	When you incise the thigh, then ignite the cautery that resembles a rod.
Aprop entremet aquel ignit en aquel atheyl abscis, e ultima la tieua ma entro que pervengua le cauteri al orifici de la vena de la qual ve la sanc.	Then insert that ignited cautery into the incised thigh, and keep your hand there until the cautery reaches the opening of the vein from which the blood flows.
E fay aquo una vetz o doas, quar si achieyl son trops, lahoras cauteriza quascun de lor segon que havem recontat, e aprop cura aquels am aquo que confereys a lor dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And do this one or two times; if there are more, then cauterize each of them according to how we have counted, and place ointments between the skin and wound as it heals.
E si cauterizas am gran cauteri sobre alquatin, es mays derier en juvament.	And if you cauterize with a large cautery on some areas, it is better for the patient's recovery.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Capitol. xxxvi.
De cauterizacio de fistolas que son faytas en la natura derie en las partidas de lu.	Of the cauterization of fistulas that occur in the natural passages of the body.
Quan la natura no obeziys a la obra la qual havem recomtada en son loc, e·l pacient es espaventat per aquo, sia sanat am cauteri.	When nature does not yield to the operation we have recommended in that place, and the patient is frightened by this, treat it with a cautery.
Donc quan ad alcun ve fistola en la natura derier, e es antiquada, corro sania de lu e humiditatz corrompudas, e donc aquo que es pus digne que cove es que proes aquela am tenta subtil, e aprop conoys la quantitat de la profunditat de lu am la devant dita tenta.	When there is an old fistula in the nature behind and it is corrupted by bad health, then what is most worthy to probe is with a fine needle, and you know the quantity of its depth with the front mentioned needle.
Aprop igneys le cauteri que es semblant a ray.	Then heat the cautery that resembles a ray.
E aprop met aquel cauteri ignit en aquesta fistula, e segon la quantitat en la qual intrec la tenta.	Then place the heated cautery in this fistula, according to the quantity in which you insert the needle.
E itera sobre aquela le cauteri entro que sian comburitz aquels cors corrumputz tost una veguada o dos o tres, segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And iterate over that with the cautery until those corrupted tissues are burned up completely in one or two or three passes, according to the quantity of your necessity.
E guarda te de combustio de nervi e de vena; o si fistula va al cors de la vesica o al cors del budel, lahoras guarda te de totz aquels locz; e no fassas aquo sino quan la fistula es en loc carnos e cogitas que no es penetrant.	And guard yourself from burning the nerves and veins; or if the fistula goes to the part of the bladder or the intestine, then guard yourself from all those areas; do not do this unless the fistula is in a fleshy part and you can see it is not penetrating.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	And cure that area once it is healed.
E si le loc es sigillat, e so abscindidas de lu las materias, e roman ayssi per lonc temps, lahoras sapias que ja es curat entierament.	And if the area is sealed, and the materials are cut away from it, and remain thus for a long time, then you can see that it is completely healed.
E si las materias no so de lu ostadas, lahoras sapias que es penetrant o en le preon de lu os corromput, o cays aquo de aquelas causas de las quals vindra rememoracio en son loc.	And if the materials are not from the site, you can see that they are penetrating or in the pores of the bone and corrupting it, or this comes from those causes which will be recalled in its place.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Capitol. xxxvii.
De cauterizacio dels ronhos.	On the cautery of warts.
Quan en les ronhos endeve dolor per freg o per grossa ventozitat, e per aysso le coyt del malaute es amermat, lahoras cove que cauterizes aquel sobre les ronhos am cauteri sobre quascun ronho am cauteri clavilh del qual precesic la rememoracio.	When warts hurt due to friction or excessive dryness, and for this reason the patient's cry is diminished, then you should cautery those warts with a cautery on each wart using the claw cautery, the details of which will be recalled.
E fort leu cauterizam am le segon un petit dejos, per que vindran tres cauteris liniatz, e donc siran mays deriers en juvament.	And we cautery with a second touch lightly, for three linear cauteries will follow, and thus they will be more effective in healing.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Capitol.xxxviii.
De cauterizacio de la vesica.	Of the cautery of the bladder.
Quan accideys en la vesica debelitat e mollificacio per freg e per humiditatz ayssi que·l malaute la urina no retengua, lahoras cauteriza aquel en la partida pus dejos sobre la vesiqua, la hon comensan les pels del pentenilh, e cauteriza am un cauteri en la partida dreyta, e am autre en la senestra de lu.	When there is a debility and softening of the bladder due to inflammation and humidity, such that the patient cannot retain urine, then cauterize that area on the side of the bladder where the skin begins to peel, and cauterize with one cautery on the right side and another on the left side.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la cantitat dels not del pous; e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en la partida pus bassa del dos, o am dos cauteris si es necessitat.	And the length of each cautery should be according to the size of the patient's foot; cauterize that area with one cautery on the lower side of the foot, or with two cauteries if necessary.
E sia cauteri clavilh segon que es procesit.	And use a lancet according to the condition.
Capitol .xxxix.	Chapter XXXIX.
De cauterizacio de la mayra.	Of the cautery of the urethra.
Quan veno en la mayra freg e humiditatz, e per aysso es prohibida enpreignacio, e son corrompudas las mestruas de lu, e es tardada la provocacio de lor, e accideys dolor deves le haveniment de lor, lahoras cove que·l loc sia cauterizat am tres cauteris en le circuit del ombelic, ayssi cum havem dit en le cauteri de la vesica; e am cauteri sobre le loc pus dejos del dos, o am dos cauteris, e sia le cauteri clavilh.	When there is cold and humidity in the urethra, and for this reason conception is forbidden, and the menses are corrupted, and the induction of labor is delayed, and joint pain occurs as a result, then it is necessary to cauterize the area with three cauteries around the navel circuit, as we have said in the cauterization of the bladder; and place one cautery on the lower part of the foot, or two cauteries, using a lancet for the cautery.
Capitol .xl.	Capitol.xl.
De cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua.	Of the cautery for the dislocation of the ankle.
Quan humiditatz moucozas so efundudas a la partida de la anqua, e so faytas causas del yssiment del sieu loc, e senhal de lu es que la coyssa es prolonguada sobre l’autre quan so comparadas entre lor.	When mucous humors infiltrate the area of the ankle, and are causes of displacement in its location, a sign of this is that the swelling extends over the other foot when compared between them.
E le loc de la dislocacio es atrobat en lu quays boyt.	And the location of the dislocation is around the outer ankle.
Adonc cove que cauterizas le malaute sobre la partida de la anqua de lu am cauteri a sercle semblant, pus que tu auras senhat am tenta en le cercuit de la partida ayssi cum es revolguda, e per so que la partida caia el mieg loc del cercle.	Then, make a circular cautery mark on the foot around the ankle with the cautery. Ensure that you have marked it in the circuit of the ankle as if it were rotated, so that the area falls in the middle of the circle.
E sia le cauteri del qual precedit la forma en la cauterizacio del estomac.	And let the form of the cautery as described above be used in the cauterization of the stomach.
E si aquest cauteri no es a tu present, lahoras cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris am cauteri olivar gran.	And if this cautery is not at hand, then use three large olive cauterization marks instead.
E sia fayt le cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de tota la codena; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And make the cautery according to the intensity of the pain throughout the leg; and then cure that which remains until it is healed.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter XL.
De cauterizacio de la vena sciatica.	Of the cautery for the sciatic vein.
Quan dolor ve en la partida de anqua, e so causa de lu freg et humiditatz, le malaute es curat am aquo que havem dit e no confereys, e aquo es antiquat, lahoras cove que tu lacses le malaute de humors grosses am pillulas fetidas o am pillulas artificials o semblantz; e aprop cauteriza aquel.	When pain comes in the region of the kidney, and its cause is cold and humidity, the patient is treated with what we have said about it, and you do not confer, and then you let the patient suffer from large humors through fetid pills or artificial ones; and then cauterize that area.
E la manieyra del cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am medicinas comburentz, o cauteri am foc.	The method of the cautery in this case is according to two methods: either with burning medicines, or with fire.
Sira segon dos manieyras scientas, de las quals es la una que cauterizes aquel sobre la partida de l’ancha de lu am tres cauteris triangulatz segon aquesta forma; e fay am aquels bona profunditat.	According to two scientific methods, of which one is to cauterize that area on the side of the flank with three triangular cauteries in this form; and do so with good depth.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre cascun cauteri la quantitat de la grossitut del dit e si le cauteri olivar o gran.	And let the space between each cautery be the width of one digit, and let the cautery be either olive-sized or large.
Mays alcunas veguadas sia le cauteri sobre le mieg loc sobre le cap de l’anquan per que son quatre cauteris.	More often, apply the cautery in the middle of the location, on the head of the kidney, as there are four cauteries.
E si vols, cauteriza am le cercle del qual es precesida la forma en la cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua, la i que sia cercle continent e comburey la ispicitut de tota la codena.	And if you wish, cauterize around the circle where the form precedes the cauterization of the dislocation of the ankle, which should be a circle that burns the sensitivity of the entire tendon.
E aquesta es la manieyra de cauteri in ciatiqua quan dolor es adherent al anqua e no es estenduda entro a la coyssa.	And this is the way to cauterize for gout when pain is localized to the ankle and not extended into the thigh.
Mays si es estenduda entro a la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre la coyssa sobre le loc al qual envireys le malaute que es la dolor; e am un cauteri sobre la cavilha per quatre ditz un pauc deves la part cilvestra.	But if it is extended into the thigh, then cauterize there with two cauteries on the thigh over the area through which you will pass the ankle that causes the pain; and with one cautery on the heel, a little you should raise the lateral part.
E si le cauteri cutellar, e sia la profunditat del cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de la codena.	And for the surgical cautery, the depth of the cauterization should be according to the amount of sensitivity of the tendon.
E si le malaute envireys que la dolor es estenduda entro al loc prop les ditz des pes, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui on envireys am cauteri per tres puntz o quatre o mays si indigeys de aquel.	And if the ankle passes through the pain extended near the base of the feet, then cauterize there where you will pass the cautery with three or four points or more if needed.
E si le malaute envireys dolor esser dejos le donolh ves la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui am un cauteri cutellar.	And if the ankle passes through and the pain is felt in the thigh, then cauterize there with a surgical cautery.
E guarda te en tota cauterizacio que no ultimes am le cauteri en tant que comburas nervi o gran arceria, e que per aquo a tu es sobre le malaute mal noccument o contraccio.	Guard in all cautery that you do not end with the cautery to such an extent that it burns nerves or great artery, and that by this you are over the patient badly injured or contraction.
E yeu ja e vist un e autre de aquels les quals cauterizero sobre la cavilha e ultimero en la cauterizacio, e la cama foc inflada entro que la tumor aconseguit lo pe, e foc perforat e corromput tot le pe.	And I have seen others who cauterized on the cartilage and ended in the cautery, and the bed was inflamed between where the tumor reached the foot, and the fire perforated and corrupted all the flesh.
E aprop accidic fort solucio de ventre, e aprop aquo la mort.	And then follows a severe solution for the belly, and then there is death.
E si la dolor es en dos partidas ensemps cauteriza quascuna segon aquesta manieyra.	And if the pain is in two parts, cauterize each separately according to this method.
E diysero les savis alcus en la cauterizacio de anqua cauteri del qual aquesta es la manieyra: fay semblant a cercle de ferr del qual le cercuit sia la maytat de un palm; e sia deves le sieu orrifici segon la grossesa de un os de datil o mens un pauc.	And they will say that wise alchs in the cautery of an aqua cauteri do this: make it seem like a circle of iron where the circumference is the width of one palm; and let its orifices be according to the size of an os of a finger or at most a little less.
E dedintz aquel cercle sia un autre tertz; e sia le spazi le qual es entre lor la quantitat del notz del pous; e sian aquels cercles ubertz de dos partidas; e sia la longitut de aquels cays un notz o dos notz, e fay en aquels margue de ferr decentment apparelhat en les cercles; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And inside that circle, place another third; and let the space between them be the quantity of a toe; and may those circles be opened in two parts; and let the length of those cuts be one toe or two toes, and make on those iron edges decently fitted to the circles; this is the form of it:
Aprop sia ignit en le foc entro que s’enrogesisca e gete scintillas, e aprop sia pausat sobre la partida del anqua, le malaute colcat sobre le latz sa.	It is heated in the fire until it turns red and sparks, then placed on the part of the water, the patient lying on the ladle.
E donc cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris redontz en una veguada.	And then cauterize it with three round cautery marks in one go.
E aprop layssa aquel per tres jorns; aprop emplastre aquel am boder e layssa la plagua uberta per trops dias; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then leave it for three days; then apply a plaster with honey and let the wound remain open for many days; and cure it by rubbing it with ointment until it is healed.
Diys Albucasis : o, filhs, de aquesta specia de cauteri pauc havem usat per la terror del reguardament de lu, e per aquo que paucs havem trobatz les quals reguardan sobre lu.	As Al-Zahrawi says: Oh, son, of this kind of cautery we have used it little because of the fear of looking at it, and because of what few of us have found to be true about it.
Mays dels bos cauteris a lu qui les sufferta, et atroba am aquel le loc de lu.	More than those who suffer from the good cautery, he finds it to be in that place.
Mays cauteri am medicinas adhurentz es que tu fassas dos cercles haventz armula perforada en la qual deyssen le guaffo de la porta de ferr; sia la longuitut de la paretz en la nauteza de lor sian dos nozes o quays aquels.	More than medicines that adhere, make two circles having a perforated ring in which the smoke from the iron door passes through; let the length of the walls where they are be about two fingers or thumbs wide.
E si le spazi le qual es entre quascu la quantitat de la grossitut del dit; e sian ubertz dejos e desus, e sian que contenguan se entre lor segon aquesta forma:	And if the space which is between each of the quantities of the swelling of the finger; and they be opened both above and below, and should contain themselves among them according to this form:
E aprop pausa sobre la partida de la anqua le malaut jasent sobre le latz sa, e comprem la tua ma sobre la partida de la anqua; e aprop pren de aygua cauda e fon la entre dos cercles, e la qualiditat de aquela sia am le foc petit a petit, e te aquela per la quantitat de una hora, e sufferta le malaute la mordicacio e la adhustio de lu — quar aquel atrobo mordicacio ayssi cum de foc — entro que cesse la mordicacio.	And then place your hand on the side of the foot where the patient feels pain, and hold your hand on the side of the water; and take some warm water and pour it between two circles, and the quality of that should be like fire little by little, and let that remain for the quantity of one hour, and allow the gout the bite and adjustment — for that atrophy bite similarly to fire — until the bite ceases.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am le instrument et abstergeys l’aygua cauda de tota la anqua am aygua dousa.	And then lift your hand with the instrument and remove the warm water from all the foot with cold water.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres jorns e pausa sobre aquel boder entro que sia la negror de la adhustio remauguda, e leyssa aquo per alcus jorns, e correra de lu poyredura; aquest es derier en juvament.	And then let that remain for three days and place your hand on that border until the blackness of the adjusted area subsides, and let this remain for some days, after which it will turn to redness; this is called erysipelas.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then cure that with ointment until it is healed.
E si la dolor es extenduda entro la coyssa o la camba, fay a lu estatua en lu que contengua aygua segon que es feyt en la anqua engualment.	And if the pain is extended into the thigh or hip, apply a statue to it that contains water according to how it is done in the water.
E aquesta es la manieyra de aygua cauda, e yeu ja he scrit aquela en le tractat de la rectificacio de medicinas.	And this is the way of applying water, and I have already written that in the treatise on the preparation of medicines.
Recipe de alcali e de caus no extinta de amdos ana partida una, e trissa les e pausa en una ola nova de la qual la partida dejos sia perforada per un petit trauc, segon la quantitat que intre en lu ray.	Recipe for alkali and for the extinct part of both halves, one third of it is mixed with a new vessel in which the part left has been pierced by a small tube according to the quantity that enters it.
E pausa dejos le fons de la ola autra ola enveyriada, e gete sobre aquel alcali e caus viva de aygua doussa la qual cobra aquels per un dit, e pus que tu compremes aquels am la tieua ma per bona compressio, e leyssa la hola que deyssenda de lu aygua aguda en la partida dejos a la ola enveyriada.	And place the bottom of the vessel in another warm vessel, and let it sit over the live alkali and water for a day, and when you understand that they have absorbed enough with your hand through good compression, leave the excess water from the alkaline solution to drain into the prepared vessel.
E aprop ajusta tota aquela aygua, e geta la sobre autra caus viva e autre alcali renovelatz, quar aquela lahoras sira de mot forta acuitat, la qual es aministrada en motas operacios de medicina e en cauterizacio dels autres membres, quar operacio fa de foc.	Then adjust all that water, and place it over fresh alkali and new alkali, for then it will be of much strength, which is administered in most operations of medicine and in the cautery of other members, for it acts like fire.
E so de las medicinas alcunas am las quals es cauterizat ancha, ayssi cum tezizic e mel anacrat e caus am sabo enayssi que sian mesclatz.	And some of the medicines, which are burnt wide, such as terebinth and mel acratic and cause anassise to be mixed, that they may be more effective.
E Gualia recontet de un home dels antics la operacio e la curacio am la qual es curada dolor de anqua e de vena sciatica, e magnifiquet mot be esser de aquel, e diys que no hac necessitat de autra curacio, e quar es sanat per una veguada ayssi cum recomtec, quar fort leu aquel intrec en banh e eysic ja sa d’aquel.	And Gualia recounts an operation and cure of an ancient man suffering from water pain and sciatica. The method was magnificent, as described by her, and she said no other treatment was necessary. He was cured in one session just as she recommended, for he immersed himself in warm baths and exercises, as she had instructed.
Et es que sia pres de certarragi vert, e si no es atrobat vert, sia presa figua recent; e mot sia trissada am un pauc de grays e sia pausat sus la anqua en la qual es la dolor, o en la coyssa, o en la camba, e sia liat.	And it should be placed near the vert remedy, and if no vert is at hand, a fresh fig; it should be tied with a few grey threads and placed on the water in which the pain is, or on the thigh, or on the chest, and it should be moistened.
E sia layssat per la cantitat de tres horas o per la quantitat que·l malaute centa cedacio de la adhustio.	And it should be left for the quantity of three hours or for the amount of time the patient can endure the application.
E aprop met aquel en banh e donc quan le cors de lu sia enrozat, entromet aquel en le sol, quar la dolor cessa e es sanat.	And then place it in warm water; when the patient's body is relaxed, insert it into the soil, for the pain ceases and the patient is cured.
E sapias que no cove que alcu use de cauteri am aquestas medicinas sino aprop la evacuacio del cors.	And be aware that none of these medicines should be used with a cautery near the body's evacuation.
Mays ja Escorides diysec que quan am fenda de cabra la vena stretica es cauterizada, aprofieyra a lu mo be; e sia le cauteri am lu segon aquesta manieyra: sia presa lana e sia enbeguda en oli antic, e sia pausat entre le pous del pe e entre le fossil.	When making a cut in the sinew vein, it will heal better if cauterized; and the cautery should be used as follows: take wool and soak it in old oil, then place it between the toes of the foot and over the bone.
E aprop pren fenda de cabra secca e emflasma aquela am foc entro que sia fayta carbo; e aprop pausa lu sobre la lana e leysa la entro que sia estengida.	And then take a dry cut of wood and ignite it inside to make charcoal; place it over the wool and let it burn until it is extended.
E aprop itera aquo, e no cessas far aquo entro que·l scintiment de la mordicacio pervengua entro al anqua e repausa la dolor.	And then repeat this, and continue doing so until the heat from the bite reaches the water and relieves the pain.
Et aquesta manieyra de cauteri es apelat cauteri de vaquas.	And this method of cautery is called the bull's cautery.
Capitol .xlii.	Capitol. xliv.
De cauterizacio de dolor de dos.	On the cautery for pain in the toes.
Alcunas veguadas dolor es en le dos per tropas causas, cum per cazement o per percucio o per superflua evacuacio, e per causas ad aquelas semblantz, per infusio de materia frega e humida.	Sometimes pain in the two [joints] is caused by multiple reasons, such as by impact or puncture or by excessive evacuation, and by causes similar to those, through the infiltration of wet matter.
E cauteri no catz sino en aquesta sola specia la qual es fayta per efusio de materia frega.	And the cautery is not used for cutting, but only in this single instance where it is applied due to the infiltration of wet matter.
Donc cove, aprop evacuacio del malaute am pillulas fitidas e am semblant a lor, que sian faytas sobre·l dos en le qual es la dolor tres linhas segon la latitut de lu, pus que senhas am tentha en quascuna linha v cauteris o mays, segon la quantitat que ve de la tolleransa del malaute e de la vertut de lu.	So digress, and after the evacuation of the groin, use pills similar to them, which are applied over the two areas where the pain is three lines according to the width of the area. Then test with cautery or more on any line if necessary, according to the quantity that comes from the tolerance of the patient and the virtue of the area.
E sia fayta cauterizacio am cauteri de punt.	And perform the cautery with a pointed cautery.
E si vols, cauteriza am tres cauteris o am quatre am cauteri clavilh medial segon aquesta forma:	And if you wish, perform the cautery with three or four cautery strokes using a medialawl according to this form:
Capitol .xliii.	Capitol.xliii.
De cauterizacio al comensament de gilbositat.	On the cautery from the beginning of gilbositat.
Motas veguadas endeve aquesta malautia als petitz enfantz; e senhal del comensament de lu en les enfantz es que accideys sobre lor estrectura en le ale eves la elevacio e·l movement.	Motions observed when this illness affects small children; and the sign of the beginning of it in children is that they experience discomfort in their limbs during play, elevation, and movement.
E atrobas en le derier espondil del dos e dels notz de lu que ja comensa a sobremontar sobre les autres spondils.	You find in the lower vertebra of the spine and the ribs that are beginning to overgrow over the other vertebrae.
E donc quan tu vezes aquo e voles prohibir, lahoras cauterisa aquel am cauteri que sia cercle segon aquesta forma:	And when you see this and want to treat it, then cauterize that area with a cautery shaped as a circle according to this form:
que prengua le cauteri sobre tota partida del spondilh engualment.	place the cautery over every part of the vertebra equally.
E si vols, cauteriza en le circuit del spondilh am le cauteri de punt dos linhas o tres.	And if you wish, cauterize around the vertebra with a pointed cautery two or three lines wide.
E sian les puntz propdas entre lor.	And let the points be close to each other.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat am aquo que havem dit.	Then cover the area thoroughly until it is healed with what we have said.
Mays guarda que cauteri no sia administrat en gelbositat que sia fayta per spasme de nervi.	More importantly, ensure that the cautery is not applied in cases of swelling caused by nerve spasm.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter XLIV.
De cauterizacio de podagra e de dolor de juncturas.	Of the cautery treatment for gout and joint pain.
Quan dolor de juncturas son faytas per humors fregas les quals so enfundutz a quascun membre del cors, lahoras quan veno dolors en los pes, de costuma dels metges es que aquo apelen podragua propriament.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and when venous pains occur in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E donc cum es curada podagra de causa frega am manieyra de cura e no so remaugudas las dolors, lahoras las remau cauteri.	And thus, gout caused by infiltration is cured using a treatment method that does not alleviate the pains temporarily but cures them with a cautery.
E es que tu cauterizas aquel aprop evacuacio en le circuit de la junctura del pe am motz cauteris.	And you cauterize the area near the foot joint with a cautery to facilitate the evacuation in the circuit of the joint.
E sia cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the olive-shaped cautery, which has this form:
E si es necessitat que puntz sia fayt sobre la fassia del pe, lahoras fay am cauteri de punt.	And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
E si las dolors pujan entro als denolhs o a las autras juncturas, e aquo motas vetz s’endeve, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre quascun donolh am tres cauteris o quatre de tota partida am aquest cauteri olivar.	And if the pains rise to the toes or other joints, and this method does not alleviate them, then cauterize each toe with three or four cauteries of this olive-shaped cautery.
E si motz cauteris que aquestz cauteris sian a tu necessaris, lahoras cauteriza aquel e no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri abans, sia tant solament enviro la specitut de la codena.	And if you need to use cautery irons for these cauteries, then apply the cautery and do not press your hand too much against the cautery before, just around the size of a thumb.
E si las dolors pugan entro al donolh e·l dos, lahoras aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le sieu capitol.	And if the pains penetrate into the groin and thigh, then apply the cautery which we have said in our chapter.
E si las dolors so en las mas tant solament, e es apelada suagra, lahoras puncta en le circuit dels focils ayssi cum se revolvo, puncta en aquels dos linhas.	And if the pains are only in the toes and it is called podagra, then puncture along the circumference of the toe joints as they twist, puncturing in those two lines.
E si reman de las dolors en les ditz, lahoras puncta en le cercuit dels focils sobre quascun notz e sobre la pinche de la ma.	And if the pains remain in the fingers, then puncture along the circumference of the joints over each finger and over the palm of the hand.
E si las dolors pugan aprop alscus jorns als coydes o als muscles, lahoras cauteriza les quascus de tota part dels ajutoris.	And if the pains persist for several days in the elbows or muscles, then cauterize the areas around all parts of the elbow.
E no evacuas le malaute de bon regiment e de recepcio de medicinas, quar si es fayt bon regiment e flacma es evacuada am aquest cauteri sira sanat, Dieus ajudan.	And if you do not evacuate the gout properly and with the right administration of medicines, then even if good regimen and flux are applied, this cautery will not be effective, God willing.
Capitol .xlv.	Capitol. XLV.
De cauterizacio de rompeduras.	Of cautery for ruptures.
Quan endeve rompedura en les angonars e diysendo les budels denant l’atela al genetiu, e aquo es comensan de aprop, lahoras cove que tu mandas al malaute layssar la sua comestio en le sieu dia e que use de causas leniens per so que la fenda deyssenda del sieu ventre.	When there is a rupture in the groin and intestines are protruding behind the cloth at the genital area, and this begins to prolapse, then when you order the patient to leave their meal for that day and use mild applications so that the descending wound of their abdomen does not worsen.
E aprop segua le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e comanda a lu que tengua le sieu ale entro que sia foro getat o aparesca l’atela o·l budels.	And then place the patient between your hands over their abdomen, and command them to keep their hand inside until it is fully contracted or the cloth or intestines appear.
E aprop retorna aquel am les tieus ditz e senha am tenta la ruptura sobre le os del pentenilh am senhal la extremitat del qual sia semblant a la maytat de cercle a las subiranas partidas del cors.	And then return those to your hands called ties and test the rupture over the bone of the thigh, marking the extremity of which should resemble the size of a circle in the upper parts of the body.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then heat the cautery of which this is the form:
entro que sia mot rog e gete cintilhas.	until it be hot and begins to spark.
E aprop reduzeys le budel o l’atela a la sua conquavitat, e aprop pause la sua ma sobre le loc per so que le budel no yesqua.	Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent it from coming out.
E tu ja has ubert entre las coyssas del malaute e dejos lu as pausat un coyssi, et autre servent sia sus las cambas de lu, e autre sus le pietz de lu, le qual tengua las suas mas.	You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
E aprop pausa le cauteri sobre aquel senhal am la tua ma am cauteri stan dreyt, e te aquel entro que am lu consieguas le os del pentenilh entro al mieg del duiduni; e itera am aquel autra veguada si a tu aquel no has conseguit en la primieyra veguada entro al os.	Then place the cautery over that mark on your hand where the cautery is straight, and there where you can find the bone of the big toe in the middle of the foot; and repeat with another pass if you have not succeeded in the first pass through the bone.
E observa saviament del ysiment del budel en la hora de la tua cauterizacio, que no comburas aquel budel per so que sobre le malaute no vengua in mort o autre gran malicia.	Observe wisely the position of the intestine during your cautery, that you do not burn that intestine so that it does not come into danger for the patient or cause other great harm.
E sapias que quan tu am le cauteri no atenhas le os, no confereys la tua operacio.	Be careful that when you use the cautery, you do not touch the bone, as this would compromise your operation.
E cove que·l cauteri dels enfants sia subtil segon le gran e la mesura de lor.	Ensure that the cautery for children is细而适度，根据他们的大小和体型。
E aprop cura le loc del cauteri per tres dias am boder entro que sia remauguda la scara del foc.	And shortly after care for the place of the cautery for three days among that the wound from the fire is healed.
E aprop cura aquel am les autres enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And shortly after treat that as well with other ointments until it is healed.
E le malaute sia jasent sobre le sieu dos per xl dias entro que sia sigillat le loc e la plagua.	And the patient lie on his back for 10 days until the place and wound are sealed.
E cove que pauses le nutriment de lu segon la longitut del temps de la curacio de lu le qual le linesca le ventre de lu, e que le budel no yesca fora deves le esforsament de guerir.	And ensure that you place the nourishment according to the length of time for the healing of the wound which closes his abdomen, and that the intestine does not come out with great effort to heal.
E aprop quan se vol levar aprop xl dias, lahoras aministra liament decentment fayt, e tengua aquel per autres xl jorns.	And shortly when it is time to lift after 10 days, then apply a decent liniment, and use it for another 10 days.
E sia mermat de trebalh e de replecio de vianda e de beure, e de votz vehementz, quar quan usa de aquest regiment de sanacio entiera sira sanat.	And let him rest from work and replenishment of food and drink, and use strong voices, for when he uses this regimen entirely he will be cured.
E yeu diyre la curacio de las rupturas en las autras partidas del ventre, e so al comensament, e vols que no treguan, lahoras cauterisa la ruptura d’aquel am cauteri redon segon la quantitat de lu, e sia aquo que es exhurit de la codena ayssi cum la tersa partida de lu; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit, e no es ajustat.	And I will say the healing of ruptures in other parts of the abdomen, and at the beginning, if they do not tear, then cauterize the rupture with a round cautery according to its quantity, and let that which is drawn from the cord be as the tender part of it; and shortly care for that which we have said, and it is not tight.
E ja diyssero alcus primiers que ruptura sia cauterizada am cauteri triangular segon aquesta forma, pus que es senhada am tenta:	And some first ones have said that a rupture should be seared with a triangular cautery according to this form, rather than sewn with a needle.
e es pausada linha que eys per la latitut en le latz pus sobira de la ruptura, e autra linha al desus; e depausa la tua ma am un cauteri clavilh, mays le primier cauteri es pus leugier e milhor.	And a line is placed for the width in the slashes and passes above the rupture, another line on top; then place your hand with a cruciform cautery, but the first cautery is lighter and better.
Capitol .xlvi.	Capitol. XLVI.
De cauterizacio de torcio.	Of the cautery treatment for a twist.
Quan endeve en alscus membres per cazement o per percussio dolor e persevera aquela dolor per lonc temps e no comfereys al u curacio am medicinas, lahoras cove que cauterizes am cauteri de punt.	When pain in some members persists due to a compression or percussion and does not respond to medicine or treatment over a long period, then you should cauterize with a pointed cautery.
E sia le cauteri de tot membre segon la magnitut e la parvitat de lu, e vertut e develitat de lu, e locacio de torcio e dolor de lu.	And the cautery should be of the size and shape appropriate to the member, its strength and sharpness, and the location of the twist and pain.
Donc si·s sanat per le primier cauteri, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera sobre lu le cauteri; quar de costuma de aquelas dolors es que sian punctatz de membre ad aquel membre le qual apropinque al u, per que cove que consieguas aquels am cauteri entro que·l malaute sia sanat.	Then if the member is healed by the first cautery, that is good; otherwise, repeat the cautery on it. For customarily, those pains are punctured in a nearby member of the same body, so that you may achieve healing through the cautery while the illness is cured.
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter XLVII.
De cauterizacio de lepra.	Cauterization for leprosy.
Les lebros alcunas veguadas am cauteri per mot gran juvament, e magerment si la specia de lepra que es fayta per putrefaccio de flacma e de melencolia.	Lepers are sometimes cauterized with a very hot cautery, especially when the species of leprosy is caused by putrefaction of flame and melancholy.
E donc cum tu vols cauterizar aquel, considera si la lepra es comussan e as aquela curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no deysen, ni esta, e temes sobre le malaute que la corrupcio comprehenda tot le cors de lu e tota la compleccio de lu, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le cap am v cauteris: am un en le mieg loc del cap, e am le segon pus dejos de lu, eves le front a la fi dels cabels; e amdos sobre dos corns; e am un detras, sobre la nuca o servitz.	And so, if you want to cauterize the affected area, consider whether the leprosy is common and active or cured as we have described in the division. If it is not, and you fear that corruption may encompass his entire body and all its complexity, then cauterize the area on the head with five cauteries: one in the middle of the head, and leave a space between them; place one at the forehead near the end of the hairline; two on the horns; and one behind, on the neck or servitz.
E ultima la tua ma am le cauteri un pauc entro que emprema en le os una petita empressio, e de lu sian deslocadas las scorsas, per so que la expiracio de grossas vapors sia alleujada de lu; e cauteriza sobre la melsa segon que es precesit.	And finish your hand with a cautery slightly inside where it leaves a small impression in the os, so that the expiration of thick vapors is alleviated; and cauterize on the melsa as needed.
E si la lepra es ja expanduda sobre le malaute e apar manifestament, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquel am aquels cauteris les quals havem ditz en le cap; e am cauteri sobre la extremitat del nas, e am dos cauteris sobre las doas maysselas, e am dos cauteris sobre dos spondils del col, e am vi cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e am un gran sobre les spondils prop de la coeta, e un sobre la cotea , e am dos sobre las anquas, e am un sobre quascuna anqua, e am dos sobre les donols e un sobre quascun donolh, e am dos sobre les coydes, e am dos sobre les muscles, e am dos las teneretutz del sieu pietz; e cauteriza aquel sobre totas las juncturas dels ditz de las mas e dels pes, e sobre quascun talon dels sieus pes, e sobre les foscils de las suas mas.	And if leprosy is already spread over the thigh and appears manifestly, then you cauterize that area as well as those cauterizations which we have said in the head; on the extremity of the nose, and on two cauterizations on the two eyebrows, and on two cauterizations on two vertebrae of the neck, and on six cauterizations on the vertebrae of the back, and a large one near the hip bone, and one on the spine, and on two on the hips, and one on each hip, and on two on the buttocks and one on each buttock, and on two on the knees, and two on the muscles, and two on their tendons; cauterize that on all joints of the fingers of the thigh and of the feet, and on each heel of his feet, and on his nerves.
E guarda te dels nervis les quals so sobre le talo que no comburas aquels.	And guard the nerves which are over the heel that you do not burn those.
E alcunas veguadas es cauterizat am un cauteri sobre le os del pentenilh e am autre sobre la boca del stomac, e autre sobre le fietge.	And sometimes cauterization is done with one cauterization on the bone of the pelvis and another on the mouth of the stomach, and another on the liver.
E sapias que quant mays ajustas cauteris, tant es mays juvatiu e mays conferent; e sapias que le malaute no ha en le cauteri dolor, ayssi cum han les sas, per so quar le cors de lu ja es stupefayt.	And know that the more tightly you adjust the cautery, the more beneficial and effective it is; and know that the patient does not feel pain in the cautery, as they do with their seams, for so the body of the patient is already numbed.
E cove que les cauteris sian grans o paucs segon les membres e las juncturas segon que es precedit de las specias dels ferramentz.	And know that the cauteries should be large or small according to the limbs and joints as indicated by the use of the instruments.
E aprop cura le cauteri am farina de errs coyta am mel e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then cure the cautery with a paste of ground err cilantro and honey, and other treatments until it is healed.
Capitol .xlviii.	Capitol. xlvi.
De cauterizacio de stupor.	Of the cautery for stupefaction.
Quan alcun membre es stabozit o adormit e es curat am medicinas, olis e emplastres, e no es sanat, lahoras tu cauteriza aquel membre stabozit am cauteris segon que merita la grandesa del membre o la parvitat de lu.	When some limb is numbed or asleep and is treated with medicines, oils, and plasters, and does not heal, then you cautery that numbed limb with cauteries according to the size of the limb or its smallness.
E sia lo tieu cauteri intrant la ispicitut de la codena un pauc.	And let your cautery enter the depth of the wound a little.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then cure that which is ointed until it is healed.
E alscunas veguadas es cauterizada alcuna stupor le qual endeve a las mas e als pes, e als spondils del dos e ves le eysiment dels nervis les quals mavon aquel membre, e es remauguda la stupor.	And sometimes certain areas are cauterized to remove the swelling in the limbs and the vertebrae, and to relieve the congestion of the nerves which run through that member.
Mays no prusuma sobre aquo sino aquel que es savi en la anotomia dels membre e de la egressio dels nervis tot le cors moventz.	But do not assume this, but only those who are skilled in the anatomy of the limbs and the course of the nerves throughout the body.
Capitol .xlix.	Capitol. XLIX.
De cauterizacio de albaras que es morfea.	On the cauterization of sores that become morphew (a type of skin ulcer).
Quan albaras es antiqua e no comfereys a lu alcu dels enguentz de medicina, lahoras tu cauteriza sobre aquela am cauteri preon un pauc segon la quantitat de la specitut de la codena entro que sia remauguda la blancor e la color de lu, e la color de lu sia mudada.	When sores are old and you do not apply any of the medical ointments to them, then cauterize the sore with a cautery, using a small amount according to the quantity of the powder in the mixture until the whiteness and color of the sore are changed.
E aprop cura aquel am farina de errs e de lentilhas am oli rozat e am folhas de arnagrosa, e am sanc de colomba o am sanc de yronda, da cascuna sia una partida e totas sian mescladas, e aprop sia linit un drap e sus le loc sia pausat entro que sia sanat.	And then cure that which is made from wheat flour and lentils in olive oil and with leaves of rosemary, or with pigeon's dung or with goose's dung, take one part of each, mix them all together, and place a cloth on the area until it is healed.
Capitol .l.	Capitol I.
De cauterizacio de cranc.	Of cautery for the groin.
Quan canser es comensan e vols aquel ostar, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri de cercle en le circuit de lu ayssi cum es revolgut.	When cancer begins and you want to stop it, then cautery it with a circular cautery in the circuit of it as it is revolving.
E diysero les savis que sia cauterizat am lo derier cauteri en le mieg loc; mays a mi no es vist aquo, quar temi que sia ulcerat, e yeu ja e vist aquo alcunas veguadas.	And the wise will say that it should be cauteryed with the latest cautery in the middle spot; but to me, this is not visible, for I fear it is ulcerated, and I have seen this a few times.
E es pus dreyturier que sia cauterizat en le circuit de lu am cercle ayssi cum avem dit, o am motz cauteris.	And it is better to cautery it in the circuit of it with a circle, as we have said, or with several cauteries.
Capitol .li.	Capitol II.
De cauterizacio de adubilati.	Of cautery for adenitis.
Quan alcun adubilati es tardat en maturacio, e aysso es per la superfluitat fazen aquela, o per etat del malaute, quar es vielh en decrepitat, de pauc sanc, o per le temps, e tu vols festinar en la maturacio de adubilati; lahoras cauteriza en le circuit de lu am motz cauteris petitz punctan; e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela fastinara en maturacio.	When some adenitis is delayed in maturation, this is either due to an excess causing it, or due to the patient's condition, which may be old age, weakness, or time, and if you want to hasten its maturation; then cautery it in the circuit of it with several small puncturing cauteries; and leave that which will mature on its own.
Mays si tu vols la perforacio de lu am cauteri, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: e depausa aquel en le mieg loc de adubilati entro que penetre la codena.	If you want to make a puncture with the cautery, then heat the cautery of which this is the shape: and place that in the middle of the affected area where the probe will penetrate.
E si le cauteri en aquel loc que es pus dejos, per so que le cors del brac sia alleujat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you place the cautery in that location, let it be so that the arm's flesh is relieved; and then cure that which will be healed.
Capitol .lii.	Capitol. lii.
De cauterizacio de corrodent.	Of the cautery for corrosion.
Corrodent es corrupcio ambulant en le membre, la qual corrodeys aquel ayssi cum a foc comedent lenha secca.	Corrosion is a walking corruption in the member, which eats away that part like fire consumes dry wood.
Donc si vezes aquel corrodent en loc le qual sufferte cauteri am foc, lahoras tu igneys cauteris clavils motz paucs, e grans segon que es convenent en aquel loc en le qual es corrodent.	Therefore, if you find the corrosion in a location where the cautery of fire is applied, then heat the cautery with many or few large sparks according to what is appropriate in that location where the corrosion is present.
E aprop cauteriza aquel de tota partida entro que erradiques tota la corrosio e no romangua alcuna causa de lu.	And then cautery that completely, after you have eradicated all the corrosion and do not leave any cause of it.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres dias, e pausa sobre les locs cauterizats solpre trissat am oli mesclat entro que las scaras sian totas eradicadas e tota la corrupcio.	And for three days let that be, and place over the cauteryized areas solely three times a day of oil mixed until all the scars are completely eradicated and all the corruption is gone.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz carn engendrantz.	And for that cure the flesh generating wounds.
Mays si aprop tres dias vezes que la carn nasca sana en la qual no es corrupcio, bo es; mays sino, lahoras itera le cauteri sobre aquo que es romas en les locs corrumputz.	More so, if for three days the flesh grows healthy in what is not corrupt, that is good; more so, if not, then re-cauterize the area that is rotted in the corrupt locations.
E corrodent es medicat alcunas vetz am medicina aguda, quar aquela es meza en loc de cauteri.	And if the flesh needs to be treated with some medicines several times with acute medicine, which is half in place of cautery.
Mays empero cauteri am foc es de pus leugier juvament.	More importantly, cautery with fire is beneficial for slight wounds.
E yeu ja e dit la curacio de lu am medicina aguda en la divisio, e donc pren aquela quan de lu auras endegencia.	And I have already described the treatment with acute medicine in the division, and therefore use that when you need it.
Capitol .liii.	Capitol. liii.
De cauterizacio de claus e dels autres semblants.	On the cautery of wounds and other similar conditions.
Motas veguadas endeve a las partidas dejos del pe malautia que s’apela clau, e es causa grossa, fentrada, la qual ladeys le pe; e cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, so es cauteri am foc e cauteri am aygua cauda.	Small stones found in the foot of the sick that are called clau, and this is a large cause, entering, which affects the foot; for the cautery in these is according to two ways, so it is a cautery by fire and a cautery by hot water.
Mays cauteri am foc es que igniscas le cauteri concau semblant a pena de voltor, le qual sia feyt de ferr segon la quantitat la qual contengua le clau de tota partida, e sia de subtils marguas.	The cautery by fire is when you heat the concave cautery resembling a pen for turning, which is made of iron according to the quantity that can contain the stone from all parts, and it should have thin edges.
E aprop pausa aquel ignit sobre le clau, e aprop revolveys la tua ma am le cauteri en le circuit del clau entro que·l cauteri pervengua a la profunditat del clau.	And then place that heated cautery over the stone, and quickly move your hand with the cautery in a circle around the stone until the cautery reaches the depth of the stone.
E leyssa aquel per tres dias entro que comense getar brac.	And let it be there for three days until it begins to dry out.
E aprop emplastre aquel am malvas salvatges trissadas am sal, e leyssa le emplastre sobre aquel per una nuoyt, quar aquel sira eradicat de las suas razitz.	And then apply a plaster with wild thyme boiled in salt water, and let the plaster remain on it for one night, so that the stone will be removed from its place.
E aprop cura le loc am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanat.	And then treat the area with a cream of generative flesh until it heals.
E si so no-convertitz, e motas veguadas accideysso en la superficia del cors, majorment en las mas e les pes, lahoras cove que tu aministres en aquels cauteri am aygua, e es que prenguas una quannula de eram o de ferr o de pena de voltor, e pausa aquela sobre le clau; e aprop geta en la quanula de aygua cauda pauca cantitat, e rete la tua ma, e tu revolveys aquela am compressio de la tua ma de tot, e sia enpremut le marge de la canula en la razit del clau, e atrobara la aygua cauda via al preon de la razit del cau; e espera le malaute un pauc la mordicacio de l’aygua cauda per una hora, e aprop remau aquela, quar le clau am las suas razitz sira erredicat.	If so-converted and spots appear on the surface of the body, mostly on the thighs and feet, then when you administer in those areas with water, take a cautery of iron or iron pin, place it over the nail; then put some water in the cautery container, withdraw your hand, and you rotate that with compression of your hand from all sides, and press the edge of the tube against the root of the nail, and you will find the water leaking through the gap of the nail; wait for the patient a little at the bite of the leaking water for an hour, then remove it, as the nail will be softened.
E ayssi fe am aquels la i aprop l’autre entro que venguas sobre totz les quals de lor so en le cors.	And thus apply to them and then to the other until you come over all of which they have in their body.
E aprop cura aquels pus que las razitz dels claus so erradicadas am aquo dels enguentz les quals la carn ve engenran.	And then cure those pus that the roots of the nails have been softened by the ointments which the flesh becomes affected.
Capitol .liiii.	Capitol. liiii.
De cauterizacio de tremor.	Of cautery for trembling.
Quan endeve ad alcu tremor per freg en le nervi o per febre de causa frega, o per autra causa semblant, lahoras cove que tu cauterises aquel am quatre cauteris o am v sobre les spondils del dos, entre quascun spondilh am un cauteri; e am cauteri en le pietz de lu, e sobre l‘estomac de lu, am cauteri olivar.	When there is an occasional trembling due to friction in the nerves or fever of a cause, or another similar cause, then cover that area with four or five cauteries on the spine, between each vertebra one cautery; and one cautery on the foot, and over the stomach, one olive cautery.
E la tremor de lu se repausa e festina la sanetat de la malautia frega.	When the trembling subsides and the healing of the illness progresses, continue as necessary.
Capitol .lv.	Capitolium.
De cauterizacio de albati accidentz al cors.	Of the cautery treatments for accidents in the body.
Quan en le cors so espellitz albati, e so pustulas fendas las quals so feytas de materias grossas corruptas; donc cove al comensament cum apareyso, que sia cauterizat sobre tot cap de la fistola am cauteri subtil am fustz de mirt, la extremitat del qual es estenduda am foc; o am razitz de erestologia longua; o am cauteri lentecular.	When in the body abscesses have formed and pustules have created openings which are made of gross, decayed materials; then at the beginning as they appear, they should be cauterized with a thin cautery using a branch of myrtle, the end of which is extended over the fire; or with an estruthion stick; or with a flat cautery.
E alscunas veguadas es cauteri ademamil al comensament de la sua expulcio segon aquesta manieyra; e no so cregudas, e es disrumpuda la superfluitat fazens aquels, et sana de aquels.	And sometimes the cautery is applied again at the beginning of its expulsion according to this method; and when they are not completely discharged, by breaking the excess, those are healed.
Mays empero cove que aquo sia fayt aprop evacuacio am fleubotomia.	But however, it should be done close to evacuation by lancing.
Capitol lvi.	Capitol the sixth.
De cauterizacio de fluex de sanc accident per incisio de arceria.	Of cautery for flux of san (a vascular injury) due to an incision of the artery.
Tropas veguadas endeve fluex de arceria que es inciza deves la plagua la qual endeve deforo, o deves la incizio de apostemas o cauteri del membre, e alor semblantz, e es dificil remaura aquel.	When veins are burned due to flux of the artery that is incised, you must burn the wound which lies beneath, or from the incision of apothemas or cautery of the member, and then seem it, and it is difficult to heal that.
Donc cum accideys ad alcu aquo, lahoras tu·t coyta am la tua ma a l’orrifici de la arceria, e pausa sobre aquel le tieu dit endic estrenh aquel motas veguadas entro que sia ostat le fluex del sanc dejos le tieu dit, e que non yesqua.	So when some vein occurs to you, first cover the orifice of the artery with your hand, and then place yourself over that to strengthen those burned veins until the flux of the blood is stopped, let it be, and do not allow it to swell.
E aprop pausa en le foc les cauteris olivars paucs e grantz, per nombre motz, e exsuffla sobre aquels entro que sian mot ignitz.	And then place the olive cautery in the fire for a few large and small applications, by number many times, and blow on them until they are dry.
E aprop pren de aquels un petit o un gran segon le loc e la plagua en la qual es rompuda la arteria, sobre aquela vena festinantment pus que auras remaugut le tieu dit, e te le cauteri entro que sia abcindit e restreyt aquel sanc.	And then take one of them small or large according to the place and wound in which the artery is broken, over that vein strongly place the cautery after you have dried your hand, and keep the cautery until it cuts and restricts the blood.
E si le sanc es expellit de l’orrifici de la arteria quan tu remaues le tieu dit e extringeys le cauteri, lahoras pren la un autre cauteri coytadament dels cauteris les quals en le foc son preparatz, e donc no cesses fer aquo un aprop autre entro que le sanc sia restrengit.	And if the blood is expelled from the opening of the artery when you rub your said part and apply pressure to the cautery, then take another cautery prepared among the cauteries that are in the fire, and continue doing this one after another until the blood is restricted.
E guarda te que no comburas le nervi que aqui es, e que vengua sobre le malaute autra malicia.	And make sure you do not burn the nerves here, and that no other evil comes to the patient.
E sapias que quan de l’arteria flueys sanc, lahoras no es possible en aquels restrenge la sanc, e majorment quan l’arteria es gran, si no am una de quatre manieyras: o am cauteri ayssi quo dit havem, o am extraccio quan no es extrayta, quar quan es extrayta las extremitatz de lu miels son comburidas e es restreyt le sanc, o que sia liat am fiel o am liament per fort strectura, o que sian pausadas sobre lu medicinas de las quals la vertut es restringir la sanc; e sian strengudas am pulvinar am costriccio decent.	And know that when blood flows from the artery, it is not possible to restrict the blood flow with a cautery, especially when the artery is large, unless one of four methods is used: either using a cautery as described above, or performing an extraction when not extracted, or when it is extracted, the ends of the vessel are burned and the blood flow is restricted, or applying honey or gum resin for its strong structure, or placing them over the medicines from which the virtue is to restrict the blood flow; they should be tightly bound with a pulvinar in a proper constriction.
Mays aquel que aministra restriccio decent de lu am liament e am strictura am draps o per posicio de causas comburentz e de semblantz, no comfereys sino tart.	More so, he who administers a proper constriction with gum resin and tight binding with cloths or by the position of burning and similar causes, will not succeed only slightly.
Mays si aquo endeve ad alcu e no sia le metge present ni medicina, lahoras obre am pausament del dit indic sobre le orrifici de aquela vena ayssi cum havem dit, e entenda a la gran costreccio de lu entro que le sanc sia ostat de la sobirana partida de la plagua, e sobre la arceria le dit no sia remaugut; e de sobre la arceria sia aspergit am aygua frega de mot gran fregiditat entro que·l sanc sia congilat e engrossat; e mays cossire en que ha de cauteri o de medicina necessitat.	If, however, it happens that no one is present except for the patient and neither a doctor nor medicine, then carefully open the digit indicated over the holes of that vein as we have said, and understand the great compression within which the blood has remained from the upper part of the wound, and above the arch let the said not be touched; and above the arch let water mixed with strongly cold flegm be sprinkled before the blood is congealed and thickened; and more if necessary cauterize or apply medicine.
Comensa la segonda partida.	Begin the second part.
De incisio e perforacio e ventozas e de fleubotomia e de plaguas e de lor semblants.	Of incision and perforation and fenestration and of bloodletting and of wounds and their appearances.
Aquestas son paraulas de Albucazis.	These are the words of Albucazis.
Ja havem dit en le primier capitol tota malautia en la qual cauteri am foc es convenient e am medicina comburent, e las occasios e las causas de lu, e les instrumentz en aquels necessaris am las formas dels cauteris; e he ordenatz les capitols de la subiranetat del cap entro als pes.	We have already said in the first chapter all illness in which a cautery with fire is convenient and medicine burning, and the occasions and causes of it, and the instruments necessary for them in the forms of cauteries; and I have ordered the chapters from the highest part of the head to the feet.
E yeu procesire en aquest capitol per aquela meteysa guisa, per que sia alliujat lo querent aquo, lahoras sobre aquo que aura demandat.	And we will proceed in this chapter in that manner, so that the one who seeks this may be relieved of what he has requested.
E denant que yeu comense aquo, cove, fils, que aprenguatz que en aquest capitol es per terror aquo que es en le capitol primier de cauterizacio.	And before we begin this, hear, sons, that in this chapter what is treated concerns the fear from that which is in the first chapter of cautery.
E per aquo que cove que sia en lu gran cautela, quar en la operacio la qual es en aquest capitol motas veguadas catz evacuacio la qual es am sanc am le qual esta la vida deves la aspersio de la vena o incisio sobre l’apostema o apercio de exsitura o puracio de la plagua o extraccio de sageta o incizio de peyra e a lor semblantz.	And therefore, hear that you be in great caution, for in the operation which is in this chapter, many cases of evacuation occur which involve the vein or incision on an abscess or puncture or extraction of pus or cleaning of the wound or removal of an arrow or incision of the boil, and similar cases.
E de totz aquels so acompanhatz temor e tremor e en le mas de lor catz la mort.	And in all of these, there is fear and trembling, and in the most severe cases, death.
E yeu amonesti vos que sobre vos no caia aquo en le qual es esitacio, quar alcunas veguadas cazo deves vos manieyras de homes am manieyras motas de malautias.	And I warn you that this applies to you in your situation, for in some cases, conditions can lead to methods of treatment going awry due to the patient's maladies.
E de lor es alcu que s’irays am la sua malautia e es leugiera deves lu la mort, e aysso per la vehemensia de aquo que troba de sa malautia, e per longuesa de la malautia de lu, e am la malautia es paor la qual significa mort.	And from these, some will go to their illness and be more easily led to death, and this due to the intensity of what they find from their illness, and due to the length of their illness, and in illness is fear which means death.
E de aquels es le qual dona a tu son aver e ditta, tu esperant am aquel sanetat, e la sieua malautia es perniciosa.	And of those who give you their symptoms and say, you wait for that health, and their illness is dangerous.
E donc no cove que tu consentas en aquel que ve a vos del qual es aquesta manieyra; e la vostra cautela sia major que covesitat e la vostra rapacitat; e no presumatz alcuna causa sobre aquo sino aprop sciencia certa la qual virifica aquo deves vos, e al qual perve successio lausabla.	And so you must consent to only those who come to you, of whom this is the manner; and your caution should be greater than greed and your rapacity; and do not presume on any cause but rather certain science which verifies what you must do, and by which success is praiseworthy.
E usatz en la curacio de totz vostres malautes de pronosticacio e indicacio de lu al qual es salut convertida, quar en aquel es a vos ajutori sobre adquisicio de fama e de memoria, de lausor e de gloria.	And use in the cure of all your patients by predicting and indicating to them where health is converted, for in that you have help in acquiring fame and memory, praise and glory.
O, filhs, Dieus en vos spire le sieu entendement e no oste a vos direccio e proteccio, quar aquo es en la sua ma.	O, children, God inspires his understanding in you and does not deprive you of direction and protection, for this is in His hand.
E yeu e ordenat aquest capitol distingent per capitols segon que precedit en le capitol de cauteris, de la cura del cap entro als pes, per que sia a vos alleujat aquo que demandatz de aquo e del qual havetz necessitat.	And I have ordered this chapter distinctly into chapters according to what was preceded in the chapter of cautery, concerning the cure from head to foot, that you may be eased by what you ask and which you need.
Capitol primier.	First chapter.
De la curacio de aygua la qual es contenguda en le cap dels enfantz.	Of the cure of water that is contained in the head of the child.
Sapias que aquesta malautia motas veguadas endeve als enfantz deves le enfantament e quan la noyrissa estrenh le cap del enfant ses livitat.	Know that this illness often appears in children during birth and when the mother strengthens the child's head after birth.
E alcunas veguadas endeve per causa amaguada la qual no es saubuda.	And sometimes during birth for causes hidden, which are not known.
Mays yeu no vi aquesta malautia sino en les enfantz; e a totz aquels les quals yeu vi se coytec la mort, e per ayssi es a mi vist layssada obra en aquels.	But I have not seen this illness except in children; and for all those whom I have seen, it leads to death, and thus I am left with the task of treating them.
E yeu e vist que un enfant le cap del qual era d’aygua omplit, e·l cap de lu era totjorn ayssi magnificat entro que ceser no podia sobre si meteys per la grandesa del sieu cap, e mays que la humiditat fe aucmentada entro que foc mort.	And I have seen that a child's head was filled with water, and his head was always thus enlarged until it could no longer bear the weight due to the size of his head, and more importantly, because the humidity increased leading to his death.
E aquesta humiditat o es agreguada entre la codena e l’os, o es agreguada dejos le os sobre le ciphac.	And this humidity is either added between the meninx and the bone, or it is added to the bone surface.
Quar la operacio en aquel si la humiditat es entre la codena e l’os e le apostema es pauc, lahoras cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am una fissura en la latitut, e sia la longitut de la fissura cays dos notz entro que corra la humiditat, e aquesta es la forma del spatum:	When the operation in that place where the moisture is between the ligament and the bone and the abscess is small, then cut in the middle of the location with a crack in the width, and let the length of the crack be about two finger-widths so that the moisture flows through, and this is the form of the spatium:
E donc si la humiditat es mays augmentada e l’apostema es major, lahoras son aqui dos fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	And therefore, if the moisture is much increased and the abscess is larger, then here are two cracks in this manner:
E si la humiditat es dejos le os, senhal de lu es que tu vezes la comissuras del cap ubertas de tota partida e l’aygua es spremuda quan tu compremes aquela am la tieua ma a las partidas dedintz e no es aquo a tu amaguat.	And if the moisture is located on the bone, the sign of this is that you will see the edges of the ligament wide open when you press it with your hand on the inside parts and it does not appear to be so under your fingers.
Cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am tres fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	Cut in the middle of the location with three cracks in this manner:
e aprop la inscizio extratz ne tota la humiditat; e aprop strenh las fissuras am draps e plumassols; e aprop enbroca aquo de sobre am vi e oli entro al quint dia, e aprop deslia le liament e cura la plagua am tentas e enguentz, e strenh le cap am equalitat; e mange le malaute am vianda secca de pauca humiditat entro que·l membre sia confortat e sanat.	and then remove all the moisture by scraping; and strengthen the cracks with bandages and pillows; and on the fifth day, pour oil over it, and remove the dressing and cure the wound with lint and ointment, strengthening the ligament with equal parts; and let the patient eat dry food of little moisture until the limb is comfortable and healed.
E es autra manieyra de incisio, que consideras hon apar la magnitut del apostema e la colleccio de l’aygua, quar alcunas veguadas es mays en le occipicii, o en la partida denant, o en la destra, o en la sinistra; e donc aten am la incizio on appar le apostema e la replecio de l’aygua, e fen aquo segon que a tu es miels possible.	And another way of making an incision, which consider as having regard to the size of the abscess and the collection of the water; for in some cases it is more at the occiput, or at the anterior part, or on the right side, or on the left; and therefore attend to the incision where the abscess appears and the filling with water, and do so according to what seems best to you.
Et observa que no inscindas la arteria e endevengua flueys de sanc e mora le malaute per aquel flux de sanc am evacuacio de humiditat.	And observe that you do not incise the artery and attempt to let pus flow from the boil through that flow of blood, for this would cause the patient to suffer due to the evacuation of moisture.
Capitol .ii.	Chapter II.
De inscisio de las arterias las quals so aprop las aurelhas, apeladas hilasseysse.	Of the incision of the arteries which are near the ears, called hemorrhages.
Capitol segon.	Chapter II.
Quan endeveno ad alcu catars o raumas als huelhs o al pietz, e es antiquat aquo, e no confereys en aquo la curacio de las medicinas, lahoras la deriera curacio en aquest es incizio de aquelas dos arterias.	When an abscess or wound is found in the ears or on the foot, it is customary not to apply medical treatment to such cases. Instead, the proper procedure for this is to make an incision in those two arteries.
E donc cove quan tu vols inscidir aquelas que le malaute raza lo sieu cap, e aprop fregua le loc am drap aspre per so que aparan las arcerias, e aprop sia strengut le col del malaute am alcu drap; e aprop considera on polsa la vena; e les locs de quascuna sobre les locs les quals so aprop las aurelhas depremutz, e tant se occultan sino en alcus homes.	And therefore cover when you want to incise those that the malady root has its head, and then rub the place with rough cloth so that the arteries appear, and then strengthen the neck of the malady with some cloth; and consider where to feel the vein; and the places of each over the places which are near the ears pressed, and they are hidden in almost all men.
E aprop senha sobre la arceria am tenta, e aprop inscideys quascuna am le spatum de quascuna partida agut am inscizio pervenient entro al os, e sia aquo per la latitut del cap.	And then touch over the artery with your hand, and then incise each with a sharp blade into the mouth, and do this for the width of the head.
E si vols, entromet le spatum dejos la arteria e trenqua aquala a las inciden a las partidas desus.	And if you want, insert the blade leaving the artery and transect it at the incisions on the parts above.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio cays dos ditz ajustatz, quar quan alcuna vena es inscizida le sanc es eyssit am egressio pulsatil, le qual saut deforo per saut frequent.	And let the length of the incision be about two digits wide, for when a vein is incised, the bleeding occurs at the pulsating exit, which spurts frequently through frequent spurts.
Mays si la arceria no apareys al cintiment, lahoras cove que tu mesures de la aurelha la quantitat del spazi de tres ditz, e aprop senha am tenta, e fen entro al os.	But if the artery does not appear at the incision, then measure from the ear the quantity of space three digits wide, and then touch with your hand, and do this into the mouth.
E aquo que cove getar del sanc es quantitat de vi unc., e fort leu ne geta de lu mays o mens, e tot aquo es segon la quantitat la qual appareys de la vertut del malaute e de la replecio de la arceria de lu.	And what flows from the wound is a quantity of blood one pint, and more or less it flows out of the same, and all this is according to the quantity which appears from the virtue of the malady and from the filling of the artery of his.
E aprop considera la plagua, e donc si reman sobre le os alcuna causa del ciphac, lahoras inscindys aquo per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then consider the wound, and thus if any cause of infection remains on the bone, then incise this to prevent an abscess from forming.
E aprop strenh la plagua am plumassols e am liamentz de drap de li, e aprop cura aquela am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then strengthen the wound with down feathers and cloth lint, and place those inside as well until it heals.
Capitol .iii.	Chapter III.
De extraccio de las arcerias las quals so en las templas.	On the extraction of arteries which are in the temples.
Quan ad alcu accideys emigranea antiqua o catertz agutz, per humiditatz agrimonials e per qualiditat en les lacertz des templas, o sodo antiqua vehement e semblantz ad aquels, e es medicat am las manieyras de curacio de medicina e aquo no comfereys, lahoras nos hem sproatz en aquestas malautias extraccio de las arcerias en les templas, o cauterizacio de aquelas ayssi cum havem mostrat.	When an old or acute headache occurs due to excessive humidity in the air and the quality of the air near the temples, or if it is a strong old headache similar to those, and is treated according to the methods of medical cure, and since this does not relieve us, then we have resorted to the extraction of arteries in the temples or cauterization of those as we have shown.
E la manieyra de la operacio e extracio de aquelas es que·l malaute raza les pels les quals son en les templas; e entenda a la arceria apparent en le templar quar ela es a tu mostrada per le sieu pols, e·s occultada sino en paucs homes per vehemencia de freg.	And the manner of the operation and extraction is that the surgeon raises the skins which are on the temples; and understand the apparent artery in the temple where it is shown to you by your pulse, and is hidden in only a few men due to the strength of the cold.
E si a tu es occultada, lahoras le col del malaute sia strengut am alcun drap; e aprop fregua le loc am un drap aspre o evapora le loc am aygua cauda entro que aparesca a tu la arceria manifestament.	And if it is hidden to you, then hold the neck of the patient tightly with some cloth; and then rub the area with a rough cloth or evaporate the place with water until the artery becomes clearly visible.
E lahoras tu pren le spatum del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then you take the spatum of which this is the form:
E aprop tu scorja la codena am aquel am facilitat entro que pervenguas a la arceria; e aprop geta en lu onti e extratz aquela a las partidas sobiranas entro que extraguas aquela de la codena e descobras aquela de las tunicas las quals so dejos aquela, de tota partida.	And then you apply the cord to that with ease until you reach the artery; and then grease it and extract that into the upper parts while extracting that from the cord and uncovering that of the tunics, which you leave there, from all parts.
Mays si la arteria es subtil, lahoras envolveys aquela am la extremitat del oncii, e aprop inscindeys de aquela una partida segon la quantitat per la qual sian alonguadas las extremitatz de lu e sian contraytas, e no endevindra flux de sanc, quar si no so inscididas no pujara le sanc de tot.	More if the artery is fine, then wrap it at its extremity with a part of the intestine, and then incise a portion according to the quantity for which the extremities of the intestine are long and contracted, and there will not be a flux of blood, for if they are not incised, the blood will not rise up.
E aprop evacua del sanc de vi unc. entro a tres.	And then evacuate from the vein one. in three.
E si la arceria es gran, lahoras cove que tu lies aquela en dos locs am fiel dopble fort de ceda o am cordas a lonc, e no coyte a lu putrefaccio denant la consolidacio de la plagua e endevengua flux de sanc.	And if the artery is large, then you divide it into two points using a needle double strong for each or with long cords, and do not touch it before the consolidation of the wound and ensure a flow of blood.
E aprop incideys la superfluitat la qual es entre dos liamentz; e fay aquo en aquela hora o aprop autra ora.	And then incise the superfluity which is between two sutures; and do so at that time or shortly after another time.
E si vols, cauteriza aquela am cauteri entro al os am cauteri cutellar entro que sian incididas las extramitatz de lu, e stara en loc de aquela meteyssa obra.	And if you wish, cauterize it with a cautery inside the bone and with a surgical cautery where the sutures are made, and it will take the place of that metal work.
E es milhor obra sino que·l malaute aia febre o es de escalfada compleccio; quar cauteri es de aquelas causas que ajudan a las humiditatz finidoras, e donc es milhor en juvament.	And it is better to do so unless the patient has fever or is of chills and fever; for a cautery is of those causes that help to resolve humidity, and therefore it is better in youth.
E cove aprop la extraccio de las arcerias que huomplas le loc de coto antic, e sian pausatz sobre lu polvils decentement fayt, e aprop sia curat am medicinas seccas fazen naysser la carn e am calguas entro que sia sanat.	And then you should ligate the arteries that you place at the proper site, and they should be packed with dust decently made, and it will be cured by applying dry medicines which cause flesh to grow and with waters until it is healed.
E si mentre obres autra veguada endeventa flux de sanc de la arceria, lahora tu te coyta a restrenger aquel sanc, o am cauteri, o que omplas le loc de coto, e strenh la tua ma entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if while working another time you encounter a flow of blood from the artery, then you must constrict that blood, or with a cautery, or what you fill the place with cotton, and strengthen your hand so that the blood is restricted.
E si deguna causa de aquelas no es a tu present, lahoras pausa le tieu dit sobre le loc entro que·l sanc sia congilat, e enbroca le loc am aygua de vehement fregiditat entro que la acuitat repausa, e sia strengut segon que cove.	And if any cause of this is not at your presence, then place your hand as you have said on the area until the blood congeals, and immerse the area in water of strong coldness until the acuity rests, and be strengthened according to what is suitable.
E aquo que es pus leugier en extraccio de arceria es que tu cauterizes la vena am aquest cauteri haventz dos cotels, pus que tu has senhat les dos locs am tenta, e depausa quascus, mot ignitz, entro que pervenguan al os e inscindan la vena en dos locs, per so que sia elonguat aquo que es entre las extremitatz de lu, quar no son consolidadas de tot am aquest cauteri.	And that which is easier in the extraction of an artery is that you cauterize the vein with this cautery having two knives, after you have marked the two areas with your fingers, and place warm coals over them until they reach the bone and incise the vein in two places, so that what is between the extremities of the vein, which are not consolidated by this cautery, may be elongated.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri:	And this is the form of the cautery:
E sia la acuitat dels dos cotels esemps.	And let the sharpness of the two knives be sufficient.
Mays empero si so mendres acuitat que dos cotels es milhor, quar si so agudas cum dos cotels propera a quascuna freg, e no enscideysso la carn am velocitat.	But moreover, if it is a sharp acute pain that is like two knives, then it is better, for if such sharp pains approach each part quickly, and you do not cut the flesh with speed.
Donc cum en aquels es alcuna grossitut, es tenguda la calor del foc en aquels e la carn es abscindida leugierament.	Therefore, when there is any swelling, keep the heat of the fire on those areas and the flesh is cut slightly.
E aquesta obra es milhor en tota obra e pus leugiera.	And this method is better in all works and more gentle.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre dos cotels la quantitat de la grossesa del dit.	And let the space be which is between two knives the quantity of the swelling of the digit.
Capitol quart.	Capitulum quartum.
De la cura de cors de lagremas agudas e aciduas dels huels.	On the treatment of bodies affected by sharp and acidic tears from the eyes.
Quan so lagremas aciduas, e es le cors de aquelas venas las quals so sobre le test del cap deforo, e no comfereys en aquo alcuna causa de la curacio de medicina, e vezes la cara del malaute ja enrogesir e sent en le sieu front deambulacio ayssi cum si era deambulacio de formiguas, e·ls huels de aquel so extenuatz, humitz enayssi que ja les pels de lor son conodutz, e las parpelas so scalfadas per la acuitat de las lacrimas, les antics agro mesties en la curacio de aquelas de aquesta operacio, e nompnero aquela curacio am spassa.	When the tears are acidic, and the body is affected by those veins which are on the temple of the head, and you find no cause for the treatment in medicine, and sometimes the face of the patient turns red and feels a crawling sensation on their forehead as if it were being crawled over by ants, and the eyes become weak, moistened, and their skin seems to be known, with the eyelids becoming scalded due to the sharpness of the tears, the ancients mixed remedies for these in this operation, and we number that treatment among them.
E es que tu comandas al malaute rayre les pels les quals son en le sieu front, e aprop inscideys en le front tres fissuras engualment distans segon la longitut del front.	And you command the patient to stretch the skin which is on his forehead, and then incise the forehead with three equal distances according to the length of the forehead.
E si’ la longitut de la fissura cays dos ditz: la una fissura sia engualment distant a la longitut del nas en le mieg loc del front, e la segonda segon la longitut un petit del movement dels lacertz les quals so en le lacrimal, e la tersa del autre part.	And if the length of the incision is two fingers: the first incision should be equally distant to the length of the nose in the middle of the forehead, and the second according to the length of a small movement of the tears which are in the lacrimal glands, and the third from the other part.
E guarda te de la incizio de las arcerias las quals so en dos latz, e elongua la tua ma de la continuacio de amdos las mandibulas.	And beware of the beginning of the arteries which are in two branches, and keep your hand away from the continuation of both jaws.
E si’ l’espazi de quascuna inscizio la quantitat de tres ditz ajustatz.	And if the space of each incision the quantity of three fingers adjusted.
E si’ a tu una pessa d’espongua apparelhada o draps seccatz motz am les quals exsiccas le sanc.	And if you have a piece of sponge prepared or dry cloth, place them over which to absorb the blood.
E aprop entremet le spatum de dos agudas extremitatz, del qual aquesta es la forma de la inscisio de lu:	And then insert the tip of two sharp instruments, the form of which is the incision for this.
que es de la partida des templas entro a la segonda inscizio.	that is from the opening between the temples into the second incision.
Exxcorja am aquel tota la codena la qual es entre dos incizios am le ciphac le qual es sobre le os, e aprop fay aquo de la inscizio migera entro a la segonda inscisio.	Excise all the tissue that is between two incisions along the suture line which is over the bone, and then do this for the midline incision into the second incision.
E aprop stratz ne aquest spatum e entromet en la primieyra inscizio autra vetz un autre instrument le qual es apelat cutellar, agut de una part e del autre no agut.	And then incise this space and insert it into the first incision. Alternatively, use another instrument called a cutter, sharp on one side and blunt on the other.
E pausa le latz de aquel agut deves la carn annexa deves la codena, e le latz de lu leon dintz le os, e empelley aquel entro que pervengua a la fissura migera, e abscindeys am aquel totz les vaysels que descendo del cap als huels.	And place the blade of the sharp side to the adjacent flesh, cut the flesh, and the blade inside the bone. Then push it into the midline fissure, and cut all the vessels that descend from the head to the heels.
Mays que sia continuada la inscizio ad aquo appar de la codena, e aprop fay aquo en la fissura migana entro al autra fissura.	More than that, continue the incision to where the tissue appears, and then do this in the midline fissure between the other fissure.
E pus que corr del sanc quantitat engual, exprem les locs de las pessas del sanc congilat.	And when the bleeding has stopped in equal quantity, express the areas of the veins congested.
E aprop pausa en quascuna fissura calgua de coto vielh, e pausa sobre aquels polvils enbegutz en vi e oli e vi agre, e vegas que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then place your hand over any old gouty crack, and place it on those powders mixed in wine and oil and vinegar, ensuring that no abscess forms.
E en le tertz dia deslia le liament e aministra gran enfusio de aygua cauda o tebeza, e aprop cura aquo am enguent bazilicon am oli rozat e autres entro que las plaguas sian sanadas.	And on the seventh day after the ligature, administer a large infusion of horse chestnut water, and place on it an ointment of basilicum in olive oil and others until the sores are healed.
Capitol .v.	Chapter V.
De la cura de lagramas per catartz e als huels descendentz de las partidas dedintz del cap.	For the cure of tears due to catarrh and phlegm descending from inside the head.
Quan ad alcu veno catartz agutz e continuantz, e vezes les huels del malaute extenuatz petitz, e ja le reguardament de lor es debelitat, e las palpebras ulceradas e de lor cazo les pels, e en le preon del cap es dolor aguda ledent e extrenutacio consequent, lahoras sapias per aquestz accidentz que las materias e catartz no veno sino de motas venas de las partidas dedintz procedent.	When there is an abundance of acute and continuous phlegm, and the gouty tears are diminished in quantity, and their appearance is weakened, and the eyelids are ulcerated and from this condition the skin is affected, and in the forehead there is severe pain and subsequent swelling, then you can deduce that these materials and phlegm do not come from the veins within the head.
E la milhor curacio en aquels es aquesta: que comandes al malaute que raza lo sieu front, e aprop inscideys en aquel una fissura al mieg loc del front, un petit per la latitut (e comensa am la fissura del templar senestre entro al dextre templar; e sia inscisio entro al os; e eslongua la tua ma dels lacertz del templas lesquals son maugutz deves la mastigacio), entro que sia le os descubert.	And the best cure for these conditions is this: you command the patient to rub his forehead, and then incise a small slit right in the middle of the forehead (starting from between the left temple and the right temple; and within the bone, extend your hand over the wrinkles of the temples which are prominently visible, ensuring thorough incision), while the bone is exposed.
Exsicca tot le sanc am espongua o am drap secc e aprop repleys entre las doas labias de la fissura am coto vielh o am draps de li.	Dry all the blood on the sponge or dry cloth and then place it between the two lips of the wound with a small piece of lint or a cloth.
E aprop estrenh desus am polvils enbegutz en vi e oli per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	Strengthen it further with powders mixed in wine and oil so that no abscess forms.
E quan deslias aquo e veses que l’apostema ja es diminuit, lahoras cove que fregua le os entro que comensa en lu nayser carn, e aprop cura aquel am regiment exsiccatiu le qual fassa neysser la carn, ayssi cum si tu prenes de farina de froment dos partidas e de colofania quatre partidas e mescla o, e de lor sia fayt emplastre e sia aministrat en aquestas plaguas a de la carn nativitat.	And when you open it and see that the abscess has diminished, then wash the bone where it begins to have new flesh, and then cure it with an exsiccative regimen which causes the flesh to dry, as if you take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of resin and mix them, and from them make a poultice and apply it to these lesions of new flesh.
Capitol .vi.	Capitol. vi.
De la cura de aquo que catz en las aurelhas.	For the cure of what catches in the ears.
Tota causa que catz en las aurelhas es una de quatre specias, quar o es peyra mineral o causa semblant a peyra, ayssi cum ferr e veyre, o es de planta ayssi cum ceze o fava, o es causa fluxtibla ayssi cum aygua e vi agre e a lor semblantz, o alcuna bestia.	All cause that catches in the ears is of four species: either it is mineral stone or a cause similar to stone, such as iron and lead, or it is from plants such as cedar or fennel, or it is a fluxible cause such as water and oil and their similarities, or some beast.
E donc quan peyra catz en l’aurelha o autra causa semblant de aquelas causas que no ajustan ne creysso en l’aurelha, e pausa la aurelha al solelh, e si vezes la peyra, lahoras distilla en aquela alcuna causa de oli violat o sizami, e aprop aministra la extraccio de lu, e fay le stornudar am condizi, e oppila las nars deve le aveniment de stornutacio.	And when the ear is pierced or another cause resembling those causes that do not settle or insert into the ear, and you place the ear in the sun, and if you touch the piercings, then it will distill in that certain cause of viola or sesame oil, and then administer the extraction of it, and make the sneezing according to condition, and plug the nostrils to prevent the onset of sneezing.
E aprop pausa en le circuit de la aurelha alscunas pessas de drap o lana, e dextendas la aurelha a las partidas desus, quar motas veguadas es foro-getada am aquestas causas.	And place some pieces of cloth or wool in the circuit of the ear, and extend the ear to the parts above, where motas (small particles) are frequently found due to these causes.
E si no n’es getada, lahoras aministra extraccio de lu am le instrument apelat gesti epicicarios subtil del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if it is not pierced, then administer the extraction of it with the instrument called gesti epicicarios, of which this is the form:
E si es foro-getada am gesti, bo es; e sino, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am onci subtil de pauca duplicacio.	And if it is pierced by the gesti, that is good; otherwise, then administer the extraction of it with a fine, doubled hook.
E donc si no es foro-getada per aquo, lahoras fay una canula de aram e entromet la extremitat de la canula en le trauc de la aurelha e claus a l’enviro de la canula am cera e am oli mollificada per so que no sia ubert sino la canula.	And if it is not pierced by this, then make a cannula of wire and insert the end of the cannula into the meatus of the ear and seal around the cannula with wax and with oil softened so that it is not open except for the cannula.
E aprop extratz am le tieu vent am fort atraccio, quar tropas veguadas cum aquo que havem recontat.	And then extract the thigh muscle with strong traction, for too many times as we have recounted.
Mays si no es foro-getada en aquesta manieyra, lahoras pren de halka alumbat o de vecz aparelhat am le qual son preses les ausels una patita quantitat, e pausa aquel en la extremitat de ray, e aprop envolopa sobre aquel coto decentment pausat.	But if it is not performed in this manner, then take some lampblack or previously prepared ink in which the fowls' wings are immersed a quantity, and place that at the extremity of the ray, and then wrap around that area decently.
E aprop entromet aquel en le trauc de la aurelha am facilitat, e aprop excicca la aurelha de la humiditat.	And then insert that into the ear tract with ease, and then dry the ear of moisture.
E donc si no es foro-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recontadas, lahoras tu coyta a talhar aquela denant que endevengua apostema caut o espasme.	And so if it is not performed with all the causes which we have recounted, then you incise to excise that which is about to become an abscess or spasm.
E la manieyra de talhar aquela es que tu al comensament sancnes le malaute de la vena sephasica e extratz del sanc segon la mannieyra de la vertut de lu, e aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas e converteys l’aurelha a las partidas desus, e fen am petita fissura en la razit de la aurelha deves lo greys de lu en le loc be premegut de lu.	And the way to incise it is that at the beginning you mark the spot of the evil from the phasic vein and extract the sanc according to the manner of its virtue, and then make a cut between your fingers and turn the ear towards the parts above, and make a small fissure in the edge of the ear and press its grays into the well-prepared place.
E sia la fissura de figura lunar entro que pervengua a la peyra, e, la peyra atrobada, osta aquela si podes am instrumentz apropriatz; e aprop cos la fissura en aquela hora am velocitat, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And let the fissure of lunar figure permeate to the heel, and, if the heel is blackened, obstruct it if possible with appropriate instruments; then apply velocity to the fissure in that hour, and cure it while it is healed.
E si la causa cazent en la aurelha es un dels gras que creysso e so inflatz, lahoras aministra la curacio e la extraccio de lu; mays si no obezeys a tu ad eyssiment, lahoras tu pren spatum teune subtil segon aquesta forma:	And if the cause affects the ear, it is one of the greases that collect and are inflamed, then administer the cure and extraction of it; but if it does not respond to your therapy, then take thin subtle spasm according to this form:
e aministra am aquel la abscizio de aquel gra lo qual es cazut en l’aurelha.	And administer the extraction of that grease which is caused in the ear.
E no fassas aquo quan cogitas que aquel ja es humectat per la vapor del aurelha, e pausa aquel en motas pessas, e prop extratz ne aquelas am les oncis o am gesti subtil, o ab inscizio ayssi co dit havem, quar es alleujada la extraccio de lu.	And do not do this when you think that it is already moistened by the vapor of the ear, and place it on fine wicks, and then extract it in those areas near the canals or with subtle touch, or by incision as we have said, for this alleviates the extraction.
Mays en l’aygua la qual es intrada en l’aurelha cove que·l malaute use de sternutacio am condizi al comensament, e omple la sieua aurelha am alcu coto vielh, e jagua sobre aquela aurelha en la qual es l’aygua, e si per aquo es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, lahoras pren tropas peyras teunas e leons segon la longitut del dit, e calfa aquelas en le foc un pauc, e le pacient entrometa una de aquelas en le trauc de la sua aurelha e saute sobre la un pe sieu de aquela partida e percussia am una autra peyra sobre la peyra la qual es dintz la aurelha.	But in the water which has entered into the ear cavity where the illness causes sneezing at the beginning, and fills the ear with some old wax, place a hot rag over that ear in which is the water. If by this it is expelled, well; but if not, then take small pieces of lead or iron according to the length of the finger, heat them in the fire for a little, and have the patient insert one of those into the tube of his ear and shake out a piece of that part over the ear with which the ear is filled and strike it with another stone on the stone which is inside the ear.
Donc no cesse aquo am peyra entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada.	Do not stop applying leeches until all the water has been drawn out.
E ja l’aygua sira foro-getada enayssi que tu prenguas de papier o de gonc i, e met la una extremetat de lu en l’aurelha e estendas l’autre extremitat am foc entro que sia comburit le may de lu.	And when the water has been drawn out sufficiently, take either paper or wool, and place one end in the ear and extend the other end into the fire until the wool is burned.
E prop met i autre gonc e fay aquo tantas veguadas entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada, e stratz aquel am canula ayssi co desus es dit de la peyra extrasadora.	And place another wool and do this several times until all the water has been drawn out, and squeeze it with a cannula as previously mentioned about the leech extractor.
Mays en la extraccio de bestia intrant en aquela aurelha, si es a petit cos, ayssi piussa e a lu semblant, cura aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio; mays si es de gran cos la qual causa apar al sen del vezement, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am gesti e oncis, e la causa de lu es pus leugiera de totas las autras causas que cazo en l’aurelha.	In the extraction of blood in that ear, if it is a small wound, apply more and to its likeness, treat it as we have said in the division. But if it is a large wound which causes significant pain, then administer the bloodletting with speed and precision, and the cause of it is lighter than all other causes that occur in the ear.
Mays en la extraccio de verm engendrat en la aurelha, quan tu curas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e en le tractat de distillacios e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu reguardes la aurelha al solelh.	In the extraction of worms generated in the ear, when you treat it as we have said in the division and in the treatise on distillations, and if your treatment does not show results, then examine the ear in the sunlight.
E donc si apar aqui alcuna causa dels verms, lahoras extratz aquel am gesti o am onci subtils, mays si no apar deguna causa, lahoras pren una canula dejos streyta e desus ampla de la qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if any cause of worms appears here, then extract that with tweezers or fine forceps. But if no cause appears, then take a cannula and stretch it open from above, as this is its form:
E entromet la extremitat subtil en la aurelha segon la quantitat la qual suffertar puesca le malaute; e aprop sucgeys am aquela per succio fort, e fay aquo motas veguadas, entro que totz les verms sian foro-gitatz.	I insert the subtle end of the cannula into the ear according to the amount that the patient can bear; and then I suction it with strong suction, performing this several times until all the worms are extracted.
Mays si no obezeysso a tu al ayssiment, lahoras tu opila e claus en le circuit de la canula am cera ayssi cum havem dit; lahoras aministre distillacios las quals han ja esproadas les antics en la curacio dels verms, e atrobaras aquo en le tractat de distillacios.	But if it does not respond to your attempt, then you plug and seal the circuit of the cannula with wax as we have said; then administer distillations which have already proven effective in the treatment of worms, and you will find this in the treatise on distillations.
E sia la tua efusio am la qual efundas les olis medicinas en la aurelha am aquest strument del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And let your effusion be with that which you pour medicinal oils into the ear with this instrument, as this is its form:
E fay aquela de argent o de eram, dejos streyt, en le qual sia un petit trauc, e am pla desus.	And make that of silver or copper, stretched out, in which there is a small tube, and a flat surface above.
E donc sia cum empellent a que es en la conquavitat de la canula de continent aqui on sira necessari.	And so that it may be forced into the cavity of the catheter here where it will be necessary.
E si vols, pren le ray e envolveys en la extremitat de lu decentment coto, e aprop gieta oli en la concavitat del auziment, o suc de alcuna herba, o aquo que vols de aquestas medicinas en la canula — e aquela es en la aurelha —, e aprop entromet le ray am coto desus e exprem am la tua ma aquel am compressio temprada de lu entro que l’oli sia expellit en la concavitat del auziment e le malaute senta le oli dedintz.	And if you wish, take the wick and wrap it properly around its end, then place oil in the cavity of the ear, or the juice of some herb, or any medicine you want from these—those are in the auricle—and insert the wick carefully above, pressing it with your hand so that the oil is expelled into the cavity of the ear and the illness feels the oil inside.
E aquo que sia enfundut en la aurelha sia ja scalfat am foc un petit.	And what is infused in the ear should be slightly heated over fire.
E guarda te que la causa la qual distillaras en l’aurelha no sia trop frega, quar las medicinas de aurelha no suffertan aquo.	And make sure that the medicine you distill in the ear is not too hot, for ear medicines cannot withstand that.
Capitol .vii.	Book VII.
De curacio de opilacio de aurelhas.	On the treatment of ear abscesses.
Alcunas veguadas alcus enfantz yeysso dels ventres de lors mayres no-perforatz, e aquo ja accideys en alcus homes, opilacio en le meat de la aurelha per plagua o per carn nada en aquela; e aquesta opilacio alcunas veguadas es fayta en le preon del trau de la aurelha la qual no consiec le vezement, e alcunas veguadas es en las partidas defora.	Sometimes children are born with abscesses in the flesh of their ears from their parents' unperforated ears, and this happens occasionally in some people, with an abscess forming in the ear肉 here due to infection or no apparent cause; sometimes these abscesses occur in the cartilage of the ear before it fully develops, and sometimes they appear on the outer parts.
E aquela que accideys en le preon de lu, la qual no comprehen le vezement, es en las majors disposicios de dificil sanacio.	And that which occurs in the anterior part of it, which does not affect the surface, is in the major dispositions of difficult recovery.
E en aquela en qual consegueys le vezement, cove que tu pauses la aurelha del malaute al solelh e reguarda en aquela.	And in that where you can see the surface, make sure that you place the patient in the sun and examine it.
E donc si vezes oppulacio apparent, obre aquela am espatum subtil del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if you see an apparent swelling, open that thin membrane under which this swelling is located:
Si’ la extremitat de lu en la qual sia petita la latitut, del qual la una partida sia aguda e l’autra no; e le spatum sia de dos latz leon per so que no fassa lizio al aurelha.	If the extremity of which is narrow in width, and one part is sharp while the other is not; and the membrane is two fingerbreadths wide so as not to irritate the ear.
E donc si la opilacio es per carn nascuda en la aurelha o en le meat de lu, lahoras te aquela am oncis subtils e incidiys aquela vehement facilitat entro que sia ostada tota la carn.	And if the opacity is due to hidden flesh in the ear or in the肉中, then you should use thin scissors and cut through it with great delicacy so that all the flesh is completely removed.
E si opilacio es en le preon de la aurelha, lahoras pren ray subtil leon e escalfa aquel am foc un pauc, e aprop met aquel en le meat de l’aurelha.	And if the opacity is in the anterior part of the ear, then take a thin needle and heat that fire a little, and then place it in the flesh of the ear.
E donc si as scentit oppulacio am aquo que le malaute atroba am facilitat, per gravetat de ausir, esforsa la oppressio de lu am facilitat; e guarda te que no plagues les nervis del aurelha.	And so if you sense an accumulation of that which the patient experiences with ease due to the weight of excretion, relieve the oppression with ease; and be careful not to injure the nerves of the ear.
E aprop pausa en l’aurelha drap de li segon la quantitat del ample del trauc lo qual tu as envolvutz en l’enguent egipciac; e fay aquo per alcus jorns entro que sias segur de la consolidacio de la plagua; o que prenguas qualgua e enfon aquela en ayguaros e pulveriza sobre lu segi trissat e usa de lu; e si vezes la aurelha ja esser apostemada, lahoras cove que tu estraguas la qualgua e permutes aquela am autra qualgua la qual tu envoloparas en cerot que sia fayt am oli rozat, entro que sia le apostema caut cedat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then place the cloth in the ear according to the size of the wound which you have wrapped in Egyptian ointment; and do this for several days until you are sure of the healing of the wound; or that you soak some and insert it into water, powder it thoroughly, and use it; and if you see the ear already swollen, then change the liquid and substitute another that you wrap in lint made from rubbed oil, until the swelling is reduced; and cure it as it heals.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras submergeys esponga o drap en aygua frega e pausa sobre la aurelha, e usa del autra curacio la qual restrengeys le flux del sanc, la qual es dita en le tractat de distillacio.	But if a flow of blood occurs, then immerse the sponge or cloth in cold water, and place it on the ear, and use the other treatment which you tighten to restrict the flow of blood, which is called in the treatise on distillation.
Capitol .viii.	Capitol. viii.
De cura de athezil le qual endeveno a las palpebras.	For the care of an eyelid that has become inflamed.
Athezil les quals endeveno a las paupebras dels huels alcuna veguada so humitz, alscunas veguadas son secs.	Eyelids that sometimes become moist, and at other times dry.
Donc cove que tu tenguas aquels am tenhalhas o am onci, e inscindas aquels am espatum de las suas razitz, e aprop pausa sobre les locs segi trissat.	Then take those flax or wool cloths, soak them in the foam of their juice, and place them over the areas after they have cooled.
Mays si dolor am flux de sanc veno, lahoras tu cauteriza aquels am cauteri lanticular subtil.	But if there is pain with a hot flux of blood, then cauterize those areas with a thin cautery.
E la milhor cauterizacio es aprop las inscizios e tropas veguadas retornam quan reman alcuna causa de sas razitz; e quan so cauterizadas am foc, aquelas razitz son comburidas e no retornan.	And the best cauterization is near the incisions, and the wounds return when there remains any cause of their juice; and when they are cauterized with fire, those juices are burned and do not return.
Capitol .ix.	Capitol. ix.
Cura de grandeyssa que veno a las palpebras dels huels.	Care for inflammation that has affected the eyelids.
Motas veguadas endeve en las palpebras dels huels alcuna causa la qual es asemblada a grandissa en sa fortalicia e duricia, e per so grandissia es apelada.	Spots appear in the eyelids of the eye, caused by some reason which is similar to inflammation in its strength and hardness, and thus it is called inflammation.
E es agreguacio de humiditat grossa en la palpebra dejos e desus.	And this is an addition of thick humidity in the eyelid above and below.
Donc la opperacio en lor es que consideras lahoras si la grandissia es procedent en lu en aquo que apar de la palpebra e es mauguda a tota partida; e la causa de lu es leugiera.	And in their operation, you must consider whether the swelling is present in them at what appears from the eyelid and affects all parts; and the cause of it is slight.
Donc fen sobre aquela am fissura per la latitut, e aprop escorga aquela de tota partida am facilitat entro que evasesca, e aprop suspen aquela am onci e abscindeys aquela.	And make a slit there for the width, and then examine that of all parts with ease as you evacuate it, and suspend that by an ocular and cut it off.
Mays si a tu no es apparelhada la incizio de lu si no pus que penetras la palpebra am inscizio pauc a pauc, lahoras aquo no notz en deguna causa.	But if you do not have access to the beginning of it and must penetrate the eyelid with an incision little by little, then this is noted in no cause.
E si la figura es gran, lahoras tu l’ajusta am sutura; e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the figure is large, then you adjust it with sutures; and care for it until it is healed.
E si es pauca, a tu no sobrevindra mal per aquela quar l’anguent de lu restaura aquela e encarna.	And if it is small, you will not suffer ill from it because the ointment of it restores and heals it.
E si la grandissia es declinant a las partidas dedintz de la palpebra deves la superficia dedintz, lahoras evesa la palpebra e suspen la grandissia am onci, otra que tu indigescas de incizio, e prem aquela de tota part, e si la palpebra per inscizio es alonguada, aquo no notz en deguna causa.	And if the swelling is diminishing inside the eyelid, you should evacuate the inside surface, then evacuate the eyelid and suspend the swelling by an ocular, or one that you choose for incision, and press it from all parts. If the eyelid is elongated by incision, this is noted in no cause.
E aprop la incizio, lava le huel am aygua salada; e cura le loc am aquo que encarna entro que sia sanat.	And at the beginning, wash the wound with salty water; and cover the area with water that will remain until it is healed.
Capitol .x.	Capitol.
De la cura axcirnah en la palpebra desus del huel.	Of the cure for excision in the upper eyelid.
Axcirnath es grays le qual es engendrat en las tunicas de la palpebra desus, e majorment endeve als enfantz, agrava les huels de aquels et accideyso a lor catartz le mayti; e no podon reguardar la claror del solelh per aquo quar lagremas se coytan ad aquels.	Excision is when foreign bodies are generated in the tissues of the upper eyelid, especially in children, worsen their conditions and cause death through their catarrh; and they cannot look at the clarity of the sun because this leads to tears gathering around those areas.
E per so tu vezes aquels jaser sobre les lors caras tot temps, e sobre les lors caras dormen; e so a las palpebras de lor dejos les sobrecils humidas, las quals ja ha cuberta imflacio, e iminencia de accernac apparent es en l’uelh; e que quant tu premes le loc am les tieus ditz, tu centes accernac entro aquels.	And for this, you often see them weep on their faces all the time, and they sleep with tears on their faces; only over their cheeks do their eyebrows remain wet, which are already covered by inflammation, and the imminent need for excision is apparent in the wound; and when you press the area with your thumbs, you feel the excision within those areas.
E alcuna manieyra de opperacio es en aquel que le malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop pausa drap de li e de lu fay calgua, e fay de lu cercle segon la quantitat la qual contena arthernach de tota partida, e aprop pausa aquel sobre aquela e prem am les tieus ditz de tota per que sia agreguat arcernac en le mieg del cercle, e aprop fen en le mieg de aquela humiditat am spatum inscident am fissura per la latitut, e la fissura no sia major que la fissura que es fayta en flaubotomia.	And one method of operation is when the patient rests their head on your hand, then places a cloth around them and ties it securely, forming a circle according to the quantity containing parts of the excised tissue, placing it over that and pressing with your thumbs so that the excision is aggregated in the middle of the circle. Then, in the center of that moisture, let spasm-inducing substances enter through a crack, ensuring the crack is not larger than the incision made in a superficial puncture.
Mays en le preon cove que tu fendas la codena tota entro que pervenguas ad arcernach, quar en las mays desposicios proceseys arcernach per fissura segon la forma de grayseza blanca.	More in the preceding cavity where you make the cut completely until you reach the artery, for in the later stages the artery passes through a fissure according to the form of white grease.
Donc extratz aquela am draps los quals tu as envolopatz entre les tieus ditz a las partidas deforo e revolv entre la ma dextra e sinistre entro que sia dispargut.	Then extract those from the sheets which you have wrapped around your thumbs and divide them by holding in your right and left hand until they are thoroughly mixed.
E guarda te que no ajustes en la fissura per so que am le spatum no pervenguas al huel e ladescas aquel.	And beware that you do not press at the fissure so that you do not block the pus and lift away that part.
Mays si no apar a tu arternach en le comensament de la fissura, mays que tu ajustes en la fissura un petit am fecilitat entro que procesisca arternach; e aprop extratz aquela ayssi quo havem dit; e aprop submargeys draps de li en aygua e vi agre e pausa les sobre le loc e estrenh aquels am polvils.	More if it does not appear at your artery in the beginning of the fissure, more that you press a small piece of flax at the fissure until it processes; then extract those as we have said; then submerge sheets in water and wine and place them over the area to strengthen those with powders.
E so alcus que trissan sal e pausan aquel en la conquavitat de la fissura per so que aquo que es remas de aquela humiditat.	And then allow those that sprinkle salt and place them in the cavity of the fissure so that what remains from that moisture is removed.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then cure it until it is healed.
Mays si accideys en le loc apostema caut, lahoras cura aquel am emplastres cedatils entro que sia sanat.	But if an abscess forms in that area, then cure it by applying flax poultices until it is healed.
Capitol .xi.	Capitol. xi.
De manieyras de tactimi del huel.	Methods of palpation of the whole body.
Quan en las palpebras dels huels so natz pels ajustatz dejos les pels naturals e so antiquatz, lahoras aquels noso al huel e fan endevenir manieras de malautias ayssi cum lacrimas assiduas e mollificacio de palpebras e tela entro que aquo sia causa de destruccio del huel que s’apela tactinir del huel, e cura se en quatre manieyras: o per cauteri am foc; o am medicina acuta segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri; o es fayt atactini per inscizio e sutura; o per cannas segon que yeu diyre.	When in the eyelids of the eye so narrowed due to tightened natural skin and become lax, then those signs are ways of diseases such as continuous tearing and softening of the eyelids and tissue before this is a cause of destruction of the eye, which is called tactinir of the eye, and it is cured in four ways: either by cautery with fire; or by acute medicine as previously said in the Capitol on cautery; or it is treated by incision and suturing; or by canthiostomy according to what I will say.
E donc cove que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se; aprop converteys la palpebra del uelh am la tua ma sinistra, e si es convertida, bo es; e sino, entromet agulha en aquela en la qual sia fiel de la partida pus dejos de la palpebra, e fay penetrar la agulha am fiel desus, e aquo sia — prop del marge de la palpebra en le qual naysso les pels — prop dels pels, e tira le fiel a las partidas desus am la palpebra, e converteys aquela am le ray.	And thus cover that you place the head of the eye in your left hand; then convert the eyelid of the eye with your left hand. If it converts, good is it; and if not, insert a needle into that part where the thread from the eyelid tightening lies, and make the needle penetrate with thread above, and this should be — near the margin of the eyelid where the skin arises — near the skin, and pull the thread to the parts above the eyelid, then convert it.
E aprop fen en la partida dedintz de la palpebra dejos les pels ajustatz am spatum inscidentz del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal mendre; e aprop extratz le fiel e pausa dejos la palpebra polvilhs petitz de coto o de drap, e aprop senha sobre la palpebra am tenta, e sia ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirt.	And then place the skins tightly against the surface of the inner eyelid, positioned between the major lacrimal gland and the minor lacrimal gland; next extract the humors and place a powder of fine cotto or cloth dust on the eyelid, and then cover the eyelid with a flap, as illustrated by the figure of a mirt leaf.
Mays empero cove que sia la figura segon la quantitat de helevacio de la palpebra, quar aquo ja es diversificat en les homes, quar de aquels es le quals indigeys que sia inscidit de la palpebra gran quantitat segon la quantitat per la qual la palpebra es mollificada.	But more importantly, ensure that the figure corresponds to the degree of swelling of the eyelid, for this varies in women, and in those cases where a significant amount of fluid is causing the eyelid to become softened, you should incise the large eyelid accordingly.
E aprop fen am le spatum sobre las doas linhas las quals has senhadas, e comensa del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal menor.	And then make the incision on the surface along the lines you have marked, starting between the major lacrimal gland and the minor lacrimal gland.
E si’ la tua fissura prop dels pels naturals ayssi cum es la grossetut del rey.	And if your incision near the natural skin is as wide as the king's thumb.
E aprop met le onci en un dels dos angles de la codena, e aprop excoria aquela tota, e aprop ajusta am la scitura las doas labias am gula o fiel de lana subtil, e abstergeys le sanc, e fay adherir aquo que superflueys dels fiels sobre dos sobrecils am alcunas causas enviscans, si voles far aquo, e sino, non cures.	And then place the needle in one of the angles of the wound, and completely excoriate it, and next suture the two edges with a thread or fine woolen string, and clean the wound, and adhere what surplus from the threads onto two small pieces of cloth for some viscous causes, if you want to do this, and otherwise, you do not treat it.
E aprop leyssa la sutura dels fiels entro a tres dias o quatre, e aprop cura aquo.	And after that, leave the suture of the stitches between three and four days, and then heal this.
E si vols, layssa la plagua ses sutura, e cura aquela am aquo que exsicca e constrenh, quar la palpebra es alevada deves la sigillacio de la plagua e la agreguacio de lu; mays sutura es milor E donc aysso diysso les antics de taxanir.	And if you wish, leave the wound open without suturing, and heal it by what dries and constricts, for when the eyelid is swollen, you should apply the sealing of the wound and its addition; but suture is better. Therefore, so say the ancients of taxonomy.
Mays empero en lu sia sollicitut sobre le malaute, e es de bona operacio, e no es en lu temor.	But if it is stimulated on the patient, and is of good operation, and not out of fear.
E es autra manieyra en taxmir, e es que senhes sobre la palpebra figura ayssi cum fuelha de mirt, e aprop eleva la palpebra am tres uncis segreguatz e congreguatz segon aquesta forma:	And another method of taxonomy is to hold the eyelid in a shape like a leaf of myrtle, and then lift the eyelid by three inches, separating and gathering it according to this form:
Mays si no es possible aquo, tener les uncis, e aquo no es engualhat, lahoras pren una agula en la qual haia fil e met aquela en le mieg de la figura, e entromet le autre fiel prop le lacrimal major, e·l fiel segon prop le lacrimal mendre, e ajusta entre les tieus ditz les fiels am equalitat, e aprop am aquels eleva la tua ma am elevacio engual, eleva tota la codena sobre la qual es senhat ayssi cum havem recomtat.	But if this is not possible, hold the inches, and thus not unequal, then take a needle on which there is thread and put that in the middle of the figure, and insert the other thread near the major lacrimal gland, and the other near the minor lacrimal gland, and adjust between the ties called threads to equality, and then raise your hand for elevation equally, raising the entire codena over which it was held as we have advised.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then adjust the two edges of the wound with stitches, and cure that which is within until it is healed.
Mays si accideys apostema deves la tua inscizio o la tua fissura, seda aquel apostema am cerot e a lu semblantz, e am enguentz.	If you make an incision or cut, tie the abscess with a thread and dress it to match, and apply ointment.
E alcunas veguadas endeve a la palpebra que·ls sieus pels sian convertitz, adonc cove que tu uses en aquela de aquo que havem dit de inscizio; mays sutura en quascus es mays artificial.	And sometimes under the eyelid, its own skin must be converted. Then use the incision method as described earlier; but stitch in a few places that are more artificial.
Ataxinir am cannas es segon aquesta forma:	Use canes according to this form:
e es que tu convertas la palpebra e scindas la figura qu’es dedintz segon que he recontat; e aprop per art fay doas cannas o doas astelas subtils de las quals longitut sia segon la longitut de la palpebra e la latitut de lor sia mendra de la latitut del spatum.	And you must convert the eyelid and split the figure that is inside according to what I have recounted; then, by art, make two canes or two thin astelas whose length be according to the length of the eyelid and their width be half the width of the space.
E tu ja has inscidit en las extremitatz de quascunas partidas, la on tenes les fils.	And you have incised at the extremities of each part where you have the threads.
Aprop agregua quascuna am subtilitat subre aquo que superflueys de la palpebra del huel, e constres las cannas de quascunas partidas am fort strictura, e layssa aquela per alcus jorns, quar la codena per la strictura morira e sira denegada e se poyrira entro que per si meteyssa cayra.	Then add some thin material over what superflues from the eyelid of each part, and tighten the canes of each part with strong tension, and leave it for a few days; as the knot due to the tension will die and become rejected, and it will come off when it falls by itself.
Mays si es tardat, lahoras trenca la am las toroyras, e aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanat.	And if it is delayed, then cut the threads, and soon after treat the wound until it is healed.
Donc cum es solidada, la palpebra es elevada e les pels no pungo.	And when it is reduced, the eyelid is raised and the skin is not punctured.
E aquesta es la forma de doas cannas las quals faras segon aquesta forma:	And this is the way to make two canes according to this form:
e haia la quantitat de la longitut e de la latitut ni mays ni mens.	and has the length and width neither more nor less.
Capitol .xii.	Capitol. xii.
De elevacio de pels pungentz en le huel am agula quan le pel es dur.	For the elevation of painful skin pricked with an awl when the skin is tough.
Quan son pels no-naturals, durs e aspres e pungentz les huels, lahoras la operacio en lu es que tu prenguas agula subtil e pauses en aquela fiel de ceda subtil e leon, e aprop que tu ajustes las extremitatz de lu e nozes quascu en manieyra mot subtil.	When they are unnatural, hard, rough, and painful skins, the operation on them is that you take a thinawl and place it in the fine fiber of the skin, and soon after adjust the ends of the awl with nuts in a very subtle manner.
E sia la longitut dels fiels de quantitat de una palma.	And let the length of the fibers be about the width of a palm.
E aprop tu compon2 autre fiel subtil dejos lu en breu, e nuza las extremitatz de aquel si tu·t vols.	And then you compose another fine cloth briefly, place it there, and use its ends if you wish.
E aprop pause le malaute le sieu cap en le tieu se, e sia prop del solelh per que la tua obra sia declarada, quar es operacio subtil e menuda.	And then place the patient's head in a towel, and near the sun to ensure that your work is effective, for it is a subtle and delicate operation.
E aprop intromet la agulha en la razit del pel ajustat la qual ha necessitat de engen, e fay aquela penetrar en la palpebra festinantment entro que extraguas aquela desus le pel natural.	And then insert the needle into the opening in the tightly adjusted skin flap, which has been prepared with skill, and make it penetrate forcefully into the eyelid. As you do this, remove the natural skin from above.
E aprop tire le pel entro desus e intromet aquel en alixati, e sian les pels un o dos o tres e no mays.	And then pull the skin upwards and insert it into the incision, using one or two or three pieces of skin but not more.
E aprop tira la tua ma am aquel entro que·l pel sia fora-gitat am alixolati en la palpebra am le pel natural.	And then pull your hand there so that the skin is moved outwards on the incision in the eyelid with the natural skin.
Mays si es atirat alixalati e non es gitat le pel, atiraras alixati a las partidas dejos am le fiel le qual tu has compost am aquela, entro qu’en sia gitat alixalati del trau sobira.	But if the incision is made with the cautery and the skin is not moved, pull the cautery to the edges leaving it on the fine cloth you have prepared there, so that when the skin is moved, the cautery will remain over the wound.
E vegas aquela am la visio del huel, quar lahoras tu gitaras alixati e lo fiel, e grotan quascu e clautz le huel, e laysse le claus per dos dias o tres, entro que·l pel adheresca al sieu loc e nasque sobre aquel bona carn.	And with that, you will place the flask on the heel, for then you will apply heat and rub it all over the heel, and leave the closure for two or three days until the hair adheres to its place and grows over that good flesh.
E si es mays breu le pel, lahoras tu ajusta un pel lonc dels pels naturals, e es elevat am aquel, o que·l leysses entro que sia alonguat aprop alcu spazi, e lehoras tu eleva aquel.	And if the hair is shorter, then you attach a longer piece of natural hair, and elevate it at that spot, or you let it grow until it lengthens somewhat in that space, and then you elevate that.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter XIII.
De la cura de ehacratir la qual ve en la palpebra desus.	Of the cure for inflammation that occurs in the upper eyelid.
Quan ve en le huel ehacratir, e es contraccio de la palpebra quan es contrayta en sus, o a dextra o a sinistra partida, per mala consolidacio de plagua o de seccio o de cauteri, e es apelada leporina, e aquesta ahercrati o es natural o accidental, e es fayta per consolidacio de plagua o de seccios o de cauteri, o per semblantz a lor malcuratz.	When there is inflammation in the heel, and it is a contraction of the eyelid that tightens at the upper or lower part, due to poor healing of a wound or a cut or a cautery, it is called leporine. This inflammation can be natural or accidental, caused by the consolidation of a wound or cuts or cauteries, or by conditions similar to them.
May la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que tu fendas aquela consolidacio e que separes las labias de lu, e pauses en lu en aquo que es entre aquelas una meca de drap de li, e ligues aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	May the manner of the operation be that you make that consolidation and separate the lips of him, and place in him at what is between those one thread of cloth, and bind those together until they are healed.
E no cove que tu uses de curacio de lu de las causas las quals exsiccan, constrenho; quar si tu fas aquo retorna alixacratir pus mal que nulh temps no foc habantz.	And ensure that you use the cure for those causes which dry up, constrain; for if you do this, it will return to worsen more than not having done it at all.
Usa en aquela de causas que mollifico ayssi cum es fenugrec, e embroca am la aygua en la qual son coytz altea e semensa de li, o enguent dyaquilon, le qual sia liquefayt am alcu dels olis, e submergeys en aquel la meca, e cura am aquel.	Use for those causes that mollify thus as with fenugreek, and soak the cloth in water in which it is steeped and its seed, or unguent of yarrow, which is liquidified by some oil, and submerge the thread in that, and cure with that.
E lo tesaur de la tua curacio es que tu perforsses am tot engen que no sia consolidat segon la forma que foc al comensament.	And the treasure of your cure is that you perforate with whatever does not become consolidated according to the form that it was at the beginning.
E aquesta operacio la qual havem dita, no es sino alcuna rectificacio de ehalixacrati que no retorna la forma del loc segon que foc denant.	And this operation which we have said, is nothing but a correction of gout that does not return the form of the place according to what it was before.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter XIV.
De la cura de ehacrati le qual es fayt en la palpebra dejos.	For the treatment of hawksbill in the eyelid, do this.
Aquesta alxacrati la qual es fayta en la palpebra dejos, la qual es nompnada vertadierament alxacrati; e es de lu alcuna natural, autra accidental.	This hawksbill that is caused in the eyelid is called an hawksbill by name; and it can be either natural or accidental.
Mays accidental es fayta per plagua o per scissura o per cauteri o per autres semblantz.	More commonly, it is caused by a wound or a cut or a cautery or other similar injuries.
E la via de la operacio de lu es que tu prenguas una agula en la qual haga fil doble, e fiques aquela en la carn, e que la fassas passar del lacrimal de senestre entro al lacrimal dextre, entro que·l fil pervengua en las doas extremitatz de la carn.	The procedure for the operation is that you take a needle on which you make double thread, and place that in the flesh, making it pass from the left lacrimal to the right lacrimal, so that the thread reaches the two ends of the flesh.
E aprop exten la carn a las partidas desus am la agula e cus aquela am la agula, e inscideys am spatum ample.	Then extend the flesh at the upper parts above the needle and stitch that with the needle, and incise with a wide blade.
E donc si retorne la figura de la palpebre segon que cove, bo es; e sino, pren le ray e pausa aquel en la figura fenduda, e am aquel converteys la palpebra, e fen las doas fissuras en le latz de la palpebra dejos.	And so, if you return the shape of the eyelid as it should be, that is good; otherwise, take the thread and place it in the incised figure, and with that, convert the eyelid, and make the two fissures in the edge of the eyelid.
E sian las extremitatz de las doas fissuras de dos angles de la inscizio, la qual has fayta entro que concurren, e sia de lor fayt angle entro que quan se congreguan sia fayta figura de lor.	And if the ends of the two cracks at the corners of the incision, which you have made where they converge, and let a corner be made between them such that when they converge a figure is formed.
E aquesta figura es letra greca: la landa.	And this figure is Greek: the lambda.
E aprop osta la carn aquela per la quantitat que es le latz de lu agut dejos de lu, aquo que siec la palpebra.	And place the flesh there for the quantity that is the length of the sharp point left from it, what remains on the scab.
E aprop ajusta las partz seperadas e cos aquelas am le fil de lana; e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit de las medicinas mollificativas e de las calguas entro que sia sanat.	And adjust the separated parts and close them with threads of wool; and cure those with what we have said about the moistening medicines and the plasters until they are healed.
E si alxacrati endeve per fissura o sutura o cauteri, lahoras cove que tu fendas am fissura plana sobre les pels de la palpebra segon que es precedit.	And if you incise further for a crack or suture or cautery, then make the incision a flat one on the skin of the eyelid as previously described.
E aprop separa am la calgua entre doas labias segon que havem dit.	And separate with the plaster between two lips as we have said.
En la suma del sermo de la cura de alxacrati quan es desus o dejos, que corra en lu operacio, segon que es preparat de la forma de alxacrati, e aquela es en forma de motas diversitatz.	In the end of the discourse on the cure of incising when above or left behind, let it flow in the operation, as prepared in the form of the incision, and that is in the form of various spots.
E le artifexs savi totz temps prepara engen en quascuna manieyra la qual es possibla a lu entro que fassa retornar la figura a la forma natural, o prop de aquela, e aquel malaute segon que a lu conveneys de la operacio e dels strumentz en las majors disposicios.	And the wise craftsmen at all times prepare an engine in any manner which is possible for him to make return of the figure to the natural form, or near to that, and that malady according to what is convenient to him from the operation and the instruments in the major dispositions.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter XV.
De la adherencia de la palpebra am la conjunctiva o am la cornea.	Of the adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea.
Quan accideys aquesta consolidacio a motz homes enayssi que sia solidada la palpebra pus desus am le album del huel, e sia prohibida de la facilitat del movement e de las suas obras naturals, donc cove que tu entrometas la extramitat del ray dejos la palpebra, e eleva en sus aquela, o exten aquela am le unci.	When this consolidation occurs in adult men, they attempt to solidify the eyelid from above on the tarsus, and to prohibit its ease of movement and its natural actions. Therefore, you should introduce the edge of a needle, let the eyelid in there, and elevate or extend it over the eyeball.
E aprop tu inscideys la adherencia am spatum subtil, le qual no sia am acuitat de las inscisios, habantz obtus un petit per so que·l malaute no sia inquietat deves la operacio, e remau le spatum que no ledesca le huel am la sua acuitat.	And then you incise the adhesion with a subtle probe, which should not be done with the sharpness of the incisions, having a small obtuse edge so that the malady is not disturbed by the operation. You should remove the probe without damaging the eyeball's acuity.
E sia la tua inscizio quays excorjan aquela adherencia am facilitat entro que sia retornada la palpebra segon la sua forma natural e que sia sanada tota la adherencia.	And let your incision be such that it facilitates the separation of the adhesion so that the eyelid returns to its natural form and all the adhesion is healed.
E aprop tu met en le huel aygua salada am la qual tu laves; o distilla en lu de zunia dissolvut en l’aygua.	And then place in it enough salted water to wash with; or distill it with zinc dissolved in the water.
E aprop separa entre la palpebra e l’huel am calgua de li, e pausa sobre le huel lana infuza en album de huou, e aprop le tertz jorn usa de causas consolidativas entro que sia sanat.	And then separate between the eyelid and the wound with salt water, and place over the wound infused wool in albumen of goose, and for several days use consolidative remedies until it is healed.
Capitol .xvi.	 Chapter XVI.
De inscizio de ungla e de eminencia de carn dels lacrimals.	On the incision of the eyelid and the prominence of the orbital fatty tissue.
Sapias que ungla es segon dos manieyras, quar o es nervosa, e es semblant a ciphac dur subtil; o es no-nervosa, semblant a humiditat blanca congilada, la qual quan ferr la toca, o es forsat aquela prendre am onci, es abscindida e le onci no es ficat en lu.	Know that the eyelid is divided into two ways: one is nervous, and it is similar to a hard thin cord; the other is non-nervous, resembling a white congealed moisture. When you touch it, if it must be cut, it is easily divided, and the piece does not remain in it.
E amdos las specias no comensan sino del lacrimal major entro que va petit a petit que cobre la vista e prohibeys le lum e·l movement de huel.	And both species do not begin but from the major lacrimal gland which gradually covers the eye and prohibits light and movement thereof.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en la inscizio de lu es que·l malaute pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop obre les huels de lu, e eleva la palpebra am la tua ma, e aprop colligeys la ungla am onci de pauca duplicacio e exten aquela a las partidas desus.	The manner of acting in the incision is that the patient places his head on the pillow, and then opens his eyes, and elevates the eyelid with your hand, and then picks up the edge of the skin and extends it to the upper parts.
E aprop pren una agula e entromet en aquela un pel de cavalh o de buou o de vaqua, o de semblantz, o de fiel fort, o duplica la extremitat de la agulha petit a petit e fica aquela en le mieg de la ungla, e penetra aquela am la agulha, e lia am fiel la ungla; e exten aquela a las partidas desus, e excorja am le pel le latz de la ungla lo qual siec la pupilla.	And then take a needle and insert into it a hair of horse or bull or ox, or one resembling such, or strong thread, or gradually double the tip of the needle and fix that in the middle of the skin, and penetrate that with the needle, and glue the skin with thread; and extend that to the upper parts, and scrape off the skin the fat of the skin which seeps from the eye, the pupil being affected.
E ayssi tu sieguas aquela am le pel entro al derier de lu.	And then follow that under the skin to the back of it.
E aprop tu inscideys le romanent en la razitz del lacrimal am spatum subtil o am petitas forfexs, e leysa la carn del lacrimal natural per so que per inscizio de aquela no endevengua fluxs de lagremas continuabla.	And then you make the incision in the duct of the lacrimal gland with a fine spatum or small forceps, and leave the natural flesh of the lacrimal gland so that by this incision it does not develop continuous flow of tears.
E alscunas vetz la ungla am le sol onci estenduda o am fiel, ayssi co havem dit, e aprop sia excurjat am spatum leon del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And sometimes the nail is placed in the sole of the foot stretched out or in pitch, as we have said, and then extracted with lion's tooth from which this is its form:
E guarda te que am le spatum no toques la tunica cornea e que avengua en lu ruptura, e que la pupilla sia perforada.	And take care that with the tooth you do not touch the corny tunic and even if there is a rupture in it, and that the pupil be perforated.
Aprop la inscizio geta en le huel un pauc de sal trissa o di cief fayt de siniar, e leyssa aquel entro al autre dia; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	Then apply a little salted honey or of vinegar made from wine to the wound, and leave it there for another day; and take care that what goes in is healed.
E si la ungla no es nervoza e no podes metre la agulha, ni es ficada en aquela le onci, lahoras motas veguadas aquesta specia de ungla es curada am medicinas, e es sanada ayssi cum yeu e recomtat en la divisio.	And if the nail is not nervous and you cannot put the needle in it, then use this kind of nail treated with medicines, and it is healed as I and recommended in the division.
E si tu vols inscindir aquela, lahoras tu obre le huel del malaute e pren spatum subtil leon de freul acuitat segon aquesta forma:	And if you want to incise it, then open the space of the patient and take a sharp lion's tooth according to this form:
am subtilitat.	of great subtlety.
E si vezes que aquela es rarificada e es confugida e empren en aquela razit, lahoras distilla de la tua ora en le huel de cief fayt de siniar o am cief rog o am sal trissat, e opila le huel entro a l’autre dia.	And if you find that it has hardened and is embedded in the sore, then spit on it with a wound made from needle or hot coal or salted water, and apply the wetness to the other side.
E aprop itera sobre aquela la operacio entro que sia remaugut tot aquo que es de lu, sino que·l contrari apostema caut sia en le huel, quar lahoras tu leyssa aquela, e cura al comensament la apostema entro que sia sanat.	And then repeat the operation on it until everything from it is removed, otherwise, if a carbuncle appears in the wound, then you leave that and cure the beginning of the carbuncle until it is healed.
E aprop itera la tua operacio sobre aquela am razo entro que sia sanat.	And then repeat your operation on it until it is healed.
La emenencia de la carn lacrimal, si notz en le huel per gran nocument, sia suspendut am onci; e inscideys aquela de aquela una partida, e no ultimes la inscizio per so que no inscidesqua fluxs de lagremas.	The lacrimal gland, if noticed in the wound causing great discomfort, should be suspended with a pin; and incise part of it, but do not complete the incision so that the flow of tears is not obstructed.
E aprop distilla en le lacrimal cief rog e fayt de siniar entro que sia sanat.	And then apply wetness with hot coal or made from needle to it until it is healed.
Capitol .xvii.	Capitol XVII.
De inscizio de alguazardenic e de aquo que es nascut de carn ajustada en le huel.	On the incision of the azhdarinicus and what arises from flesh pressed into the wound.
Alcunas veguadas en les huels de alcus es nascuda carn roga, e es sobre-pausada entro que cobre la pupilla, o apropinqua o estrenh sobre las palpebras e fort leu comprem las palpebras a las partidas deforo e es assemblada a roza de balaustra.	Sometimes in the corners of some eyes, a tender flesh grows, and is pressed over when covering the pupil, or approaches or strengthens on the eyelids and lightly clamps the eyelids at the edge near the window frame.
Mays la operacio en lu es que·l malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se; e aprop obre les huels de aquel e colligeys tota aquela carn am oncis convenientz ad aquo, e te aquo am una forcep o am cesti; e aprop inscindiys la carn el comensament entro que tot sia finit am le encisori, e guarda te del huel que no ledescas aquel deves la tua operacio.	The operation for this is that the patient lies on his side on a table; and then open the corners of the eye and collect all that tender flesh with forceps or tongs; and then incise the flesh where it begins, as everything is finished with the scissors, and guard the corner so that you do not lose the one you should retain for your operation.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscides aquelas o am espatum le qual nos havem recomtat en la inscizio de la ungla, o am petitas forfexs am las quals es colligit ascebel segon que vindra la forma de lu aprop aquest capitol.	And your incision should be where you incise those, either with a spatula as we have described in the incision of the cataract, or with small pincettes with which you collect the flesh according to the form that will appear near this chapter.
Donc cum es complida la tua inscizio e es remauguda tota aquela carn, lahoras omple le huel de sal trissa, o destilla en lu polvera roga e semblantz a lu de las medicinas corrossivas, e pausa sobre le huel deforo coto am album de huou entro que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	Then, when your incision is completed and all that flesh is thoroughly removed, fill the wound with salt water, or sprinkle it with tender powder similar to that of corrosive medicines, and place a compress over the wound as you would with a honey pad until an abscess is assured.
E si roman alcuna causa de alguardenici e es senhoragat sanc caut, e temes apostema caut, lahoras leyssa le huel e cura aquela apostema am aquo que ceda aquela apostema, e aprop itera sobre aquel am operacio entro que sia sanat, e semblantment fay en la carn ajustada la qual accideys en le huel de aquesta especia.	And if there arises any cause for guardance and is infected with a sore caut, and fears an apostema caut, then let the whole and cure that apostema with what yields that apostema, and then repeatedly operate on that above which until it is healed, and similarly do in the flesh adjusted which you encounter in the healing of this kind.
Mays empero tu cove que alienes tota curacio del huel freul per via natural o per via accidental, obran am ferr, e no metas la tua ma en alcuna de aquestas operacios entro que veges que aquel membre sia suffertant aquela operacio.	Moreover, however, you must ensure that any healing from a female sore occurs naturally or accidentally, and use iron for it, and do not put your hand in any of these operations until you see that that limb is suffering from that operation.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter XVIII.
De colleccio de sabel en le huel.	On the collection of knowledge about female sores.
Sabel so venas rogas las quals son testudas sobre le huel e prohibeysso al vesement la sua operacio, e develican le huel am longitut de dias.	Knowledge is that veins are rough on the sore and you prohibit their operation, and these increase the sore over a long period of days.
Donc necessari es al comensament que tu consideres si le huel en le qual es sabel es fort e en lu no es autra malautia que sabel, lahoras tu colligeys aquel sabel.	Therefore, at the beginning, you must consider whether the sore in which knowledge is sought is strong and contains only a single sore, then you collect that knowledge.
E es que tu comandes al malaute que pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop suspen aquelas venas am un onci o am dos segon la tua prudencia; e sia aquel onci de subtil duplicacio segon aquesta forma:	And you command the patient to place his head in your lap, and then suspend those veins at one or two inches according to your prudence; and let that inch be of subtle double thickness according to this form:
o so dos oncis gradantment en un cos segon aquesta forma:	or two inches gradually in one piece according to this form:
E aprop sian colligidas aquelas venas am forses subtils, am subtilitat, e abstergeys le sanc hora aprop hora, entro que vegas aquelas venas esser remaugudas del huel e sian revolgudas.	And then gather those veins with fine threads, in subtlety, and wipe the wound hour by hour, while urging those veins to rise up and be rotated.
E guarda te que tu no ledes le huel am las extremitatz del spatum; e si’ la tua operacio en le miegjorn denant le solelh, e sias mot ferm en la tua operacio que no inscidas sino aquelas venas.	And beware that you do not let blood at the extremities of the spatum; and if your operation in the middle of the day before the sun, then remain firm in your operation so as to enter only those veins.
E quan tu auras complitz, lahoras tu distilla en le huel cief vert o rog per que am sa acuitat corrodesca aquo que es remaugut del sabel.	And when you have completed, then distill in the wound green vitriol or rhubarb so that with its acidity it destroys what is raised from the surface.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible colligeys tot en aquela hora, e lahoras tu emplastra tot am aquo que cede la dolor de lu, e leyssa lu per alcus dias entro que sia sedada la dolor de lu e que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	But if this is not possible in that hour, then plaster everything with what relieves the pain, and let it be for a few days until the pain subsides and an abscess is assured.
E aprop itera sobre lu segon que la mateyssa manieyra entro que sia sanat.	And then repeatedly over it according to how the patient responds as it heals.
E aquesta es la forma de las forfexs:	This is the form of the splints:
Capitol .xix.	Capitol XIX.
De reduccio de arizati al nas.	For the reduction of dislocations to the nose.
Quan tu curas arisati am cauteri o am medicina aguda comburent segon que es precedida la narracio de lu e no es sanat, lahoras no es engen en lu sino que fendas sobre le apostema deves la maturitat de lu, e que extraguas tota la humiditat la qual es en lu e·l poyre entro que sia descubert le os.	When you treat dislocations of the nose with a cautery or with sharp burning medicine, according to whether the narration of the case indicates it and it does not heal, then do not hesitate in it. Instead, cut over the abscess and wait for its maturity. Then remove all the moisture which is within it, and let the bone be uncovered.
E donc cum es descubert le os e vezes en lu corrupcio o negror, lahoras tu ratz lu am un sturment del qual aquesta es la forma:	And so, when the bone is uncovered and there is corruption or blackness in it, then treat it with an instrument of which this is the form:
E es nompnat de aspre cap, e sia feyt de fer indi, e sia le cap redon ayssi cum asir le qual sia fayt punctat per punctacio de lima o aliskalfati per punctacio subtil (ayssi cum es en la forma seguent).	And it is named "hard head," and it is made of iron, and its head is round, like holding the one which is made punctured by sawing or filed with fine points (as in the following form).
E pausa aquel sobre le loc corrumput del os, e aprop revolveys aquel entre les tieus ditz, e prem la tua ma petit a petit entro que sapias que aquela corropcio es rasa.	And place him over the corrupted part of the bone, then return that between the toes, and press your hand little by little making sure that you feel that corruption is superficial.
E aquo sia fayt alcunas veguadas, e aprop restaura le loc am causas exsiccativas e stipticas.	And do this several times, then restore the area caused by drying and constrictive factors.
Donc si·l loc es consolidat e es en lu nascuda bona carn e es abscindit le cors de la sania e roman per xl dias, e no es renovat e no es apostemat e no accideys en lu accident, lahoras tu sapias que es sanat.	So if the area is consolidated and there is good hidden flesh and the wound separates from the healthy tissue after 40 days, and does not become gangrenous and does not suffer an accident, then you know that it is healed.
E sino, lahoras no es en lu engen sino reduzir la fissura a la forma del nas, e segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu descuebras de segon os am ferr o am medicina acuta, e cum sira descubert le os, lahoras tu pren tribo segon aquesta forma:	And if not, then reduce the deformity to the shape of the nose, and do it in this manner: first, uncover the bone with forceps or sharp medical instruments, once the bone is exposed, then proceed as follows:
Sia la extramitat de lu ferr triangulada, e·l fust de lu sia prim extenuat entro a la extremitat ayssi cum vezes assi.	Let the tip of the forceps be triangular, and the shaft be narrowed towards the tip like you can see.
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le os, e sia aquel prop del lacrimal; e alongua la tua ma un pauc del huel, e aprop revol la tua ma am le tribo entro que penetre tot le os, e aquel sente le malaute per asso que atroba vent yssir per so quan te la sua ma.	And place it over the bone, which should be near the lacrimal bone; then extend your hand a little and return your hand with the forceps, ensuring that it penetrates the entire bone. The patient will feel the pain where there is a hole or air escaping due to the presence of the hand.
Donc lahoras restaura le loc am medicinas stipticas exsiccantz ayssi cum t’e eyssenhat.	Then restore the area with medicinal powders drying as they should.
Donc cum nays la carn e·l loc es endurazit, lahoras la materia la qual effundia a las partidas deforo retorna al nas, donc aquo es pus leugier sobre le malaute.	Then when the flesh and area are hardened, the matter which it infused into the surrounding parts returns to its place, so this is lighter on the patient.
Capitol .xx.	Capitol.xx.
De reduccio de la eminencia del huel.	For the reduction of the prominence of the heel.
Quan le huel emineys am la sua totalitat e no accideys en le vezement nocument ni diminuacio, lahoras cove que laxas le malaute, e aprop que·l segues, e aprop que pausas ventozas en le cervitz ses scarificacio e succa per bona succaccio; e aprop pausa sobre le huel liniment le qual sia fayt de acatra e aloe e enses e sarcocolla, e aprop strenh le emplaustre sobre le huel am motz polvils.	When the heel swells completely and there is no damage or diminution of the clothing, then you should loosen the foot, subsequently apply warm scarification and suck out the blood with good suction; then place liniment on the heel made of acacia, aloe, sesamum, and storax, and finally strengthen the plaster on the heel with motz (a mixture of powders).
E la manieyra dels polvils es que prenguas draps de li leons motz, e quascun drap sia duplicat en quatre plecs; e fay de aquels motz.	And the method of the powders is that you take pieces of lion's fat, each piece folded into four parts; and use those pieces.
E aprop pausa aquels la un sobre le autre segon la quantitat de la qual ha le huel necessitat.	And then place those one over the other according to the quantity of what has the need.
E aprop strenh sobre aquels am drap dur am fort strictura; e itera las ventosas am succio ses scarificacio; e aprop osta las ventosas e leyssa le huel streyt le dia e la nueyt.	And then strengthen those with a hard bandage in firm wrapping; and repeat the cups with suction several times; and then leave the cups on for the day and night.
Mays si entretant le liguament es mollificat, lahoras cove que sia mot streyt.	But if meantime the ligament becomes softened, then leave it quite straight.
E aprop osta le liament aprop le dia e la nueyt ayssi cum havem dit.	And then keep the ligament for the day and night as we have said.
E si vezes le huel ja esser redusit, bo es, e sino, lahoras itera le emplastre am les polvils e la strictura e las ventosas entro que sia sanat.	And if the swelling has already subsided, that is good. Otherwise, then repeat the plaster with the powders and the wrapping and the cups until it is healed.
Capitol .xxi.	Capitol.xxI.
De la inscizio de la eminencia de la tunica uvea.	Of the incision of the prominence of the uveal tunic.
Quan endeve disrupcio en la tunica uvea, e aprop es eminent e procezeys fora las palpebras ayssi cum un gra de rasim, e es orrazada la forma de home per aquo, e vols aquo inscidir, lahoras la operacio en lu es ayssi cum havem recomtat, que tu entrometas la agula en la razitz de la uvea de la partida dejos en la partida desus, e aprop met la agula autra en la qual sia fil doble de la part del lacrimal, e fay aquela penetrar e leyssa la primieyra agula segon la sua disposicio; e aprop inscideys le loc del fiel doble e leva am aquel la partida de la uvea en le circuit de la agula, e strenh aquela mot.	When there is disruption in the uveal tunic, and then it protrudes outside the eyelids as much as a degree of wrinkle, and this forms the shape of a human figure. If you wish to incise this, then the operation on it is as we have recommended: you insert the needle into the wrinkle of the uveal tunic from one side to the other side above, and then place another needle, which is twice the size of the lacrimal duct, in the opposite part. Make the latter penetrate while leaving the first needle in its position; then incise the area where the double thread passes and lift the part of the uveal tunic in a circle around the needle, and strengthen that area.
E aprop extratz la agula e pausa sobre le huel lana infusa en album de huou e leyssa entro que cayha le fil am la uva.	And then extract the needle and place yourself over the hole filled with wool infused in cow's milk, leaving the thread inside until it dries.
E aprop cura le huel am aquo que conforte aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And then cure the hole with what comforts that which is within as the wound heals.
E alcunas veguadas aduna de tota partida am cercle de drap entro le huel ajuste eminencia gran, e aprop sia perforat am le spatum subtil que vengua al preon del huel, e corra la humiditat albuginea, e descen le huel e intra tantost.	And in some cases, gather all parts of the torn tissue into a circular piece of cloth around the hole, then place an eminentia gran in it, and then perforate it with a fine needle that goes to the edge of the hole, allowing moisture to flow out, reducing swelling and healing the hole quickly.
E aprop strenh entro que sia sanat.	And then strengthen it so that it may be healed.
Capitol .xxii.	Capitol.xxii.
De curacio de alconati.	On the cure of ulcers.
Aquesta malautia que es apelada alconati no es sino sania la qual es ajustada en le huel semblant a aygua dessendent e no es aquela.	This illness called alconati is nothing but a sore that settles in the hole resembling water dripping down and is not the other.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en ela es que fasses le malaute sezer sobre la sela aparelada e dreyta, e aprop pren le cap sieu en las tuas mas de doas partz e mau aquel entro que veias la sania pervenir a las partidas dejos, e aprop sia siccada e no descenda, e sia ostat le lum, e·l malaute veia las causas ayssi cum vezia.	The method of treating it is to place the patient on a prepared and straight bench, then take the patient's head in your hands at two parts and move that which you see the sore approaching the parts left, and then dry it so that it does not descend, and let the patient remain in this position until the sore shows signs of healing as you would observe.
E si no descendra en jos, sapias que es aygua.	And if it does not come down below, know that it is water.
Mays si no es preparat le descendement a la sania am aquo que havem dit, lahoras fay le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e aprop pren spatum subtil e fen am aquel sobre le pannicol cernent un petit deves la continuacio de la conjunctiva am la tunica cornea en la corona (entro al loc vuet), entro que sia fora-getada la sania.	And if the descent to the eye is not prepared as we have said, then make a切口在眼睑和眼球之间，然后取出积液，在此过程中尽量避免损伤角膜。
Donc cum es fora-getada, lahoras tu distilla en le huel aygua cauda en la qual has mesclat mel o aygua en la qual ja has bulit fenugrec e mel.	And since it is removed, then you drop water infused with honey or water in which you have boiled fenugreek and honey into the eye.
E aprop sia curat am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And then treat other causes once it is healed.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter 22.
De la curacio de la aygua descendent del huel.	On the treatment of descending eye water.
Ja havem dit las specias de la aygua en la divisio e qual conveneys a perforar am sermo declarant, lahoras aquel segon la sanetat.	We have already mentioned the species of eye water in the division and which ones require piercing by declaring so according to the patient's condition.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre un cayrat e lia le sieu huel sa, lu mot stringent.	Then you must make a cut in the eye between your fingers on a cushion and hold its part well with a tight grip.
E aprop pausa prop de la palpebra del sieu huel la tua ma senestra, si le huel en le qual es l’aygua es le huel senestra; o am la tua ma dreyta, si le huel es le dextre.	And then place your left hand near the corner of his eye, if the affected area is the left side, or with your right hand if the affected area is the right side.
E aprop am la tua ma dextra pren almagda, si le huel es senestre; o am la tua ma senestra, si le huel es de dreyt.	And then with your right hand take the sponge, if the affected area is the left side; or with your left hand, if the affected area is the right side.
E aprop pausa la extremitat de almagda prop de la corona per la grossesa del ray en le album del huel de part del mendre lacrimal, e aprop enpelleys almagda am vertut e revol la tua ma am aquel.	And then place the tip of the sponge near the corner of the eye for the width of the eyelid from the inner canthus, and then press the sponge with virtue and rotate your hand around it.
E aprop penetre en le album del huel e sentas que almagda ja es pervenguda a causa vueda.	And then penetrate into the eyelid and feel that the sponge has already been moistened due to the moisture.
E cove que sia la masura del cami de almagda al preon la mesura del spazi le qual es de la pupilla entro a la fi de la negror, e es la corona del huel; quar tu veyras am aquel pupilla am la visio de l’huel per la clartat de la tunica cornea.	And ensure that the size of the sponge is appropriate when pressing, matching the width of the space between the pupil and the edge of the dark part, which is the corner of the eye; for you will see the pupil through this with the clarity of the corneal membrane.
E aprop pausa almagda entro al loc en le qual es l’aygua, e aprop tu la atira en jos una veguada aprop autra, e donc si la aygua descen tantost, lahoras vetz le malaute aquo sobre le qual huebre la sua vista tantost, e almagda en le sieu huel.	And then place your hand in the spot where the water is, and then you draw it down one time or another, and so when the water descends quickly, then see the patient there below where his vision can reach quickly, and water remains in its fullness.
E aprop repausa se un pauc; donc si la aygua es descenduda, lahoras tu depausa aquela autre veguada abantz que almagda ne sia getada.	And then rest for a moment; so when the water has descended, then you draw it down another time before your hand is gotten back.
E donc quan es sicada e no descen, lahoras tu extrat almagda am facilitat, e revol am aquel la tua ma pauc a pauc, e aprop dissolveys en l’aygua un petit de sal clara de gemma e am aquela lava le huel dedintz; e aprop pausa fora le huel coto o stopa o lana infusa en oli rozat e album de huou e ligua am aquo le huel sa.	And when it is taken out and does not descend, then you withdraw your hand with ease, and move your hand little by little, and then dissolve a little of clear gemstone salt in the water and with that wash the area inside; then place outside the area a small piece of wool soaked in olive oil and egg white and cover it with this the area.
Mays nos e aquels que so de nostre temps pause sobre aquel comi trissat am album de huou.	More often, however, and those of our times cover it with olive oil.
E si no obezeys a tu almagda al intrament de l’huel per la sua duricia — quar es alcu dels homes del qual le huel es dur mot —, lahoras cove que prenguas le spatum le qual es nompnat alberid del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if your hand does not fit into the area due to its hardness — which is often the case with some people whose skin is very hard —, then take the spuma (foam) which is called albared, and this is its form:
E donc perfora am aquel aquela conjunctura, e no ultimes la tua ma en le trauc, e no es si no que fassas via ad almagda loc subtil.	And therefore puncture at that joint, and do not withdraw your hand from the tract, but rather make a small way to a soft location beneath.
E aprop entromet almagda segon que havem dit.	And then introduce the amgada as we have said.
E deves le compliment de la tua obra, sia preparat al malaute dormitori descentment fayt en le qual dorma sobre le sieu dos en mayson tenebrosa, e sia prohibit de totz movementz .	And you should provide the patient with a comfortable bed, placed in a dark room where he can lie on his back, and all movements should be prohibited.
E pausa en la natura de lu aquo per que sia linida la sua natura, e no maugua le sieu cap a la partida dreyta ni senestra de tot.	And pause in the nature of the wound to let its nature heal, and do not pour too much water onto its right or left side.
E sia le liament segon la sua disposicio entro al tertz dia.	And apply the bandage according to its disposition on the third day.
E aprop deslia aquel en aquela maysso tenebrosa e exproha la freol vista, e fay li vezer alcunas causas, e aprop retorna le liament entro al dia .vii.	And then remove the patient from that dark room and expose him to bright light, and make some incisions, and return the bandage on the seventh day.
E no cove que fassas aquo en la hora de las curacios o tantost aprop la infusio.	And do not perform this during the hour of cure or shortly after infusion.
Habantz cove que tu alienes aquo per so quar la aygua puega leugierament per gran e vehement de reguardament.	Having a cavity that you allow this to pass through due to its great and strong urgency.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que deslias le huel denant le vii dia, e rectifica aquel am aquo que ceda apostema.	But if it happens that you make a boil incision, then having a cavity that you open before the seventh day, and correct that with which the boil yields.
Lahoras tu absol la vista de lu e pausa sobre la cara de lu oral per le qual sia regit le vezement de lu dejos lu per alcus dias, lu existent en la mayszo tenebrosa.	When you finish the incision and place your hand over the face of the wound orally for which the bleeding is controlled, let the wound heal for a few days, remaining in the most shady place.
E aprop sia gitat de aquela mayzo gradantment e conversa8 en las suas causas.	And gradually it is healed, and its causes are converted into their sources.
E sapias que in alchatea no es excusat le discipol de visio alcunas veguadas, e lahoras tu sias ardit sobre la operacio.	And know that in surgery it is not excused for the apprentice to have a few visions, and then you should be attentive to the operation.
E ja es pervengut a nos de alcu de aquels les quals so al Artach , e alcu disse que fayt foc en al Ayrac magdaam perforat am le qual es succada la aygua.	And we have already been informed of some of those which are in Artach, and some say to make fire in Ayrac magnam perforated with which water is drawn.
Mays empero yeu non e vist degu en la nostra terra le qual haia perfeyt aquo, ni e aquo legit en alcu dels libres dels antics; e es possible que aquo sia novel.	But I have not seen anyone in our land who has perfected this, nor is it mentioned in any of the books of the ancients; and it is possible that this is new.
E aquestas so las formas de las specias de magdaan per que sia sobre aquelas aquel le qual ignora aquelas:	And these are the forms of the species of madigaa because it be about those that ignore those:
E sian faytas de eram o de ferr propriament, e sian las extramitatz de lor am aquesta subtilitat triangulada, la extremitat aguda ayssi cum aquela es la forma.	And they are made of leather or iron properly, and their ends have this subtlety in the form of a triangle, the尖端同样也是这种形式。
Capitol .xxiv.	Capitol. xxiv.
De la curacio de carn nada en le nas.	For the healing of flesh in the nose.
Quan en le nas so nascudas carns diversas ajustadas de las quals es alcuna causa la qual es assemblada a scorpio de motz pes, o a polip peys; e aquesta malautia es apelada polipus quar es a semblansa de aquel peys representat.	When in the nose hidden flesh masses are concealed from which arises some cause that is associated with a scorpion of heavy weight or with a polyp of a place; this illness is called polypus, which is in resemblance to that place represented.
E de lu es carn cancrosa, lapadea, de fusca color; e de lu es que es carn leon no de color fusca.	And the flesh is cancerous, dark in color; and from it comes the flesh of a lion not of dark color.
Donc en aquela que es en aquestas carns leon no fraudulenta ni cancroza, cove que fassas le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e posat al solelh, e huebre las nars de lu, e picoys le tieu onci en aquelas carns.	Therefore, in that which is in these lion flesh or non-cancerous flesh, make the wound severe between your fingers and place it in the sun, and blow into the nostrils, and prick the tumor in those flesh areas.
E aprop extrat aquela a las partidas deforo, e aprop inscindeys aquo que has comprehendut de aquelas am spatum agut subtil de la una partida entro que sapias que tota la carn ja es ostada; que si roman de lu deguna causa de la qual la abscisio es possibla, lahoras tu ratz aquo am la un dels estrumentz subtils am facilitat entro que de lu romangua denguna causa.	And then extract it from the incised parts externally, and then divide what you have grasped with a sharp thin knife between which you perceive that all the flesh is cut; if any remains due to some cause for which the division is possible, then quickly use one of the fine instruments to facilitate its division for any reason.
Mays si senhoreja am sanc o accida apostema caut, lahoras tu pausa a lu aquo que cove; o es dels apostemas malignes, lahoras tu coyta e cauteriza aquel entro que sia abscindit sanc e sian ostadas las cavas totas.	If the lord is inflamed or an abscess has formed, then place a probe where it fits; if it is a malignant abscess, then extract and cauterize it thoroughly so that the cavities are all exposed.
E aprop sia getatz en le nas aprop la inscizio vi agre e aygua o vi.	And then insert something in the nose near the incision either to breathe or to drain.
Mays si le nas es ubert e de lu procezeys humiditat entro al palat, lahoras sapias que ja es sanat.	If the nose is opened and you perceive moisture in the palate, then you know that it is already healed.
Mays si la humiditat no penetra segon que cove, lahoras tu sapias que dedintz lu es carn nada en los pus sobiras osses de las nars als quals non es pervengut abscizio.	If the moisture does not penetrate as expected, then you know that inside there is flesh rather than pus, and it will be bones of the nose to which incision has not reached.
Donc lahoras cove que entromitas fiel de li al qual sia alcuna grosseza, e nuza en lu motz nuzes, e pausa entre quascun nutz la quantitat del dit o mens, e engene le malaute e entromet una extremitat del fiel en le nars am lo ray o am autra causa la qual es a lu possibla.	When you find that there is a lump in the place where there should be none, use your fingers to probe gently, and place the quantity of your finger or less between each probe, and explore carefully and insert an extremity of the cord into the nostril with a needle or for another reason which is possible for you.
E pus que aquo aura fayt, que atire le sieu odorament entro que pervengua a las canals de las nars, e sia eyssit sobre le sieu golayro, quar tropas veguadas le semblant ad aquesta accio fan les enfantz a las scolas, e es leugiera causa ad aquel que ho vol far.	And when this has been done, let it emit its odor into the nasal passages until it reaches them, and sit over his head, for often children at schools laugh at such actions, and it is a light cause for someone who wants to do it.
E aprop pausa las dos extramitatz del fiel, una extremitat que iesca sobre le nas et l’autra que romangua en le nas, e aprop aministra serratura de carn am les nuzes que so en le fiel, e fay aquo entro que sapias que las carn ja so am les nuzes del fiel.	Then return the two extremities of the cord, one that touches above the nose and the other that reaches into the nostril. Next, apply a flesh clamp to the fingers that are in the cord, and do this before you can feel that the flesh is against the fingers of the cord.
E aprop extratz le fiel, e pausa en le nas aprop la abstraccio del sanc una calgua , e fay aquo per tres dias o mays entro que l’enguent corrodo tot aquo que es romas de las carns.	Then extract the cord, and place a pledget of wool in the nostril near the edge of the wound, and do this for three days or more until the ointment corroded all that was damaged by the flesh.
E aprop en la fi de la causa, pausa en le nas una canula de plom per alscus jorns entro que sia sanat.	And at the end of the treatment, place a lead tube in the nose for several days until it is healed.
Mays si endigeys de curacio que exsique, usa de aquela.	And if you desire a cure that is effective, use this one.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument a capipurge fazedor am le qual son distillatz olis e medicinas en le nars:	And this is the form of the instrument for making nasal distillation, where oils and medicines are distilled into the nose:
E fay aquo de argent o de eram, la qual sia semblant a una petita lampesa uberta, ayssi cum petita conqua, e le meat semblantment.	And make it of silver or gold, which should resemble a small open lamp, like a small cup, and the spout should be similar.
E si vols, fay una canula clausa ayssi cum cana, e la cancula del estrument a capipurge fazedor e sia plana, descuberta; a la qual sia manubre en lo derier de lu, am le qual tenguas aquela quan escaufas en lu oli o aquo que tu vols dels sucs e de las causas suctiblas.	And if you want, make a closed tube like a reed, and the spout of the instrument for making nasal distillation should be flat and open; to this, attach a handle at the rear end, with which you can hold it when you heat oil or water from the oils or causes that are extractable.
E aquestz capipurgi es precios: recipe de enforbi de castor, de balayra blanc, de giengiebre, e piletre de safra, de pebre lonc, de escafragia, de epetum de spic ana unc. vi cumfizeys am suc de bleda e de caul, e sian faytas pillulas, e sia destemprada una pillula am aygua tebeza, e sia gitat en las nars del malaute jasent envers.	And these nasal probes are precious: take a mixture of castor oil, white balata, gingerbread, safflower oil, long pepper, fennel oil, and one pennyworth of powdered spice. Combine this with wheat juice and cumin juice, and make pills from it. Then, temper one pill with clear water, and give it to the patient to inhale through his nose.
Capitol .xxv.	Capitol xxv.
De theyls natz en las extramitatz del nas.	From the teeth to the extremities of the nose.
Motas veguadas es nat theyl en las extramitatz del nas, e es magnificat e omentat en alscus dias entro en que mot es leg le reguardament de lu.	Pimple-like spots appear on the teeth at the extremities of the nose, and they become larger and are covered in a few days as the pimple is examined.
E per aquo cove que tu inscidas aquel en le comensament de la apparissio de lu, e erediques tot aquel.	And because of this, you should go to that in the beginning of the appearance of the pimple, and extract all of it.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc o cauteri o medicina comburent la qual estia en loc de lu.	And place yourself over the area or apply a cautery or burning medicine where it was located.
Mays si es tardada la sua inscizio entro que sia magnificat, lahoras considera si es lapificat, dur, de fusca color e de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr quar es apostema crancos; quar motas veguadas ad aquel que inscideys aquesta apostema endeve per lu granda malicia sobre aquel le qual aquel havia.	But if the extraction is delayed until after it has become larger, consider whether it is hardened, dark in color, and has little sensation. In that case, do not touch it with iron, as it is an abscess; for pimple-like spots should be extracted from this abscess because of its great malignity towards the area where it was located.
E si le apostema es de leon tocament e no es de fosca color, e vezes que inscizio es possibla en tot aquel, lahoras evacua le malaute e inscideys aquel senes temor, e cura le loc am aquo que exsique e costrenh entro que sia sanat.	And if the abscess is due to a blow and not dark in color, and extraction is possible throughout it, then empty the poison and extract it without fear, and treat the area with something that dries and constricts until it is healed.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter 26.
De sutura del nas e de las labias e de la aurelha quan la continuitat es dissolvuda per plagua o per semblantz.	For the suturing of the nose and lips and the auricle when continuity is dissolved by wound or by resemblance.
Sapias que quan accideys solucio de continuitat en una de aquestas cartillages, pauc confereys en aquela operacio sino en alcus homes.	Know that when there is dissolution of continuity in any of these cartilages, you should consult with a few experts rather than relying solely on your own operation.
Donc cove, quan endeve ad alcu alcuna causa de aquelas, que consideres si es plagua fresca am le sieu sanc, e lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, when it comes to any such cause of these, consider whether it is a fresh wound with its own secretion, and then adjust the two edges of the wound with sutures, and proceed to treat it until it heals.
E si las labias de solucio de continuitat so ja separadas, e quascuna es fayta sana, lahoras cove que tu excorjes quascuna partida de la sua codena apparent entro que n’iesca sanc.	And if the edges of dissolution of continuity are already separated, and any one is made healthy, then you should excise each part of its hidden wound until it exudes secretion.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias am sutura e strenh aquelas, e sobre aquelas pulveriza sanc de drago e enses trissat, e pausa sobre la polvera una pessa de emplaustra diafinicon, o de alcu autre dels emplastres consolidatius, e leyssa aquel liat per dos jorns o per tres, e aprop deslia aquel e permuta aquel emplaustre e leyssa aquel entro que·ls fiels per si sian abscinditz, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Then adjust the two edges with sutures and strengthen them, and sprinkle dragon's blood powder and threefold incense over them, and place a piece of diaphonic plaster or some other consolidated plaster on top of the powder, and leave this mixture for two to three days. Then remove it and change the plaster, leaving it until the roots are absorbed, and proceed to treat with ointment until it heals.
Mays la manieyra de la sutura es que tu agregues la solucio de continuitat o am agulhas ayssi cum havem recomtat en la sutura del ventre, o agregua la solucio de continuitat am fiel ayssi cum a tu e fayt saber.	The manner of suturing is that you add the solution of continuity or use needles as we have recommended in the belly suture, or add the solution of continuity with thread as you are made to know.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter XXVII.
De extraccio de aquela causas que veno en las doas labias en las partidas dedintz.	Of the extraction of those causes that the vein enters in the two lips in the internal parts.
Motas veguadas endeve a motz homes en las partidas dedintz de las suas labias alcus apostemas durs semblantz a gras de errs, e alscunas de lors son mendres e alcunas son majors.	Spots turned into boils are found in the internal parts of their lips, where abscesses hard and resembling fat of pork appear, some being smaller and some larger.
Donc cove que tu convertas las labias e fendas quascuna de aquelas duricias de tota part, e aprop la abscizio umpliscas le loc de sagi trissat entro que·l sanc sia restrengut, e aprop sia lavat am vi agre e sia curat le loc am aquo que es stipticitat, entro que sia sanat.	Then carefully remove all parts of the hardnesses from the lips and corners, and after the extraction, fill the place with three layers of sponge so that the wound is constricted, and then wash it with vinegar and treat the area with water that is astringent until it heals.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter XXVIII.
De inscizio de la carn ajustada en las gengivas.	Of the incision of the flesh fixed in the gums.
Granre de veguadas nays sobre la gengiva carn ajustada la qual les antics apelero albulus, adonc cove que tu suspendas aquela am onci o que tenguas aquela am las forfecs e inscidas aquela deves la sua razit, e leyssas la sania correr o le sanc.	Great care should be taken over the gum tightly fitting the tooth, which the ancients called albulus. Then you must hold that thread with one hand or have another hold it while you incise with the other and let the healthy blood flow out or the disease.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc sagi trissat o autra polveras stipticas o excicativas.	Then place something warm on the area for three days or another cooling or excitatory powders.
E si aquela carn retorna, lahoras inscideys aquela segundariament, e cauterisa aquela, quar aprop le cauteri no retornara.	And if that flesh returns, then incise it again, and cauterize it, for after the cauterization it will not return.
Capitol .xxix.	Capitol.xxix.
De razo de dentz am ferr.	On the reason for teeth being firm.
Quan en la superficia de las dentz de las partidas dedintz e de las de foro e entre las gingivas so ajustadas escorsas aspras, legas, e alcunas veguadas son de nigradas e son faytas citrinas o vertz entro que a la gingiva ve per aquo corrupcio e son faytas las dentz legas.	When on the surface of the teeth both inside and outside parts, as well as between the gums, show sharp, hard edges, some are black and are caused by yellow or green substances that corrupt the gums. This causes the teeth to become loose.
E donc cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas e pausar le cap de lu en le tieu se, e ratz las dents en las quals apareysso aquelas escorsas e causas semblantz arena entro que de lor no romangua deguna causa, e aquo fay de la negror e de la citrinitat e de las autras entro que sian mondificadas.	And therefore you must cut open the patient between your thighs and place the head in a basin of water, rub the teeth where these edges and similar causes appear so that nothing from them breaks due to any cause, and do this with the blackness and the yellowness as well as other substances that have been altered.
Donc si es ostat aquo que es en aquelas del comensament de la razio, bo es; e sino, lahoras tu itera la razio sobre aquelas al autra dia e al segon e al tertz entro que vengua al derier stament en aquo que tu vols.	So if what remains from the beginning of the reasoning is good, that is well; and otherwise, then you repeat the reasoning on those the next day and the second and the third until it reaches the final statement in what you want.
E sapias que las dentz han necessitat de motz rezoris de diversas formas e de motas figuras segon que es preparat a la tua operacio.	And know that the teeth have required roots to be removed in various ways and of diverse figures according to how you prepare your operation.
E per so quar le razori am le qual la dent es raza de la partida dedintz es autre del razori am le qual es ras entre las dentz segon autras formas, e aquestas formas de razoris sian deves tu preparadas las quals veyras tantost:	And so, some razors for removing the tooth from the inside are different from those razors used to remove between the teeth according to other forms. These forms of razors you must prepare, which you will often see:
Capitol .xxx.	Capitol.xxx.
D’eradicacio de dentz.	For the extraction of teeth.
Cove que tu cures la dent de la sua dolor am tot engen e tardes en tota eradicacio de lu, quar no es denguna causa que suplisqua la veguada de lu quan es eradicada, quar es sustancia sublima entro que es excusacio en la eradicacio de lu.	Cave that when you cure the tooth of its pain with great skill and take much time in the entire extraction, for no cause can substitute the need to extract it completely when it must be extracted, for a substance is sublimated during the process of its extraction.
Mays cove quan le malaute es forsat aquela dent eradicar, que fermament deves tu sia certificat quala es la dent dolent, quar motas veguadas la dolor descep le malaute e cuga que sia en dent sana, e tu eradicas aquela e aprop la dolor no cessa entro que la dent malauta e dolent sia eradicada, quar nos ja havem vist aquo per operacio dels barbies.	When the patient is forced to open that tooth, you must certainly be certain which tooth is painful, for many times the pain deceives the patient and indicates a healthy tooth, and you extract that one and soon after the pain ceases as the sick and painful tooth is extracted, for we have seen this in the operations of barbers.
Donc cum deves tu es sertificat qual es la dent dolent, e que o sabes be, lahoras cove que tu scarifiques en le circuit de la dent am spatum en le qual sia alcuna vertut, entro que sia dissolvut de la dent de la gingiva de tota partida, e aprop mau aquel am les tieus ditz, o am forfexs subtils al comensament petit a petit entro que aquela concucesquas.	Therefore, you must be certain which is the painful tooth, and knowing well, when you incise along the circuit of the tooth in which some virtue lies, until it dissolves from the tooth of the gum completely, then probe there with tweezers or fine forceps gradually so that those concussions cease.
E aprop alogua en lu fortz tenalhas grans per bona loquacio o estuptura fort, e pausa le cap del malaute entre les tieus denolhs que be le tengues que no·s maugua, e aprop tratz la dent segon rectitut en manieyra que no trenques aquela, ni al malaute major dolor no dones.	And then fill it well with strong water for good speech or strong fracture, and place the head of the patient between your fingers so that you hold it well without hurting them, and then extract the tooth straight according to the right manner so as not to break it, nor give the patient unnecessary pain.
E donc si no es foro-getat, lahoras pren un de aquels instrumentz, e met aquel dejos lu de tota part am facilitat e esforsa la remocio de lu ayssi que es feyt al comensament.	And if it is not forced out, then take one of those instruments, and place it under the tooth from all sides with ease and effort to facilitate its removal as is done at the beginning.
Mays si la dent es trauquada o corrosa, lahoras cove que tu comples de drap aquel trauc e estrenguas aquel am la extremitat de ray subtil per so que no sia trinquada en la hora de la tua constriccio sobre aquela am tenalas.	If the tooth is broken or corroded, then you should wrap that part with cloth and tie it tightly at the end of a fine thread so that it does not get injured during your procedure on that area.
E cove que tu obres exquesitament am scarificacio en le circuit de tota part de la gingiva e guarda mot la tua fortaleza que no trenques aquela e romangua partida de lu, e retorne sobre le malaute per la malicia que sia majo que la primieyra dolor de lu.	And you should incise precisely in the circuit of all parts of the gum and preserve its strength so that you do not break that torn part of it, and return to the illness due to its malignity which is greater than the first pain of it.
E guarda te que no fassas aquo que fan alscus ignorantz barbiers en lor fistinacio e audacia sobre la eradicacio de lor, ses que no aministran aquo que nos havem recomtat; quar motas veguadas fan venir sobre les homes malautias grans las quals son pus dificils que sian trinquadas, e las razitz de lor remaugudas totas, o alcunas de aquelas, o que extrayguas aquela am alcus osses de la mandigula ayssi cum motas veguadas havem testificat.	And guard yourself that you do not do what some ignorant barbers do in their incisions and audacity regarding the eradication of such things; for they do not administer what we have advised. Which spots seen bring great illnesses to men, which are harder to injure than broken bones, and the causes of their remedies all, or some of those, or that you extract from certain bones of the mandible as spotted by us.
E aprop la eradicacio de lu sia lavada la boca am vi caut o vi agre am sal.	And after the extraction, wash the mouth with vinegar or sour wine mixed with salt.
E si endeve fluxs de sanc per aysso, ayssi cum motas veguadas endeve, lahoras trissa alcuna quantitat de zegi e aspergeys sobre la plagua, e si no confereys aquel zegi, cauteriza.	And if bleeding occurs for this reason, just as with wounds that bleed, then take some wool and sprinkle it over the wound, and if this does not stop the blood, cauterize.
La forma de las forceps e tenalas subtils am las quals es mauguda la dent al comensament sia de longua extramitat, de breu manubre e gros, per so que no sian doblatz quan am aquels deves obrar.	The shape of the forceps and thin tongs used to extract a tooth should be long, short, and thick, so that they do not bend when those you need to work on.
E sian ayssi cum vezes de gros manubre entro que quan estrenhas am aquelas no sian dobladas, sian breus extramitatz.	And they should be as thick and short as you can make them without bending when tightened on those.
E sian faytas de ferr de India descentment faytas de dreytas extramitatz, e en las extramitatz de aquelas sian dentz de las quals las unas intron en las autras e estrenhan per constriccio descent fort, e alscunas veguadas las extramitatz de aquelas sian la forma del bec d’un auzel le qual ha nom ciconia, so es guanta, e son de fort constriccio.	And they should be made of Indian iron, straight and long. At the ends of these, there are teeth that interlock and tighten by descending construction with great force. Sometimes the ends of these have the shape of a heron's bill, which is called a ciconia, and they are strongly constructed.
Capitol .xxxi.	Capitol.xxxvi.
De erradicacio de dentz e d‘estraccio dels osses de las mandibulas trincadas.	On the extraction of teeth and the removal of broken jawbones.
Quan deves la eradicacio de dent le qual es trinquat roman alcuna causa, lahoras cove que tu pauses sobre le loc coto am boder per un jorn o per dos entro que·l loc sia mollificat; e aprop entromet algesti o tenalhas las extramitatz de las quals so asembladas al bec de un auzel apelat ciconia o guanta, la forma de las forceps:	When you must remove a tooth that is cracked for some reason, then you must place a cloth over the area for one or two days until the place becomes softened; then insert gauze or bandages at the edges of which are attached the tips of a bird's beak called ciconia or forceps.
Las extramitatz de lor sian faytas dedintz ayssi cum lima o alfagi.	The edges of the tips should be made like a file orawl.
E si no obediys a tu a eyssiment am aquestas forceps o tenalas, lahoras cove que tu caves sobre la razit e descrobas tota la carn e entrometas le instrument le qual ha nom atali, so es palanca petita del qual la forma es aquesta:	And if the edges of the tips do not obey your attempt with these forceps or bandages, then you must scrape the root and strip all the flesh, and insert the instrument which is called an atrial, a small lever of which the shape is like this:
E sia de breu extremitat grossa un petit, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	And briefly, the extremity should be slightly large, and not cracked so that it does not break.
Donc si per aquo la razit es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, ajuda te am aquestz autres instrument dels quals aquestas son las formas: la forma del primier instrument es de triangulada extramitat en la qual sia alcuna grossesa:	So if the root is slightly perforated, that is good; otherwise, help yourself with these other instruments of which these are the forms: the shape of the first instrument is triangular-edged, in which there is some thickness:
La forma del segon instrument es que sia de triangulada e de pus subtil extremitat.	The shape of the second instrument should be triangular and of fine extremity.
E ja so ajudatz am aquest instrument havent dos ramps del qual aquesta es la forma aprop la seguent:	And already assist in this instrument having two ramps, of which this is the form approximately as follows:
e am autres instrumentz les quals precidero en rasura de dentz; quar juvament es fayt am aquest instrument le qual es asemblat a onci gran, e aquesta es la forma:	and there are other instruments which will follow for the scraping of teeth; for this youth is made with this instrument, which resembles a large hook, and this is the form:
de la triangulada extremitat torta o curta, la qual sia alcuna grossesa, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	of the triangular twisted or curved extremity, which should be somewhat thick, and not too thin so that it does not break.
E otra sapias que·ls instrumentz de las dentz motz so e semblantment les autres instruments.	And another spoon for the tooth instruments is similar to other instruments.
Mays le artifexs savi e subtil en l’art, atroba per si mateys segon aquo que a lu significa la operacio e las malautias diversas; quar son de las malautias a las quals les antics no diysero ni pausero propri instrument, per las formas de diversas specias.	But the skilled craftsmen find for themselves suitable instruments according to what the operation and various ailments signify; for there are ailments to which the ancients did not refer or provide specific instruments due to the diverse forms.
Mays si es trinquat l’os de la mandibula o dels autres osses de la boca, o si poyreys, lahoras sia pes curat sobre aquel en son loc am aquo que es a lu convenient dels instrumentz e de las forceps las quals havem dit en la extraccio de las razitz de las dentz, e ajuda te am gesti del qual aquesta es la forma:	But if the bone of the mandible or other bones in the mouth are broken, or if extracted, then apply a compress to that area in its place with what is convenient from the instruments and forceps which we have mentioned in the extraction of the roots of the teeth, and the gesture of which this is the form:
E sia en lu alcuna grosseza petit a petit, e sia instringida o tenguda am la boca per que no evasesca o fuga entro que l’os de tot sia foro-getat; e aprop restaura le loc am medicinas convenientz ad aquo.	And let it be in him some small lump little by little, and let it be pressed or held at the mouth so that it does not escape or flee until all the bone is thoroughly treated; then restore the place with suitable medicines for this.
Mays si en l’os es petita poyredura, lahoras ratz aquel de aquela poyredura e de la sua negror, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if there is a small abscess in the bone, rush that abscess and its blackness, and cure it while it is still healthy.
Capitol .xxxii.	Capitol. xxxii.
De la cura de las dentz eminentz sobre las autras.	Of the treatment of the prominent teeth above others.
Quan las dentz so eminentz no segon lor cors natural per aquelas la forma es laga, e majorment quan endeve a las femnas, e majorment a las piuselas venerablas; donc cove que tu consideras: si dent es nada aprop autra dent, e no es possibla sarradura ni linament de lu, lahoras radica aquela; mays que no sia annexa am autra dent, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am aquest instrument del qual aquesta es la forma; e es semblant a morr de porc, e sia feyt de ferr de India de extramitat mot aguda.	When the teeth are prominent not according to their natural form, especially when they protrude in women, and particularly in venerable old ladies; therefore consider this: if a tooth is close to another tooth and it is impossible to extract or line it, then extract that one; but if it is not attached to another tooth, then incise that one using this instrument, which resembles the head of a pig, and made of Indian steel with an extremely sharp edge.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscideyses aquela en trops dias per la duricia de la dent, e que no sia comauguda autra de las dentz.	And let your incision be where you cut that in too many days due to the hardness of the tooth, and may not be another of the teeth.
E si es dent eminent expausat a limadura, lahoras lima aquel am lima de ferr de India del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if the tooth is prominently protruded and needs filing, then file that with a file of Indian iron, the form of which is as follows:
E sia tot de ferr de India e·l margua eysament; e sia de motz menutz puntz ayssi cum lima am la qual son faytas agulhas, am la qual la dent sia limada pauc a pauc en motz dias am fecilitat, per so que no sia autra dent comauguda e caga.	And let it be entirely of Indian iron; and let the margin be filed; and let it have small pointed teeth as on the file with which the tooth is gradually filed over many days for ease, so that no other tooth is damaged or loosened.
E aprop lineys aquela en la fi, e ratz aquela am alscus razoris.	And then line that at the end, and sharpen that with some razors.
E si es dent del qual una partida es trinquada e lideys la lengua, lahoras cove que tu limescas aquel entro que l’aspretat de aquela fraccio sia ostada e engualhada, e sia aplenada per so que la lengua no ledesca ni la paraula no corrumpa.	And if the tooth is such that one part is broken and causes irritation to the tongue, then cut that part off where the sharp edge of that fragment is stopped and equalized, and let it be fully smoothed so that the tongue does not become irritated nor the speech impaired.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter XXXIII.
De restauracio de dentz maugudas am fiel de aur o de argent.	For the restoration of decayed teeth using gold or silver paste.
Quan accideys a las dentz devant concussio e remossio per percussio o per cazament, e le malaute no pot strenher sobre aquo que manga, e tu has curat aquel am medicinas stipticas, e no ha valgut la tua curacio, lahoras per so que no cagan es engen en aquelas que sian strengudas am fiel de aur e no de argent, quar argent se fa vert e aprop se poyreys aprop alscus dias, mays aur nul temps no es mudat.	When accidents occur to the front teeth due to concussion or removal by striking or during hunting, and the patient cannot strengthen what is left, and after treating it with styptic medicines your treatment has not been effective, then for those that are strong use gold paste and not silver, because silver turns green and may spoil in a few days, but gold remains unchanged for any length of time.
E sia le fiel en tal subtilitat e grocesa segon la quantitat que puesca entrar entre las dentz; e la forma de la reccio es que prenguas le fiel e pren lo doble de lu entre doas dentz sanas, e aprop que cresques am doas tortuositatz del fiel entre doas maugudas, o si’ una o motas, entro que pervengua la tela a la dent sana del autra partida.	And the paste should be in such fine particles and granules according to the quantity that can enter between the teeth; and the method of application is as follows: take the paste and place twice its amount between two healthy teeth, then carefully shape it so that there are two tortuosities of the paste between two decayed teeth, or if one or several, until the fabric reaches the healthy tooth on the other side.
E aprop itera le teyssiment entro a la partida de la qual comenciest, e strenh la tua ma am facilitat e savieza entro que no sia mauguda.	And then insert the fabric into the part from which you started, and strengthen your hand with skill and wisdom so that it does not decay.
E sia la tua striccio am la qual strenhas le fiel deves las razitz de las dentz que no evasesca.	And let your tie be such that it holds firmly the roots of the teeth so that they do not escape.
E aprop inscindeys las extramitatz del fiel superfluens am las forceps o tosoyras, e agregua aquelas en quascun loc am gesti, e converteys aquelas e las occulta entre la dent sana e la dent mauguda, per so que no fassa lesio a la lengua.	And then divide the roots of the superfluous tooth with forceps or scissors, and add them to any place with your hand, and hide both in the healthy tooth and the decayed one, so as not to injure the tongue.
E aprop leyssa aquela ayssi streyta cum roman.	And let it be thus tied like a Roman.
Mays si es desliada o rumpuda, strenh aquela o aquelas am autra fiel en tal manieyra en tot son temps.	And if it is slipped or broken, hold it with another tooth in such a manner throughout its entirety.
E aquesta es la forma de las dentz e la figura de la rectacio de doas dentz sanas e de doas maugudas, ayssi cum vezes aquestas liadas:	And this is the way of the teeth and the figure of the extraction of two healthy teeth and two decayed ones, as you see these tied:
E quan se fa que retorno una dent o doas aprop le cazement de quascuna en lors locs, e sian recrescutz ayssi cum havem recomtat, e que remauguan.	And when you return one or two teeth to their socket in their proper locations, and they are grown back as we have described, and they are decayed.
E no fa aquo sino bo artifexs e savi.	And it is not done by mere artisans but by wise and skilled practitioners.
E alcunas veguadas es aptat alcuna causa dels osses de vaca, e es fayt de lor ayssi cum forma de dent, e es pausada en loc en le qual defayl la dent, e es strengit ayssi cum havem dit, e reman e serveys am aquel per lonc temps.	And sometimes it is fit for some cause of the bones of cattle, and is made of them thus like a tooth, and is placed in the place where the tooth failed, and is strenghtened as we have said, and remains and serves you for long time.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Chapter XXXIV.
De inscizio del liament le qual ve en la lengua e prohibeys loquela.	Of the incision of the ligament which we call and prohibit speech.
Aquest liguament le qual ve dejos la lengua alcunas veguadas o es natural am le qual hom nays, o accidental e accideys per plagua la qual ja es consolidada.	This ligament, which causes the tongue to hang down sometimes, is either natural, something one is born with, or accidental, occurring due to a wound that has already healed.
E la operacio en lu es que huobres la boca del malaute, le sieu cap existent en le tieu se; e eleva la sieua lengua, e aprop inscideys aquel liament nervos segon la latitut entro que sia solvuda la lengua de la sua recencio.	And the operation is to open the mouth of the patient, whose chief symptom is hoarseness; then elevate the patient's tongue, and subsequently incise that ligament nerve according to the width between which the tongue can be separated from its resting position.
Mays si en aquela es alcuna duricia o denodacio, e aquo es stat per consolidacio de plagua, lahoras tu gieta unci e scindeys aquel per la latitut entro que aias inscindit le liament e sia dissolvuda la nodacio.	But if there is any hardness or induration in that area, and this is due to the healing of a wound, then you gently cut and incise that ligament along the width where you have already separated the tongue from its resting position.
E guarda te que no sia fayta fissura en le preon de la carn e que scindas aqui arceria e vengua flux de sanc.	And make sure that no fissure is made in the skin and that you split here the arch and let a flow of blood occur.
E aprop sia lavat le vestigi de la inscisio am ayguaros o am vi agre o am aygua frega; e aprop pausa dejos la lengua licini; so es meca la qual tengua le malaute dejos la lengua en quascuna nuoyt per so que no sia consolidat autra veguada.	And then wash the incision margins with a mixture or with warm water; and place the tongue depressor over them; if it is necessary to keep the patient under, leave the tongue depressor in one of the nostrils to prevent the wound from becoming consolidated again.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, pausa sobre le loc vetriol trissat; mays si le sanc ventz, lahoras cauteriza le loc am cauteri lantiginos le qual conveneys ad aquo.	But if a flow of blood occurs, place a glass tourniquet over the area; but if the blood stops, then cauterize the area with a pointed cautery that is suitable for water.
E aprop aquel cura am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And then apply these treatments to other causes until the patient is healed.
Capitol .xxxv.	Capitol.xxxv.
De extraccio de ranula dejos la lengua.	For the extraction of a ranula, leave the tongue depressor in place.
Alcunas veguadas accideys dejos la lengua apostema asemblant a nomla petita prohibent la lengua de la sua operacio natural; e fort leu es magnificada entro que huempla la boca.	In some cases, complications may arise where the tongue becomes swollen like a small abscess, prohibiting the tongue from its natural operation; and greatly enlarges as it fills the mouth.
E la operacio en lu es que huebras la boca del malaute sesent devant le solel e considera le apostema.	And the operation on them is to split open the space between the patient's thighs sixty degrees in front of the thighs and consider the abscess.
E si tu le vezes de fusca color o de negra, dur, al qual le malaute no atroba sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel quar es cranc.	And if you see it of a brown color or black, hard, to which the patient feels no sensation, then do not touch that part which is diseased.
E si es declinat a blancor, en le qual es humiditat, lahoras tu met le onci en lu, e inscideys aquel am spatum subtil, e inscindeys le de tota partida; e si sanc te ventz en la hora de la tua operacio, lahoras tu pausa desus zegi trissat, so es vetriol, entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if it is turned to white, in which there is moisture, then you apply the needle to it, and incise that area with a subtle blade, and incise all parts; and if you find blood during the time of your operation, then place above it three grains of vitriol, so that the blood is constricted.
E aprop retorna a la obra tua entro que lo haias trayt am compliment de lu, entro que sia lavat am vi agre e sal; e cura aquel am l’autra curacio ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And then return to your work until you have completed it, until it is washed with vinegar and salt; and care for that with the other cure once it is healed.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Chapter XXXVI.
De extraccio de apostema de doas aurelhas e de aquel que es nada en le golayro e de las autras apostemas.	On the extraction of abscesses from both ears and those that are located in the cheek, as well as other abscesses.
Quan endeveno en le golayro godat, so son glandulas las quals son asembladas algodat, las quals accideysso deforas e son nompnadas doas aurelhas, las quals quan tu las curas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no es sanat, lahoras tu considera si le apostema es dur, de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr.	When the boil is godet (full or ripe), so are its glands which are gathered like cotton, which occur on the surface and are named two ears, which when you cure them as we said in the division and it is not healed, then consider if the abscess is hard, of dusky color, of little sensation, then do not touch that with iron.
E si es de roga color e la razic es grossa, lahoras no toques aquela am ferr per le flux del sanc; abantz layssa aquel entro sia madurat, e lahoras o tu trauqueras aquel, o sira romput per si.	And if it is of red color and the root is large, then do not touch that with iron for the flow of blood; first let that mature, and then either you will puncture it, or it will break by itself.
E si es de blanqua color, radon, e la razit de lu es subtil, lahoras aquel es que cove esser inscidit.	And if it is of white color, tender, and its root is fine, then that should be incised.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras, denant la tua operacio, si ja ha repausat le apostema de lu caut am repaus complit o si es deminuit am alcuna deminucio; e lahoras fay sezer le malaute denant le soleyl, e·l cap de lu sia en le tieu se, e huebre la boca de lu, e le servidor prenent entre las suas mas prema la lengua de lu dejos am instrument mot noble del qual aquesta es la forma:	And the operation in it is that you consider, before your operation, if the abscess has fully matured and rested after cauterization, or if it has decreased with some reduction; then make an incision in the morning before the sun, place its head in your sight, and open its mouth. The servant holding between their hands the patient's tongue should take hold of the noblest instrument of which this is the form:
E sia fayt de argent o de aram, e sia subtil cum cotel.	And it should be made of silver or copper, and as fine as a blade.
Donc cum tu premes am aquel la lengua e es mostrat a tu la apostema, e catz sobre aquel le tieu vezement, lahoras pren onci e fica aquel en l’amenla, e tira aquel a las partidas defora tant quant podes.	So when you press at that spot and the abscess is shown to you, and you quickly see over it, then take a pin and stick it there, and pull it outward as far as you can.
Otra aquo que tiras alcuna causa de las tunicas, e aprop incideys aquela am instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	Another thing you pull from the cause of the tunics, and then apply that to the area using an instrument of which this is the form:
e es asemblat a forceps, empero las extramitatz de lu son corvadas, ayssi que l’orrifici de quascuna de aquelas es en le endreyt del autra, mot agudas, le qual sia de ferr indi enbegut.	and it is similar to forceps, but the ends of these are curved, so that the opening of each of those is in the opposite direction, sharp points, which should be made of iron and embedded.
Mays si aquest instrument no es a tu present, lahoras inscideys aquel am spatum del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: E sia agut de la una part, no agut del autra part.	But if this instrument is not present, then incise there with a spatula of which this is the form: and it should be sharp on one side, but not on the other.
E pus que has inscidit una mella, inscideys l’autra segon aquesta meteyssa manieyra de inscizio, e aprop la inscizio le malaute guarguarise de aygua frega	And after you have incised one cut, incise the other according to this method of incision, and then wash the patient with water so that the illness heals.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, guarguarise aygua de decoccio de scorsa de milgrana o de fuelha de mirtra e semblantz ad aquel de las causas stiptiquas entro que·l flux del sanc sia restreyt, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If there is a flow of blood, guard with water from decoction of scorched mint or of holly leaf and similar to those causes stopping the flow of blood, and then cure that once it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas naysso en le guolayro autras apostemas otra aquelas doas aurelhas, e inscideys aquelas segon que yeu e dit en la inscizio de doas mellas engualment.	Sometimes this occurs in the groin, or other boils, or those of both ears, and incise those according to what the surgeon dictates in the incision of both ears equally.
E yeu ja fu medicat una femna de apostema le qual era nat en le golayro de lu, le qual apostema tendia a color fusca, de pauc sentiment, le qual ja havia claus le golayro de lu, e la femna respirava am meat streyt, e ja havia prohibit a lu comestio e beure de aygua, e ja era pervenguda a la mort si mays agues stat per un dia o per dos.	And I have already treated a woman with a boil that was located in her groin, which had turned a dark brown color, with little sensation, and had already closed the groin area. The woman was breathing directly, and had been forbidden to eat and drink any water, and she was nearing death if more water remained for one or two days.
E l’apostema ja tant havia pugat que havia mezes dos ramps entro que eyssiro per dos traucs.	And the boil had matured so much that it took more than two weeks to rupture through two incisions.
Donc yeu me cuytegui fisturalment e fiquegui en un de lor onci, e tiregui aquel, e atirada es de lu gran porcio, e aprop yeu incidigui aquela de on comprendegui del autre trau, e aprop yeu obrigui la boca de lu, e compremegui la sua lengua, e aprop yeu fiquegui le onci en aquela apostema.	Then I cut it carefully and incised one of its edges, then pulled that part out, and removed the larger portion. Next, I incised the other side, and sutured its mouth shut, compressed its tongue, and placed the edge in the boil.
E aprop yeu abscizi gran partida de lu, e no corria de lu sino un pauc de sanc.	And then you cut a large part from it, and there was flowing from it only a little blood.
Donc absolut es le guolayro de aquela femna, e comensec tantost beure aygua, e aprop presec vianda, donc yeu no cessegui inscidir de aquela apostema motas vetz per lonc temps, e succesia apostema en loc de aquel, le qual inscizia entro que es prolonguat aquel.	Therefore, the gout of that woman had begun, and she soon started to drink water and eat preserved food. Therefore, I could not stop incising that abscess for a long time, and an abscess would form in its place, which continued to grow as long as that condition persisted.
Donc yeu engen agui e cauterizegui le guolayro de lu, donc astec de addicio; e aprop yeu perambulegui e no saubi que fec Dieus de aquela aprop mi.	Therefore, I treated the gout of her and applied a cautery to it, following the method; and then I walked around, not knowing what God had done to that nearby.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Capitol.xxxvii.
De inscizio de huvela quan es apostemada.	Of incising the abscess when it is swollen.
Quan catarr deysen a la huvula, e es apostemada e es longa, lahoras ela es nompnada perpendicular; e si es en la partida dejos grossa e redonda, e lahoras ela es apelada buba.	When the catarrh affects the uvula, and it is swollen and long, then it is named perpendicular; if it is in the part with a large and round swelling, then it is called a bubo.
Mays quan es curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio, e no comfereys la tua curacio, e eyssament ja vezes que apostema caut ja es ostat de lu e es subtil, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquela que es agreguadas redonda; e si es ad aquela longitut, e es sanguina, de fusca color o de negre, e no es a lu centiment, lahoras cove que tu temtes la inscizio de lu, quar en aquela es temor sobre le malaute.	When it is cured as we have said in the division, and you do not find your cure effective, and you realize that the abscess has already been cauterized and is subtle, then you should incise the one that is added and round; if it is long, and is bloody, of a dark or black color, and is not more than a centimeter, then you must be careful with the incision, for there is fear of gout in that area.
E quan tu vezes aquela segon la manieyra que yeu he dita de la sua blancor e longuesa, que tu fassas sezer le malaute e premas la lengua de lu am instrument del qual procesic la sua forma e aprop fica le onci en la nuva, e tira aquela en jos e inscideys aquela am un de dos instrumentz les quals e ditz en la inscizio de dos mellas.	And when you see that according to the manner that I have said of its whiteness and length, you make an incision in the malade and press its tongue with the tip of the instrument by which its shape is formed, then place the onion in the new opening, and pull that down and incise that with one of the two instruments which are called in the cutting of two halves.
E cove que no inscidas aquela sino aquo que es ajustat sobre le terme natural ses addicio, quar si tu inscides de lu mays, lediyras le sieu parlar.	And know that you should not incise there but where it is attached to the natural term of addition, for if you incise beyond it, you will ruin its speech.
E aprop la inscizio, usa de aquo le qual havem recomtat en la inscizio de dos mellas, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And near the incision, use what we have recommended in the cutting of two halves, and care for it until it is healed.
Mays si era le malaute espaventat per la inscizio de lu, cove que use de engen en la cauterizacio de lu ses temor, e la manieyra del cauteri en lu no es sino am aygua aguda, e es que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop prem la lengua de lu am le instrument le qual havem dit, e aprop pren de l’aygua la qual havem dita en le capitol de cauterizacio, e comfeys am aquela caus viva, e pausa aquela no spessa ni subtil, e de aquela omple la concavitat de l’estrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if the malade was frightened by the incision, know that you should use an anesthetic in the cautery to relieve his fear, and the way of the cautery is merely with sharp water. For you should place the head of the malade in your hand, and then press its tongue with the instrument we have mentioned. And then take the water which we said in the chapter on cautery, and apply it live to that cause, and pause the application not thick nor subtle, but use it to fill the cavity of the instrument whose form this is.
Sia la extramitat de lu conquavitat en la qual sia pausada la medicina ayssi cum la conquavitat de culher de ray, e pausa le strument am la medicina sobre la vula, e·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu latz per so que corro saliva o musellage de la boca de aquel per la intrinscequa medicina, per so que no deyssenda de aquela deguna causa sobre le golayro de lu e que ledesca aquel.	Let the lower part of the cavity where the medicine is placed be as wide as the width of a ray fish, and place the instrument with the medicine on the vulva, and the patient's hand on his own leg to prevent saliva or mucus from the mouth of that person entering the internal medicine, so that it does not deteriorate due to any such cause in the wound and heals that.
E aprop te la tua ma am la medicina, e exprem aquela sobre la uvula per l’espazi de miega hora entro que vegas aquela esser denegrada e sedada per la mordicacio de la medicina.	Place your hand with the medicine, and express it over the uvula for about half an hour until you see that it has darkened and been saturated by the action of the medicine.
E si vols, prengues coto e envolopes aquel sobre la extremitat del ray, e submergeys le coto en la medicina, e entrometas le ray am le coto en una canula de sobre entro que·l coto adheresca en aquela canula, e fay aquo tantas vetz entro que consiegues aquo que vols de la cauterizacio de la uva, e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela se seccara e cayra aprop tres dias o quatre.	And if you wish, take a cloth and wrap it around the end of the ray, then submerge the cloth in the medicine. Insert the ray with the cloth into a tube from above, so that the cloth adheres to the tube. Do this several times until you achieve what you want for the cautery treatment of the uvula. Then let it dry and fall off in about three or four days.
E si indigeysses que iteras la medicina, itera aquela, e aprop la cauterizacio abstergeys en le circuit de la uva am coto enbegut en boder, e mondifica am aquel aquo que es en le circuit de lu de la medicina, e sia lavat am aygua frega, e sia curat deforo am embrocacio, e dedintz am guarguarismes entro que sia sanat.	And if you need to apply the medicine again, apply it, and after the cautery, clean around the uvula with a cloth soaked in vinegar, and modify what is in the circuit of the uvula due to the medicine, and wash it with water, and treat externally with ointment, and internally with powders until it heals.
E aquesta especia de curacio es pus salva que inscizio e pus long de temor.	And this method of treatment is safer than incision and shorter in duration.
Alcunas veguadas es curada la uvuola am aquo que es pus subtil que cauteri e inscizio, quar es curat am subfumigacio en aquesta manieyra: recipe calament, ysop, origua, ruda, scicados arabic, camamilla, broyda e semblant ad aquels de las erbas, e ajusta totas aquelas causas, o alcunas de lor, en una ola, e sian submergidas am vi agre, e bulhan; e la ola sia be lutada am lut decentment, e sia en le mieg loc de la ola un trauc, sobre le qual sia pausat un instrument conquau de aram segon aquesta manieyra; sia fayt de argent o de aram.	Some cases of uvula are cured by what is finer than cautery and incision, which is treated by subfumigation in this manner: take calamus, hyssop, origanum, rue, scordium arabicum, camomile, powder the roots of these herbs, and adjust all those causes or some of them into one vessel, and let them be submerged in water enriched; and the liquid be well stirred, and in the middle of the liquid place a tube, over which an applicator made of wool according to this manner; it should be made of silver or wool.
E sia entromesa la extremitat en la boca del malaute entro que la vapor poge a la uvula sobre la quanula, entro que la uvula sia mot ofuscada.	And insert the extremity in the mouth of the patient so that the vapor reaches the uvula over the quula, until the uvula is well moistened.
E aprop itera sobre aquela motas veguadas entro qu’es secca, e guarda te que no fassas aquesta curacio al comesament de l’aveniment de apostemas, quar trop ajustaria en le apostema, e no cove que tu fassas aquo, sino deves la declaracio de apostema de lu caut.	And then repeatedly over those dry spots until they are well moistened, and guard that you do not perform this treatment at the beginning of the formation of apoplexy, for it would overly constrict the apoplexy. You should not do this, but instead declare the condition as an apoplexy with a cautery.
Mays si no es a tu present aquest instrument, lahoras pren una cana e compon en la extramitat de lu un clos de huou, per so que la boca del malaute sia comborida, quar le closc del huou prohibeys la vapor comburir la boca.	But if you do not have this instrument at hand, then take a cane and place a hazel nutcracker at the end of it, so that the opening of the patient's anus is dilated, because the nutcracker prevents the vapor from burning the opening.
E aquesta curacio es bona am salut.	And this cure is good for health.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter XXXVIII.
De extraccio d’espinas e de aquo que adhereys en le golayro e de las autras causas.	On the extraction of thorns and what adheres in the wound and other causes.
Motas veguadas adhereys en le guolayro o spina de peys o alcuna autra causa.	Spots or thorns adhering in the wound or from a foreign object or some other cause.
Adonc cove que tu extraguas aquo que de aquels es apparent, sobre le qual catz la vista, pus que tu premes la lengua am instrument denant solelh, per so que a tu sia declarat aquo que es en la guola.	Then carefully extract what is obvious and visible from the wound or thorn. Place your hand on the tongue with an instrument in the sunlight, so that you can determine what is in the throat.
E aquo que no apar e es a tu occultat en le guolayro, cove que tu fassas vomir le malaute denant que la vianda sia degerida en l’estomac, quar fort leu la causa annexsa le golayro sira foro-getada per vomit; o que deglusia le malaute una pessa de nap o de razit de laytuga o un boci de pa sec; o prengua una pessa de sponga marina sequa leon, e lia aquela fortment am fiel, e aprop le malaute transglussia aquela, quar cum perve al loc en le qual so spinas e es extrahuda, lahoras so foro-getatz.	And what is not obvious and hidden in the wound, make the patient vomit before the food is digested in the stomach, because if the cause attached to the wound is strong, it will be expelled by vomiting; or have the patient swallow a piece of napkin or razit leaf or a piece of dry bread; or take a piece of sponge well saturated with honey, tie it firmly and make the patient swallow it, so that it reaches the location where the thorns are and are extracted, thereby being expelled.
E mays pren una anguila e be am fiel liada, e sia dedintz mesa e soptament sia extrayta; o pren un porr e soptament le metas e soptament l’en tratz.	And take an eel and bind it with honey, placing it inside the body and secretly extract it; or take a pepper and secretly place it inside and remove it secretly.
Mays si no so foro-getatz am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas, lahoras husa de un instrument de plom segon aquesta forma:	And if none of these causes apply to the cases we have mentioned, then use a lead instrument in this form:
E sia pus gros que ray un petit, e en la extramitat de lu sia conquavitat la qual tu entrometas en la sua guola am facilitat.	And let it be as thick as a small grain, and at the end of it, have a cavity that you insert into his throat with ease.
E el aga le sieu cap elevat en sus, e guarda te que·l tocament del sieu os de la gola, per so que endevengua a lu cos e am aquela que enpellesca le os o la spina, o que aquel le metge am la sua ma.	And let him raise his head up, and guard that the touch of his bone in the throat reaches his body, or that it scrape the bone or the spine, or that the doctor places his hand there.
Mays empero que·l malaute aquel entrometa es miels, per la sua sciencia del loc de la causa annexa e enpellisca en jos, e tira la sua ma am le instrument en sus, tot aquo segon la quantitat la qual es a lu preparada entro que sia foro-getada.	And instead, if the patient himself inserts honey, by his knowledge of the place of the cause and scrapes downwards, and pulls his hand towards the instrument, all this according to the quantity which is prepared for him before it is forgotten.
Capitol .xxxix.	Capitol.xxxix.
De extraccio de sancguisugua annexsa al golayro.	From the extraction of gouty blood associated with gout.
Quan es medicada sanguisugua am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la curacio am medicinas e no comfereys, considera lahoras en le guolayro del malaute al solelh, pus que tu aias compremuda la lengua de lu am instrument le qual a tu havem recomtat.	When treated with gouty blood as we have said in the division of the cure with medicines and you do not find relief, consider at the gout of the patient in the sun, for you may have misunderstood the language of the patient using the instrument which we have recommended.
Donc si tu vezes la sancguisugua, extratz aquela am onci petit o am gesti subtils decentment.	Therefore, if you see the gouty blood, extract it either through a small needle or with fine threads properly.
E si no es a tu possible estrayre am aquel, lahoras pren una canula concava e entromet aquela en lo guolayro del malaute, e aprop pausa en la concavitat de la canula un ferr ignit, e fay aquo tantas vetz (entro que la sancguisugua sia morta e se osta del guolayro) e abstengua se le malaute tot lo jorn de aygua.	And if it is not possible to extract it through that, then take a concave cannula and insert it into the gout of the patient, and place a heated iron in the concavity of the cannula, performing this as many times as necessary (until the gouty blood is dead and comes out of the gout) and make the patient abstain from all liquids for the entire day.
E aprop prengua una veyria plena de aygua frega, e obra la boca de lu en aquela, e lava la boca am aquela; e no trasglucia de aquela alcuna causa e maugua l’aygua una hora aprop autra am la sua ma, quar la sancguisugua tantost cum sent l’aygua catz.	And then take a cloth full of water, open its mouth over that area, and wash the area with it; and do not swallow any of it for any reason, but let the water remain on the area for about an hour with your hand, as soon as the gouty blood senses the water it will begin to come out.
Mays si no es foro-getada am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras subfumigua le malaute am cimetz o am assafetida per le instrument le qual havem recomtat en la sufumiguacio de uvula.	If not previously fumigated with the wormwood or with asafetida over the instrument we have recommended in the fumigation of the uvula, then do so.
Fay aquo, so en quar cayra.	Do this, so that it may fall.
E es un’autra manieyra de operacio en sufumiguacio de aquela, es que tu prenguas una ola en la qual sian carbos ignitz e la ola sia cuberta am una cobertora en le mieg de la qual sia un trauc, e sia compausat en aquel trauc la extremitat del instrument; e aprop dega desus la subfumigacio; e pause le malaute la sua boca en la extremitat de la canula, e claugua la sua boca per que la subfumiguacio no sia foro-getada entro que sapias que la subfumigacio es pervenguda a la sancguisugua, quar la sancguisugua tantost cayra.	And another way of operating in fumigation is that you take a bowl in which are burning coals and the bowl is covered with a cloth in the middle of which is a hole, and you place the end of the instrument at the hole; and then proceed with the subfumigation; and place the patient's mouth at the end of the cannula, and seal its opening so that the subfumigation does not get extinguished until you see that the fumigation has reached the uvula, for the uvula will soon fall.
E si no catz, lahoras tu itera la subfumiguacio motas vetz, e abstengua le malaute de beure, e mange causas saladas e alhs, e no begua aygua, e ayssi necessari es que am aquest regiment sia fora-getada.	And if not cured, then repeat the subfumigation several times, and refrain the patient from drinking, eating salty foods and such, and do not let them have water. Thus it is necessary that this regimen be followed.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument am le qual es trayta sancguisugua del guolayro quan es vista; e es semblant a forceps ayssi cum vezes, sino quar es en lu alcuna curvitat:	And this is the form of the instrument with which gouty hemorrhoids are treated when visible; and it resembles forceps as you see, but there is some curvature in it.
le qual sia mesa al guolayro, e la extremitat de lu es semblant a bec de ciconia, que es guanta, en la qual es aspretat de lima, per so quar, quan comprem alcuna causa, aquela no leyssa.	And it is placed over the gouty area, and the extremity of it resembles the beak of a stork, which is curved, and is filed with a file, so that when any cause is grasped, it does not slip.
Capitol .xl.	Capitol.xl.
En le qual es la suma del sermo en apercio de apostemas e en seccio de lor.	In which the main discourse on boils and their treatment is presented.
Les apostemas so motas specias, de motas manieyras, segon que ve rememoracio de lor, de quascuna en aquest libre.	Boils are special lumps, of various types, according to the memory of them, of each one in this treatise.
E so diversas en perforacio e seccio de lor per doas manieyras, de las quals la una es per la specia de apostemas en si meteys; e per aquo que comprem de las humiditatz.	And they vary in their perforation and treatment through two methods. Of these, one is specific to the type of boils themselves; and it concerns what is grasped from the humors.
E la segonda manieyra es prop les locs en les quals accideys del cos, quar le apostema accident en le cap es autra de la apostema accident en le cul; e le apostema en le loc carnos accident es autra del apostema accident en junctura; e a quascun de lor es son juguament per operacio.	And the second method is specific to the locations where bodily accidents occur, for a boil that occurs on the head is different from one that occurs in the anus; and a boil that arises in a fleshly location is different from one that arises at a joint; and for each of them, their judgment is made through an operation.
E mays de apostemas so alcunas las quals cove que no sian perforadas sino aprop maturacio de la sania en aquels o compliment de lor.	And more of abscesses some of which cover that they not be perforated but near maturation of the health in those or complement of their.
So autras apostemas les quals cove que sian traucatz quan son cruzes, e no son maturatz segon lor compliment, ayssi cum apostemas que son propdas a las juncturas, quar apostema quan ve prop junctura, lo esser de lu es prolonguat entro que·s poyreys aquo que es en le circuit de lu, e fort leu son corromputz les liamentz o les nervis de aquela junctura, per que es fayta causa de contraccio de aquel membre; o es apostema prop de membre principal, e si tu tardas la perforacio de lu entro sia madurat nosira al membre principal; o es prop le cul, donc perfora aque no-madurat; e no cove que·l perforas cru, de no-complida degestio, sino aquel que es prop del cul, per so que no poyresca le preon de lu e sia elonguat a las partidas dedintz del cul, e sia fayta fistula, o que sia fayt en le terme de lu que no sia sanat.	So other abscesses some of which cover that they be lanced when crossed, and are not matured according to their complement, thus as abscesses that are near joints, for an abscess when near a joint, the nature of it is prolonged into where·s poyreys you that is in the circuit of it, and strongly let the veins or nerves of that joint be corrupted, for it may cause contraction of that member; or it is near the main limb, and if you delay the perforation of it until its maturity affects the main limb; or it is near the anus, therefore lance that which is not matured; and should not lance it crude, from lack of digestion, but one that is near the anus, so that it does not procure a prolapse of it and be elongated to the inner parts of the anus, and a fistula may be made, or that it be done in the term of it that is not healed.
Mays cove que tu sapias la hora de la perforacio de la apostema, e aysso es quan es maturat.	And you should know the time for lancing the abscess, and this is when it is matured.
E sapias que es madurat quan es la cedacio de la dolor e la cessacio de la febre, e aprop la diminucio de la rogor e de la pulsacio, e la acuitat del cap del apostema, e les autres senhals.	And know that it is matured when there is the cessation of pain and the end of fever, and the decrease of swelling and pulse, and the subsidence of the head of the abscess, and other signs.
E quar cove que sapias la perforacio cazer en le loc pus dejos del apostema e de pus venient de curacio de la eminencia.	And know that when you can feel the perforation cage in the place just below the abscess and of pus coming from the cure of the prominence.
E perforacio tostemps sia per le lonc de la carn o del cors, si las apostemas son en las partidas de las mas o dels pes, e en loc dels lacertz, de las cordas dels nervis, de las arcerias; e, al derier, en totz locs enguals en les quals no es reflecio; quar en aquels que so reflectitz, usa de perforacio segon aquel membre.	And the perforation should be made along the length of the flesh or body, if the abscesses are in the thigh or feet, and at the location of the lacertae, of the nerve cords, of the arteries; and, accordingly, in all similar places where there is no reflection. For in those that are reflective, use perforation according to that member.
Mays quan le apostema es en loc carnos, lahoras miels es que leysses la perforacio de lu entro que sia confermada la digestio de lu segon compliment, ayssi quo havem dit; quar si tu perforas aquel denant aquo, es prolonguat le cors del poyre de lu e de mota sordicia, e fort leu las labias de lu so enduradas e la profunditat de lu.	When the abscess is in a fleshly location, it is better to delay the perforation until the digestion of the pus is confirmed according to our previous saying; for if you perforate before that, it will prolong the course of the putrefaction and harden the walls of the abscess and increase its depth.
Mays alcus apostemas so perforatz segon la latitut de la carn o del cos deves la necessitat, o segon aquo del qual lo membre indigeys.	More abscesses should be punctured according to the width of the flesh or body as the need demands, or according to that from which the limb suffers.
E cove que administres petita perforacio , e·n les apostemas grans gran perforacio e ampla o motas seccios segon la diversitat de la grandesa dels apostemas.	And ensure that you administer a small puncture in large abscesses, and a large and broad or multiple sections according to the diversity of the size of the abscesses.
E autras so dels apostemas en les quals cove que la codena sia conquavada e sia encidida, quan es fayta ayssi quo pan e fayta es en terme que ja stigua, ayssi cum aquel que accideys en trops de dubelec e de bubos.	And in other abscesses, ensure that the cord is returned to its cavity and tied, when this is done, do so while it is still warm, just as you would do with cords from piles and buboes.
E de aquels so que so insciditz am seccio havent tres angles; e de aquels es en le qual es inscidit ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirtra, ayssi cum las apostemas dels angonars.	And of those that are incised with a section having three angles; and in which an incision is made as the figure of a mulberry leaf, as with abscesses of boils.
E de lor so en les quals es administrada seccio redonda e seccio lunar, e semblantz ad aquels.	And of these, there are those in which a circular section and a crescent section are administered, and similar to those.
Mays aquel al qual no es cap ayssi cum son apostemas leons superficials, cove que tu perforas aquel am perforacio superficial, o plana tant solament.	More so for those where nothing is done in this manner, as with superficial abscesses, you should puncture them with a superficial or flat puncture only.
E cove quant le apostema es gros e ya ha colligit mota sania, que perfores aquel e no te coytes que extraguas tot le poyre en aquela hora; habantz extratz de aquel una partida, e aprop opila le apostema entro al autre dia, e aprop extratz una partida major, e aprop fa aquo motas veguadas segon graduacio entro que sia foro-getat.	And when the abscess is large and has already collected some healthy pus, you should puncture it so that all the foul matter is not extracted at once; having extracted part of it, then on another day fill the abscess with more, and continue extracting larger parts in successive days until it is thoroughly drained.
E majorment si·l malaute es de freol vertut, o femna prens, o enfant petit, o viel en decrepitut, quar l’esperit animal motas vetz es resolvut am la egressio de la sania, e fort leu mor le malaute, e tu operte les.	And especially if the patient is of virile virtue, or a woman in labor, or a small child, or an old person in decrepitude, for the animal spirit resolved with the exit of the healthy pus weakens the malady, and you must open it.
Don guarda aquest capitol am gran cautela, e aprop la tua perforacio en la qual perforas aquestz apostemas, cove que abstergescas las plagues e consideras donc si la plagua del apostema es pauca, o es una seccio plana, lahoras tu aministra las qualguas de li o de coto antic; e si le apostema es gran, e las fissuras de la perforacio son motas, lahoras cove que tu pauses meca en quascun trauc entro que pervenguan ensemps.	Take great care with this chapter, and when you puncture the abscess in which you are going to make your incision, ensure that you cleanse the wounds and consider whether the wound of the abscess is small, or a flat section, in which case you should apply some locally effective remedies; if the abscess is large, and the openings from the puncture are large, then you must place your hand between each one until they heal together.
E si en le apostema es abscindit una partida de la codena o has concavada aquela en le circuit, lahoras cove que tu la complescas de coto viel o de fil fayt de drap de li, ayssi cum quan has traytz pans o razizos, ses humiditat; e strenh aquel entro al tertz dia; e aprop proceseys aquel e cura le am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if in the abscess you have divided part of the strand or concaved it in the circuit, then you must complete it with fine linen or a thread made of linen cloth, just as when you have drawn out bandages or roots, to maintain their moisture; strengthen it on the seventh day; and proceed with it and cure it as what is appropriate from the ointments until it is healed.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc en la hora de la operacio tua, lahoras tu aministra aygua frega e vi agre en les quals mules un drap de li, e pausa aquel sobre le loc del fluxs del sanc motas veguadas.	But if you happen to experience bleeding during the time of your operation, then administer water infused with wine in which you soak a cloth, and place that over the location of the bleeding several times.
Mays si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras cove que tu aministres regiment e curacio e polveras las quals he recomtadas en motz locs de aquest nostre libre e de divisio.	But if the bleeding persists, then you must administer treatment and cure with powders which I have recommended in several places of this our livre and division.
Mays si es en temps de hivern, e·l loc de la apostema es loc de motz nervis, lahoras cove que tu enfundas pulvils en vi e oli caut, e pauses aquels sobre les locs.	But if it is in the time of winter, and the location of the abscess is near many nerves, then you must infuse powders with wine and oil, and place those over the locations.
E si es en estiu, e les locs son carnoses, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils enbeguts am aygua e oli o am vi e oli, e tot aquo sia freg entro que sia le ters dia, ayssi cum havem dit, e lahoras cove que tu deslies le apostema e abstergescas aquel e aministres en la curacio de lu aquo que a lu conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if it is in the summer, and the locations are fleshy, then you must place powders infused with water or oil or with wine and oil, all of which should be applied on the third day, as we have said, and then you must drain the abscess, cleanse it, and administer to its cure what is appropriate for it until it is healed.
E aysso es aquo que es necessari de la cognicio de la curacio de apostemas universalment, mays segon la via de distinccio ja he dit de tot apostema en qual manieyra es via de la cura de lu per capitols singularment.	And this is what is necessary regarding the knowledge of the cure of abscesses universally, but according to the way of distinction, I have already said everything about the abscess in how the cure of it should be done by chapters singly.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter XL.
De seccio de apostemas les quals veno en la codena del cap.	Of the section on abscesses that occur in the vein of the head.
En la codena del cap petitz apostemas, e so de specias de nodes les quals conteno tunicas que so a lor factz ; e las specias de lor so motas.	In the vein of the head, small abscesses occur, and these contain nodes which are formed within them; the nodes have spots.
E de lor son pingas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditat semblant a lima.	And these nodes are hard, and those that contain humidity resembling lime.
E de aquelas so las quals conteno humiditat semblant a pols, et asemblantz a lor; e de aquelas so que son lapideas, durs.	And those that contain humidity resembling dust, similar to it; and those that are hard, like stones.
E en la seccio de totz, e en la extraccio de aquels no es temor, cum deves la exteccio de aquels no fa contrariat arceria.	And in the section of all of them, and in the extraction of those, there is no fear, as you should not have any aversion to the extraction of these.
E la operacio en seccio de aquels es que tu esproes aquels am instrument la forma del qual ve aprop aysso, le qual es apelat entromes, entro que sapias que contengua.	And the operation for the section of these is that you express them using an instrument in the form of which see below, which is called an entremes until you know it contains pus.
Quar si aquo que conte es humiditat, lahoras scindeys aquel am seccio segon la longitut per seccio superficial segon aquesta forma:	If what is contained is humidity, then section it along its length by superficial section in this manner:
E comensa en la seccio de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G. Donc cum la humiditat es evacuada, lahoras tu excoria aquela pel que conte aquela humiditat, e no leysses de aquela alcuna causa de tot, quar tropas veguadas retorna, si roman de aquela alcuna causa.	And commence in the section of the line of B between the line of G. As the humidity is evacuated, then you scrape that skin which contains that humidity, and do not leave any cause of it all, for too many times it returns if there remains any cause of it.
E aprop submergeys coto en enguent egipciach, si es present, e sino, en aygua e sal; e umpleys am aquel la plagua e layssa aquel entro ad autra dia, quar am aquo corrodeys tot so que es romas de aquela pellicula.	And then immerse it in Egyptian ointment if present, otherwise in water and salt; then fill that with the mixture and leave it for another day, for with this you will dissolve all that is left of that skin.
E aprop itera sobre aquel coto am enguent egipciach segondament e tersament si indigeyses de lu, entro que·t comfides que no y haia romas alcuna causa de aquela pellicula; lahoras cura la plagua am enguent entro que sia sanada.	And then repeatedly apply to that area with Egyptian ointment gently if you need it, until you are confident that there is no remaining cause of that skin; then cure the wound with ointment once it is healed.
E si apostema conte nodi gras, lahoras tu inscideys aquel segon aquesta forma:	And if there is an abscess containing fatty nodules, then you incise it according to this form:
am seccio havent forma de crotz, e geta oncis entre doas labias de la seccio e scorsa aquel de tota partida, e esforsa la tua vertut en extraccio de la tunica la qual conte aquel.	In the section having the form of a cross, and make an incision between two sides of the section, and drain it completely, and exert your virtue in extracting the tunica which contains it.
Mays si a tu arceria fa contrarieta, lahoras fay aquo que yeu t’e recontat primieyrament.	But if your artery resists, then do what I recounted to you first.
E semblantment fay en le apostema lapificat de seccio e de curacio segon que a tu havem dit; e seccio sobre apostema lapificat es pus leugiera, quar es de pauc sanc e de pauca humiditat.	And similarly treat the abscess lanced and for its section and cure as we have said; the section of an abscess lanced is lighter, because it involves little bleeding and little humidity.
E alcunas vetz so alcus de aquestz apostemas les quals so en le cap en alcus homes am los quals de tot no es humiditat; la qual causa es quar yeu inscindigui sobre un apostema en le cap de una femna vielha e atrobegui le apostema ayssi cum peyra sorda, aspra, blanqua, la qual no podia esser trinquada, e si a alcu fos am aquela percussit, plaguera aquel.	And sometimes some of these abscesses located on the head in some people who have little humidity overall; the cause is that I cannot describe for an abscess on a woman's head and make the abscess like a deaf, rough, white pear, which could not be cut, and if any were struck by it, it would heal.
Mays en les autres apostemas accidentz en le cap otra aquest no es aquest capitol, ayssi cum les apostemas que veno als caps dels enfantz e deves las razitz de las aurelhas, mays la seccio de aquestz totz sia seccio superficial.	But in other head abscesses, this is not covered in this chapter; as with abscesses that occur on the heads of children, you should lance the auricular regions, but the sectioning of all these should be superficial.
E pausa la perforacio de aquels de la partida pus bassa de lor per so que sia alleujat le cos de la sania a las partidas pus bassas.	And place the lancing of those in the lower part for the sake that it benefits the body by allowing the disease to reach the lower parts.
E aprop cura aquelas am aquo que conveneys ad aquel de curacio.	And then attend to those matters that pertain to the cure.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter XLII.
De seccio de scrophulas las quals accideyso en le col.	Of the section on scrofulas which occur in the neck.
Motas veguadas endeveno aquestas apostemas en le colh e en las aysselhas e en les angonars; e alcunas veguadas accideyso en las autras partidas del cos.	Black spots often cause these abscesses in the neck, in the armpits, and in the groins; and sometimes they occur in other parts of the body.
E so aquelas que accideysso en le colh, e so motas que so engendradas entre lor, e tota scrofula de aquelas es dintz la sua tunica propria, e ayssi cum en les nodis e apostema del cap, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And those that occur in the neck, and the spots that are generated among them, and all scrofula of these is within its own membrane. Just as with nodes and abscesses in the head, as we have recounted.
E las specias de aquestas scrophulas son motas, quar de aquelas so alcunas lapideas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditatz, e de aquelas so malignas las quals no obeseysso a curacio.	The species of these scrofulas are spots. Some are mottled, some contain moisture, and some are malignant, which do not respond to cure.
Donc en aquela la qual tu vezes de bona disposicio en le Tocament, de la qual la color de aquo que es manifest es propda a la color de la codena, e es mauguda a tota partida, e no es annexsa am le nervi del colh, ni am las venas, ni am la arceria, e no es preonda, cove que tu inscidiscas aquela am siccio superficial de la partida desus a la partida dejos del cos de la linha de .G. entro la linha de .B., e scorja aquela de tota partida, e exten dos labias de la codena am onci, o am motz oncis si has necessitat de aquels, ayssi cum havem dit en las apostemas del cap, e extratz aquela petit a petit.	Then in that one where you find good disposition in the Touchement, where the color that is manifest is similar to the color of the skin, and is diffused throughout the body, and is not attached to the nerves of the neck, nor to the veins, nor to the artery, and is not painful, cut that part with a superficial dry incision from above the body line of G. to the body line of B., and scrape it completely away, and extend the edges of the skin flap outward by one finger or several small fingers if you need them, as we have said in the abscesses of the head, and extract it little by little.
E es mays cautela que no sia inscidida la vena o nervi.	And it is greater caution that the vein or nerve not be cut.
E sia le spatum no mot agut, que no ajuste a tu la tua ma am inscizio, o que enquiete le malaute, e que inscidas aquo que no es necessari inscidir; quar si inscideysses vena o arceria e prohibeys tu de la tua operacio, lahoras pausa en la plagua vetriol trissat o autras polveras las quals ostan fluxs de sanc, e estrenh la plagua, e layssa aquel entro que·s repausa la acuitat de la apostema e sia mollificada la plagua e comense esser poyrida.	And let the incision not be too deep, so that you do not cut into your own hand during the operation, or to ease the patient's pain, and make cuts only where necessary; for if you were to cut a vein or artery and stop the operation, then apply a glass of treacle or other powders which are fluxes of salt, strengthen the wound, and leave that in which is relieved the acute state of the abscess and makes the wound softer and begins to suppurate.
Quan le sanc es abscindit.	When the blood is cut off.
Donc retorna a la tua operacio entro que l’aias complida.	Then return to your operation until you have completed it.
E aprop inquireys am le tieu dit indic si es romas alcuna causa de las autras petitas scrophulas, donc inscideys aquelas e munda aquelas.	And then inquire if there is any other cause for the small scrofulous swellings, and if so, cut those and clean them.
E si es en la razit de la scrophula gran vena, cove lahoras que no inscidas aquela scrophula de la sua razitz.	And if there is a large vein in the vicinity of the scrofulous swelling, avoid cutting that part of the scrofulous swelling.
Abantz cove que lies aquela am fiel doblat fort e que leysses aquela entro que caia per si ses nocument.	Before you fold that cloth strongly in half and let it fall so that it covers by itself.
E aprop omple la plagua de coto vielh le qual tu has ja submirgit en enguent egipciac, e aprop cura aquel.	And then fill the wound with old cloth which you have already soaked in Egyptian ointment, and then cover it.
E si inscides aquela scrophula tota, lahoras cove que tu ajustes las doas labias de la plagua e cuzas2 tantost pus que no y ha romasa deguna superfluitat.	And if you insert the scrofula completely, then you must adjust the two lips of the wound and press so that there is no remaining superfluous fluid.
Mays si tu vezes que haia romasa superfluitat per la grandeza de la scrofula, cove que tu entendas a inscidir la razit de aquela, e astrayra aquela e aministra sutura e aquo que es dit.	But if you see that there is remaining excess fluid due to the size of the scrofula, then you must understand to insert the sharp blade, extract it, and administer sutures as said.
E aquela de las scrophulas que conteno humiditatz, perfora aquela am perforacio superficial aqui la on appar a tu le loc de maturacio de lu, e pausa perforacio de aquo que siec le pus bas del cos, ayssi cum havem dit.	And for those scrofulas containing moisture, make a superficial perforation at the place where it appears to you as the site of maturation of that scrofula. Then stop the perforation with a dry application below the surface of the body, as we have said.
E aprop aministra perforacio, calguas am enguent e semblantz ad aquels, per so que corroda aquo que es romas de la corropcio.	And then make the perforation, apply ointment and similar substances to it, so that it腐蚀了剩余的坏死物质。
E aprop quan tu vezes la plagua ja esser mundada, lahoras tu cura aquela am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanada.	And when you see that the wound is already clean, then apply the cream of flesh-generating ointment until it is healed.
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter XLIII.
De seccio del pilhot del apostema accident dintz le guolayro.	Of the section of the abscess in cases where there is a complication in the groin.
Diyssero les antics aquesta seccio en le epilhot, e no vist alcu hom en nostra terra que aquela aia fayta.	The ancients described this section in the epilhot, and no one in our land has ever seen it done.
E aquesta es la inscriptura del sermo de aquels.	And this is the inscription of the speech of those.
Mays en les homes haventz esquinencia, cove que sia esquivada la extraccio del epilhot, cum per aquo no sia fayt juvament per so quar totas las venas e las majors del malaute so aqui.	More in men with hernias, a cavity should be avoided during the extraction of the epilhot, for if not done properly, all the veins and major ones in the groin will suffer.
Mays en aquels que han apostemas cautz en la boca o guolayro o dos aurelhas, quan la malautia no es en la cana, cove husar de la seccio de epilhot a fugir la perdicio la qual es fayta per perfocacio.	More in those who have abscesses cauterized in the mouth or groin or ears, when the illness is not in the throat, it is advisable to use the section of the epilhot to avoid the damage caused by perforation.
Donc cove quan volem aquo, que inscidam le epilhot dejos tres cercles dels cercles del epilhot, o quatre am petita seccio per la latitut en aquel que es entre dos cercles per quantitat, que la seccio sia en ciphac, no en la cartillage, e aquest loc es convenent a seccio, quar es privat de carn e les vayselhs de sanc de lu son luhen.	When we want to do this, cut the epilhistium and leave three or four small circles in the space between two circles in terms of quantity, so that the section is circumferential, not in the cartilage, and this place is suitable for sectioning, as it is devoid of flesh and its vessels are lacking.
E si le metge es pauruc, cove lahoras que extenda la codena del golayro am onci, e aprop fenda la codena entro que pervengua a la canal, mays evite les vaysels de sanc si vetz de aquelas alcuna causa.	And if the doctor fears this, do so when he extends the hook's chain to open it wide, and then cut the chain before it reaches the channel, but more avoid the vessels of blood if you see any cause.
E aprop inscida li ciplach segon que havem recomtat; e es significat sobre la seccio de la canal per le flacma le qual es de aquela eyssit am aquo que es de lu disromput e per la abscizio de la votz.	And then incise the cicatrix as we have directed; and it is significant on the section of the channel by the flame which is from that heat and by the disruption of the voice.
E layssa la plagua uberta per alcun temps.	And leave the wound open for some time.
Donc cum la hora es remauguda en la qual perforacio es temuda, agregua doas labias de la codena de la plagua, e cus aquela sola ses la cartillage.	And when the time is delayed in which the perforation is feared, add two flaps of the wound's chain, and suture that alone to the cartilage.
E aprop administra medicinas que fan naysser la carn entro que sia sanat.	And then administer medicines that cause flesh to grow where it is lacking.
E diyssec Albucasis que la summa del sermo le qual havem recomtat, exposicio no es sino que veias que alcus de aquetz apostemas ja han opilat lo guolayro del malaute, e le malaute es vengut entro a mort, e le ale de lu es entresecat, e alcus van a inscidir le epiglos per so que respire le malaute sobre le loc de la plagua per alcuna respiracio, e sia salvat de mort.	And Alcucis says that the main point of the discourse we have recounted is simply that you can see some of those abscesses have already ruptured the patient's throat, and the patient has come into death, and its life force has been cut off. Some proceed to incise the epiglottis so that the patient may breathe over the place of the wound through some breath, and thus be saved from death.
E per aquo comandero layssar la plagua uberta entro que sia consumida la malicia de la malautia; e es la malicia de lu per tres dias; e donc lahoras comandero cosi la plagua, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And for this, I command to keep the wound open until the malignity of the disease is consumed; and the malignity of the disease lasts for three days; and then, when it is so, I command thus the wound, and cure that where it is healed.
E aquo que yeu he vist per mi meteys, es que una sirventa pres un cotel e mesec le en le sieu golayro e inscidic am aquel una partida de la cana del pulmo, e yeu fu apelat a la curacio de lu, e atrobegui la mugen ayssi cum es mugit del moridos, e descubrigui la plagua e atrobegui le sanc le qual era yssit de la plagua petit.	And what I have seen with my own eyes is that a servant took a knife and placed it in her throat, incising one part of the lobe of the lung, and I was called to treat this case. I gathered the mistletoe as it grows from the dead, uncovered the wound, and let the blood which was oozing from the wound out.
Donc yeu fo confessat que aquela no havia inscidit vena ni guidegi, e le vent yssia de la plagua, e curegui aquela entro que foc sanada.	Then I have to confess that there was no rupture of vein or artery, and the wind from the wound, and cured her where it was injured.
E no accidic a la sirventa si no rauquiera en la votz, e aprop alcus dias retornec ad miloracio de las suas dispozicios.	And she did not suffer any accident or even hoarseness, and soon recovered from her discomfort.
E ara dic yeu que en la seccio del epilhot no ha temor.	And now I say that in the case of the inguinal region, there is no fear.
Capitol .xliv.	Capitol XLIV.
De seccio sobre apostema le qual accideys en le golayro defora, e es apelat hernia del golayro.	On the section about an abscess that occurs on the thigh outside, and is called a thigh hernia.
Aquest apostema nompnat hernia del golayro es apostema gran segon la color del cors, e es mot en las femnas.	This abscess, named thigh hernia, is a large abscess according to the color of the body, and it often occurs in women.
E es segon dos manieyras, quar o es natural o accidental.	And it can occur in two ways: either naturally or accidentally.
E en le natural no es engen de curar.	And in the natural case, it is not easy to cure.
E l’accidental es segon dos manieyras del qual la un es semblant a nodes grasses, e l’autra manieyra es semblant apostema le qual es fayt per nodacio de arteria, e en aquel es temor.	And the accidental case occurs in two ways: one resembles fatty nodes, and the other resembles an abscess formed by the obstruction of an artery, and in this case, there is fear.
E no cove que·s fassa presumpcio a lu cum ferr sino en aquel que es petit.	And do not assume that this applies to him as much as to the small one.
E tu proha aquel e investigua aquel am le dit, e si atrobas lu semblant a nodi gras, e no es suspendut am alcuna de las venas, lahoras tu inscideys aquel ayssi cum les nodes, e extratz aquel am aquo que conte lu de la pel e bursiclam; e sino, lahoras es perscrutat tot le sieu esser, e aprop cura le loc am aquo que cove de curacio entro que sia sanat.	And thou probe that one and investigate that one as he is told, and if thou findest a semblance to nodules of fat, and it is not suspended in any of the veins, then thou incisest that thus like the nodules, and extract that from within the skin and bursicle; and if not, then thoroughly examine his whole being, and place care on the area as what is suitable for healing until it be healed.
Capitol .xlv.	Capitol. xlv.
De seccio de las specias de nodes.	Of the sections of the species of nodules.
Dels nodes so motas specias e yeu ja he dit totas las specias de lor en la divisio.	Of the nodules, there are various species, and I have already described all the species of these in the division.
E cove que yeu recomte assi la diferencia entre node e exitura cum fassa dubitacio.	And note that I recount thus the difference between a nodule and an ulcer so as to avoid doubt.
Donc yeu dic que am exitura es caliditat e febre e dolors vehementz entro que es sedada la ebullicio de la superfluitat; e es complida putrefaccio que lahora cessa la febre, la dolor e la calor.	Therefore, I say that in an ulcer there is quality, fever, and violent pains until the boiling of the excess subsides; and when complete putrefaction occurs, then the fever, pain, and heat cease.
Mays am node no es caliditat ni febre ni dolor, e conte aquel ciphac leon le qual es al u sac propri.	But if there is no heat or fever or pain, and concerning that lion's skin which is on the back pack.
E es segon la color del cors, e le comensament de lu es cum un ceze e es fayt ayssi cum vace, sia major o minor, e son segon dos specias, quar o so grassas e conteno humiditat, e las colors de la humiditat son motas, segon que yeu diyssi en la divisio.	And it is according to the color of the body, and the beginning of it is like a blotch and is made thus, either larger or smaller, and they are according to two species, namely those that are fatty and contain humidity, and the colors of the humidity are spots, as I said in the division.
Donc cove, quan pervenas a la curacio de node, que exprohes aquel e inquiras aquel al comensament am sturment le qual es apelat intromes, segon que vindra la sua forma en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	Therefore, when you arrive at the treatment of nodes, express that and inquire about that from the beginning by examining the swelling which is called intromes, according to its form which will be in the capital which is nearby.
E es manieyra de inquisicio de apostemas e de totz nodes, e es que tu prenguas aquest sturment e entromet aquel en le loc pus humit le qual atrobas en le apostema, e tu revolveras les tieus ditz am aquel petit a petit entro que sapias que·l sturment ja ha penetrat la codena.	And this is the method of inquiring about abscesses and all nodes, and it is that you take this swelling and insert it into the place most humid which you find in the abscess, and you will mix the tissues little by little with it until you know that the swelling has penetrated the core.
E aprop ultima la tua ma segon la mesura de la grandeza del apostema, e aprop extratz le entromes e considera aquo que es yssit en le vestigi de lu.	Then place your hand according to the measure of the size of the abscess, and extract the intromis and consider what is situated in the residue.
E si es fora-getada la humiditat corrent, de qualque color sia, lahoras tu le inscideys am seccio superficial segon que he dit en les autres apostemas.	And if the running moisture of any color is neglected, then you incise according to a superficial section as I said in other carbuncles.
E si del vestigi de l’intromes no hieys humiditat, lahoras sapias que es gras.	And if there is no moisture from the intrusion, then you know it is fatty.
E secca sobre lu am seccio havent forma de crotz segon aquesta forma:	And if it is dry on the surface and has the form of a cross according to this form:
ayssi cum t’e ensenhat, e suspen aquel am oncis, e excorja la codena de tota part am facilitat, e guarda la pel o sac, si podes, sobre aquel e extraguas aquela sania am le node.	As I have taught you, suspend it with threads, and carefully remove the cord from all parts with ease, and keep the skin or sack above it, if possible, and extract the healthy part at the node.
Mays si es romput en la operacio, no es possible extrayre aquela sana, e motas veguadas endeve aquo, e lahoras tu la extratz a pessas entro que de lu no romangua denguna causa.	But if it breaks during the operation, it is not possible to extract that healthy part, and many clots will remain. Then you should remove them in pieces so that none of them gets infected for any reason.
Quar si de lu roman denguna causa, pauc o trop, le node retorne segon le mays.	But if it gets infected for any reason, either partially or completely, the node should return as best as possible.
E si tu vezes que de lu roman alcuna part petita, lahoras comple la plagua de alcunas polveras corrosivas agudas e strenh la plagua, e pausa sobre aquela que sede apostema caut, e cura aquel del autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And if you see that any part of it is infected, then fill the wound with some sharp and strong corrosive powders, strengthen the powder, place it over the area where the carbuncle resides, and cure the rest with the other treatment until it is healed.
E si es node gran, lahoras tu cus las doas labias de lu e cura aquel am aquo que encarna.	And if it is not great, then you close its two lips and cure that which is enclosed.
Mays si vena pulsatil es a lu contraria, o no-pulsatil, lahoras tu coyta e huemple le loc de zegi trissat que es vetriol e leyssa aquel streyt per dos dias o per tres entro que·s poyresca la plagua e que repause la ebullicio del sanc; e aprop retorna a inscindir aquo que es romas del node.	And if the vein is pulsatile on the opposite side, or non-pulsatile, then you incise and fill the area with a cloth soaked in vinegar and let it dry for two days or three until the swelling subsides and the boiling of the blood calms; and then return to cut what is ruptured from the node.
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter 46.
De las formas del sturmentz necessaris en seccio e perforacio.	Of the forms of instruments necessary for section and perforation.
De aquels so las formas dels intromesas, e so de tres specias, que de aquels es alcu gran, e de lor es migier, e de lor es petit.	Of those, these are the forms of the instruments, and they are of three species: some are large, and others are medium, and others are small.
La forma de intromes gran es aquesta:	The form of the large instrument is this:
La forma de intromes migier es aquesta:	The form of the medium instrument is this:
La forma de intromes petit es aquesta:	The form of the small instrument is this:
Sian faytz de ferr, de alfulud, de extremitatz cayradas decentment, per so que festino le intrament en les apostemas.	They should be made of iron, of copper, of fallen extremities properly, so that the instrument speeds in the abscesses.
E aquestas so las formas dels experientz, e son nompnatz albered, e un de aquels es apelat berid.	These are the forms of the experienced ones, and they are called albed, and one of them is called berid.
E so de tres especias, quar de lor es gran, migier e pauc.	And these are made from three spices, of which one is major, the other two are minor.
La forma de experient gran, forma de lu:	The form of the experienced one, great, is as follows:
La forma de experient migier, forma de lu:	The form of the experienced one, half, is as follows:
La forma de experient pauc, forma de lu:	The form of the experienced one, little, is as follows:
Conveneysso que sian per aquels apostemas e exituras e fistulas e bubos per so que entre aquelas so dels osses e de autras causas.	It is advisable that they be used for those abscesses, ulcers, fistulas, and buboes, so that they are located near the bones or due to other causes.
E so faytz redontz, grosses, leons, ayssi cum grans agulhas am las quals son cosidas las selhas, e son faytas de eram citri, o de eram o de ferr, o de argent, E las milhors so quan so faytas de eram citri.	And they should be round, large, like big needles to which the threads are attached, and they are made of iron, or steel, or silver. The best are those made of steel citron.
E son faytz les experient de plum negre, les quals se acordan que per aquels sian ubertas las fistulas en la conquavitat de las quals so reflexios, que sian reflectidas am la sua levitat am aquelas refleccios.	And they make experiences with black feather, which are said to be effective when the fistulas in their cavity are opened and the reflections are reflected back due to their lightness.
E so de tres specias, quar alcus de lor so loncs, e dels autres migiers, e dels autres breus, segon la quantitat del ample de la fistula e de la strictura de lu.	And so of three species, some are long, and others medium, and others short, according to the width of the fistula and its stricture.
Forma del experient gran de plom:	Form of the experience with great lead:
Forma del experient migier de plom:	Form of the medium-sized lead experience:
Forma del experient petit de plom:	Form of the small lead experience:
Las formas dels oncis so de motas specias, quar de aquels so alcus simples, als quals es una curvitat solament, e so de tres specias: grans, paucs e migiers.	The forms of the feathers are of three species. Some of them are simple long ones, which have only a curvature, and they are of three species: long, few, and medium-sized.
E de lor so uncis orps, e so de tres specias.	And they have feather bodies, which are of three species.
E de aquels so uncis haventz doas curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And those feathers having two curves, are of three species.
E de lor so haventz tres curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And from them they have three curves, and are of three species.
E totz aquetz so necessaris en lor loc.	And all these are necessary in their place.
Forma de unci simple gran, forma de lu:	Shape of a single large one, its shape:
Forma de unci simple migier:	Shape of a single medium one:
Forma de unci simple pauc, forma de lu:	Shape of a single small one, its shape:
Forma de unci orp gran:	Form of a very large single one:
Forma de unci orp migier, forma de lu:	Form of a medium-sized single one, its form:
Forma de unci orp pauc, forma de lu:	Form of a very small single one, its form:
Forma de unci gran havent dos curvaturas:	Form of a large single one having two curves:
Forma de unci migier havent dos curvatas:	Form of a medium-sized single one having two curves:
Forma de unci pauc havent dos curvaturas:	Form of a small single one having two curves:
Forma de unci gran havent tres curvaturas:	Form of a large single one having three curves:
Forma de unci migier havent tres curvaturas:	Form of a woman having three curves:
Forma de unci pauc havent tres curvaturas:	Form of a woman having three curves:
E aquestas so las formas dels scalpels am les quals son seccatz e scorjatz les nodes e le apostemas, e so de tres specias, quar de aquels es gran, migier, e pauc.	And these are the forms of the knives which are sharp and clean of knots and abscesses, and there are three species, one of which is large, woman-like, and small.
Forma de scapel gran:	Form of the large knife:
Forma del scapel migier:	Form of the woman-like knife:
Forma de scapel pauc:	Form of the small knife:
Las extramitatz de aquels am les quals es fayta seccio so agudas e las autres extramitatz so no-agudas, e no so pausadas en tal manieyra, sino per que sia fayt juvament en la excorjacio dels nodes la temor de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e per aquels sia sanat le malaute e atrobe tranquilitat un petit per la adustio la qual atroba deves la excoriacio del apostema.	The ends of those which are cut sharp are acute, and the other ends are not acute, and they are not used in this manner, but so that it may be done judiciously in the cutting out of knots, to avoid injury to vein or nerve, and for these purposes it is healed and a small degree of comfort is found from the heating which causes the excoriation of the abscess.
E aquestas son las formas de almagidas, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc, ayssi cum veyras.	And these are the forms of the lancets, and there are three species: large, woman-like, and small, as you will see.
La forma de magda gran:	The form of great abscess:
Forma de magda migier:	The form of female abscess:
Forma de magda pauc:	The form of small abscess:
Sian faytas de eram e so semblantz de ray am le qual e fayt alcofol.	If they are formed of heat and have the appearance of a red spot on which alcohol is applied.
E es en la extramitat lada punctada am spatum occultada e en aquela corr a las partidas dedintz e defora, quan tu vols, ayssi cum veses.	And if in the outer side it is pierced with a probe hidden and there flows to the inner parts both inside and outside, when you want, as you see.
Las formas de spatimis, les quals so amaguatz entre los ditz deves la perforacio dels apostemas e no les percebo les malautes, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc.	The forms of pustules, which are hidden between the fingers and do not cause pain, are of three species: great, female, and small.
E aquestas so las formas de aquels:	And these are the forms of those:
Las formas de ventozas am las quals es abscindit le flux del sanc, e so de tres specias; gran, migiera e pauca; las formas de lu:	The forms of hemorrhoids, in which the flow of blood is stopped, are of three species: great, female, and small; the forms of it:
Sian faytas de eram citri, redondas am alcuna longitut , e sian subtils.	If they are formed of citrus heat, round of some length, and very fine.
E cove que sian aquestas specias de ventosas deves tu grans, migieras e paucas, per so que per aquelas abscindas flux de sanc am velocitat en necessitat, e lahoras quan a tu primieyrament no es medicina.	And these should be these suction cups either large, medium, or few, so that through those divided flux of blood is accelerated in necessity, and when you first applied it, it is not medicine.
Enpero no uses de aquelas ad abscidir sanc en tot loc del cors, e non uses sino en locs carnoses, ayssi cum en les lacertis de las cambas e de las coyssas, e en les lacertz dels brasses, e de las mamillas e del ventre e dels engonars, e semblantz a lor dels lacertz carnoses humitz.	But do not use those to reduce blood in all parts of the body, and use them only on fleshly areas, such as on the tendons of the knees and thighs, and on the tendons of the arms, and on the breasts, and the abdomen, and the armpits, and similar fleshly tendons.
E alcunas veguadas son faytz de aquels strumentz autres petitz semblantz scorsas de fisacs segon aquesta forma; per les quals lo sanc es abscindit quan es fayt per fleubotomia, o deves inscizio de vena o de arceria.	And sometimes small ones are made with those instruments, resembling curved sickles according to this form; through which blood is reduced when performed by venesection, or by incision of a vein or artery.
E alcunas veguadas son faytas redondas segon aquesta forma:	And sometimes they are made round according to this form:
Capitol .xlvii.	Capitol. xlviii.
De la cura de las mamillas dels homes las quals so asembladas de femnas.	Of the treatment of the breasts of men which are gathered from women.
Alcunas veguadas so infladas las mamillas de alcus homes deves le compliment del dormir cum comensan esser pellutz, e aprop so infladas las mamillas, e so asembladas las mamillas de las femnas, e romano apostemosas, lejas.	Some times the breasts of certain men swell as they begin to become flabby, and at these times the breasts swell, and the breasts of women gather together, like Roman apstles.
E ad aquel que avoreys aquo, cove que inscidisca aquelas am seccio lunar segon aquesta forma, de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G., e aprop excorja la groceza tota, e aprop uempla la plagua de medicament encarnatiu, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am cosidura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And for those who have this, cut out the affected lunar section according to this form, from the line of B to the line of G, and then excise all the growth, and fill the wound with red medicine, and sew the two edges of the wound together, and cure him until he is healed.
Mays si la mamilla declina a las partidas dejos e es mollificada per la sua magnitut ayssi cum endeve a las femnas, lahoras sia fendut en dos latz sieus pus sobiras, am dos seccios semblantz a figura lunar, de las quals quascuna sia contenguda en l’autra deves la fi de quascuna, entro que sia que la linha major contengua la menor segon aquesta forma de la linha de .B. e la linha de .G. E aprop excorja la codena la qual es entre dos labias de la plagua, e osta la pingueza, e aministra aquo que havem dit de la sutura e de las polveras aquo que es necessari en la curacio entro que sia sanat.	Moreover, if the breast droops to the sides and is softened by its size, like in women, then divide it into two layers so that each part is contained within the other. According to this form, let the major line contain the minor line from the line of B to the line of G. Then excise the cord which is between the two edges of the wound, remove the fatty tissue, and administer what we have said about suturing and powders as necessary during the cure until it is healed.
E si tu non conpleysses la inscizio de aquo que cove inscidir per la inquietut del malaute, e per flux de sanc, lahoras cove que huemplas la plagua de coto submergit en enguent corrosiu e layssa aquel entro que aquo corroda que es romas de la grayssa, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you do not complete the incision that needs to be made due to the patient's restlessness and flow of blood, then you must fill the wound with cloth submerged in corrosive ointment and leave it there until it eats away at the roots of the grease, and then cure what is left there until it is healed.
Capitol .xlviii.	Capitol. xlviii.
De perforacio de apostemas que veno dejos le titillic.	Of the incision of boils where pus leaves it.
Aquetz apostemas que veno dejos le titillic so de las specias de scrophulas, durs, las quals conte una pel que es sac.	These boils where pus leaves them are of the kinds of scrofula, tumors, which contain a core that is removed.
E de aquelas so alcunas que conteno humiditatz; e aquelas que conteno humiditatz cove que sian inscididas am seccio lunar segon aquesta figura: de la linha de .G. a la linha de .B. E cum es tot evacuat aquo que es en le apostema de la sania, lahoras tu le comple de coto viel e leysa le entro al autra dia.	And of those that contain moisture, they must be incised on the lunar phase according to this figure: from the line of G to the line of B. And when all that is within the boil is evacuated, then complete it with dry material and leave the inside for another day.
E aprop le coto sia ostat e sia curat am enguent convenient ad aquo, entro que sia sanat.	And then let the dry material remain and be treated with appropriate ointment until it is healed.
E si le apostema de las specias dels nodes es, e de las scrophulas, lahoras tu scindeys sobre aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la seccio sobre las scrophulas engualment.	And if the abscess of the nodes and scrofula is, then you incise thereupon in this way as we have said in the section on scrofula equally.
May si la plagua es extenduda en aysso que yesca poyredura, lahoras administra en lu cauteri segon que en aquo havem denant dit.	And if the ulcer is extended in such a way that it causes putrefaction, then apply to it a cautery as we have already said.
Capitol .xlix.	Capitol. xliv.
De seccio de apostemas que accideysso per arceria o per vena.	Section on abscesses that occur due to an arrow or a vein.
Quan arceria es rompuda, e la codena es consolidada la qual es sobre aquela, lahoras motas veguadas accideys apostema E les senhals per les quals es conoguda que imflamacio e apostema sian per la arteria o per vena: quar quan apostema es per arceria es lonc agreguat en le preon del cors; e que quan inpelleysses le apostema am les tieus ditz, sentes en lu quays sia stridor.	When an arrow breaks a vein and the chain (likely referring to a tendon or ligament) is consolidated over it, spots with dark shadows often occur as abscesses. The signs by which one can recognize that inflammation and abscess are due to the artery or vein: when an abscess occurs from an arrow, it is long and extends along the surface of the body; and when you press the abscess with your finger, you feel a stridor (a grating or friction) within it.
E aquel que es per vena es redon al manifest del cors.	And that which is from the vein is round in appearance on the surface of the body.
E seccio sobre aquest apostema es error, e majorment en aquel que es dejos las aysselhas, e en les angonars, e en le col, e en motz locs del cors; e es mot gran, donc cove que la sua curacio am ferr sia esquivada, e aquel que es en las extramitatz, o al cap, cove que sia evitat.	And the exudation over this abscess is error, and especially in those that are left under the armpits, in the inguinal regions, in the neck, and in other random parts of the body; and if it is large, then consider that its cure must be avoided, and that which is in the extremities or at the head should be avoided.
Mays sobre aquel que es de lor per imflacio de l’orrifici de la arceria, scindeys en la codena seccio en le lonc; e aprop huebre la seccio am uncis e aprop la arceria, e deliura de las tunicas entro que sia descuberta.	More about that which is due to them by inflammation of the orifice of the artery, cut the longitudinal section in the chain; then narrow the section with clips and approach the artery, and剥离动脉周围的组织直至显露。
E aprop met sobre aquel agulha e fay aquela penetrar entro al autre latz, e estrenh la arceria am fiel doble en dos locs, — la qual causa yeu a tu eyssenhegui en extraccio de doas arcerias les quals so en les templars.	Then place a needle there and make it penetrate into the other side, and strengthen the artery with double stitches in two places — which you should show me in the extraction of two arteries that are in the temple area.
E aprop punh le loc le qual es entre dos liamentz am spatum entro que yesca le sanc tot que es en lu, e sia dissolvut le apostema.	Then burn the area between two sutures with a cauterizing tool as it bleeds out, and dissolve the abscess.
E aprop administra curacio en la qual es engendrat poyre entro que caian les liamentz; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz convenientz ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	Then administer treatment in which powder is applied before the sutures are placed; and cure it with suitable ointments as it heals.
E si es apostema per seccio de vena, lahoras cove que tu tenguas am la tua ma aquo que es a tu possible del apostema am la codena, e aprop intromet la agulha dejos le loc le qual tu has tengut dejos la tua ma, e fay aquela penetrar; e sia en aquela fil doble entro que tu extraguas aquel del autre latz, e aprop ligua le apostema am bo liament segon que yeu he dit a tu en le liament de uva4 de doas partz am doas extremitatz del fil.	And if it is an abscess due to the drying of a vein, then you should grasp with your hand that which you can reach of the abscess at its root, and then introduce the needle where you have held the abscess with your hand, and make it penetrate; and take out from there on one side what is on the other side, and tie the abscess tightly with good lint as I said in the grapevine fiber chapter about tying at both ends of the thread.
Mays si temes que extraguam le fil, lahoras entromet le fiel am aquela agula dejos tot le apostema deves la inscizio de la agulha primieyra, e strenh les tieus fiels en quatre locs.	And if you fear that you will take out the thread, then introduce the wax into the needle and remove all the abscess by making the first incision of the needle, and strengthen your ties in four places.
Aprop secca le apostema en le mieg loc de lu entro que quan es yssit aquo que es en lu, lahoras tu inscideys la superfluitat de la codena, e layssa aquo que de lu es liat.	Then dry the abscess in its middle location such that when it is sitting on this, you make the incision of the root, and leave what is wet.
E aprop pausa sobre lu pulvil le qual has submergit en vi e oli, e aprop administra la curacio la qual es fayta am calguas e enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then place the powder which you have soaked in vinegar and oil on it, and proceed to apply the cure which is made with cloths and ointments until it is healed.
Capitol l del apostema le qual accideys per torcio de nervis.	Capitalize the area where the abscess occurs due to nerve compression.
Ayssi cum accideys apostema en arceria e en vena, e semblantment accideys apostema en les nervis quan accideys en lor percussio o accideys per trebal superfluable, e per semblantz.	Similarly, an abscess can occur in arteries and veins, and similarly, an abscess can occur in nerves when there is percussion or excessive work on them.
E es fayt le mays de lu en les locs dels adjutoris o del talo, o en tot loc en le qual so maugudas las juncturas.	And it is most often found in the areas of the ribs or the spine, or in any place where the joints are loose.
E es apostema greu, e es asemblat a la color del autre cors, e es en las majors de lu disposicios ses de lor e quan es streyt am vehementia, sent en lu le malaute semblant stupor.	And it is a severe abscess, and its color resembles that of the rest of the body. It is located in the largest parts of his body system, and when stretched by inflammation, pain is felt in it resembling a state of stupor.
E no es apostema agreguat en le preon del cors, e per so es dejos la codena, e el es maugut a tota partida e no va a las partidas denant ni detras.	And it is not an abscess aggregated in the anterior part of the body, and therefore you loosen the bandage, and he is loose in all parts and does not go to the front or back parts.
Donc aquo de aquels que es en las juncturas no cove que sia envasit am ferr, quar fort leu endevenguera contracio.	Therefore, that which is in the joints does not need to be filled with iron, for strong ligaments can withstand contraction.
Mays aquel que es en le cap o en le front fen la codena am spatum.	May those in the head or on the forehead be made with spatula.
Mays si es apostema pauc, lahoras te aquel am les forfecs e abscindeys aquel de razitz.	May it be that if the apтемema is small, you incise it with forceps and cut out the pus.
E si es gran, lahoras tu le suspen am unci, e excorja aquel, e aprop osta aquel; e ajusta la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if it is large, you suspend it with forceps, and scrape out that part, and stitch it up; and cure that until it heals.
Capitol .li.	Capitulum.
De seccio de apostema le qual accideys de cheil que accideys al ventre.	Of the section on apтемema that occurs in the cheek which affects the abdomen.
Endeveno ad alcus homes motas veguadas en les ventres de aquels e en las autras partidas del cors de aquels theils les quals son apelatz funguals per similitut de aquels am funges, dels quals la razitz es subtil e·l cap de aquel es gros; e ja las labias de aquels so conversas, e es de aquels que es petit, e es de aquels que es mot magnificat.	Some men have had warts appear in their abdomens and in other parts of their bodies. These are called funguals due to their similarity to fungi; the pus from them is thin, and the head of the wart is large; and the lips around them are soft, coming from those that are small, and from those that are a magnified lump.
E yeu ja e vist un, e en le ventre de lu eran dos theils les quals eran mays a funges semblantz, e no era diferencia entre aquels blancs, de menuda razitz.	And I have seen one case where in the abdomen there were two lumps that resembled fungi, and there was no difference between those white ones, with thin pus.
E ja las labias de aquels eran enversadas e se fendian, e humiditat corria de aquel tot temps.	And already those lips were turned inward and split, and moisture flowed from there continuously.
Donc yeu inscidegui aquels e atrobegui en la un en pes quays xviii unc. e l’autre quays vi unc.	Then I incised those and punctured in the one foot at eighteen inches. The other at six inches.
E la operacio en la inscizio de lor es que consideres lahoras si·l malaute es humit, e la color de atheil es blanca, humit, de subtil razitz; lahoras tu le inscideys am spatum lat, e sian en la presencia tua cauteris en le foc, quar motas veguadas deves la seccio de lu es expellit mot sanc; e si te ventz le sanc, cauteriza aquel.	And in the operation of their incision, consider whether the gout is humid, and the color of the flesh is white, humid, of fine particles; then you incise with a spatum lat, and let it be in your presence cauterized in the fire, so that the section of it should be expelled without infection; and if you meet the infection, cauterize that.
E si vezes le malaute pauruc e temeros, guarda te de inscizio am ferr; mays lahoras pren fiel de plom recent fayt, e strenh am aquel atheil, la manieyra del qual es aquela que havem dita; e leyssa aquel per dos dias.	And if you find the gout painful and fearful, avoid incision with a knife; rather, when you take lead powder recently made, strengthen that flesh, the method of which is as we have said; leave it for two days.
E aprop ajusta en la strictura del fil de plom; donc, no cesses strenher le plom granre devetz en theil, entro que sia abscindit e cayha per se ses trebalh.	Then adjust in the stricture of the lead thread; therefore, continue to strengthen the lead greatly throughout the flesh, between which it should be incised and fall by itself due to its work.
Mays si theil es de grossa razitz, lahoras en la inscizio de lu es alcuna causa de temor e de paor, e majorment en aquel que es en le ventre.	If the swelling is from a large tumor, in its incision there is some cause for fear and alarm, especially in that which is in the belly.
Mays possibla es que tu inscindas la maytat de lu , e aprop cauteriza aquel per que no retorne.	Perhaps you can incise the tumor, and then cauterize it so that it does not return.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanada la plagua.	And then cure what is within to heal the wound.
E guarda te que tu no presumas inscidir theil le qual es de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, de leg reguardament, quar aquel es absi cancros.	And beware that you do not attempt to incise tissue which is of a dark color, with little sensation, and appears suspicious, for such tissue is likely cancerous.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio de cranc aprop aysso.	And I will now recall the treatment for this disease further on.
Capitol .lii.	Chapter II.
De curacio de eminencia del umbilic.	On the treatment of an umbilical hernia.
Eminencia del umbilic es fayta per motas causas; o per fissuras del ciphac le qual es sobre le ventre, e yeys de lu la tela o budel segon que endeve en las autras rupturas; o per sanc le qual flueys de vena o de arceria segon que es denant dit, o per ventositat coarctada en lu.	An umbilical hernia is caused by various factors; it can be due to cracks in the diaphragm which is above the belly, and protrudes through the abdominal wall according to where other ruptures occur; or due to a tumor that flows from a vein or artery as previously mentioned, or due to constricted fatty tissue.
Mays si es per fissura del ciphac e per yssiment de la tela, lahoras la color del apostema es semblant a la color del cors; e es leon ses dolor, e aprop appar de divers situament.	If it is due to a tear in the sac and leakage of the membrane, then the color of the abscess resembles the color of the body; and the pain is like that of a lion, and often appears in various positions.
E si es per egressio del budel, lahoras le situament de aquel am lu de aquo que havem recontat, de mays vehement diversitat, e cum tu premes aquel am les tieus ditz es occultat, e aprop retorna; e fort leu es am lu so, e es magnificat mot deves le introt de banh e vehement trebalh.	If it is due to the protrusion of the intestine, then the location of that area differs from what we have described, with more varied severity. And when you press on that area with your thumb, the swelling diminishes and quickly returns; it is light in that area, and a strong motive for treatment should involve bathing and vigorous work.
Mays si per humiditat, lahoras es leon e no es occultat quan premes am la tua ma, ni es constrengut, ni es cregut.	If it is due to humidity, then the pain is like that of a lion and does not diminish when you press on it with your hand; it is neither constricted nor relieved.
E si es per sanc, lahoras am aquestz senhals apareys le apostema a negror declinant.	And if it is due to a wound, then in this case the abscess appears blackish in color.
Mays si es per carn nada, lahoras es apostema greu, gros e dur, e es ficat segon una quantitat.	If it is due to no flesh at all, then the abscess is heavy, large, and hard, and is located according to a certain quantity.
Mays si es per ventositat, lahoras le tocament de lu es leon.	If it is due to excessiveness, then the touch of it is like that of a lion.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras lahoras si la eminencia de l’umbilic es per sanc de arceria, o de vena, o per ventositat; lahoras cove que sias prohibit de la curacio de lu, quar en aquela es temor e paor ayssi cum t’e ensenhat en le capitol en le qual he dit les apostemas per arceria e per vena.	And the operation in such cases is that you consider whether the prominence of the navel is due to an artery, or a vein, or from phlegm; then you must refrain from treating it, for there is fear and dread as you have been taught in the Capitol where I said about abscesses from arteries and veins.
E si la eminencia del umbilic es per le budel o per la tela, lahoras cove que comandes al malaute que tengua le ale sieu, e sia stant extendut; e aprop senha am tenta en le circuit de tot le umbilic, e aprop comanda a lu que stia envers entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e aprop circunda am spatum lat en le circuit del umbilic sobre le loc le qual has senhat am la tenta; e aprop exten la maytat del apostema a las partidas desus am unci gran; e aprop lia en le circuit am fiel fort o am ceda e la manieyra del liar decent.	And if the prominence of the navel is due to the intestine or the hernia, then you must command the patient to lie on their side; and then gently feel around the entire circumference of the navel, and command them to lie facing between your legs on their back; and then surround the area you felt with a strong paste or a cord in the same manner of binding decently; and finally apply a firm ligature or a soft one in the circuit.
E aprop huebre le mieg del apostema extendut sobre le liament e intromet le dit tieu en aquel indic e quereys le budel; e si tu l’as atrobat ni guardat per le liament, lahoras tu extratz alxorati e impelleys le budel a las partidas dedintz del ventre.	And then extend the majority of the abscess over the bandage and insert your finger in that indentation to feel for the intestine; if you have already grasped it and kept it with the bandage, then you extract it quickly and push the intestine into the inner parts of the abdomen.
E si has atrobada la tela, lahoras pren aquel am unci; e inscideys las superfluitatz de lu.	And if you have found the membrane, then take it with forceps; and incise its superfluous parts.
Mays si es contraria a tu arceria o vena, lahoras circunda aquel mot, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio; e pren dos agulhas e met en aquelas dos fiels fortz e entromet dos agulhas en le circuit le qual has feyt entorn le apostema en manieyra de crotz, las quals fassas penetrar; e aprop strenh le apostema en quatre partidas sobre las agulhas.	But if it is contrary to your artery or vein, then circumvent that spot, and soon return to your operation; and take two needles and put them into those two strong threads and insert two needles into the circuit you have made around the abscess in the manner of a cross, making them penetrate; and soon strengthen the abscess in four parts over the needles.
E si tu vols, osta las agulhas e leyssa le loc entro que poyresca la carn extenduda e caia per si; o inscideys aquel quan es subtiliat e se poyreys, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if you want, hold the needles and let the area where the extended flesh can ooze and fall by itself; or incise that which has become thin and can be allowed to drain, and soon cure that with ointments until it is healed.
E si la eminencia del ombilic es de carn nada en lu o per humiditat, lahoras cove que tu conquaves le apostema ayssi cum havem dit e estraguas le sanc o la humiditat, la qual atrobas en lu, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove e que consolide le loc.	And if the prominence of the navel is filled with flesh or due to humidity, then drain the abscess from your cavity as we have said and remove the pus or humidity you find in it, and soon cure that with ointments until it consolidates.
Capitol .liii.	Capitol liiii.
De curacio de cranc.	Of the cure of cough.
Ja havem dit, en la divisio, de specia de cranc e en qual manieyra es via a la curacio de lu am medicinas, e que es squivador en lu la curacio am ferr per so que no sia ulcerat; e havem dit cranc engendrat en la mayra e cautela de la curacio de lu.	We have already said, in the division, of types of cough and in what manner treatment is approached with medicines, and that the cure should be conducted so as not to become ulcerated; and we have said about a cough generated by the method and care of its treatment.
E diyssero les antics que alcunas veguadas cranc es en loc on es possibla la eradicacio de lu, ayssi cum de cran le qual es en las mamillas o en la coyssa e a lor semblantz dels membres allocat a estrayre tot aquel, e majorment quan es comensant petit.	And the ancients said that some types of cough can be cured in the location where its eradication is possible, such as with the one in the chest or in the groin and their equivalents in other body parts, by extracting all of it, especially when it begins small.
Mays quan es antiquat e es gra, no cove que te propries a lu, quar yeu non pogui sanar de aquel alcu ni no he vist autre, ni que sia pervengut ad aquo.	More often than not, when it is old and hard, one cannot determine its properties, for I have neither been able to cure such cases nor have I seen any other, nor can it be cured by this method.
E la operacio en lu es quan es allocat ayssi cum havem dit, es que tu precedescas e laysses le malaute e purgues de colera negra alcunas veguadas, e aprop sagna aquel, si es atrobada replecio manifesta.	And the operation for it is as follows: when it has spread, as we have said, you should first isolate the patient and purge them of black bile for several days, then extract it, if it is found to be clearly filled with blood.
E aprop prepara le malaute am preparacio en le qual sia locat am operacio, e aprop prohiceys en le trauc uncis les quals cove ad aquel; e aprop concava de tota part am la codena sego bona perexcrutacio entro que no romangua alcuna causa de las razitz de lu.	And then prepare the patient for the operation, placing it in a position suitable for the procedure; and raise the curtains to which they are attached; and carefully depress all parts with the forceps so that none of the reasons for the operation are damaged.
E layssa correr le sanc, e no abscidas aquel leugierament, e exprem les locs, e abstergeys le sanc gros tot am la tua ma o am instrument am le qual es a tu possible dels instruments.	Let the blood flow, and do not stop it too soon, and squeeze the areas, and wipe away the thick blood with your hand or an instrument at your disposal.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat de sanc gros inscizio de vena o de arceria, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que·l flux del sanc sia cessat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	But if you encounter thick blood in the incision of a vein or artery, then cauterize it once the flow of blood has stopped, and treat it with another method until it is healed.
Capitol .liv.	Capitol. liv.
De curacio de ydropici.	Of the cure for dropsy.
Nos ja havem recomtat, en la divisio, de las specias de ydropici de l’aygua, e les senhals de quascuna especia, de la curacio de lu am medicinas.	We have already discussed in the division the species of dropsy from water, and the signs of each species, and the cure for it using medicines.
E aquela la qual es curada am ferr no es sino la specia de althitas sola, e no es aproximat am ferr a la specia de timpanistres ni a la especia de yposarcha, quar aquo es mortal.	And that which is cured with iron is only the species of altithermal dropsy alone, and it is not approximated with iron to the species of tympanic dropsy or the species of hypoarchic dropsy, for this is fatal.
E quan tu ja has medicat aquesta especia de ydropici timpanistre am medicinas e no comfereys la tua medicacio, lahoras considera, quar si al malaute ja es conseguida debelitat, o es am aquel autra malautia otra ydropici, ayssi cum si es en lu tos o cos de ventre e semblant ad aquels, lahoras guarda te que no le mediques am ferr, quar temor es sobre aquo.	And when you have medicated this kind of diphtheritic ear disease with medicines and do not find your treatment effective, consider whether if the patient has already achieved sufficient debility, or another illness such as edema, similar to those in their lungs or abdominal organs, then guard yourself against further medication, for fear of harm.
Mays si tu vezes le malaute de vertut exuberant, e am lu no es autra malautia sino ydropici tant solament, e no enfant ni vielh, lahoras la manieyra de la operacio de lu es que tu eleves le malaute entre las tuas mas, e le ministre aprop lu exprema le ventre de lu am la sua ma, enpellen la aygua a la partida dejos del pentenilh, e aprop pren spatum spinos segon aquesta forma:	And if you see the patient has excessive vital force, and in him there is no other illness but edema only, neither child nor old, then the way of the operation for him is that you lift the patient between your arms, and apply your hand to his abdomen, squeezing out the water from him with your hand, push the water to the lower part of the body, and then take a spinal tap according to this form.
sia de dos partz agudas lonc, de aguda extremitat ayssi cum spatum; mays empero sia en lu alcuna brevitat petit a petit, per so que en la operacio am aquel no passes entro al budel, e que ledas aquel.	It should consist of two sharp parts long, with sharp ends like a spinal needle; however, it should be somewhat short, so that in the operation you do not enter the intestine, and you stop there.
E aprop considera si la generacio de ydropici es de part dels budels, quar lahoras cove que tu am la seccio te alonhes del ombelic per la quantitat de tres ditz a las partidas dejos, en le dreyt de lu sobre le pentenilh.	And consider in this case if the generation of edema is from the intestines, for then you must place the section away from the navel by the width of three fingers to the lower parts, along its side above the pelvis.
Mays si la generacio de hydropici es per malautia del fietge, lahoras la tua seccio sia sinistra del ombilic per tres ditz.	If the generation of dropsy is due to illness of the liver, when your section is on the left side of the navel for three fingers.
E si la generacio de lu es per la melsa, lahoras la tua seccio sia en le las dreyt.	If the generation is due to the spleen, when your section is on the right side of the navel for three fingers.
E no cove que la tua seccio sia sobre le costat sobre le qual vol jaser le malaute per que no corron las superfluitatz ad aquel loc freul.	And ensure that your section is not over the side where the illness wants to affect so that the superfluities do not flow to that area.
E aprop perfora am le instrument tota la codena, e aprop entromet en aquela seccio, e eleva la tua ma am le spatum entre la codena e·l siphac, e tu excorja aquel; e si’ la quantitat de una ungla o enviro.	Then pierce the instrument completely through the wound, and insert it into that section, elevate your hand with the spout between the wound and the syphon, and you extract it; if the quantity is about an ounce or so.
E aprop perforo le ciphac entro que pervengua le spatum al loc vuoyt, e es loc de l’aygua.	Then pierce the syphon so that the spout reaches the desired location, which is where the water (liquid) is.
E aprop extratz aquel e entromet un instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	Then extract it and insert an instrument of which this is the form:
e es semblant a canula de argent subtil; es fayt de argent o de eram o de lato leon, al qual en la partida pus bassa de lu es un petit trauc, e en les costatz de lu so tres traucs: dos de una partida e un del autra partida; e fayta es la extremitat de lu insciza segon la manieyra de pluma, ayssi cum vezes:	And it is similar to a thin silver cannula; it is made of silver or copper or tin, on the lower part of which there is a small hole, and along its sides are three holes: two from one side and one from the other side; and the end is incised in the manner of a pen, as you can see:
E en la extramitat de lu pus sobirana es armilla, quar quan le instrument perve al aygua, lahoras aquela tantost deysen sobre le instrument, donc evacua de l’aygua en la ora miega quantitat, quar si tu evacuas de aquela mes que no cove en la hora, fort leu mor le malaute per resolucio del sieu spirit animal, o accideys a lu cincopi que es appropinquada la mort.	And at the extremity of the limb an overcoat, for when the instrument reaches the water, then they quickly say upon the instrument, therefore evacuate from the water in the half hour a quantity, for if you evacuate from there more than can fit in the hour, great harm comes to the patient through resolution of his animal spirit, or accidents approach him that are close to death.
Mays evacua de aquela segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu e segon que significan a tu las disposicios del malaute de la vertut del pols de lu e de la bontat de lu.	Evacuate from there according to the quantity of the virtue of the limb and according to your assessment of the patient's disposition due to the virtue of his pulse and the goodness of his condition.
E aprop extrats le instrument, e rete l’aygua la qual causa es quar tantost es retenguda per la codena la qual rete le trauc que es sobre le ciphac del qual e recomtat a tu que perfores aquel segon aquela manieyra.	And then withdraw the instrument, and retain the water which causes this, for it is quickly retained by the cord which you hold above the clavicle, and you are advised that you should perforate there according to this manner.
E aprop itera le instrument al autra dia si vezes le malaute tollerant aquo, e extratz de la aygua petita quantitat, e fay aquo per alcus jorns sobre temor, e guarda te de error entro que no romangua de l’aygua sino pauc.	And then repeat the instrument on the other day if you see the patient tolerating this, and withdraw a small quantity of water, and do this for several days with caution, and be careful not to become wet from the water except slightly.
Mays si tu temes sobre le malaute, e leyssas de l’aygua gran quantitat, lahoras cura aquel am sepultura en arena cauda, e mota suzor en banh, e al solelh espere per lonc temps; e cura aquel am medicinas dessicativas entro que sia sanat.	But if you fear for the patient, and let a great quantity of water remain, then cure that with burial in sandy ground, and washing in bathwater, and under the sun wait for a long time; and cure that with drying medicines until it is healed.
E cauteriza sobre le stomac, e la melsa e·l fitge aprop la extraccio de l’aygua, segon que yeu he recontat en aquo que es precedit.	And cauterize on the stomach, and the spleen near the extraction of the water, as I have recounted in what came before.
Capitol .lv.	Capitolium.
De la curacio dels enfants les quals so natz les locs de la urina no-perforatz.	For the treatment of children whose urine outlets are not perforated.
Alcunas veguadas alcun dels enfantz es eyssi del ventre de la sua mayre e·l cap de la sua mixtio no es perforat (o es trauc streyt o no es en son loc).	Sometimes some of the children are born with the abdomen of their mother not perforated, or the opening is not in its proper place.
Donc cove coytar am perforacio de lu tantost que es nascut am spatum mot subtil segon aquesta forma:	Then immediately after birth, make a small perforation and gently blow in a fine mist according to this method:
E aprop pausa en le trauc un clavil subtil de plom e ligua aquel, e te per tres jorns o per .iiii.tre.	Then place a fine lead probe in the opening and sew it up, and let it be for three days or for four.
E quant vol urinar sia remaugut e hurine; e aprop retorne aquel.	And when they wish to urinate they strain and do so; then return that.
E si tu no pauses le plom, ja es possible que la urina la qual va sobre le loc, no leysa aquest claure.	And if you do not place the lead, it is possible that the urine which falls on the area will not let this close.
Mays aquel del qual le trauc es streyt sia medicat am clavil de Plom, ayssi cum havem dit, per trops dias entro que sia amplificat.	May the one from which you remove it be straightened and treated with a lead clamp, as we have said, for many days until it is widened.
Mays aquels en les quals es le trauc no en son loc, so leditz, la qual causa es quar de aquels, aquel que es nat e·l trau es deves la fi del cap de la vergua per que no pot urinar a las partidas dedintz, entro que eleva la vergua am la sua ma a las partidas desus; e no es a lu generacio, per so quar le sperma no pot pervenir a la mayre segon rectitut, e es malautia mot laga.	May those in which you remove it not be in their place, as said, the cause is due to those where the trauma is at the tip of the penis, for which it cannot urinate inside; while elevating the penis with its hand above the parts upward. This is not a generation issue, because the sperm cannot reach the uterus according to the correct path, and this is a long-lasting malady.
E la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que·l malaute sia envessat sobre le sieu dos, e aprop exten le cap de la vergua de lu am la tua ma sinistra am vehement extraccio, e inscideys le cap del cap de la vergua del loc del perpucii am spatum agut, ayssi cum es inscizio de pluma, o que tu ne razas alcuna partida, per so que·l mieg de lu vengua semblant al cap de la vergua e que le trauc caia en le mieg loc segon que cove.	And the method of the operation on him is that the patient be placed on his side, and then extend the tip of the penis with your left hand with strong extraction, and incise the tip of the tip of the penis at the circumcision site with a sharp blade, as if it were a feather cut, or any part you think appropriate, so that the wound heals resembling the head of the penis and the removal heals in the middle of the wound.
E guarda te que en la tua operacio de flux de sanc, quar motas vetz accideys aquo; e pausa te a lu am aquo que abscindeys le sanc, e cura la plagua entro que si’ sanada.	And guard yourself in your operation for the flow of sand; whenever you notice accidents occurring there; then pause at that which cuts the sand, and treat the wound before it becomes infected.
Capitol .lvi.	Capitol LXVI.
De albater le qual accideys en le prepucii en le cap de la vergua e de corropcio e negror e adherencia del prepucii del cap de la vergua.	Of the white substance which occurs in the prepuce, at the head of the penis, with corruption, blackness, and adhesion of the prepuce to the head of the penis.
Motas veguadas accideys aquest albater en la vergua e es eminencia de carn laga.	White spots occur on the penis and form a raised flesh lesion.
E de aquela una es maligna e autra es no-maligna.	And of these, one is malignant and the other is non-malignant.
No-maligna, cove que suspendas am unci subtil e abscindas aquela entro que aquela mondes tota; e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto submirgit en enguent egipciac; e aprop aquel, cura le am enguent diafinicon entro que sia sanat.	Non-malignant, first suspend it with a fine thread and cut that part while cleaning it thoroughly; then place it over that with Egyptian ointment; afterwards, treat it with diafinicon until it is healed.
E si albater es maligna, de lega color, lahoras cove que tu aministres cauteri aprop la inscizio de lu e la razio de lu.	And if the white substance is malignant, of a changeable color, then you should apply a cautery near its incision and around it.
Mays si albater es en le prepuci del cap de la vergua no-circumcis, e la una partida de albater es dedintz le prepucii e l’autra partida es defora, lahoras cove que tu ostes albater le qual es dedintz al comensament entro que es consolidat; e lahora tu cura aquel deforo, quar quan tu curas aquel ensemps le prepuci, no es asegurat que no sia trinquat.	If there is a wound on the foreskin of an uncircumcised penis and one part of the wound is inside the foreskin and another part is outside, then you should treat the part that is inside at the beginning where it has consolidated; and then treat the part that is outside. When you treat the latter, it cannot be assured that the former will not become infected.
E ja eysamen accideys en les genetius e en le prepuci negror e corruccio, adonc cove que tu conquavas tot aquo que ja es denigrat e que ja se vol corrompre o que ja es corrumput; e aprop lineys sobre aquel aprop aquo am mel, le qual es contusit am farina de scorsa de milgrana e de errs trissatz e crivellatz.	And we treat accidents in the genitals and in the foreskin, such as blackening and corruption. Then you should evacuate all that which is already darkened and that which is about to腐化或已经腐败；然后在那个区域敷上一层蜂蜜，该蜂蜜是由陈葛兰粉、细研的三种粉末和筛过的制成。
E aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sana.	And then treat the other injury as it heals.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, lahoras aministra cauteri lunar segon aquesta forma:	But if there is a flow of blood, then administer a lunar cautery in this manner:
quar cauteri juvatiu es a dos disposicios ensemps, so es a flux de sanc e a la plagua quan es corrumpuda.	but the lunar cautery is in two positions together, used for a flow of blood and on the wound when it has腐化。
E si le cap de la vergua es corrodut e es destruit tot en la hora, lahoras cove que tu intrometas en lo meat del prepucii una canula de plom per so que le malaute urina per aquela.	And if the head of the tumor is corroded and destroyed entirely in an hour, then you should introduce a lead cannula into the meat of the prepuce so that the disease urinates through it.
En la adherencia del prepucii am le cap de la vergua (et aquesta adherencia no accideys sino en aquel del qual le prepucii es sa, e sobre lu no es exhigida circumcizio; e quan accideys adherencia per plagua o per apostema) cove que excorjas am spatum obtus entro que sia dissolvut le liament e sia deliurat le cap de la vergua de tota partida.	In the adhesion of the prepuce, there is the head of the tumor (and this adhesion occurs only in that part from which the prepuce detaches, and no circumcision is required over it; and when adhesion occurs due to inflammation or abscess) you should excoriate with a blunt instrument until the adhesive is dissolved and the head of the tumor is delivered completely.
E si es dificil desirnir aquelas exquisidament, lahoras cove que tu excorjes am spatum alcuna causa del cap de la vergua e del prepucii, e aysso es quar le prepucii, quan es subtil, fort leu es perforat per la sua subtilitat leugierament.	And if it is difficult to excoriate those thoroughly, then you should excoriate with a blunt instrument some cause of the head of the tumor and the prepuce, and this is why the prepuce, when thin and light, is perforated slightly by its subtlety.
E aprop separa entre·l prepucii e·l cap de la vergua am dra7 de li subtil, le qual ja es mulhat en l’aygua frega per que no adherescan autra veguada.	Then separate between the prepuce and the head of the tumor with a sharp instrument, which has already been moistened in the abrasive liquid to prevent re-adhesion.
E aprop sia curat am vi stiptic entro que sia consolidat.	And then it should be treated with astringents after it has consolidated.
Capitol .lvii.	Capitol. lvii.
De mundificacio dels enfants e de la curacio de aquo que accideys ad aquels de circumcisio.	On the purification of children and the treatment of what occurs to those who have been circumcised.
Circumcisio no es solucio de continuitat ayssi cum las autras plaguas: mays empero cum sia de la nostra operacio e de nostra voluntat, e lus de aquela sia propriament en les enfants, es necessari que asignem en aquela milhor operacio e via pus leugiera perdusent a salut.	Circumcision is not a solution for continuitas in the same way as other plagues: nevertheless, since it is of our operation and our will, and those of others are properly in the children, it is necessary that we assign to that the better operation and the more gentle way, losing nothing for health.
Donc dic que les antics no diyssero circumcisio en alcu dels lors libres, quar no n’usan en las suas leys, e no es sino quar havem aquisit per speriment, la qual causa es que yeu he atrobat la major partida dels artifexs e dels barbies usar circumcisir e mundificacio am novacula e am torores; e usan de liament am fiel e de inscizio am la ungla.	Therefore, it is said that the ancients did not perform circumcision on any of the free men, for they do not use it in their laws, and this is only because we have acquired knowledge through experience. The reason is that I have examined the majority of craftsmen and barbers who use circumcision and purification with a blade and with torches; and they use linen with honey and incision with oil.
E yeu ja he prohadas totas aquestas manieras e no atrobegui milhor mondificacio am forfexs, am liament am fiel que en mondificacio cum la ungla, quar motas vetz efugeys la codena pus desus, quar la codena del prepucii a dos tunicas, e roman la tonica pus dejos, e fort leu es forsat ad autra inscizio e dolor sicura.	And I have already examined all these methods and found that the best purification is with forceps, with linen and honey rather than in purification with oil. For you will easily remove the string above, for the string of the prepuce has two tunics, and fastens at the top, so it is necessary to make another incision and suffer certain pain.
E am mundificacio le qual es fayta per alphecati, e es digital, del qual usan les sabatiers, no es segurada la inscizio de la extremitat del membre viril, quar fort leu intra en le trau de lu.	And a circumcision which is performed by circumcisers, and is digital, of which they use the fingers, is not secured at the extremity of the male member, for it often enters into the wound.
Mays en la operacio am ungla, fort leu obazeys ferr e corromp la tua operacio.	In the operation, be cautious, firmly use iron and corrupt your operation.
E la codena del enfant es breu per natura, e motas veguadas nays en tal manieyra que no ha necessitat de mondificacio, e yeu he vist aquel.	And the foreskin of the child is short by nature, and often in this manner does not require circumcision, and I have seen it.
Mays de la mondificacio que·s fa am forfexs e liamentz am fiel, la bontat, experiment descrobic a mi, quar las forfexs so de proporcional inscizio, per aquo quar la acuitat que es desus es ayssi cum la acuitat que es dejos; e donc cum tu premes la tua ma so proporcionadas dos acuitatz, e inscideysso segon una comperacio en un temps; e es fayta compressio del fiel am figura contenent la codena de la vergua de tota partida, am le qual no catz error de tot.	More on the circumcision that is done with scissors and threads of bowel, its goodness, I have experienced personally, for the scissors are of proportional incision, for which their sharpness above is thus like the sharpness below; and therefore as you press your hand proportionally on two sharps, and cut according to a comparison in one time; and it is made compression of the bowel in a figure containing the foreskin from all sides, upon which no error can arise.
E la manieyra de la operacio primeyra es que tu fassas estar le enfant majorment si es de aquels que entendo un petit, que no fassas sino que tu lies le fiel en la sua vergua tant solament, e que leysses aquel entro al autra dia.	And the manner of the first operation is that you keep the child mostly if he is one who understands a little, and do not do anything but tie the bowel around his penis only, and leave it for another day.
E aprop fay aquel alegrar en tota aquela manieyra que es a tu possibla de aquo que recep la sua intelligencia.	And then do everything possible to comfort that part where their intelligence is received.
E aprop fa aquel estar entre las tuas mas estatuir preparadament, e no sia ges cezent; e occulta las forfexs en la tua ma o dejos le tieu pe, que l’enfant no veia aquelas ni degun autre dels instruments.	And then place the infant in your arms preparedly, so that it is not too tightly wrapped; and hide the scissors in your hand or let the child's head rest there, so that the child does not see them or any other of the instruments.
E aprop entremet la tua ma a la vergua de lu e suffla en la codena, e tira aquela entro que sia eyssit le cap de la vergua, e aprop mondifica aquel de aquo que es agregat en ela de sordicia.	And then place your hand in the genital area and blow into the vagina, and pull that out so that it straightens the head of the penis, and then modify that which is attached to it for deafness.
E aprop lia le loc signat am fiel dobla, e aprop ligua pus bas de aquel un petit le segon liament, e aprop te am le dit pous e endic tieu le loc del liament dejos am bona retencio, e inscideys entre dos liaments.	And then fold the marked area with faeces, and then tie a bit below that with a small ligature, and then have your finger on the site of the ligature with good tension, and incise between two ligatures.
E aprop eleva la codena sus leugierament e estratz le cap de la vergua; e aprop leyssa le sanc corre petit e petit, quar es milhor ; e pausa polvera desus e sobre la polvera pausa drap en le qual es spandut mugol de huou coyt en ayguaros concosit am oli rozat recent bo; e layssa aquel sobre aquel entro al autra dia; e cura aquel am curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then lift the vagina slightly and stretch the head of the penis; and then let the bleeding proceed slowly and slowly, for that is better; place powder above and over the powder, put a cloth impregnated with honey cooked with fresh olive oil on it; leave that there until the next day; and cure that with healing until it is healed.
La forma de las forfexs a mondificacio, aquesta es la forma:	The shape of the pincers after modification, this is the shape:
Sian las unas extramitatz no-talhantz e las autras sian talhant, que non sia yssit le ram del clau, e sia la longitut de las doas acuitatz ayssi cum la longitut de dos manubres engualment.	If the fingers are uncut and the others are cut, let the stem of the key sit in them, and let the length of the two claws be as long as the length of two equal-sized handles.
Mays la error en mundificacio es quar fort leu efugeys la codena intrinseca tota, o partida de lu deves la inscizio.	More importantly, in modification, if you remove the intrinsic chain entirely or partly, you must incise.
Donc cove que tu extendas aquela de la tua hora am la tua ungla denant la apostemacio del loc e que inscidas aquela segon equalitat.	Therefore, make sure that you incise there where your finger meets the surface of the wound and incise it according to equality.
E si no la podes tenir am la tua ungla, lahoras extratz aquela am unci e inscideys aquela.	And if you cannot reach it with your finger, then extract it and incise it.
Mays si son passatz tres dias, e roman aquo que es imflat dejos la vergua apostemat, lahoras tu leyssa aquo entro que sia cedat le apostema caut, e excorja aquel am fecilitat, e inscidex aquel segon que a tu es preparat.	More importantly, if they have passed three days and the swelling remains due to the empyema, then you let it be until the abscess is ripe, and extract it with ease, and incise it according to your preparation.
E guarda te del cap de la vergua, quar no nosera a lu aquo.	And guard the head of the swelling, for that is not where it will be.
E donc cura aquel am aquo que la plagua consolida de las polveras las quals havem recomtadas en le tractat de las polveras.	And therefore take care that the wound consolidated by the powders which we have recommended in the treatise on powders.
E si es inscidit de la codena sobre mesura, e obezeys a las partidas desus, aquo no notz a lu.	And if it exceeds the measure from the ankle, and you follow the parts above, this will not hurt him.
E mays cura aquel am aquo que havem dit entro que sia sanat.	And take more care that which we have said must be healed.
Capitol .lviii.	Capitol.lix.
De curacio de urina retenguda en la vesiqua.	On the cure for retained urine in the bladder.
Retencio de urina en la vesica es fayta per oppulacio fayta per peyra o per sanc congilat, o per poyre o per carnada, e semblantz ad aquels de aquo que havem dit de las manieyras de curacio en la divisio.	Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by an obstruction due to a stone or a burn, or pus or flesh, and resembles those we have said about the methods of cure in the division.
E si no es dissolvuda la urina, e veses retencio de lu esser per peyra le qual ja es en le col de la vesica, lahoras cove que le malaute sia encorbat sobre les sieus denolhs.	And if the urine is not dissolved, and you see that the retention is due to a stone which is in the neck of the bladder, then take care that the patient be bent over his thighs.
E aprop conponeys les pes de aquel sobre le sieu dos e extendas le sieu ventre de la partida pus desus del sieu dos, e le malaute estrengua le sieu ale tant quant es a lu possible.	And then place his feet on his buttocks and extend his abdomen above his back, and the patient should bend forward as far as it is possible for him.
Donc lahoras le col de la vesica es costreyt ha espulsio de la peyra a las partidas detras, per que la urina es absolta.	When the neck of the bladder is sewn for the expulsion of the stone to the rear parts, so that urine is released.
E si no es dissolvuda am aquo que havem dit he vehement es fayta la causa sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que aministres extraccio de lu am instrument le qual es apelat siringua, del qual aquesta es la forma: Sia de argent e sia subtil leon conquau, ayssi cum canula de pena de ausel am subtilitat de ray lonc en similitut d’un palm e mig, al qual sia cana subtil en le cap de lu.	And if it is not dissolved as we have said, then strongly make the cause on the patient, and when you must administer extraction from him with an instrument which is called a syringe, of which this is the form: It shall be of silver and shall be thin like a quill, thus like a goose feather in thinness of long thread in the likeness of half a palm, to which there shall be a thin cane at its head.
E la manieyra del eyssiment de la urina per aquel es que prenguas le fiel doblat e lies en la extramitat de lu lana o coto per bona liadura; e entrometas las extramitatz del fiel en la partida dejos de la ciringua, e inscideys am las forfexs si superflueys alcuna causa de la lana, mays intromet la en la canula am vehemencia E aprop enongeys la ciringua am boder e am album de huou.	And the manner of ejecting urine through this is that you take the needle doubled and tie it at the end with good knot; and insert the ends of the needle into the part left by the syringe, and cut with scissors if there is any superfluous cause of the wool, more thoroughly insert it into the canula with force. Then quickly draw back the syringe with the thumb and index finger.
E fay cezer le malaute sobre la selha, e embroca la vesiqua de lu e la vergua am olis umitz, e oli de oliva e ayguaros.	And cauterize the patient on the sole, and anoint the bladder and foreskin with mild oils, olive oil, and aqua vitae.
E aprop entromet la ciringua am facilitat entro que pervengua a la razit de la vergua; e aprop dobla la vergua desus a la partida del embelic; e aprop empelleys la ciringua dintz aquela; e aprop empelleys aquela entro que pervengua a la vesica, e aquela centa le malaute esser pervenguda a la causa vuoda, e no es fayt asso segon aquest orde, sino le meat en le qual va a tortuositat.	And then introduce the catheter easily between where it will reach the head of the penis; and then fold the head up above the point of the glans; and then push the catheter inside there; and then push that inside so that it reaches the bladder, and that is done as required, otherwise the meat in which it goes becomes tortuous.
E aprop exten le fiel am la lana petit a petit, quar la urina siec la lana.	And then slowly pass the string through the wool little by little, for the urine will wet the wool.
Aprop extratz aquela e fay per curacio urina, e usa ciringua, no cesses fer aquo e usa ciringua entro que sia evacuada la vesica e le malaute atrobe alleviacio.	And then extract that and use it for urine cure, and use the catheter, do not cease doing this and use the catheter until the bladder and patient are fully relieved.
Capitol .lix.	Capitulum 6.
De qualitat de clisterizacio de la vezica am clampcedra e am semblantz instrumentz les quals sian acordants ad aquo.	On the quality of catheterization of the bladder, use clamps and similar instruments that are suitable for this.
Quan accideys en la vesica ulceracio o apostema, o sanc congilat en aquela, o es coartat poyredura, e vols en aquela destillar ayguas e medicinas, lahoras sia fayt am instrument le qual es apelat clampcedra, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When an ulcer or abscess occurs in the bladder, or there is a constricted hemorrhoid in that area, and you want to distill waters and medicines into it, then make use of an instrument called a clampcedra. This is the form of the clampcedra:
sino que en la extramitat de lu es sorda, so es clausa.	so that at the extremity of the limb it is numb, it is closed.
Et en aquela so tres traucs: dos de la una partida , ayssi quo vezes.	And in that there are three incisions: two from one side, thuswise.
En le comensament es loc concau, en le qual es aquo que es enpellit, e sia segon quantitat que oppile aquel, ses addicio, entro que quan alcuna causa es ab aquel tirada de las humiditatz, sia atirada, e quan es expellida, am aquo sia atirada, e quan es expellit lonc, segon que fa clampcedra am la qual es phicat naphta en las batalhas de mar.	At the beginning is a concave location, in which that which is pushed resides. Its amount that fills it is addition, until when some cause is drawn by those humors, it is drawn, and when expelled, it is also drawn, and when expelled long, it makes clapping against which naphta is placed in naval battles.
Donc cum tu vols prohicir humiditatz en la vesica, entromet la extremitat de clapcedra en la humiditat, e atira am aquel aquo que es empellit a las partidas desus, quar la humiditat es atirada en la conquavitat de clapcedra.	So, in order to expel humors from the bladder, insert the end of the clamps into the humor, and draw out that which is pushed to the upper parts, for the humor is drawn into the cavity of the clamps.
E aprop entromet la extramitat de clapcedra en la vergua segon que havem recomtat en la ciringua; e aprop empelleys la humiditat am aquo que empelleys, quar aquela humiditat perve a la vesica tantost, e le malaute cent aquela.	And then insert the end of the clamps into the vagina as we have described for the ear; and then push the humor by that which you push, for that humor quickly reaches the bladder, and gout centers there.
Forma del cristeri subtil am le qual la vesica es cristerizada, e es aquela la forma:	The form of the subtle stone that the bladder crystallizes, and this is its form:
E sia fayta de argent o de lato, de la qual le cap pus aut sia semblant a petita pluma, e dejos lu cana dedintz liament.	And let it be made of silver or copper, of which the head is either like a small feather or a tiny bead, and insert the cane inside it.
E aprop pren vesica de moto, e pausa en aquela la humiditat que vols cristirizar en la vesica, e aprop lia aquela entre dos am fort liguatura am fiel doble, e escalfa aquela humiditat sobre le foc.	And then take a bladder of a pig, place the humidity you want to crystalize in the bladder inside it, and tie it tightly with a double thread of linen, and heat the humidity over the fire.
E aprop entromet la extremitat del cristeri en la vergua.	And then insert the end of the crystal into the vagina.
E aprop estrenh la tua ma sobre la vesica am la humiditat am strectura descent entro que·l malaute centa que aquela humiditat ja es pervenguda a la vesica.	And then strengthen your hand on the bladder with the humidity in a descending structure so that the patient centers on the bladder as the humidity has already reached it.
Mays si a tu no es present vesica, lahoras tu pren una pessa de parguames e fay de aquel cercle; e perfora aquel de tota la sua retonditat; e aprop entromet fiel fort en aquels traucs, ayssi quo so revolgut; e aprop agregua le cercle ayssi quo es agreguat alsofatur, pus que tu pausas en aquel aquo que tu vols de las humiditatz, e olis e ayguas.	But if you do not have a bladder, then take a piece of parchment and make a circular shape from it; and perforate it completely round; then insert strong thread through those holes, as they are turned; then attach the circle in such a way that it is attached, for you place the part you want of the humidities in it. Saturate and bind it well.
E aprop tu lia aquel en le instrument e fay am aquel ayssi cum has fayt am la vesica, e exprescio am la tua ma entro que la humiditat pervengua a la vesica.	And then you place that one in the instrument and do so with it as you did with the bladder, keeping your hand there so that the humidity reaches the bladder.
Capitol .lx.	Capitol.lx.
De extraccio de peyra.	Of the extraction of gravel.
Nos ja havem dit en la divisio las specias de peyra e curacio de lu am medicinas, e la diferencia entre peyra engendrada en los ronhos e peyra engendrada en la vesica, e les senhals de aquela.	We have already discussed in the division the species of gravel and its treatment with medicines, and the difference between gravel generated in the kidneys and gravel generated in the bladder, as well as the signs of the latter.
E havem dit la peyra en la qual catz operacio am ma, e seccio.	And we have discussed the gravel for which surgical intervention is required, and the sectioning procedure.
E la peyra engendrada en la vesica propriament es aquela que es ficada en la vesica.	And the gravel generated in the bladder properly is that which is inserted into the bladder.
E yeu so narrant aquel am exposicio manifesta e abreviacio.	And I am now narrating it in a clear and concise exposition.
Donc dic que peyra engendrada en la vesica majorment ve als enfantz; e dels senhals de lu es que la urina que es eyssida de la vesica es semblant a aygua en la sua subtilitat, e apar en aquela arena; e le malaute fregua la sua vergua, e motas veguadas pen, e aprop es dressada; e am aquo yeys foro le cul en motz de aquels.	Therefore, I say that gravel generated in the bladder mostly affects children; and the signs of it are that the urine expelled from the bladder is similar in its subtlety to water, and appears with that sand; and the patient rubs his genitals, experiences pain, and is generally ill; and for this, the thigh is often inflamed instead.
E es laugiera la sanacio dels enfants de aquela entro que han conseguitz xiiii ans; e es dificil curacio en les viels.	And the cure for children who have reached four years is easy; and it is a difficult cure in old women.
Mays en les joves es migiera per aquo quar es entre aquels.	In the young, gout is often caused by that which is between them.
E de aquel del qual la peyra es major e la curacio es pus leugiera; E si es pauca, es contraria ad aquela.	And of that in which the stone is larger and the cure is easier; And if it is small, it is contrary to that.
Donc cum pervenem a la curacio de aquela, cove al comensament de aquela que mondifiquem le malaute am cristeri le qual extragua tota la fenda la qual es en les sieus budels; quar aquela fenda alcunas veguadas prohibeys la envencio de la peyra deves la inquisicio de lu.	And so, to achieve the cure for that, we come to the beginning of it by cleansing the gout with a cress seed which exerts all the passage which is in their intestines; for that passage sometimes prohibits the formation of the stone and releases its inquiry.
E aprop sia pres le malaute am les sieus pes e sia contosit e maugut enjos per so que la peyra descenda al preon de la vesica, o que saute de loc aut alcunas veguadas.	And then place the gout on their feet and compress and rub it well so that the stone descends to the neck of the bladder, or it may pass from there in a few days.
E aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas preparat, e las mas de lu sian dejos las coysas de lu, per so que la vesica tota sia fayta declinant a las partidas dejos.	And then make that cushion under your hand prepared, and let the other servants prepare the things needed, so that the bladder is made to slope downward in all parts.
E aprop perquier aquela e tota aquela deforo.	And then insist on that and all that area.
Donc si sentes la peyra en l’espazi, lahoras tu te coyta tantost am seccio sobre lu.	And if you feel the stone in the space, then quickly apply heat to it.
E si no catz de tot dejos le tieu tocament, lahoras cove que tu untes am oli le tieu dit indic de la ma sinistra, si malaute es enfant, o le dit miga si es jove complit, e entrometas aquel en le sieu cul.	And if you do not feel the stone, let your hand touch it, then rub it with oil from your right index finger if the patient is a child, or with your thumb if the patient is an adult, and insert that into the patient's anus.
E perquier de la peyra entro que stia dejos le tieu dit.	And insist on the stone by letting your hand touch it.
E converteys aquela petit a petit entro al col de la vesica.	And gradually push that small object into the neck of the bladder.
E aprop prem sobre aquel am lo tieu dit, e expelleys aquel a las partidas defora ves le loc del qual vos la seccio.	And then press on it with your finger, and expel that out through the parts outside, observing the location from which it comes.
E comanda al ministra que prema la vesica am la sua ma; e comanda a un autra ministra que am la sua ma dextra extenda les genetius a las partidas desus, e am la sua autra ma remaugua la codena la qual es dejos les genetius, en partida del loc en le qual se fa la seccio.	And command the minister to press the bladder with his hand; and command another minister to extend the genitals upwards with his right hand, and with his other hand tighten the band which holds the genitals, at the part where the section is being made.
E aprop entromet espatum be inscident del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then insert a sponge between them, from which this is the form of it:
e scindeys en lu aquo que es entre·l cul e·ls genetius, no en le mieg loc, abantz al latz de la coyssa sinistra; e sia la seccio sobre aquela peyra e·l tieu dit sia en le cul, e sia fayta seccio transversa, per que la seccio defora sia ampla e dedintz streyta segon la quantitat que egrecio de la peyra sia a lu possibla, e no major, quar fort leu comprem le tieu dit le qual es en le cul la peyra deves la seccio, e es foro-getada ses defacultat.	And cut through it what is between the buttocks and the genitals, not in the middle location, in front of the left thigh; and let the section be on that bone and your right hand be on the buttocks, and make a transverse section, so that the outer section is wide and the inner narrow according to the quantity that flowed from the bone is possible, and not more, for your right hand which is on the buttocks you should make the section along the bone, and it becomes an opening-sutured defect.
E sapias que de la peyra es alcuna a la qual so angle e margers, per que le eyssiment de lu es fayt deficil per aquo.	And note that from the bone there is some with angles and margins, because the excision of it is made difficult by this.
E de aquela aquo es leon semblant a glan, e es redonda, e es fayt de lu leugier eyssiment.	And of that which resembles a lion's head, and is round, and a light excision is made of it.
Donc si es aquela al qual so angles e marger, ajusta en la fissura.	And if that which has angles and margins, adjust in the fissure.
E si no es ayssi foro-getada, lahoras cove que tu engenes sobre aquel, o que strenguas sobre aquel am gesti decentment, la extremitat del qual sia ayssi cum lima am le qual strenguas sobre la peyra, e no evasesca de lu; o que entrometas dejos lu instrument subtil de curvada extremitat.	And if not thus relieved, then you should gently press upon it or firmly press upon it with proper gesture, the end of which should be like a rasp over which you are pressing on the heel, and do not withdraw from it; or that you insert a slender instrument under its curved end.
Mays si tu no podes sobre aquel, lahoras tu amplifica le trauc un petit, e si tu veus flux de sanc, abscindeys en strenh aquel am vitriol trissat.	And if you cannot do this, then you slightly enlarge the wound, and if you want a flow of blood, incise firmly there with vitriol trissat.
Mays si la peyra es mays de una, lahoras al comensament tu impelleys la ma a la boca de la vesica, e aprop inscideys sobre lu; e aprop impelleys un petit aprop aquo; e semblantment fay si son motas mays de doas.	And if the heel is more than one, then at the beginning you press your hand to the mouth of the bladder, and then incise slightly over it; then press a little where you have incised; and similarly do if they are more.
E si es peyra mot gran, lahoras ignorancia es que tu inscidas aquel am gran seccio, quar accideys al malaute una de doas causas: o que mora o que endevengua a lu destillacio de urina continuabla, per aquo quar le loc no es de tot consolidat.	And if the heel is very large, then ignorance dictates that you incise there with a broad section, for which an evil result occurs in the patient from one of two causes: either he dies or he suffers continuous urine distillation, due to which the area is not fully consolidated.
Mays aministra expulcio de lu entro que sia fora-getada, o engenia en la fractura de lu am las forfexs entro que extragua aquela en pessas.	And administer an expulsion when it is not relieved, or manipulate in the fracture of the foot with the forceps until that which is inside comes out through the wound.
Donc cum tu auras cumplit la tua opperacio, lahoras omple la plagua de enses de aloe e de sanc de drago, e strenh aquel.	Then when you have completed your operation, fill the wound with slices of aloe and dragon's blood, and strengthen it.
E pausa sobre aquel drap enfus en oli e vi, o en oli rozat e aygua frega, per so que apostema caut sia cedat.	And place the soaked cloth on it in oil and wine, or in olive oil and water, so that the abscess may yield.
E aprop resupina le malaute sobre le sieu col, e no deslias le liament entro al tertz dia.	And then raise the patient's leg above its own heart, and do not loosen the bandage on the third day.
E cum aquel auras desliat, embroca le loc am aygua e mot oli, e aprop cura aquel am enguent diafinicon e am enguent diabazilicon entro que sia sanat.	And when you have loosened it, wet the area with water and apply oil, and then cure it with ointment containing diammonium and ointment containing myrrh until it is healed.
Mays si en la plagua accideys apostema caut, adhust e corrosiu, e de aquel semblantz ayssi cum si le sanc es en la vesica congelat, e per lu es la hurina prohibida (e aquo es conogut per la egressio del sanc am urina), a donc entromet lo tieu dit en la plagua e extratz aquel sanc, quar si roman provoca la vesica a corropcio de la vesica e de lu putrefaccio.	Mais if in the wound you encounter an abscess with heat and corrosion, and it appears as if the blood is frozen in the bladder, and from this comes the prohibition of urine (and this is known as the egress of blood through urine), then insert your said instrument into the wound and extract that blood, for if it remains it can cause corruption of the bladder and its putrefaction.
E aprop lava la plagua am vi agre, aygua e sal, e am opposicio a tota specia, am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then wash the wound with warm water, salt, and in opposition to all spices, using what is suitable for its healing until it is healed.
E cove en las horas de tota la curacio que tu lies amdos las coyssas e ajustes las medicinas las quals so pausadas sobre le loc.	And keep the area of the entire treatment where you have placed the thighs and applied the medicines which are pressed onto the area.
E si la peyra es petita e es en le meat de la vergua, e es ficat en lu, e eyssement de urina es prohibit, lahoras cura aquel am aquo que yeu recomti denant que pervenguas a seccio, quar tropas veguadas per aquesta curacio yest acusat de seccio; e ja yeu e esproat aquo, e es que tu prenguas un perforador de ferr alfelut, del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if the stone is small and is in the meat of the penis, and urination is prohibited, then cure it by using what I have recommended before reaching the stage of desiccation; for too many days of this treatment are accused of causing desiccation. And now I will describe this: you should take a perforating iron implement, of which this is the form:
de triangulada extramitat, agut, ficat en fust.	of triangular cross-section, sharp, inserted into a shaft.
E aprop pren fiel, e lia am aquel la vergua dejos la peyra per so que no retorne a la vesica.	And then take a needle, and sew the penis closed, leaving the stone in place so that it does not return to the bladder.
E aprop entromet le ferr en la vergua, perforant am fecilitat entro que·l perforador vengua ad aquela peyra.	And then insert the iron into the penis, perforating easily until the perforator reaches the stone.
E revolveys le perforador am la tua ma en aquela peyra petit a petit, e tu perforsa la perforacio de lu entro que fassas aquel del autra part penetrar; quar la urina tantost es absolta.	And you rotate the probe with your hand in that heel little by little, and you perforate the perforation of it before you make that of the other side penetrate; for the urine is soon released.
E aprop prem la tua ma sobre aquo que es romas de la peyra de la partida deforo de la vergua, quar aquela es trinquada, e es foro-getada am la urina, e le malaute es sanat.	And then press your hand on what is fractured in the heel behind the penis, for that is cracked, and is pierced by the urine, and the patient is cured.
Mays si aquesta curacio no es a tu aparelhada per alcuna causa la qual prohibeys de aquela, lahoras lia un fiel dejos la peyra, e autra fiel desus la peyra.	But if this cure is not possible due to some cause that prohibits it, then you have a cord tie the heel, and another above the heel.
E aprop encideys sobre la peyra en aquela vergua entre doas liaduras.	And then bind over the heel in that groin between two ligatures.
E aprop extratz aquela.	And then extract it.
E aprop deslia le liament e mondifica le sanc congilat, le qual es fayt en la plagua.	And then untie the ligature and modify the surgical wound, which is made in the wound area.
E no es necessari liament de fiel dejos la peyra, sino per que no retorne a la vesica, e l’autre liament desus sino, quar quan es desliat le fiel aprop la egrecio de la peyra, la codena retorna a son loc e cobra la plagua.	And you do not need a cord for the heel, but only to prevent it from returning to the bladder. The other cord above is necessary, for when the cord is untied near the injury of the heel, the wound returns to its place and heals the wound area.
E per aquo es a tu necessari quan lias le fiel desus, que tu eleves la codena a las partidas desus, o que retorne deves le tieu compliment, e cobra la plagua ayssi co havem dit.	And for this it is necessary when you have the bile above, that you lift the partition above or return your lower part, and take back your former position, and cover the wound as we have said.
Capitol .lxi.	Capitol.lix.
De extraccio de peyra de las femnas.	For the extraction of kidney stones in women.
Peyra en las femnas pauc es engendrada.	Stone in women is not frequently generated.
Mays si ve peyra ad alcuna de aquelas, lahoras dificil es la curacio de lu, e es prohibida per tropas manieyras.	But if there is a stone in any of those cases, the cure is difficult, and it is prohibited by too many methods.
La una de lor es quar la femna fort leu es verges.	One of them is that if the woman is strong and a virgin.
E la segonda es quar tu no trobas femna be scient que descroba si meteyssa al metge quan es casta, o es de las femnas haventz maritz.	And the second is that you cannot find a well-informed woman who can describe to the doctor whether she herself has had it or if it is one of the women who have a husband.
La tersa es quar tu no hatrobas femna be sabent aquesta art, majorment la operacio am ma.	The third is that you cannot find a well-informed woman about this art, especially regarding the operation.
E la quarta es que·l loc de la seccio sobre peyra en las femnas es longinc del loc de la peyra, per que indigeys de seccio preonda, e en aquela es temor.	And the fourth is that the place of the section on the heel in women is far from the location of the heel, so you need a preceding incision, and there is fear.
Mays si necessitat provoca a tu ad aquo, lahoras cove que tu prenguas una femna metga be scient, e pauc es atrobada.	And if necessity prompts you to do this, then seek out a skilled female surgeon, and it is seldom found.
Mays si tu es privat de aquela, lahoras cerca metga quast e subtil, o presenta una femna matrona be esenhada en le feyt de las femnas, o femna que en aquesta art ennueys partida del art.	And if you are lacking in that, then consult a skilled and subtle surgeon, or present a wise woman experienced in the affairs of women, or a woman who has some part of this art.
Donc fay aquela present, e comanda a lu que fassa tot aquo que tu li mandaras, de la enquisicio sobre la peyra al comensament; la qual causa es que reguarde si la femna es verges, lahoras cove que meta lo sieu dit en le cul de lu e quiera la peyra.	Then have her present and command her to do all that you will tell her, from the examination of the heel to the beginning; for this reason, she should check if the woman is a virgin, and then insert her finger into the woman's buttocks to feel the heel.
Donc si atroba aquela, coarte aquela dejos le sieu dit, e lahoras comanda a lu que inscida sobre aquela.	Then if she finds it, cut it off and withdraw her finger, and then command her to incise the area.
Mays si no es verge, lahoras comanda a la matrona que entrometa lo sieu dit en le conh de la malauta e enquiera sobre la peyra, pus que pausa la sua ma sinistra sobre la vesica, e comprem aquela am bona comprecio.	And if she is not a virgin, then command the wise woman to insert her finger into the vagina of the patient and examine the heel, while placing her left hand on the bladder, and compress it with good pressure.
Donc si atroba aquela, lahoras cove que gradantment maugua aquela de l’orrifici de la vesica a las partidas dejos am somman de la sua vertut entro que pervengua am aquel a la razit de la coyssa.	Then if you find it, gradually introduce that from the orifice of the bladder into the parts, leaving some of its virtue so that it reaches the root of the thigh.
E aprop inscida sobre aquela apposicio de la maytat del conh deves la razit de la coyssa de qualque part sia a lu parada e cent la peyra en aquela partida, e·l dit de lu no sia remaugut de la peyra coartan dejos lu.	Then place the root of the thigh in any part where it is stopped and center the foot in that part, ensuring that the said part is not removed from the foot by cutting away from it.
E la seccio sia pauca al comensament; e aprop entrometa lo ray sobre aquela seccio, e si sent la peyra, lahoras ajuste en seccio segon la quantitat la qual sap que la peyra sira getada de aquela.	And the section should be small at the beginning; then insert the needle into that section, and if the foot is felt, adjust the section according to the quantity he knows the foot will be drawn from there.
E sapias que las specias de peyra son motas: quar de aquelas es pauca e gran, e leon e aspra, e longua e redonda, e havent ramps.	And know that the symptoms of the foot are spots: some are few and large, lion-like and harsh, long and round, and have borders.
Donc tu sapias quantas specias so de lu per aquo que tu signifiques sobre aquo que vols.	And know what symptoms it has so that you can signify about what you want.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, ajusta en le loc vetriol trissat e te aquela per una hora entro que sia abscindit le sanc, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	And if you want to induce a flow of blood, adjust the location with trioxide of lead and apply that for one hour until the blood is drawn out, then return to your operation once the stone has been removed.
E fay que prepares am tu dels instrumentz les quals e ditz en la extraccio de peyra en les homes, per so que sias ajudat per aquels en la tua operacio.	And make sure to prepare those instruments you use in the stone extraction from men, so that you can be assisted by them during your operation.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, e sabes que la expulcio del sanc es de la arceria que es insciza, lahoras tu pausa polvera sobre le loc e estrenh aquel am pulvils e strictura descent, e no iteras aquo; e layssa la peyra e no extraguas aquela, quar fort leu morira la malauta.	And if you want a flow of urine, and you know that the expulsion of the urine is from the artery that is incised, then place powder over the area, strengthen it with powders, and apply downward pressure; and do not repeat this; leave the stone and do not remove it, for strongly pressing will kill the patient.
E aprop cura la plagua.	And then treat the wound.
Donc cum es cedada la acuitat del sanc aprop alcus jorns, e·l loc se poyreys, lahoras tu retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	And when the acute pain of the urine has subsided after several days, then you can return to your operation once the stone is passed.
Capitol lxii.	Capitol lxii.
De seccio sobre ernia acoza.	On the section about inguinal hernia.
Hernia ayguoza no es sino agregacio de humiditat en le ciphac blanc lo qual es dejos la codena dels genetius contenent le huou, e es nompnat ciphac.	Aguoyza hernia is nothing but the accumulation of humidity in the white chive, which is the conduit of the generative fluids containing the humors, and it is named chive.
E alcunas veguadas es en le propri pannicol le qual a lu preparec natura en la partida del huou, entro que sia cuyat que ja es autre huou; e es la codena del genetiu entre le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, e no es aquo sino tart.	And sometimes in the very same skin which nature prepared for that part of the foot, between where it is cut and another foot; and this is the seam of the stocking between the white garter which we have said, and it is not here anything but thread.
E la generacio de aquest hernia es per debelitat la qual accideys als genetius, per que ad aquels es efundunda aquesta materia, e alcunas vetz accideys per percuscio fayta sobre les genetius.	And the generation of this hernia is due to weakness which affects the inguinal regions, for into those regions this material infiltrates, and sometimes it occurs due to a blow struck on the inguinal regions.
E aquesta humiditat es havent motas colors, quar la color de lu o es declinant a citrina o a sanguinent, o rog, o es negra feculenta, o es ayguosa blanqua, e es aquo que es mays.	And this humidity, having streaks of color, may be yellowish or reddish or brown, or black and powdery, or watery white, and it is what is most common.
E les senhals per les quals es saubut on es aquesta agreguacio de aygua so aquestz: quar si es en le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, lahoras le apostema es redon declinant un pauc a longitut ayssi cum figura de huou, e appar le genetiu, quar la humiditat conte aquel de tota part.	And the signs by which one knows where this accumulation of water is located are these: if it is in the white garter which we have mentioned, then the abscess is round, slightly elongated, like the shape of a foot, and the inguinal region becomes apparent, for the humidity contains that from all sides.
E si la humiditat es en le propri pannicol, lahoras le apostema es redon am partida del huou e per aysso hom estima que es autre huou.	And if the humidity is in the very same skin, then the abscess is round starting from the foot and for this reason one thinks it is another foot.
E si la humiditat es entre la codena dels genetius e·l ciphac blanc, lahoras catz dejos le centiment.	And if the humidity is between the sciatic nerve and the white muscle, then cut and remove the tissue.
E cum tu vols la cognicio de la color de la humiditat, lahoras tu esproa la color de la humiditat en le apostema am entromes cayrat del qual la forma es precedida; e segon aquo que es eyssit en le vestigi del entromes, jutga de aquo que es dedintz lu.	And in order to know the color of the humidity, you should probe the color of the humidity in the abscess by inserting a needle; and according to what is found in the trace of the insertion, judge what is inside it.
Donc quan nos vinem a la curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que comandem al malaute que sia fleubotomat si aquo es a tu possibla, e vezes le cos de lu ple.	Then when we come to the treatment of it, you should command the patient to bleed if this is possible, and often raise his body.
E aprop sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos sobre alcuna causa un pauc auta, e pausa dejos lu motz draps.	And then lift him up on his back for a little while, and place his head on some pillows.
E aprop setz tu sobre la part sinistra de lu, e comanda al ministra que segua a la dextra de lu, le qual extenda la sua vergua a hun de dos latz a la codena dels genetius e a la partida del mirac del ventre.	And then sit you on the left side of the patient, and command the minister to stand on the right side of the patient, who should stretch his cloth across one of the sides at the sciatic nerve and the part of the flank.
E aprop pren spatum lat e scindeys la codena dels genetius del mieg loc per la longitut entro prop le pentenilh.	And then take a spatula and split the sciatic nerve longitudinally in the middle near the buttock.
E sia fayta la seccio segon rectetut engualment distant de la linha que deveseys la pel dels genetius, entro que pervengua al ciphac blanc comprehendent.	And the section should be made according to right measurement, equally distant from the line where you shall cut the skin, between which it reaches the white fat comprehending.
E excorja aquel, e observa, e guarda te per aysso que tu no inscidas aquel; e la tua excoriacio am la qual aquel excorjas per partida jassia que sia suspenduda am le huou mays e subtilment escruta am la excoriacio segon la quantitat a tu possibla.	And excise that, and observe, and guard it for this that you do not incise that; and your excision where you incise that should be suspended from the greater and more subtle you examine it according to the quantity possible.
E aprop perfora le ciphac ple de aygua am perforacio ampla, e extratz tota l’aygua.	And then perforate the fatty tissue full of water with a large hole, and extract all the water.
E aprop separa entre doas labias de la seccio am uncis, e exten le ciphac a las partidas desus; e no toques la codena les genetius comprehendent, e inscideys le ciphac en aquela manieyra que es a tu possible.	And then separate between the two labias of the section with needles, and extend the fatty tissue to the upper parts; and do not touch the root of the genitalia encompassing, and incise the fatty tissue in that manner which is possible to you.
E inscideys aquel am la sua totalitat o en pessas, e majorment le sieu latz subtil, quar si tu no perscrutas exquisidament la inscizio de lu, no es fayta segurtat que la aygua no retorne.	And incise that in its entirety or in pieces, especially its thin edge; for if you do not thoroughly examine the incision, it is not certain that the water will not return.
Mays si le huou procezeys de aquela defora de la sua codena en la ora de la tua operacio, lahoras quan tu auras complida la seccio del ciphac, retorna dedintz aquel, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la codena dels genetius am sutura, e aprop cura aquel ayssi cum las autras plagua, entro que sia sanat.	If the humor proceeds from within his groin during your operation, when you have completed the section of the thigh, return inside that area, and properly suture the two labia of the groin, and properly treat that as well until it is healed.
E si atrobas le huou corromput per autra malautia, lahoras cove que tu lies les vayssels les quals so sore le suspensori, e extrat le huou, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit.	And if you find the humor corrupted by another illness, then tie the vessels which are above the suspensory ligament, extract the humor, and properly treat that as we have said.
Mays si l’aygua es agreguada en doas partidas esemps, lahoras sapias que doas son las ernias; donc inscideys aquela partida segon que has feyt en l’autra engualment; e si es a tu vist que sia una opera, lahoras tu la fay.	And if the water is added in two parts, then know that there are two hernias; therefore, incise that part just as you did for the other; and if it is evident to you that it is a single operation, then do so.
E aprop tu abstergiys le sanc, e entramet en las seccios lana submersa en oli o en oli rozat; e pausa deforo autra lana la qual tu as submersa en vi e oli, e expandeys aquela sobre dos genetius e·l mirac del ventre; e pausa desobre draps doblatz e pulvils, e lia aquels desobre am liament le qual es segon aquesta forma:	And then cleanse the wound, insert strips of submerged wool in oil or rubbed oil; place another strip of wool submerged in wine and oil over it, and spread that over the thighs and the wonder of the belly; place over this clean cloths and powders, and cover those with lint which is according to this form:
e aprop sian preses dos draps e sian humplitz de lana carmenada segon aquesta semblansa; e sian faytas las extremitatz am les quals es premut de coto o de lana humida, e sian agreguatz am strectura en le braguier de las braguas, e la una de las extremitatz prengua del cul entro al dos, e la segonda prengua a la partida del pantenilh, e dos extramitatz sobre dos coyssas dejos e dos extramitatz autras sobre dos angonars, e tota extrictura sia ajustada en le braguier de las braguas.	And then place two cloths filled with well-combed wool according to this likeness; and let the ends which are pressed with cotton or wet wool be added to the structure in the breeches' belt, and one end take from behind into the two, and the second take to the part of the armpit, and two ends over two thighs leave and two other ends over two armrests, and all structure be tightened in the breeches' belt.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta hernia es medicada artificialment am cauteri en loc de seccio am ferr; e es que tu prenguas cauteri cutellar subtil e que inscidas am aquel la codena dels ginitius, e es ignit segon que havem recomtat entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc contenent la aygua, e lahoras tu pren cauteri segon aquesta forma:	Sometimes this hernia is artificially treated with a cautery at the location instead of sectioning with a surgical instrument; and you should take a fine surgical cautery and incise there at the cord of the genitalia, and ignite it according to what we have recommended until the white chyphac containing the water is discovered, and then you take the cautery in this form:
e es asemblat a letra greca.	and it is similar to the Greek letter.
E aprop perfora am aquel ciphac, e es ignit entro que tota la humiditat sia fora-gitada.	And then puncture that chyphac, and ignite it until all the humidity is expelled.
E aprop exten le ciphac am uncis, e excorja am uncis, e excorja am cauteri subtil ignit; e inscideys aquel segon que es a tu possible entro que eradiques tot lu; e guarda te del huou que·l foc no·l toque.	And then extend the cut with scissors, and incise with scissors, and cauterize with a thin ignited cautery; and cut that according to what is possible for you to remove all of it; and beware of the smoke that the fire does not touch.
E sapias que aquesta operacio es pus salva e pus longinqua de flux de sanc, e milhor que operacio am seccio.	And know that this operation is safer and more distant from the flow of blood, better than an incision.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat apostema caut en la hora de seccio o en hora de cauteri, o flux de sanc, lahoras cove que tu cures qual contrarietat fa a tu per aquo, am curacio la qual conveneys a lu segon que es dit.	But if you find any contrariety, make a cautery at the time of incision or at the time of cautery, or during the flow of blood, then cure as you would for any contrariety, using the appropriate cure as described.
Mays si le malaute es pauruc, e no spera la segonda operacio per la sua horribilitat, lahoras administra perforacio segon que yeu recomti aquo; e es quan es certificat deves tu, per aquo que havem dit de las significacios, que aquela hernia es ayguosa.	But if the patient is faint, and does not expect the second operation due to its horror, then administer perforation as I will instruct you; and when you are certified, by what we have said about the significations, that that hernia is acute.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute sobre alcuna cezelha elevada, aprop perfora le apostema en la partida pus bassa de lu am spatum lat, e pausa la perforacio segon la longitut del cos.	Then you should place the patient on some elevated bench, and perforate the abscess in the lower part of it with a flatawl, and stop the perforation according to the length of the body.
E sia la apercio ampla entro que corro tota l‘aygua.	And let the opening be wide enough through which all the water can flow.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc coto e lia aquel e layssa aquel, per so que corro le romanent de l’aygua.	And then place your hand over the hole carefully and hold it there, so that the water can continue to flow.
E aprop cura aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And then cure that through which the wound is healed.
Mays si contrarietat es a la egrecio de l’aygua en aquela hora tu perforas aquela: e aquo no es fayt sino per aquo quar le pannicol blanc en le orrifici de la plagua fa contrarietat e prohibeys le eyssiment de l’aygua, lahoras cove que tu metas en la plagua pena o instrument am la qual es extrayta l’aygua dels ydropitz, la forma del qual es precedida; o ajusta en la opprecio de la plagua un petit.	But if contrary to the flow of water at that time you perforate it: and this is not done so that the white linen cloth in the orifices of the wound causes a contrary effect and prohibits the passage of water. When you must put a sponge or an instrument into the wound from which water is extracted, the form of which is described; or place a small tube in the opening of the wound.
E sapias que l’aygua retorna, e es agueguada aprop vi meses o enaviro aquels; e cum es agreguada, lahoras sia perforat segon aquela meteyssa manieyra, quar le malaute ayssi passara les sieus dias.	And you should know that the water returns, and it is agueguada (recovered) approximately six months or until then; and when it is recovered, then perforate it according to that method, so that the patient will pass its days.
Capitol .lxiii.	Chapter LXIII.
De seccio sobre hernia carnosa e la curacio de lu.	Of section regarding a fleshly hernia and its cure.
Sapias que en la seccio sobre aquesta hernia es temor perdusent a pernicia en las majors disposicios; per que a mi es vista la dimissio de lu e esser salvat per aquela milhor.	Know that in the section regarding this hernia, one must beware of causing harm to the major organs; for I have seen its removal and been saved by the better outcome.
E yeu so rememorant la operacio en aquela e las specias dels apostemas.	And I recall the operation in that case and the types of abscesses.
Donc, dic que l‘apostemas natz en les cos dels quals les genetius so conponutz e es fayt aquo per motas causas: o per superfluitat aguda agra, la qual es efundida als genetius, o per percuscio.	Therefore, I say that abscesses arise in the tissues where the glands are located, and this occurs for various causes: either due to acute excessive flux, which is infused into the glands, or due to percussion.
E es la color de la apostema segon la color del cos, e no es atrobat en lu dolor, e es apostema greu.	And the color of the abscess depends on the color of the tissue, and pain is not present in it; it is a severe abscess.
E fort leu es apostema lapificada, del qual la color es fosca, e no es centiment a lu.	And the abscess is firm and ripe, of which the color is dark, and there is no pain in it.
E alcunas veguadas es fayt per nodacio de las arcerias, e per imflacio de aquelas ayssi quo ja es perceubut la rememoracio de lu, o per imflacio de venas.	And sometimes abscesses form due to the obstruction of the arteries, and due to swelling of those vessels, as is remembered, or due to swelling of veins.
Mays aquo que es per imflacio de arcerias es conogut per la dispercio de la apostema quan compremas aquela am les tieus ditz; e no cove que aquel toques.	More than that, which is due to the inflammation of arteries, it is known as the dispersion of the aposteme when you press upon those ties said; and note that you should not touch it.
Mays aquel que es fayt per imflacio de vena no es dispergut de lu alcuna causa deves la compressio am les ditz.	More than that, which is due to the inflammation of veins, it is not dispersed by any cause; you should apply compression with your fingers.
E ja es possible que sobre aquesta specia sia fayta seccio e sobre les autres carns; e es que tu inscida la codena dels genetius, e aprop esten le huou a las partidas desus, e extratz aquel del ciphac blanc, e deliura le suspensori dels vaysels, e ligua les, e inscideys le suspensori pus que tu deliuras aquel de tota partida de las partidas del huou.	And it is possible that section be made on this species and on other tissues; for you incise the canal of the genitises, and then stretch the skin above, and extract that from the white cyst, and deliver the suspensory ligament of the vessels, and ligate them, and incise the suspensory ligament after you deliver that from all parts of the skin.
Donc si l’huou ja es am aquelas carnadas consolida, lahoras cove que tu extraguas le huou e inscidas aquel.	Then if the skin has already adhered to the other tissues and consolidated, you should extract the skin and incise it.
E si es adherencia entro alcuna causa del ciphac, o entre aquo que es entre les bayssels, lahoras cove que tu deliures tota aquela adherencia e inscidas aquela per inscizio redonda.	And if there is an adhesion due to any cause of the cyst, or between what is between the vessels, then you should deliver all that adhesion and incise it with a round incision.
Mays si es nativitat de carn en le loc de la adherencia la qual es detras, lahoras cove que tu inscidas tot aquo que es de lu, e extraguas le huou ayssi cum havem dit.	But if the nature of the flesh in the place of adhesion behind it is such that you must incise all of it, and extract the humor as we have said.
Donc cum es complida la tua operacio, lahoras omple la plagua de lana imfuza en oli rozat e vi; e aprop cura aquela am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	So when your operation is complete, fill the wound with wool soaked in rubbed oil and wine; then cover it with another dressing until it heals.
Capitol .lxiv.	Chapter LXIV.
De la curacio de hernia que es de vitz.	On the cure of hernias that are external.
Vit es apostema envolut per alcuna envolucio semblant a broto am mollificacio dels testiculs, e es fayt dificil movement exercitiu e deambulacio sobre le malaute.	It is an external hernia enveloped by some envelope resembling a swelling due to the thickening of the scrotum, making physical exercise and walking difficult.
E en la curacio de aquesta malautia es per temor per aquo del qual es precedida rememoracio.	And in the cure of this illness, one is apprehensive about what preceded it and causes reminiscence.
Empero cove que diguam opperacio en aquela segon que fero les primiers.	However, proceed with the operation as you would for the first one.
E dic que cove que fassas sezer le malaute sobre una cezelha elevada; e aprop enpelleys le suspensori dels testiculs a las partidas dejos; e aprop te la codena dels genetius am les tieus ditz am les baysels que so probdas a la vergua; e tengua aquels autre ministre que tu, e extenda aquels am extencio vehement.	And I say that you should incise the hernia on an elevated cushion; then attach the suspensory ligament of the testicles to the parts left; and place the inguinal canal on the thighs that are tried by the virga; and have another minister hold those, extending them forcefully.
E aprop inscideys am spatum lat agut per seccio traversa en le dreyt dels vaysels entro que sian les vayssels descubertz.	And then incise through the skin longitudinally along the vessels among which the vessels are exposed.
E aprop excorja de tota partida ayssi quo a tu havem dit en extraccio de arceria las quals so en las templas.	And then excise from all parts as we have said in the extraction of arteries which are in the temples.
E aprop fica en aquelas un’agulha en la qual sia fiel doble, e lia aquel en le primier del locs en les quals accideys vit, e lia aquel autra veguada en le derier de lor.	And then place a needle in which there is a double thread, and tie that at the beginning of the location where the injury occurs, and tie the other end at the end of them.
E aprop inscideys aquels en le mieg loc per seccio dreyta segon la longuesa del cos, e extratz aquo que es agreguat de las humiditatz fetulentas e corruptas.	And then incise those in the middle location through a longitudinal section according to the length of the body, and extract what is added from the foul and corrupted humors.
E aprop cura la plagua am curacio de las autras plaguas en las quals vols sania esser engendrada per so que caian les vaysels les quals noyreysso un de dos genetius, quar no es mal per aquo.	And then cure the wound by the treatment of other wounds in which you wish to have healing occur so that the vessels which do not contribute from either genius are not affected, for this is not harmful.
Mays si accideys vit a totz les bayssels, lahoras cove que·ls testicols sian extragutz o que les testicols per aquo se cequo am les vayssels, per que sia privat de tot nutriment per la inscizio dels vayssels, e que sian estaborits, o que cequo per so que no sia juvament am aquels.	But if the vessels are injured throughout, then consider that the testicles may be extruded or that the testicles perish due to the injury of the vessels, because it would be deprived of all nutrition due to the incision of the vessels, and they should be established, or that it perishes for this reason.
Capitol .lxv.	Capitol lxv.
De la cura de hernia entestinal.	Of the cure for intestinal hernia.
Le adveniment de aquesta hernia es per seccio que endeve en le ciphac extendut sobre le ventre de part dels angunars del mirac del ventre, per que deysendo les budels de aquela ruptura ad alcu dels budels.	The occurrence of this hernia is due to a separation that extends over the diaphragm across the abdomen from the inguinal ring, because of the rupture of the intestines through some of the intestines.
E aquesta ruptura es o del ciphac o de excencio de lu, e accideysso aquestas doas specias per motas causas: o percussio, o per sautz, o per clamor, o per elevacio de alcuna causa greu, o per semblantz.	And this rupture is either of the diaphragm or of its excision, and these two species occur due to various causes: from a blow, or by a jump, or by shouting, or by lifting some heavy cause, or by something similar.
E·l senhal de aquo, quan es per extencio del ciphac, es que accideys pauc a pauc en lonc temps, e no accideys soptament, e es apostema engual entro ves le preon per so quar le ciphac comprem le budel.	And the sign of this, when it is due to extension of the diaphragm, is that it occurs gradually over a long period of time, and does not occur suddenly, and there is an abscess forming within the chest as the diaphragm compresses the intestine.
E le senhal de lu es quan es per seccio del ciphac, quar al comensament fa accidir dolor vehement sobtament; e es apostema divers aparent dejos la codena propdana aparent, e aquo es per eyssiment del budel, e·l cos de lu a las partidas deforo del ciphac.	And the sign of this is when it is due to diaphragmatic separation, for at the beginning it causes sudden and intense pain; there is an abscess that appears different from the apparent one near the diaphragm, and this is due to the displacement of the intestine, and the body shows symptoms in the parts outside the diaphragm.
E alcunas veguadas es fora-getat am le budel la tela, e es apelada aquesta hernia entestinal zirbal.	And sometimes the intestine protrudes through the skin, and this intestinal hernia is called zirbal.
E alcunas veguadas es fayta am ventositat, e alcunas veguadas corr en le budel fenda, e aqui es retenguda, e es am aquo gran pernitia3 del malaute, e alcunas veguadas fa endevenir dolor malvada e majorment quan es premut.	And sometimes it is caused by distension, and sometimes a hole forms in the intestine, where it is stopped up, and this greatly disturbs the patient, and sometimes it causes severe pain, especially when pressed.
E en la curacio de las especias de aquesta malautia am ferr es temor, per que cove que sia esquivat le cazament en aquela.	And in the treatment of the symptoms of this illness, there is fear, because it is known that hunting should be avoided.
E la manieyra de la operacio de aquela es que comandes al malaute que redugua le budel am la sua ma a las partidas dedintz de la sua conquavitat si obezeys al sieu retornament, e aprop sia envessat sobre le sieu col entre las tuas mas, e eleva las cambas de lu.	And the manner of performing the operation is that you command the patient to push the intestine back into its cavity with their hand at the internal parts of their cavity if it obeys on its return, and then tie it over their collarbone between your hands, and lift the patient's shoulders.
E aprop sten la codena la qual siec la codena dels testicols a las partidas desus, e inscideys la codena dels testicols tota per le lonc; e aprop fiqua en doas labias de la seccio uncis segon que indigeysses a hubrir la seccio am aquels.	And then stitch the scrotal skin at the parts above, and incise the scrotal skin entirely lengthwise; then place two stitches in the incised section as needed to open the section.
E si’ la seccio segon la quantitat que a tu sia possible que de aquela le huou sia foro-getat.	And if the section according to the quantity that it is possible for you to be perforated from there let the oil flow.
E aprop excorja aquela ciphaqueth les quals so dejos la codena dels testicols, entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc dur de quascuna partida.	And then excise that cyst which they leave near the cord of the testicles, once the white hard cyst from each part is uncovered.
Lahoras tu entromet le tieu dit en aquo que siec le testicol, en aquo que es entre ciphac blanc, le qual es dejos la codena del huou, e entre le ciphac segon, e absolve am aquel’adherencia que es en la partida detras del huou.	And when you insert your thumb into what is being excised from the testicle, in what is between the white cyst, which they leave near the oil cord, and between the second cyst, and release any adhesion that is behind the oil part.
E aprop mau am la ma la codena dels testicols a las partidas deforo, e am aysso exten le ciphac blanc en sus am la ma sinestra, e eleva le huou am le ciphac a la partida de la seccio; e comanda al ministre que extenda le huou ensus e tu dissolveys la adherencia que es detras am solucio complida.	And then hold the oil cord of the testicles at the front parts, and by this extend the white cyst on your left hand, and raise the oil towards the cyst to the part of the section; and command the minister to extend the oil upwards and you dissolve the adhesion that is behind with the completed solution.
E cerqua am les tieus ditz que lay no sia alcuna causa del budel envelopat en le ciphac blanc dur.	And near your thumbs, say that there is no cause for the intestine being enveloped in the white hard cyst.
Mays si tu atrobas de lu alcuna causa, lahoras tu enpelleys aquel al ventre dejos.	But if you find some cause, then you peel it off to the belly leaving.
E aprop tu pren una agulha en la qual sia fiel gros fayt de x fiels, e entromet aquel deves le derier del ciphac, le qual es jos la codena dels testicols, la qual siec seccio; e aprop inscideys las extremitatz las quals emineysso del fiel entro que sian quatre fiels, e aprop compausa alcus de lor sobre alcuna figura en manieyra de crotz; e lia am aquel le ciphac del qual havem dit que es dejos la codena dels testicols am fort liament de dos partz.	And then you take a needle made of thick wire, and insert it near the root of the scrotum, which is below the testicles, at this section; and then incise the extremities from which the wire emerges, ensuring there are four wires, and then place some of them on a certain figure in the manner of a cross; and bind that to the scrotum from which we have said it is below the testicles with strong thread in two parts.
E aprop envolveys las extremitatz dels fiels e lia aquelas am liament vehement entro que alcu dels vayssels que noyrrisso aquels no puscan trametre alcuna causa per so que de aqui no accida apostema caut.	And then wrap the ends of the wires and bind those with strong thread in such a way that none of the vessels nourishing them can transmit any cause, so that no abscess forms.
E pausa autra veguada liament segon foro le primier liament, lonh de lu mens tres ditz; e aprop aquestz dos liaments layssa del ciphac le qual es dejos la codena dels testicols la quantitat de la grandeza del dit, e inscideys tot le romanent segon redondeza, e osta de lu le huou.	And place another bind in the same area, about three fingers' length away from the first bind; and between these two binds leave the scrotum at the width of a finger's breadth, then incise the remaining part according to its roundness, and cover it with skin.
E aprop inscideys en la partida dejos de la codena dels testicols per seccio de la qual corra sanc e sania ayssi cum havem recomtat en aquo que havem dit.	And then incise in the part left of the cord of the testicles by section of which flows blood and health as we have recommended in what we have said.
E aprop aministra lana submersa en oli, e pausa en la plagua; e aministra le liament le qual havem recomtat (e alcunas veguadas le ciphac blanc es cauterizat, le qual havem dit aprop la inscizio de lu temen de flux de sanc, quar motas veguadas accideys aquels) e leyssa le liament entro que per si caia.	And then apply wool soaked in oil, and place it on the wound; apply the plaster which we have recommended (and after several applications, the white cloth is cauterized, as we have said near the incision of this fearing blood flow, for several applications occur there). And leave the plaster until it falls by itself.
Mays si le cazement de lu es tardat, lahoras de aygua cauda sia embrocat, e pausa sobre aquel entro que caia segon que havem dit.	But if the dressing is delayed, then pour cold water over it, and place it on the area until it falls as we have said.
E aprop cura la plagua am l’autra curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And then cure the wound with another treatment for wounds until it is healed.
Capitol .lxvi.	Capitol. lxvi.
De hernia ventosa.	Of ventral hernia.
En aquesta hernia no e vist alcu que sia estat ardit sus la curacio de lu am ferr.	In this hernia, nothing has been seen that has been burnt during the treatment of it.
E les primiers diyssero que es fayta ayssi cum havem recomtat en la hernia que es am vi; la qual es que tu lies les vayssels aprop la seccio sobre aquela am fecilitat de lu; e aprop secca en le mieg loc en enviro le apostema am aquo que obro aquel, entro que caian les vayssels.	And the first ones said that it should be done this way as we have recounted in the hernia case; which is that you tie the vessels near the section above that facilitation of it; and then dry out in the middle place around the apostema with what I operate there, before the vessels fall.
E cura la plagua segon que havem dit entro que sia sanada.	And cure the plague as we have said until it is healed.
Capitol .lxvii.	Chapter LXVII.
De la disropcio que es fayta en les anguonars.	Of the disorder that occurs in the ankles.
Alcunas veguadas endeve ruptura en les angonars ayssi cum havem dit, e emineys le loc.	In some cases, there is a rupture in the ankles as we have said, and you should treat the area.
E no deyssen als genetius alcuna causa dels budels al genetius; e si deyssen, aquo es pauc; e retorna s’en en totas horas.	And the genii do not attribute any cause of the intestines to the genii; and if they do, it is few; and return them to their place in all cases.
Mays si es prolonguat le temps am aquo, es ajustada fissura en le ciphac entro que deysenda le budel en le ciphac; e accideys aquo per la extencio del ciphac le qual es en le angonars ayssi cum havem dit, la qual causa es quar le ciphac es estendut, e aprop es mollificat e·l loc es apostemat e emineys.	But if the time at that point is prolonged, there is an adjusted fissure in the chiasm where we insert the intestine in the chiasm; and this occurs due to the extension of the chiasm, which is in the ankles as we have said. The cause is that the chiasm is extended, and nearby it becomes softened, and the area becomes apostematous and you should treat it.
E la cura de lu es am cauteri ayssi quo es precedida la narracio de lu.	And the treatment of it is by cautery as it is preceded by the narration of it.
E alcunas veguadas es curada am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: e es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos entre las tuas mas, e aprop secca le loc de la ruptura dels apostemas emineys am seccio per la latitut segon la quantitat de tres ditz.	Sometimes it is treated with iron in this manner: the patient lies on his side between your legs, and then the area of the rupture of the abscesses is dried out by heat according to the width as much as three fingers.
E aprop strenh le ciphac blanc que es jos la codena entro que sia descubert.	And then strengthen the white cloth that is under when it is uncovered.
E aprop pren le ray e pausa aquel sobre le loc eminent del ciphac, e prem aquel al preon del ventre.	And then take the rod and place it over the prominent area of the cloth, and press it against the front of the abdomen.
E aprop cus le dos locs eminentz sobre la extremitat del ray del ciphac, e ajusta am la sutura un de aquels am l’autre.	And then fix the two prominent areas over the ends of the rod of the cloth, and adjust one to the other with the stitch.
E aprop extratz la extremitat del ray, e no inscidas del ciphac de tot, ni no extenda le huou, ni autra causa ayssi cum yeu te fi saber en la curacio de hernia entestinal.	And then withdraw the end of the rod, and do not extend it completely out of the cloth, nor lengthen the stitch, nor any other cause as I know in the treatment of intestinal hernia.
E aprop cura aquela am la curacio de las plaguas, e cum inscideyses les fiels, mundifica aquela e restaura la plagua entro que sia consolidada; quar le ciphac es contrayt e no es ajustada la eminencia de ruptura.	And then treat that in the treatment of wounds, and after incising the flaps, clean it and restore the wound before it is consolidated; for the cloth contracts and does not adjust the prominence of the rupture.
E cauteri es milhor en aquest loc, quar es pus propda a salut.	And cautery is better in this place, because it is more proximate to health.
Capitol .lxviii.	Chapter LXXXVIII.
De mollificacio de la codena dels testiculs.	On the softening of the scrotum.
Motas veguadas la codena dels testiculs en alcus homes es mollificada per aysso quar las carns que so entre aquela son mollificadas, e es fedat le reguardament de lu.	When spots appear on the scrotum in some men, it is softened because the flesh between those spots is softened, and attention should be paid to this.
Adonc necessari es ad aquel que es preguat en la curacio de lu que fassa jazer le malaute segon le sieu dos, e enscida tota la codena la qual es mollificada sobre la codena natural; e aprop que ajuste doas labias am la sutura.	Then it is necessary for the one who is consulted in the treatment of this to have the patient lie on their side, and completely expose the scrotum which is softened over the natural scrotum; and then draw the two lips together at the seam.
E si vols, cus en le comensament la superfluitat de la codena mollificada am tres cozeduras o quatre e am ferma sutura.	And if you wish, stitch in the beginning the excess of the softened scrotum with three or four stitches and a firm seam.
E aprop inscideys entre las suturas; e aprop cura per curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat e caian les fiels.	And then incise between the seams; and thereafter treat for the other wounds until it heals and the sutures fall out.
Capitol .lxix.	Capitol lxix.
De castracio.	Of castration.
Sapias que castratio en nostre ley es excomengada, mays per causa es legut a mi que·m remembre de lu en aquest libre; e no es necessaria la rememoracio de lu sino per doas manieyras, de las quals es la una per so que aquo sia en la sciensa del metge quan es enterroguat de aquela, que sapia la curacio de lu al qual accideys; e l’autra manieyra es que nos motas vetz havem necessitat de castracio de autras bestias per les juvamentz nostres per aquelas, ayssi cum de motos, e de bocs, e de porcs, e de semblantz a las bestias.	Know that castration in our law is excommunicated, but by cause it is allowed to me to remember it in this free treatise; and the remembrance of it is necessary for two ways, of which one is so that when a doctor is asked about it, he knows the cure for whom it happens; and the other way is that we might see there is a necessity for castration of other beasts for our young ones, such as from bulls, and from boars, and from pigs, and similar to beasts.
E donc dic que castracio es fayta en dos manieyras: o per atrissio, o per fissura a seccio.	And therefore say that castration is done in two ways: either by excision, or by incision.
Mays en aquela que es fayta per atrissio, la via de la opera es que nos fassam cezer la bestia en aygua cauda entro que·ls genetius de lu sian mollificatz e sian linhitz e que pendan.	But in that which is done by excision, the way of the operation is to tie the beast's tail in water until the testicles are softened and relaxed.
E aprop pren aquels am la tua ma entro que sian resols e no apparescan dejos le tocament.	And then take those with your hand until they are soft and do not appear to have lumps when touched.
Mays en castracio fayta per fissura e seccio, cove que tu tenguas la bestia e premas la codena dels testicols de lu am la ma senestra.	In castration performed by fissure and section, make sure you have the beast and press the cord of the testicles with your left hand.
E aprop lia le suspensori, e inscideys sobre quascun huou am una seccio entro que dos huous proceseysso.	Then lift the suspensory ligament, and incise over each groove between two processes.
E aprop inscideys aquels pus que auras quascu excorjat.	Then incise those pus that you have from each excoriation.
E no leysses sobre aquels del ciphac alcuna causa, sino le ciphac subtil le qual es sobre les vazes.	And do not leave on those of the scrotum any cause, but the thin skin which is over the veins.
E aquesta manieyra de castracio es milhor la qual es fayta per atrissio, quar atrissio fort leu layssa alcuna causa dels testicols per que la bestia desira coyt.	And this method of castration is better which is performed by traction, for traction firmly leaves no cause of the testicles because the beast desires copulation.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	Then cure the wound while it is healing.
Capitol .lxx.	Chapter 70.
De la cura de hermafrodozia.	On the cure of hermaphroditism.
Hermafrodozia en les homes es segon dos manieyras: la una es quar o appar en aquo que siec l’espazi en la codena de testiculs, en aquel que es entre dos testiculs figura quar cunh de femna en la qual so pels.	Hermaphroditism in males occurs according to two methods: one where it appears that the space in the cord of testicles is opened, in which there is a mixture between two testes with some female characteristics in them.
E alcunas veguadas de aquel corr urina le qual es en la codena dels testiculs.	And sometimes urine flows from that vein which is in the root of the testicles.
Mays en las femnas es una specia: e es que·l conh de la femna sobre le pentenilh es ayssi cum dos testiculs de home un pauc de tot yminiheys a la partida deforo ayssi cum le perpucii de home e dos testicols.	In women, it is special: and the vein in the woman's groin is like two testicles of a man, slightly larger, with some heaviness at the outer part, similar to the scrotum of a man and the two testicles.
E la curacio es de tres specias: de dos dels homes e de una specia de las femnas.	And the cure is of three kinds: two for men and one for women.
E es que cove que tu inscidas aquelas carns ajustadas entro que efuga la emprecio de aquela, e aprop que cures aquelas am curacio de las autras plaguas.	And it is that you should incise those tight tissues where the excess of that humor escapes, and then proceed to cure those with the treatment for other wounds.
E en la segonda specia dels homes de la qual yeys urina la qual es en la codena dels testiculs, no es curacio ni opperacio en lu.	And in the second kind for men from which urine flows from the vein of the testicles, neither cure nor operation is needed.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter 21.
De lentinge e de carn eminent per causas de las femnas.	On the enlargement and prominence of flesh in women due to certain causes.
Lentige fort leu es ajustada sobre causas naturals entro que es etressat e es fayt leg le reguardament; e alcunas veguadas es magnificada en alcunas femnas en tant entro que es spandit ayssi cum en les homes e perve entro al coito.	Enlargement of the flesh is usually adjusted over natural causes where it is stretched and made firm by looking; sometimes in certain women it is magnified to such an extent that it extends like in men, and swells during intercourse.
Adonc cove que tu tenguas la superfluitat de lentinge am la tua ma o am unci e inscidas.	Then you should have the excess mucus in your hand or cupped and drain it.
E no ultimes en inscizio, majorment en le preon de la razit, per so que no endevengua flux de sanc.	And do not finish in cupping, especially on the right side, lest there be a flow of blood.
E aprop cura aquela am curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanada.	And then care for the wound in its care and healing.
Mays carn nascuda es carn que nays en le horrifici de la mayre entro que umple aquel, e fort leu es eyssit a las partidas deforo segon semblansa de coa (e per aquo alscus primiers appelero aquo “malautia caudada”); donc cove que nos inscidam ayssi cum inscidem lentinge, e curem aquela entro que sia sanada.	More hidden flesh is flesh that arises in the horror of the mother before it fills that space, and a strong cord is fixed to the parts outside according to the likeness of a vein (and for this some first called this "caudata malady"); therefore, we should cut it thus as we cut mucus, and care for it until it is healed.
Capitol .lxxii.	Capitol. lxxii.
De curacio de alratica.	Of the care of alratica.
Alratica es que le conh de la femna no sia perforat, o sia le trauc petit.	Alratica is when the canal of the female is not perforated, or is slightly injured.
E es o natural o accidental.	And it can be natural or accidental.
Accidental es per malautia la qual ha precedit, e aquela es fayta o per carn nada ajustada o per ciphac subtil o espes.	Accidental is due to a malady which has preceded, and that one is caused by meat not fitting well or by a pulse thin or thick.
E es fayt o en le preon de la mayre, o en les costatz de lu, o en le pus sobira de lu, o en le pus bas de lu, e prohibeys de cuoyt e de enprenguacio e de enfantament, e fort leu prohibeys las mestruas.	It is caused in the liver, or in the flanks of the body, or in the upper parts thereof, or in the lower parts thereof, and you prohibit coitus and conception and childbirth, and strongly you prohibit menstruation.
E la cognicio de aquela es fayta per reguardament de la metrona, si la oppilacio es apparent, propdana; mays si no es apparent, lahoras tu cerqua aquela am les tieus ditz o am le ray.	The knowledge of that is made by looking at the midwife, if the obstruction is apparent, probe gently; but if it is not apparent, then you examine that among the thighs or on the abdomen.
Mays si oppilacio es per ciphac subtil, e es propda a las doas labias, lahoras tu coyta e disromp aquela.	But if the obstruction is due to a thin pulse, and is close to the two lips [vagina], then you insert and dilate that.
E es que pauses sobre las doas labias pulvils, e aprop pausa les tieus ditz indicz de amdoas las mas encemps.	And you place powders on the two lips [vagina], and then place your fingers indicating both sides near the entrance.
E la femna sia sobre le sieu dos, las sieuas coyssas extendudas, e aprop exten las doas labias am forsa entro que aquel ciphac subtil sia romput e la oppilacio sia uberta.	And the woman is on her back, her thighs extended, and then spread the two lips with force until that thin pulse is broken and the obstruction is opened.
E aprop pren lana e enbeu le4 en oli e pausa aquela sobre·l loc, e jagua am home le dia per so que·l loc inscis no sia consolidat.	And then take wool and soak it in oil and place it over the area, and leave a man there to prevent the incised place from becoming consolidated.
Mays si le ciphac es gros e espes, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel am spatum lat o am fuelha de mirta.	And if the ulcer is large and deep, then incise it with a spatula or leaf of mint.
Mays si la oppilacio es per carnada, lahoras suspen aquela am unci, e inscideys aquela.	And if the ulcer is superficial, then suspend it with a pin, and incise it there.
E sian am tu las medicinas que fan cessar flux de sanc ses mordicacio, ayssi cum ahacatia, e sanc de drago, e enses, ajustat am album de huou.	And use those medicines that stop the flow of venom from bites, such as aconite, dragon's blood, and ensese, prepared with alum.
E aprop aministra una canulha de plom ampla per so que la plagua no sia consolidada leugierament.	And then administer a broad lead cannula to prevent the ulcer from becoming slightly consolidated.
E tengua aquela per alcus jorns e aministra calgua de li sec.	And keep it there for several days and administer cooled wine.
E aprop sia curada am l’autra curacio de consolidacio entro que sia sanada.	And then treat with the other consolidation remedy before it is healed.
E alcunas vetz accideys en la mayre nativitat de autres carns, e lahoras cove que inscidas segon aquesta manieyra.	And sometimes accidents occur in the natural abundance of other tissues, then you should incise according to this method.
Mays si aysso es per apostema crancos, a l’apostema crancos le qual es en la mayre no sia fayta contrarietat am ferr en deguna manieyra.	If this is due to a painful abscess, for an abscess that is in the greater part, do not perform any opposition by iron in any manner.
Capitol .lxxiii.	Chapter 73.
De la cura de emorroydas e de tayl e de botor roja que accideysso en le conh de las femnas.	Of the cure for hemorrhoids and for tail and for red boil that occurs in the groin of women.
Emorroydas so apprecio dels orificis de motas venas entro que de aquelas corro mot sanc continuadament; e cum so antiquadas emorroydas e son fayts theyls.	Hemorrhoids are appreciated from the openings of the small veins between which blood flows continuously; and as for old hemorrhoids, they are formed into masses.
E ja yeu he dit en la divisio las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e diyre ayssi aquelas que recebo curacio e aquelas que no recebo curacio.	And I have already said in the division the species of those and the signs of those, and to say likewise which receive cure and which do not receive cure.
Donc dic que emorroydas e theyls quan so en le preon de la mayre e no apparo al sentiment, lahoras en aquelas no sia fayta curacio am ferr.	Therefore, say that hemorrhoids and masses when they are in the pelvis and do not appear in sensation, then for those do not perform any iron to cure.
Mays aquelas las quals so en le orrifici de la mayre sobre las quals catz sentiment, so aquelas que so curadas.	But those that are in the openings of the pelvis on which there is sensation, are those that can be cured.
E cove que tu metas la femna en mayso frega e aprop exten atheyl am les forfexs, o am drap aspre, e inscideys aquelas am las razitz.	And make sure that you put the woman in hot water and then extend the thighs with scissors or a rough cloth, and incise those areas with razors.
E aprop pulveriza sobre aquelas deves le fluxs del sanc de una de las polveras insciscivas ses mordicacio, ayssi cum acassia e semblant ad aquels.	And then sprinkle on those areas the flux of the blood from one of the incisive powders seven bites, thus and with the same appearance as those.
E aprop enpellesca les sieus pes per una hora, e aprop pausa aquela en aygua freja.	And then wrap her feet for an hour, and then immerse that in cold water.
E si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras fay aquela sezer en decoccio de sumat e de scorsas de milgranas e de gualas e de semblantz.	And if the bleeding persists, then make that poultice in decoction of sumac and of scours of millet grains and of walnuts and with the same appearance.
E aprop pren farina de ordi e comfiys aquela am miel e vi agre e fay emplastre am aquo sobre le dos de lu.	And then take flour of oregano and mix it with honey and wine, and make a poultice with this over his back.
E si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, fay adherir am dos ventozas, e a las mamilhas ses escarificatio.	And if the bleeding is stopped, that is good; otherwise, apply two vetches, and to the breasts perform six incisions.
E aprop pren lana e submergeys aquela am suc de coliandre o am suc de arnagloza o am suc de guarravier am vi pentit e fay adherir al loc; e aprop cura le loc am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then take wool and immerse it in the juice of fennel or in the juice of agrimony or in the juice of greater celandine in fermented wine, and apply it to the area; then cover the area with ointment until it heals.
Mays athyl rog le qual es de aspre reguardament, cove que tu inscidas aquo que a tu appar de aquel segon que he dit en theyl engualment.	May this be of harsh regard, cover that you insert here what it appears to you according to what I have said equally.
E cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And cure that which is within and let it be healed.
Capitol .lxxiv.	Capitol.lix.
De perforacio de eyssedura accident en la mayre.	On the puncture wound accident in the thigh.
Motas specias de apostemas accideysso en la mayre, ayssi cum cranc e apostema lapident e ulceracios e adhubelat e erpetromens e fistulas emorroyas e raguarrias e thyl e autres apostemas.	Various types of apostemata occur in the thigh, such as carbuncle, erysipelas, ulcers, abscesses, erythromela, fistulae hemorrhagy, and thrombosed veins, and other apostemata.
E yeu ja he dit aquestas malautias e las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e las curacios de lor en la divisio.	And I have already said these illnesses and the types of those, and the signs of those, and their cures in the division.
E cove que yeu digua en aquest tractat de apostema caut le qual ve en la mayre quan es dels apostemas que collegeysso sania, e si vols saber en qual manieyra se fa la opperacio de lu am ferr.	And cover that I say in this treatise on apostemata to cauterize which comes in the thigh when it is one of the apostemata that produces health, and if you want to know how the operation of it is done.
Adonc cove que tu consideres si la dolor de la apostema en le sieu comensament es aguda am percussio e flecma e febre, e vezes aquel enrogezir e si catz sobre aquel le sentiment, lahoras no·t coytes am perforacio de lu, e cura aquel am aquo que ajuda sobre la maturacio entro que cesse la acuitat dels accidentz.	Then consider whether the pain in the abscess at its beginning is acute upon percussion and flux and fever, and sometimes that reddening and if catz over that the sentiment, when no·t cuts of it, and cure that with what helps on the maturation until the acuity of the accidents ceases.
E lahoras cove que tu fassas cezer la femna sobre una cezelha que aia doas cezelhas; e recline sobre le sieu dos e ajusta les sieus pes a la partida pus dejos del ventre, e las sieus coyssas sian expandudas, e pausa les sieus brasses dejos les sieus denols, e lia quascus am liament ad aquo convenient.	Then you should place the woman on a pillow that has two parts; recline her upper body and adjust her legs to the part behind her abdomen, and spread her thighs. Place her arms behind her hips, and tie quilts with linens as needed.
E aprop la matrona segua del latz dreyt e aministre le instrument am le qual es ubert le orrifici de la mayre, la forma del qual vindra en aquelas causas que·s faran aprop.	Then the midwife should follow the length correctly and administer the instrument to the opening of the vagina, the form of which will be described in the causes that will be given later.
E cove quan vols ministrar aquest instrument que tu fiques am lo ray le preon de la mayre de la femna, e aquo que del instrument es intrat en la mayre no sia mays que·l preon de la mayre e leda le malaute.	When you want to administer this instrument, place it along the length of the cervix of the woman, and what part of the instrument enters the vagina should not exceed the length of the cervix and help the patient.
Mays si l’estrument es major que·l preon de la mayre, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils sobre la textura del preon de la mayre per sso que sia prohibit l’intrament de tot instrument en le preon de la mayre.	If the instrument is larger than the mouth of the uterus, then cover it with powder on the cervix to prevent the instrument from entering the cervical opening.
E cove que tu pauses le vertitge que corr en le strument del latz pus desus e que le ministre tengua le strument e revolva le vertitge entro que sia ubert le orrifici de la mayre.	Cover it so that the fluid running in the tube of the syringe is above, and let the minister hold the tube and rotate the fluid until the cervical openings are open.
E cum appar la excitura, e es tocada am la ma e es leon e molh, lahoras cove que tu secces aquela deves le cap de lu am spatum lat.	And when the excitement appears, and it is touched with the hand and is like a lion and wet, then cover that part by sprinkling the head of it with cold water.
E cum la sania es evacuada, lahoras cove que tu pauses en la plagua una meca submersa en oli rozat o oli vert en le qual sia alcuna stiptisitat; e pausa la calca7 en la seccio en le preon de la mayre.	And when the foulness is evacuated, then cover it with a wet cloth submerged in sweetened olive oil or green olive oil with some astringency; and place the compress in the cervical area at the cervical opening.
E pause deforo la mayre e sobre le pentenilh lana munda submersa en aygua en la qual sian bulidas malvas.	And place it over the cervix and on the pelvis a clean woolen cloth submerged in water in which mallows have been boiled.
E aprop sia curada aprop dos dias am enguent le qual conveneys ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	Then it is usually cured in about two days by applying ointment that you apply while it is healing.
E alcunas veguadas es lavada la mayre e la plagua enayssi que es cristerisat am aygua e mel, e aprop am aygua en la qual es bulhida razit de liri o de aristologia longua, e aprop retorna al enguent.	And sometimes the liver and wound are washed in an attempt to cauterize them with water and honey, then with water in which is boiled bark of willow or of arbor vitae, and then return to ointment.
E si la plagua es dedintz en la mayre ameguada, lahoras cove que tu sias prohibit de la curacio de lu am ferr, habantz cura aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio.	And if the wound is deep within the liver, then covet that you desist from the treatment of it with iron, taking care that which we have said in the division.
Capitol .lxxv.	Chapter 75.
A ensenhar las matronas en qual manieyre les enbrios bius sian medicatz quan yeysso segon figura no-natural.	To teach midwives how to treat miscarriages properly when they occur according to an unnatural figure.
Necessaria causa es que la matrona conogua en le comensament la figura del enfantament natural per senhals de lu, e es que quan tu vezas la femna expremar a las partidas dejos e desira odorar le ayre, e sobre aquo es enleujada per aquo que sobre ela es del part, e festina le eyssiment del enbrio, lahoras sapias que aquest part es segon figura natural, e es l’eyssiment de lu sobre le sieu cap, e la segondina am aquel o suspensa o pendent del ombelic.	Necessary is that the midwife know at the beginning the sign of a natural birth by its symptoms. For when you see the woman expelling from the passages and desiring to smell the air, and over this she is enlivened by what happens around her, and hastens the expulsion of the fetus, then you know that this passage is according to the natural figure, and it is the expulsion of the fetus above its head, and the second one is either suspended or pendant from the umbilicus.
Donc cum tu vezes aquels senhals, lahoras cove que·l ventre de lu sia compremut per so que l’embrio deysenda leugerament quar quan deyssen sobre le sieu cap, deysen a lu la segondina, e es mondada de aquelas superfluitatz am bona mondificacio.	Then when you see those signs, at once let the abdomen be compressed so that the fetus descends slightly; when it is on its head, let the second stage begin, and it is prepared for those excessive fluids through good management.
Mays aquel que es otra aquest part es no-natural e no-lausable, quar quan le enbrio es eyssit sobre sos pes e·l cos de lu es eyssit devant le cap de lu e·ls pes de lu, e la ma de lu una, o al pe de lu i, o es eyssit le cap de lu e la ma de lu, o al ventre de lu, e fort leu es convertit sobre le sieu col, e semblant de las figuras de lu no-lausablas.	That which is another to this part is unnatural and unacceptable, for when the fetus is situated on its feet and the body of the mother is situated in front of the head of the fetus and its feet, or one hand, or at the side of the fetus, or the head of the fetus and one hand, or over the abdomen of the fetus, and heavily it is turned over its own back.
Don necessaria causa es a la matrona que sia savia e subtil en totas aquelas causas, e que·s guarde de error e de decepcio.	For necessary causes the midwife must be wise and subtle in all those causes, and she must guard against error and deception.
E yeu so mostrant tota figura de aquelas, e qual engen es en aquelas per so que sia significat per aquo e sia stat sobre aquo.	And I show all the figures of these, and which engine is in them so that it may be signified by this and be placed here.
Quan le feyt es eyssit sobre le sieu cap per egrecio natural, e aquel es vehement sobre la femna e es fayt a lu part dificil, e vezes la vertut de lu ja debelitada, lahoras fay aquela sezer , o que las femnas tenguan lu, e evapora le conh de lu am fenugrec coyt e am olis humitz.	When the fetus is situated on its head by natural causation, and it is vehement over the woman and made difficult for her, and sometimes the virtue of her is weakened, then make that cesarean section, or what the women have for it, and evaporate the concoction of fenugreek and humid oils.
E aprop entrometa la metrona entre les sieus ditz espatum petit e fenda am aquel la segondina, o secce aquela am la sua ungla entro que corro aquo que es en ela de humiditat.	And then insert the needle between his so-called small spines and split the second one, or dry out that one with its nail through which flows what is in it of moisture.
E preme le ventre de la femna entro que deyssenda le fet.	And press the woman's belly as the fetus descends.
Mays si no deyssen, lahoras cove que la femna sia cristirizada de mucellage de ptilli e mucellage de fenugrec am cizami.	But if it does not descend, then cause the woman to be moistened with honeyed mucus and fenugreek mucus.
E aprop comanda a lu, aprop le cristeri, que sia compremuda e fay aquela stornudar am condisi; e te la boca de lu e·l nas de lu per huna hora, quar le fet sira foro-getat tantost.	And then command her, placing her on her side, to inhale the fumes, which make her sneeze while in this position; and keep her mouth and nose covered for about an hour until the fetus is delivered.
E si las doas mas del fet so foro-getadas al comensament, lahoras cove que tu redusiscas aquelas am fecilitat petit a petit.	And if both hands of the fetus are delivered first, then cause you to reduce them gradually for facilitation.
Mays si no obezeys al intrament, lahoras pausa la femna sobre una cezelha e leva les pes de lu sus, e aprop concuceys la cezelha sobre la terra; e la femna sia tenguda que no caia deves la concussio.	But if you do not obey the instrument, then place the woman on a bench and lift her feet off it, and hold the bench close to the ground; and keep the woman so that she does not fall due to the concussion.
E si las mas no son dedintz tornadas e morr le fet, lahoras inscideys aquelas e extratz le romament del fet o lia le cors a la ma de lu am drap e extratz aquel am equalitat, quar aquel sira foro-getat.	And if the hands are not returned inside and the wound is closed, then incise there and extract the torn part of the wound or hold the body with a cloth and extract it equally, for that will be left hanging.
De eyssiment del embrio sobre les sieus pes.	From the embryo on its feet.
Quan le fet yeys sobre les sieus pes, lahoras cove que tu impelliscas aquels en sus, e aprop convertas le fet petit, e aprop que engualhes aquel, e aprop que prenguas un pe de lu e extendas aquels petit a petit.	When the wound yews on its feet, then push those parts in, and soon make the wound smaller, and soon equalize that, and soon take a part of it and extend those little by little.
Mays cum son eyssit entro a las coyssas, lahoras tu comanda a lu que se exprema, e fay aquela extornudar am condizi, quar sira foro-getat si Deus lo vol.	More when it is situated between the thighs, then command him to express it, and make that turn outward with a cloth, for it will be left hanging if God wills.
E si no es foro-getat am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras tu retorna le fet petit a petit entro que pauses aquel segon figura natural, quar aquel sira lahoras foro-getat am leugier eyssiment.	And if it is not left hanging as we have commanded, then you return the wound little by little into place as you pause that according to the natural figure, for it will be left hanging with a slight incision.
E si es prohibit am tot aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras pren de musellage de altea e de goma dissolvuda, e percuteys tot en le mortier per bona percussio, e aprop linieys am aquo le conh de la femna, el pus bas del ventre de lu.	And if all that we have commanded is prohibited, then take a mixture of alum and dissolved gum, and grind them together in the mortar for good pounding, and pour that over the wound on the woman's lower abdomen.
E aprop fay aquela cezer en aygua tebeza, entro que consegua les ypocondias.	And then make that incision in clear water, once you reach the hypochondria.
E cum vezes que las partidas dejos de lu so lenificadas, lahoras fay a lu subfumiguacio de mirta e sub-pausa aquela a lu.	And when you see that the parts around the wound are numbed, then perform a mirtle fumigation on it and place your hand over it.
E quan te la sub-fumiguacio per una hora, lahoras tu la fay sezer sobre una cezelha, e aprop fay aquela stornudar e extrenh la boca de lu, e levas de aquela, e prem la partida pus bassa del ventre de lu am leugiera compressio, quar le fet sira tantost foro-getat.	And when the fumigation lasts for an hour, then make that incision over a bowl, and then perform a snuffing operation at the mouth of it, and remove it, and apply a light compression to the lower part of the abdomen, which will soon become firmer.
Eyssiment del fet sobre les sieus denols e las suas mas.	Apply pressure to the wound on its sides and hold its edges together.
Quan le fet eyssira segon aquesta forma, lahoras tu engenies en entrometen las suas mas petit a petit; e aprop la femna stia evessada sobre le sieu col, e les pes de lu pengo en jos, e aquelas sia jasent sobre le lieyt, e complegua las suas mas.	When the wound heals in this manner, then gradually insert its edges; and place the female patient lying on her back, with her feet elevated, and those on the sides over the area, completing the process with her hands.
E aprop prem sobre le ventre de lu petit a petit, e aprop extratz aquo que es dejos les pes de lu de las aurelhas entro que sia preparada en la partida pus dejos.	And gradually apply pressure to the abdomen, and when the feet are ready, place them in the holes of the pillows before positioning them.
E si le fet no es fora-getat, lahoras pren les pes de lu e mau aquels am movement vehement, e aprop prem aquo que es sobre les ypocondres petit a petit entro que le fet puege a las partidas desus.	And if the wound is not well-packed, then take the feet and move them with vigorous movement, and place what is on the hypochondria gradually closer as the wound closes from above.
E aprop entrometa las suas mas e engualhe le fet petit a petit, e comanda a la femna que se exprema entro que le fet sia foro-getat.	And gradually insert their hands and pack the wound gradually, and command the woman to express it while the wound is not well-packed.
Eyssiment del fet latutidinalment pendent una de las suas mas.	Suture the wound longitudinally with one of their hands.
Sia engeniat en reduccio de la ma de lu, mays si no podes aquela reduzir, lahoras eleva la femna e fe aquela anar.	Ensure the reduction of the hand, but if you cannot reduce it, then elevate the woman and make her go away.
E si anar no pot, lahoras fay la jazer sobre le lieyt, e concuteys las coyssas de lu am concussio vehement, e aprop aministra liamentz les quals yeu e recomtatz de mucillages.	And if she does not go away, then apply pressure to the region, and shake the patient's thighs with violent shaking, and then administer liniments which you prepare from mucilages.
E si es vengut le enfantament, lahoras fay aquela sezer sobre cezelha, e aprop studia sobre la reduccio de la ma, e enguala le fet segon figura natural, e fay stornudar la femna e comanda a lu que comprema a si entro que sia foro-getat.	And if labor has come, then apply pressure with a handkerchief, and then study the reduction of the hand, and pack the wound according to its natural figure, and make the woman cough and command her to hold herself until it is well-packed.
Eyssiment del fet sobre·l col expandudas las suas mas e la fassia de lu es al dos de la sua mayre.	Lift the foot over the patient's neck, spread their hands, and position the foot so that its sole is against the back of their mother.
Cove que la matrona tengua la ma del fet e aprop revolva aquel petit a petit, e eque aquel am facilitat.	Hold the foot in your hand, the midwife, and gradually rotate it slightly, so that it becomes easier.
E cum es e quant so es engualhat, e lahoras pausa sobre le conh de lu aquo que havem recomtat de oli e de mucellages.	And when it is equalized and settled, then place it over the thigh as we have advised with oil and ointments.
E aprop comandas a lu que·s maugua petit a petit, e quan auras feyt aquo, lahoras fay aquela cezer sobre una cezelha e comanda li que sia inclinada sobre le latz dreyt, e aprop comanda a lu que sia compremuda; e fay aquela stornudar am condizi.	And then command that it be moistened gradually, and when you have done this, place the cauterizing iron on a coalshovel and command that it be inclined over the right side, and then command that it be heated well; and make it snuff with a condition.
Exitus foetus praeparati super latus.	The prepared fetus comes out on the side.
Quan deyssen a horrifici de la mayre segon aquesta manieyra, considera, e lahoras tu inscideys la segondina am la tua ungla entro que sia evacuada de la humiditat.	When the mother's pains occur in this manner, consider it, and then incise the second stage with your finger so that it is evacuated of moisture.
E si le fet es suspendut sobre la cara e·l col de lu, lahoras tu inscideys aquela del embelic, per so que no sia retengut e mora.	And if the foot is suspended over the face and neck of the patient, then incise the one causing the swelling, so that it is not retained and leads to death.
E aprop empelleys le fet a las partidas dedintz entro que pauses aquel segon que cove, e manda a la femna que comprema a si alcunas veguadas, e el sira fora-getat am eyssiment leugier, si Dieus o vol.	And then push the fetus into the parts inside where you have placed it, and order the woman to bear with it for some minutes, and let it be slowly delivered gently, if God wills.
Exitus geminorum aut foetuum multorum.	The exit of two infants or many fetuses.
Sapias que gemels motas veguadas so natz, e alcunas vetz naysso tres o quatre , mays aquo es estranh e tart s’endeve; mays v so causas foro natura, e no vivo.	Know that in most cases, twins appear after several weeks, and sometimes they may be born three or four, but this is strange and worth investigating. However, these are usually caused by natural factors, not supernatural ones.
E conte aquelas, ja sia que sian montiplicatz, una segondina, e son seperatz per ciphac, distingen aquels enter le liguament en l’ombilic de cascun de aquels E alcunas veguadas so foro-getatz ayssi cum es un fet per eyssiment natural leugier, e so eysitz alcunas veguadas per eyssiment no-lausabla ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And among those, if they are multiply born, one is a second, and they are separated by ciphalac (a method of separating twins), distinguishing those within the ligament at the navel of each. In some weeks, they may be slowly delivered as if one fetus, by natural labor, and in other weeks by a non-laborious delivery as we have recounted.
E si son dificils alcus de lor deves le enfantament e perveno ad aquo que havem dit de las figuras no-naturals, lahoras tu cura aquels ayssi cum havem recontat.	And if they are difficult, some of them you should deliver the fetus and proceed to what we have said about unnatural figures, then care for those as we have recounted.
E si’ la matrona subtil e fassa aquo que fa am facilitat e subtilitat, e am tarditat, e sia ingeniat segon tota figura segon que es a lu preparat de l’engen amenant a salut.	And if the midwife is skilled and does what must be done with subtlety and delicacy, and with delay, according to her ingenuity according to whatever is prepared for her bringing about health.
Rememoratio eius quod formatur in matrice ex embrionibus et Abortiuntur.	Recollection of that which is formed in the matrix from embryos and are aborted.
Alcunas veguadas son formatz en la mayre un, e dos, e tres, e quatre, e v, e vi, e vii, e mays x, e ja es deves mi verificat que una femna abortem ne getet vi, e una autra x totz formatz, la qual causa fo fayta per mensuracio dels glorios savis.	Sometimes in the uterus one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, and more ten are formed, and you must verify that a female aborts with a single fetus, and another with all ten formed, the cause of which is made by the measurement of the glorious sages.
E tot aysso cove que sia en la sciencia de la matrona quar fort leu ad aquela parve semblant de aquo, e donc opause se ad aquo am so que cove.	And all this covers what is in the science of the midwife, for she must perceive it well and then place her hand on it according to what is proper.
Capitol .lxxvi.	Capitol. lxxvi.
De extraccio del fet quan es mort.	On the extraction of the fetus when it is dead.
Quan tu curas le fet mort am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la medicacio e no es defora eyssit, e tu yest forsat usar de opperacio am ma, lahoras cove que consideras si la femna es de sana vertut e no es am alcu dels accidentz per les quals sobre ela es temuda perdicio.	When you treat the dead fetus as we have said in the division of therapy and it is not outside the body, then you must use surgery more. You must consider whether the woman is in good health and not affected by any of the conditions for which her life is feared to be in danger.
Lahoras cove que la femna sia envessada sobre le lieyt sobre le sieu dos, e sia le cap de lu enclinat enjos e las coyssas de lu sian elevadas.	When the woman is placed lying on her back, and her head inclined sideways, and her thighs elevated.
E·l ministre tengua aquela de doas partz o sia liada en le lieyt per so que·l cos de lu no se extenda deves la extraccio del fet.	The minister should hold that [object] in two parts or tied on the surface so that the body does not extend during the extraction of the fetus.
E aprop tu humecta la boca de la mayre de lu am olis humitz e am mucellage de altea e de fenugrec e de semensa de li.	And then moisten the mouth of the uterus with oil of roses and honeyed mallow and fennel and linseed.
E aprop unte la matrona la sua ma am aquels olis e mucellages, e aprop entrometa la sua ma am fecilitat en la mayre, e aprop cerque am la ma loc en le qual fique les uncis en le fet.	And then the midwife should anoint her hand with those oils and honeycombs, and place her hand with facilitation in the uterus, and seek with her hand the location where the fingers will enter the fetus.
E locs convenient en aquo: adonc tu considera si le fet es preparat que deysenda sobre le sieu cap, e lahoras tu fique les uncis en les huels de lu, o en le col, o en la boca, o en le palat, o dejos la barba, o en la furcula de lu, o en les locs propdas de las costas, o dejos les ypocondres.	Place the fingers accordingly: then consider if the fetus is ready to descend over its head, and then place the fingers in the fetus's hands, or neck, or mouth, or palate, or beard, or under the clavicle, or in the proper locations of the ribs, or under the hypochondria.
Mays si le deysendiment es sobre les pes de lu, lahoras en le pentenilh, o en le mieg de las costas.	But if the discharge is from his feet, then at the ankle, or in the middle of the back.
E cove que tengua le unci am la ma dreyta, e pausa la curvitat de lu en aquel loc le qual es entre les ditz de la ma senestra, e entrometa la ma am facilitat e fique le unci en alcu de aquels locs les quals havem ditz, entro que pervengua a la causa boyda.	And let the thumb be with the right hand, and curve it at that location which is between the fingers of the left hand, and insert the hand easily and place the thumb in one of those locations which we have said, until he reaches the cause beneath.
E aprop pause e fique en la apposicio de lu un autre unci, o le tertz si es necessitat, per so que sia atraccio engual, e no sia extencio segon la sua rectetut tant solament.	And then place and keep another thumb, or the third if necessary, so that there is an equal pressure, and not extension according to its straightness solely.
Ans sia maugut a tota partida, per so que l’eyssiment de lu sia alleujat ayssi cum es fayt en dent deves la eradicacio de lu.	And let it be held at all times, so that the pressure of it is alleviated as is done in extracting a tooth.
E cove en lu aquo que es entre lor que la extencio sia mollificada; e si alcuna partida de lu es retenguda, lahoras cove que la matrona unte alcus sieus ditz am oli e entrometa aquels espertament e revolva am aquels aquo que es retengut.	And let it be curved so that the extension is softened; and if any part of it is retained, then let the midwife anoint some of her fingers with oil and insert them expertly and rotate them where the part is retained.
Donc si la partida del fet es fora-getada, lahoras les uncis sian permudatz entra loc le qual sia pus aut; e fay aysso entro que tot le fet sia fora-getat.	Then if the part of the fetus is forgotten, let the nails be inserted in that place whether it be above or below; and do so before all the fetus is forgotten.
Mays si la ma es eyssida denant l’autra, e no es possible reduzir aquela per la coartacio de lu, lahoras cove que drap sia envolopat sobre aquela; e aprop extratz aquela entro que tota sia fora-getada, e inscideys aquela o en la junctura de la ma o en le coyde.	But if your hand is placed in front of the other, and it is not possible to reduce it due to the contraction, then cover that part with a cloth; and quickly extract it before all of it is forgotten, and incise it at the wrist or near the joint.
E ayssi cove que fassas en l’autra ma e en les dos pes.	And do so also with the other hand and on both feet.
Mays si le cap del fet es gran, o accideys a lu coartacio en le eyssiment, o es en le cap de lu aygua ajustada, lahoras cove que entrometa entre les ditz espatum spinos e fenda le cap e extragua la aygua, o que discroba aquel am un instrument le qual es nompnat “alundat”, la forma del qual vindra am las formas dels autres instruments en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	But if the head of the fetus is large, or it undergoes constriction during extraction, or there is water in its head, then you must insert a spiny gauze between the fingers, open the head, and drain the water, or that you use an instrument called "alundat," the shape of which will be shown in the forms of other instruments in the chapter that follows this.
E semblantment fassa si·l fet es de gran cap per natura: e lahoras cove que inscida aquel am algematu, o que prengua aquel am alunda ayssi cum havem dit; e aprop extra les osses am les forceps.	And similarly, if the fetus has a large head by nature: then you must incise it with a looped instrument, or use an alundat as we have said; and quickly extract the bones with forceps.
E si le cap es eyssit e es coartat deves la furcula, lahoras sia fendut entro que la humiditat la qual es en le pietz sia efunduda.	And if the head is swollen and constricted, you should cut the furca, then incise where the humidity which is in the feet has infiltrated.
Mays si no es complicat, ni obezeys a eyssiment, lahoras tu inscideys le cap tantost segon que a tu sira possible.	And if it is not complicated, nor obstructed by swelling, then you should incise the head as soon as possible according to what suits you.
E si le dejos del ventre es apostemat o es en lu ydropici, lahoras cove que tu perfores aquel entro que corro la humiditat que es en lu.	And if the swellings in the abdomen are suppurated or are in dropsy, then you must perforate it where the humidity that is in it flows.
Mays si le fet es sobre les sieus pes, lahoras la atraccio de lu es leugiera e la direccio de lu a la boca de la mayre es leugiera.	And if the fistula is on his feet, then the attraction of it is light and its direction to the mouth of the vein is light.
Mays si es coartat deves le ventre e·l pietz, lahoras cove que tu extraguas aquel am drap le qual auras envolopat sobre la tua ma, e que fendes le ventre e·l pietz entro que corra aquo que es en aquels.	And if it is constricted, you should incise the abdomen and the foot, then you must extract that which you have wrapped around your hand, and incise the abdomen and the foot where what is within them flows.
Mays si les autres membres so ostatz e torna le cap, lahoras la metrona entrometa la ma senestra; mays si la boca de la mayre es huberta, lahoras intrometa la ma en le preon de layre, e cerque am aquela le cap, e atira aquel am les ditz entro a la boca de la mayre, e aprop entrometa en lu un unci, o dos uncis, e atire lu am aquels.	And if the other members remain attached and return the head, then the surgeon should insert his left hand; and if the mouth of the vein is opened, then he should insert his hand in the preorder of the vein, and seek for the head, and push that with his fingers into the mouth of the vein, and quickly insert one or two pins, and push them there.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada per apostema caut le qual accideys a l’u, lahoras cove que no sia trebelhat sobre lu; abantz cove lahoras aministrar efusio de causas humidas grassas.	And if the mouth of the vein is constricted by an abscess, cauterize what occurs to him; ensure that it is not irritated; first, do so in order to administer effusion of fatty humid causes.
E aministre emplastres; e segua le pacient en ayguas que mollifican e humectan.	And administer plasters; and follow the patient with waters that soften and moisten.
E si le fet es sobre le sieu costat, lahoras si possible es, sia agulat: e sia aministrat aquo que havem dit en le fet viu.	And if the wound is on his side, then it is possible to lance it: and administer what we have said about the live wound.
E si aquo no es possible, lahoras sia inscidit en pessas, e sia extrayt.	And if that is not possible, then incise in pieces, and extract.
E cove que non layssas alcuna causa dedintz de la segondina.	And ensure that you do not leave any foreign cause inside the incision.
E cum tu auras complida tota la tua opperacio, lahoras aministra aquo que havem dit de la curacio en les apostemas cautz les quals accideysso de la mayre.	And when you have completed your operation, then administer what we have said about the treatment of abscesses caused by the vein.
E si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras deyssendas en ayguas stipticas e aministra l’autra curacio.	And if there is a flux of blood, then apply cold waters and administer the other treatment.
E yeu ja e vist una femna en le ventre de la qual era fet mort, e aprop sobre aquel foc autra veguada emprenhada, e aprop foc mort es le fet autre.	And I have already seen a woman in her abdomen where one fetus was dead, and nearby another pregnancy began, and the dead fetus is the other.
Accidit al u aprop lonc temps apostema en le sieu embelic; e inflat es entro que foc ubert, e comensec a getar brac.	It happens that after a long time an abscess forms in the armpit; and when it becomes inflamed, it opens up and begins to discharge pus.
E yeu fu appelhat a la cura de lu, e medicat a lu per lonc temps, e la plagua no es consolidada.	And I was called to treat it, and treated it for a long time, but the wound did not heal.
Adonc yeu pausegui sobre lu de alscunas causas emplastra de forta atraccio, e eyssic de lu un os, e aprop passero alcus jorns, e eyssic un autre os; e yeu fu trop meravilhat, cum en le ventre no sia os.	Then I applied plasters of strong attraction over it for some causes, and cauterized it with an iron. And after several days, I cauterized another one; and I was too amazed, as there is no bone in the abdomen.
E adonc yeu cogitegui que eran dels osses del fet mort.	And then I realized that they were the bones of the dead fetus.
Donc yeu enguisigui la plagua, e extrayssi de lu motz osses , la femna existent en las sieuas milhos disposicios, e ja visquec en tal manieyra per lonc temps, correc de lu un petit de brac.	Then I dressed the wound, and extracted bones from it, along with the fetus present in the woman's uterine condition, which she had experienced this way for a long time, and cured her of a small arm.
E yeu no afermegui asso esser stranh, sino quar en aquo es sciensa e ajutori ad aquo que le metge artifec am la ma per curacio aministra.	And I do not refuse it to be strange, but rather that in this there is science and aid to what the physician uses his hand for in treatment.
De las formas dels instrumentz que so necessaris a extrayre le fet.	Of the forms of the instruments that are necessary to extract the stone.
Forma de vertitge am la qual es uberta la mayre:	Form of vertigo at which the kidney is opened:
Aquesta es la forma de strenhedor en le qual so engualhatz les libres, al qual engualhament sian dos virtitges en doas extremitatz de dos futz.	This is the form of strengthener in which you equalize the libres, at which equalization there are two vertigos at the two ends of two tubes.
May empero aquesta virtitge cove que sia pus subtil de strictori, e sia fayt o de eba o de fust de boys.	Nevertheless, let this vertigo be more subtle in structure, and made either of hemp or of reed.
E sia la latitut de quascun fust quays dos ditz e le marge de quascu amdos quays un dit, e la longitut de quascu es un palm e mig; e en le mieg loc de dos fustz so dos ajustaments de aquel meteys fustz les quals ja son fermatz, dels quals la longitut es la maytat de un palm e un pauc mes, e la latitut de quascu es quay dos ditz, o un pauc mes.	And let the width of each tube be as wide as two fingers, and the margin on both sides be as wide as one finger. The length of each is a palm and a half; in the middle location between two tubes are two joints of that same material tube, which are already secured. The length of each joint is about a palm and a little more, and the width of each is as wide as two fingers, or a little more.
E aquestz dos additamentz sian entromeses en la boca de la mayre per que sia uberta am aquels quan tu revolves las doas prescriptas virtigges.	And these two additions be inserted in the mouth of the womb so that they be opened when you revolve the two prescribed virtues.
Forma autra semblant de aquela pus subtil e pus leugiera:	Form another one similar to that, but more subtle and lighter:
Sia fayta de fustz de eba o de boys segon la semblansa de forceps.	Be made of elm wood or boxwood according to the likeness of forceps.
Mays empero en la extremitat de lu so dos additament ayssi cum vezes, e la longitut de aquels additament es quays un palm, e la latitut de quascu es dos ditz.	Nevertheless, at the extremity of each, there are two additions as you can see, and the length of those additions is about one palm, and the width of each is two fingers.
E cum tu vols am aquels ubrir la mayre, lahoras tu fay cezer la femna sobre le lieyt les pes pendentz, ubert aquo que es entre las coyssas de lu.	And when you want to open the womb, then place the woman on her side with her feet hanging down, opening that which is between her thighs.
E aprop obre la tua ma am le instrument ayssi cum fas am forfexs engualment segon la quantitat que vols de la aprecio de la boca de la mayre entro que la metrona fassa so que vols.	And then open your hand with the instrument as you would with scissors equally according to the quantity you want of the depth of the womb, while the metronome applies pressure where you want.
La forma de vertitge la qual diysero les antics:	The form of revolution which the ancients described:
Forma de impellent am le qual es empellit le fet:	Form of pressing which is applied to the fetus:
Forma de amisidat2 am le qual es conterit le cap gran	Form of holding in which the large head is contained
E es asemblat a forceps al qual so dentz en la extremitat, ayssi cum vezes, e alcunas veguadas es fayt lonc ayssi cum forceps segon aquesta forma, ayssi cum vezes, al qual so dentz ayssi cum dentz de ressegua am le qual es inscidit e conterit.	And it is assembled to forceps which have teeth at the extremity, as you see. Sometimes it is made long like forceps according to this form, as you see, with teeth like spoon teeth, upon which it is incised and contained.
Forma de amesidat pauc:	Form of holding lightly:
Forma de unci havent una spina:	Form of holding with one hand having a spine:
Forma de unci havent doas spinas:	Form of holding with one hand having two spines:
Forma de forceps a la qual so dentz de cerra am le qual le cap del fet sia conterit:	Form of forceps to which closing teeth are applied, upon which the fetus's head is contained:
Forma de spatum havent dos extremitatz am le qual le cap es abscindit:	Form of spatula having two extremities, upon which the head is incised:
Forma de dos espatums latz:	Form of two flat spoons:
Totz aquels instrumentz so excersitatz, e quan mes so multiplicadas las specias de aquel e so preparadas deves le artifexs, quant es pus leugier a la sua opperacio e pus aut deves les homes per la sua quantitat.	All those instruments are exercised, and when more species of that kind are multiplied, you must prepare the artists, as much lighter for their operation and more suitable for the quantity of men.
E no obres de aquels instrumentz ja sia qua sia deves tu aparalhat, quar la necessitat de aquels no es excusabla.	And do not delay with those instruments whether you should prepare them or not, for the need of those is not excusable.
De extraccio de la segondina.	For the extraction of the second born.
Quan la segondina es retenguda deves le enfantament, lahoras cove que tu comandes a la malautae que retengua le sieu ale, e aprop fay aquela stornudar am condizi, e strenh la tua ma sobre la boca de lu e sobre las nars de lu, e si per aysso es defora eyssit, bo es.	When the second child is retained, you must induce labor, and then command the patient to hold her breath, and soon apply that coughing remedy, and strongly place your hand over the mouth and nose of the patient. If by this means she delivers, it is good.
E sino, lahoras tu pren una ola e perfora en la cuberta un trauc e pausa en aquela erbas ubrent la boca de la mayre, ayssi cum calament e ruda e anet e camamilla e scicados arabic e cassia lignea e santaurea.	And if not, then take a rod and perforate in the cover one hole and place it over burning herbs near the mouth of the mother, as with a calamus reed, ruda, anet, camomilla, scikats Arabic, cassia lignea, and santaura.
Totas aquestas erbas o alcunas de lor sian submersas en aygua en la ola, e pausa aquela sobre le foc.	All these herbs or some of them may be submerged in water in the rod, and place that over the fire.
E aprop pausa una canula de canaviera en la boca de la mayre, e tengua aquela entro que la evapor vengua a la concavitat de la mayre.	And then place a canal of reed in the mouth of the major artery, and keep it there so that the vapor comes to the cavity of the major artery.
E aprop fay aquela stornudar ayssi cum havem dit, e la segondina sira fora-getada am velocitat.	And then perform the sneezing in the way we have said before, and the second one will come quickly.
Mays si roman aprop aquesta curacio e no es eyssida, lahoras tu comanda a la matrona que submerge la sua ma sinistra en oli sizami o en micellage de altea, e aprop entrometa aquela en le conh e queresca am aquela la segondina, e cum aquela auras trobada, lahoras pren la e exten aquela pauc a pauc Mays si es annexsa en le preon de la mayre, lahoras entrometa la sua ma segon que havem recomtat, e quan aura trobat la segondina, extragua aquela petit a petit segon rectetut per so que la mayre no caja deves la atraccio vehement.	If this cure does not succeed, then command the midwife to submerge her left hand in sesame oil or poppyseed oil, and then insert that into the wound and seek out the second object with it, and do as you have found. If it is attached to the major artery, then insert your hand according to what we have recommended, and when you have found the second object, extract it little by little so that the major artery does not suffer from the extraction.
Abantz cove que sia permudada als costatz dreyt e sinestre am facilitat.	Place it between the right and left sides with ease.
E aprop sia ajustat en la quantitat de atraccio, quar ela obedira e evasira de adhirencia.	And then adjust the amount of extraction so that it obeys and avoids adherence.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada, nos ja havem recomtat la curacio am sturnutacio e am medicacio de la ola am erbas.	And if the mouth of the main vein is constricted, we have already recommended treatment by fumigation and medicinal treatment with herbs.
Mays si no es fora-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recomtadas, lahoras guarda te que no fetigues sobre aquela en iteracio de abstracio, mays empero cove que aquo que es eyssit de lu a la boca de la mayre lies a la coyssa de la femna, e aprop cristeriza aquela am enguent e tetrafarmacon; quar aquel fara poyrir aquela aprop alcus dias e sira dissolvuda e sira fora-getada.	And if none of the causes we have recommended occur, then guard that you do not fatigue it in repetition of abstraction, but rather apply it to the mouth of the main vein and place it on the woman's thigh, and accordingly cristallize it with ointment and tetrafarmacological substance; for that will cause it to be absorbed within a few days and be eliminated.
Mays quan se poyreys, es de lu elevada mala audor al cap, e al estomac, e aquo ledeys la malauta; e adonc cove que sian aministradas sub-fumiguacios e convenientz ad aquo.	And when you apply it, raise the bad humor to the head and to the stomach, and this leads to the disease; then you should administer sub-fumigations and what is suitable for this.
Mays alcus dels Antics ja so esproatz sub-fumigacio de nazitort e de figuas seccas.	And some of the Ancients already recommended sub-fumigation with nazaroot and dry figs.
Forma de instrument am le qual la femna es sub-fumiguada deves la retentio de mestruas e de la segondina:	Form of the instrument with which the woman is sub-fumigated, she should retain menstruation and the second exhalation:
Sia fayta de veyre o de eram.	Let it be made by sight or by touch.
E sia pausada la extremitat subtil en le conh e la extremitat ampla sobre le foc, e la sub-fumiguacio sia pausada sobre las brazas del foc.	Let the finer end be placed over the cohen and the wider end under the fire, and let the sub-fumigation be placed over the flames.
E tengua aquela entro que sia consumida aquela sub-fumiguacio e itera·n autra.	Let him hold it there until the sub-fumigation is consumed, and then repeat if necessary.
De curacio del cul del enfant no-perforat.	For the treatment of an unperforated child's anus.
Motz enfantz naysso e les culs de lu no so perforatz, les quals ya ciphac subtil e opilat.	When the child cries and its anus is not perforated, those should be opened subtly and gently.
Adonc cove a la matrona que perfore am le sieu dit aquel ciphac; e sino, perfora aquel am spatum agut, e guarda se que no toque le lacert.	Then have the midwife perforate with her own said opening; otherwise, use a sharp probe, and ensure that she does not touch the ligament.
E aprop pause sobre aquel lana enfusa en vi e oli; e aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia senat.	And then place something warm and oily over it; and apply ointment to it until it is set.
Mays si temes que sia opilat, lahoras pausa en le trauc una canula per motz dias, e osta la quan le enfant voldra degerir.	But if you fear it is obstructed, then place a catheter in it for several days, and wait until the child wants to defecate.
E ja accideys oppilacio del cul per consolidacio de plagua o de apostema; adonc cove que aquela consolidacio sia inscidida, e aprop sia curada am aquo que avem dit de la curacio e del plom.	And now a fistula of the buttocks occurs due to the consolidation of a plague or abscess; then ensure that this consolidation is incised, and subsequently treated as we have said for the cure and the lead.
De curacio de las fistulas que endeveno dejos.	Of the cure of fistulas that develop wounds.
Las fistulas que endeveno en la partida dejos pus bassa so nodacio e grossetut las quals endeveno prop del cul defora o en l’espazi de la una partida.	The fistulas that develop wounds with pus beneath are nodules and swellings which often occur near the buttocks or in the space of one side.
E es una fistula o motas.	And it is a fistula or spots.
E cum aquela nodacio es antiquada e corr de la humiditat aygosa blanca o poyridura subtil, e alcunas veguadas so de aquestas fistulas alcunas penetrantz.	And when that nodule is old and flows with watery white or subtle rot, sometimes some of these fistulas will penetrate.
E aquelas penetrantz so conogudas per aquo que es eyssit de aquelas per la egressio e per ventosetat; e alcunas vetz use le malaute de egressio, e fort leu es eyssit de aquelas verm.	And those that penetrate are known by the discharge and by the wind condition; sometimes the patient uses the opening, and strongly smells like those with worms.
E so de aquelas fistulas alcunas veguadas en l’espazi penetrantz entro a la vesica, e entro al meat de la vergua; e so de aquelas penetrantz entro la junctura de la coyssa e entro al notz de la coeta.	And of these fistulas, sometimes in the space they penetrate into the bladder, and into the flesh of the groin; and of those that penetrate to the joint of the thigh and to the notch of the buttocks.
E aquo en que es conoguda fistula penetrant entro al cul e no-penetrant, es que tu metas le tieu dit endic en le cul, e entrometas tenta subtil de eram o de ferr en la fistula quan no y es turtuositat.	And in what is known of a fistula penetrating into the anus and non-penetrating, you should insert your finger into the anus, and introduce a thin thread or wire into the fistula when there is no pus.
Mays si en aquela es turtuositat, lahoras entromet en aquela tenta subtil de plom o de pels de caval entro que tu sentas la tenta o le pel en le tieu dit.	And if there is pus in that area, then introduce a thin lead thread or horsehair thread into it, where you feel the thread or hair with your finger.
E si no sentas aquela de tot ni no procezeys del trauc alcuna causa de egestio ni verm ni ventositat, ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras sapias que es no-penetrant, e lahoras coyta te a la curacio.	And if you do not feel that at all, nor any cause of evacuation, or worm, or flatulence as we have said, then know that it is non-penetrating, and proceed to its cure.
E quan la fistula es penetrant entro a la vesica o entro al meat de la vergua, lahoras la significacio de lu es eyssiment de urina de aquela e prohibicio de lu ad aysso que·l loc am medicina sia consolidat.	And when the fistula penetrates into the bladder or into the flesh of the groin, its significance is dribbling urine from there and prohibition thereof until the area with medicine is consolidated.
Mays si es penetrant entro la junctura de la coyssa o entro al os e envencio de dolor en le circuit, lahoras senhal de lu es que la tenta perve entro aqui si en lu no es turtuositat entro al os, e envencio de dolor en le circuit de la partida; e que de lu yeys poyredura tostemps; e que no val en aquela medicacio, ni es consolidada am enguent.	And if it penetrates into the junction of the thigh or into the bone and causes pain in the circuit, its sign is that the thread passes through here if there is no pus in the bone, and pain in the circuit of the limb; and that redness persists over time; and that it does not respond to topical medication, nor is it consolidated with ointment.
E en totas aquelas fistulas penetrant no es curacio de tot, e la curacio de aquelas es trebalh e vanetat dels folyls metges sobre·l qual so fermatz.	And in all those fistulas penetrating them, there is no cure for it, and the cure of those is hard work and frivolity of the leaf doctors over which they are bound.
Mays en aquela que no es penetrant e no antiqua, sanacio am ferr es sperada segon que yeu a tu recomtare, e aquo que ja yeu e proat.	Moreover in that which is not penetrating and not old, healing by iron is hoped for according to what I will recount to you, and what already I have done and attempted.
E es que le malaute jagua entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos e eleva las cambas de lu entro sus, las coyssas sian enclinadas al ventre de lu, e aprop entromet tenta de plom, o de eram si es en la fistula turtuositat, entro que sapias le loc on perve la tenta.	And it is that the patient lies on his back and elevates his legs between his thighs, the hips inclined towards the abdomen, and then insert a lead or iron probe into the fistula if it is tortuous, where you can feel the location where the probe passes.
E si aquela sent le malaute entorn le cuol, lahora cove que tu entrometas le tieu dit endic en le cuol.	And if that location is near the throat, then you must insert the probe at that point in the throat.
E si sentas en le tieu dit la tenta ja per si meteyssa descuberta penetrar, otra aquo que sentas entre le tieu dit e aquela siphac o carn, lahoras sapias certanament que aquela es penetrant; e adonc no trebalhes en aquela, quar no es en aquela sanacio, ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you feel in the probe itself the passage already clearly revealed, or anything between the probe and the siphac or flesh, then you can certainly determine that it is penetrating; and then do not work on that, for there is no healing in that, as we have said.
Mays empero diyssero alcus que es sana en alcus homes tart.	Some may say that it is healthy in some men to have gout.
E de la medicacio per la qual es sperat juvament en lu es que tu ignes cauteri subtil segon le ample de la fistula, ayssi cum es precedit, e intrometas aquel ignit en la fistula entro que pervengua entorn le cuol; e aprop itera aquel doas o tres vetz entro que sapias que ja son adhustas totas aquelas carns ajustadas fistuladas que so semblantz a cana de pluma de ausel.	And for the treatment in which hope of cure is placed, you should use a fine cautery according to the size of the fistula, as previously described, and insert that burning into the fistula until it approaches the vein; then repeatedly do this two or three times until you know that all those tissues around the fistula are sufficiently cauterized and appear like quill feathers.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder entro que en yescan totas aquelas carns que so adhustas, e aprop cura aquela am medicinas la carn engendrantz e consolidantz, e si es sanada, bo es; e sino, lahoras no es sana en degun temps per autra curacio.	And then cure that with a compress wrapped in cloth until all those tissues that are cauterized are completely cooled, and then apply medicine to the flesh generating and consolidating, and if it is cured, well and good; but if not, then it may not be cured in some time by another treatment.
E si la tenta intra, e no penetra entro·l tieu dit le qual es en le cul, e entre aquel e la tenta que es velament spes de carn o de ciphac, e vezes la fistula en aquo que siec la superficia de la codena, lahoras secca la codena del comensament de la fistula, e tu ve seccan am la tenta, e sia en la fistula entro que la seccio pervengua al loc en le qual perve la extremitat de la tenta, e per la tenta es liberat e catz.	And if the probe enters but does not penetrate inside, you have noted which is in the anus, and between that and the probe that is veiled with flesh or skin, dry the fistula in what dries the surface of the anal canal. Then dry the probe itself, and do so in the fistula until the drying reaches the point where the tip of the probe passes through, and by the probe it is released and cauterized.
E aprop mundifiqua aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so asembladas a canula de pena de ausel e no romangua de aquelas alcuna causa.	And then cleanse those fistulated wounds which are similar to an alembic of the female genitalia and do not drain from any of these causes.
Mays si flux de sanc vezes que vengua entre tu e la tua opperacio quan ensideysses aquelas carns, lahoras le milh que sia e del pus leugier instrument es cauterizar am foc o am medicina acuta, quar cauteri am foc ajusta bonas doas habitutz: so es adhustio de aquelas carns ajustadas, e abscizio del sanc exseccacio de las humiditatz.	And if there is a flux of blood greater than that which comes between you and your operation when insides those wounds, then let the more severe and purgative instrument be cauterized with fire or with sharp medicine, for the cautery with fire makes good double adjustment: it both adheres to those tissues properly and stops the bleeding by the excision of humidity.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder o en caus trissat entro que·l loc geta brac, e aprop lahoras cura la plagua am enguentz carn dura engendran e consolidan.	And then cure that which is caused by water enveloped in borders or in third-degree burns around the area, and then cure the wound with an ointment of hard flesh that generates and consolidates.
E so medicinas en las quals so stipticitat e exseccio; quan lahoras es restaurada ja es sanada e no temes iteracio.	And in those medicines which have astringency and excision; when restoration is restored, it is healed, and you fear no recurrence.
Mays si la fistula ja perve entro al preon del cul e es elonguada de lu superficia del cos, lahoras entromet le tieu dit en le cul e inquireys am aquel.	And if the fistula has already pierced through to the perineum and is long from the surface of the body, then insert your finger into the anus and inquire about it.
E donc si centes la tenta e entre tu e ela es velament de ciphac o de carn, e es propda a la penetracio, lahora no es operacio en lu sino segon via di fiducia e de speransa.	And if the tent is set up and between you and her it is of canvas or flesh, and close to the penetration, then this is not an operation in itself but rather according to the way of trust and hope.
La qual causa es aministrar en lu una de tres manieyras: o que cauterize aquela ayssi cum havem dit; o que secces aquela entro que consieguas la conquavitat de lu per que sia a tu possible entrometre las qualcas e la curacio propdana; e no procesiscas mot am seccio per so que no inscidas le lacert contenent le cuol, e que accidisque sobre le malaute eyssiment de la egistio ses voluntat; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit quar fort leu sira sanat; o que elongues aquel velament e mondes aquel pus que seccas aquel entro prop le cul, ayssi cum havem dit, o am tenta o am autre instrument de aguda extremitat, e aprop mondifique aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so en la seccio entro la on podes am percrustacio; e aprop esforsa te a far la restauracio de tota la plagua am seccio, e si le orrifici pus desus no es consolidat, e romangua la fistula uberta en la partida del cul, e sira pus leugier per le malaute.	The cause is to administer in it one of three ways: either cauterize that as we have said; or secrete that until you achieve the cavity of it so that it may be possible for you to introduce the necessary objects and the cure; and do not proceed with mere excision because then you would enter the sac containing the gut, and harm would come about through the malaise against the will of nature; and properly cure that as we have said which is strong and will be healed; or lengthen that veil and clean that pus which secretes that until it is dry near the anus, as we have said, either by tent or by another instrument with a sharp extremity, and properly modify those fistulized tissues which are in the section through which you can percrustate; and properly strive to perform the restoration of the entire wound by excision, and if the opening above is not consolidated and breaks open the fistula at the part of the anus, it will be more easily healed for the malaise.
E alscunas veguadas la fistula es finida segon aquesta manieyra: es quan tu entrometas la tenta en la fistula, e es en le latz del cul entorn la superficia del cos am la codena e en le marge del cul, lahoras pren tenta de perforada extremitat, que es ayssi cum agulha de preparantz les coers segon aquesta forma:	And sometimes the fistula is closed according to this manner: when you introduce the probe into the fistula, and place it in the fold of the buttock near the surface of the body and around the margin of the anus, then take hold of the perforated extremity, which is like a needle preparing the veins according to this form.
e entromet en aquela fiel envolopat de v fiels o entorn aquels; e aprop entromet tenta am fiel en la fistula entro que consiegua la conquavitat de lu.	And introduce it into that fiber包裹着几根线或围绕着这些线；然后将探针蘸上纤维插入瘘管中，直到达到其腔室。
Mays si es penetrant en le marge del cul prop dedintz, lahoras tu extratz le fiel de aquel trauc ayssi que tu intrometas le tieu dit en le cul; e extraguas la extremitat del fiel e ajustes las duas extremitatz essemps, e estrenh cascuna, e leyssa aquo per un dia o per dos, e quan mays inscideys le fiel en la carn, estrenh be aquel entro que aquelas carns sian inscididas las quals so entre doas extremitatz del fiel e que cajan.	But if it penetrates into the margin of the anus quite inside, then you extract the fiber as you introduce your thumb into the anus; extract the end of the fiber and adjust both ends evenly, strengthen each, and let this be for one or two days. When more fibers are incised into the flesh, strongly reinforce that part where those flesh parts between the two ends of the fiber are incised.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia consolidada e sanada.	And then cure the wound once it is consolidated and healed.
Mays si le orrifici de la fistula no es penetrant, lahoras fay aquel penetrar, en qualque manieyre sia a tu preparat, sino que sia mot en le preon, quar no es a tu que fassas aquo per que no inscidas le lacert; e aprop fay am aquela entro que sia sanada.	If the fistula's openings are not penetrable, then make them penetrable in any way you prepare, but ensure it is moist on the outside, for it is not your task to do this so that you do not get burned; and place something inside that will help it heal.
La forma de spatum spinos am lo qual es fenduda la fistula: la curvitat del qual es mot aguda e l’autra partida es no-aguda, per so que no inscidas aquo que no es necessari, ayssi cum vezes.	The shape of the spine of the splint on which the fistula is opened: the curvature of which is acute and the other part is not acute, so that you do not get burned where it is not necessary, as you see.
De sutura de emorroydas en las quals corra sanc en la inscizio de aquelas.	For the suturing of hemorrhoids where there is pain at the site of those hemorrhoids.
Emorroydas so segon dos manieyras, quar o so entre le cul semblantz aysi que es de carbos, o quays aquelas sian cum a gras de rasim.	Hemorrhoids can be classified in two ways, for some resemble charcoal and others are like the fat of a date.
E de aquelas so petitas e grans, e que le sanc corr de aquelas tostemps e es una, e so motas, e so fora·l cul, e en las extremitatz de lu.	And of these, some are small and large, and the pain comes from them at times and is one, and they are motas, and are external to the anus, and in their extremities.
Mays empero aquelas que so foro le cul so segon las mes de pauca humiditat, de las quals corr aygua citrina o un petit de sanc am cos continuabla, e so segon la color del cos.	But the ones that are external to the anus vary according to their degree of dryness, from which yellowish water or a bit of continuous blood flows, and they are classified according to the color of the body.
E la curacio de aquela que es dedintz le cuol es que comandes al malaute que se assela e que se exprema entro que le cuol yesca e las emoroydas apparescan a tu.	And the cure for that which is inside the bowels is that you command the patient to lie down and to press between where the belly bulges and the veins appear.
Adonc tu te coyte e suspen am uncis o que tenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, e aprop incideys aquelas deves las suas razitz.	Then you knead and suspend with your fingers those that you feel under your nails, and then strike those veins with their roots.
Mays si les uncis no so tengutz en aquelas per la humiditat de lor e mollificacio de aquelas, lahoras pren aquelas am drap aspre o am coto o am flassada de lana, e extratz aquelas am les tieus ditz, e aprop inscideys aquelas e polveriza sobre lor alcunas polveras caudas aprop la inscizio, per que sian ad aquelas en loc de cauteri; o cauteriza aquelas segon que es precedit en le capitol de cauterizar.	But if the fingers cannot feel those veins due to their humidity and softness, then take white cloth or thin or woollen flax, and extract those veins with the tweezers mentioned, and then strike them and powder some caustic powders near the strike, so that they may act as a cautery; or cauterize those according to what is preceded in the chapter on cauterization.
E aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And then cure those with the other remedy until they are healed.
E si le cul no obezeys a egressio, lahoras cristerisa le malaute am cristeri en le qual sia mordicacio petita, e sia lavat am aquel aquo que es en le cuol e que obezesca a egressio leugierament quan le malaute s’esprem.	And if the buttock does not respond to evacuation, then cauterize the patient with a small bite of cautery where the pain is felt, and wash it with that fluid from the bowels which responds to evacuation when the patient strains.
Mays si las emorroydas so defora le cul, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiera, e es que tu prenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, o que prenguas aquelas am unci, e inscidas aquelas, e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit entro que sian sanadas.	If the hemorrhoids are outside the buttocks, when the cause is slight, then you take those with your finger, or take them with forceps, insert them, and afterwards cure them with what we have said until they are healed.
E aquel que avoreys inscizio, cove que aministres sutura de lor segon aquesta manieyra: pren fiel envolopat e entromet aquel en agulha e aprop extratz las emorroydas a las partidas dessus, e fay aquel penetrar am la agulha en la razit del autra part, e envolveys las doas extramitatz del fiel en la partida pus dejos de la agulha, e so latitudinalment; e estrenh la emorroyda am strectura fort, e aprop noza le fiel e extratz la agulha.	And if you have an incision, make sure to suture them according to this manner: take thread wrapped around and insert it into the needle, then extract the hemorrhoids from the parts above, and make the thread penetrate through the other part, wrapping both ends of the thread in the part below the needle, and securing it longitudinally; strengthen the hemorrhoid with strong suturing, and afterwards remove the needle.
E fay aquo a totas, e layssa de aquelas una e no la cozes, per so que la superfluitat del sanc corra de aquela.	And do this to all of them, leaving one unsewn, so that the excess blood from the wound flows through it.
E aprop pausa sobre le cul drap enfus en oli rozat o en cerot; e pausa aquel sobre·l cuol e comanda al malaute que·s repause.	And place a soaked cloth in olive oil or ointment over the buttocks; place it there and command the patient to rest.
E aprop layssa aquela entro que caja; e quan es casuda, cura aquelas am enguentz o am autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then let that which is inside remain; when it is ripe, cure those with ointment or other remedy until it is healed.
De curacio de fistulas.	Of the treatment of fistulas.
Motas veguadas accideys per exseccacio de fenda o per costriccio de natura.	Injuries caused by the opening of a wound or by natural constriction.
E cum so antiquadas e no val en aquela medicina, lahoras cove que tu razas aquelas am la puncta de spatum o am la tua ungla entro que sian faytas humidas e sia hostada de aquelas la escorsa pus desus, la qual prohibeys aquelas de consolidacio; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian consolidadas.	And since they are old and not useful in that medicine, you should scratch them with the point of a needle or with your fingernail while they are wet, and then apply those from the outer side over them, which prevent their healing. Then treat those that have healed.
Lahoras tu osta aquelas am razio pus vehement que la primieyra entro que mot sancno e sian excoriadas; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	And when you scratch them with a sharper tool than the first, while they are still bleeding and irritated; then treat those that have healed.
De curacio de almesamir, so es clau.	Of the treatment of abscesses, this is key.
Sapias que alamermar, so es clau, e no es si no notz redon segon la color del cors semblant a cap de claviel, e es fayt en tot le cors e majorment en las partidas dejos les pes e als ditz, e endeve per aquels dolor deves le anament.	Know that an abscess, this is key, and it is not something else but a round swelling resembling the head of a nail, and it forms in the entire body, especially in the areas around the feet and fingers, and because of these pains, you must treat them.
E adonc cove que sia inscidit aquo que es en le circuit del clau, e sia tengut am les forfexs o am unci, e sia eradicat de la sua razit; e aprop cura aquel.	And then cut out what is in the circuit of the key, and hold it with tongs or forceps, and eradicate it from its root; and then treat that.
E si vols, cauteriza le segont que es precedit en le sieu capitol.	And if you wish, cauterize the next as preceded in its chapter.
Mays de veruca es eminencia petita aspre fistulada redonda sobre la superficia del cos, e motas veguadas veno en las mas dels enfantz.	More commonly, a veruca is a small, rough, rounded prominence on the surface of the body, and veins show visible spots in most children.
E curacio de lu es que estendas e inscidas aquela, o que estrenhas aquela am fiel o am pel entro que caja.	And the treatment for it is to extend and excise that, or to tighten it with a thread or with a needle that holds it.
E si vols, cauteriza aquo, segon que havem dit, am foc o am medicina acuta.	And if you wish, cauterize this as we have said, with fire or with sharp medicine.
E ja so eradicadas enversas e no-enversas am le instrument le qual yeu diyre.	And already, both against and not against the instrument which you will say.
Mays formica es eminencia petita feutrada o fistulada grossa sobre la superficia del cos anant mot en le preon, e quan le freg atroba aquela es centit en lu semblant de mordificacio de formigua, e es fayta entorn le cos.	More commonly, a formica is a small, fibrous or fistulated prominence on the surface of the body, and when you touch it, it resembles the sting of an ant, and is made around the body.
E curacio de lu es que prenguas una canula de pena de auca o de pena de voltor, e sia fort, e pausa aquela sobre la formigua entro que la contengua le cercle de la canula de las partidas de lu; e aprop revolveys la tua ma am la canula entro que inscidas aquo que es en le circuit de la formigua, e pauses aquela en le preon de la carn, e que eradiques la formigua de la sua razit.	And the treatment is that you take a needle of oak or willow, strong, and place it over the blister between which you contain it with the circle of the needle from the parts of the leg; then return your hand around the needle as you insert what is in the circuit of the blister, and place it in the prominence of the flesh, and that you eradicate the blister from its root.
E si vols, fay aquo am canula de eram o de ferr segon aquesta forma:	And if you wish, do this with a needle of elm or iron according to this form:
Sia la partida desus de la canulha trahent a subtilitat, sorda (so es no-perforada), envolopada per so que sobre le dit la aprencio de lu sia ablaviada e la revolucio de aquela.	Let the upper part of the needle be fine, blunt (i.e., non-perforated), wrapped so that above it the learning of the needle is covered and its revolution is reversed.
E si vols cauteriza la formiga segon que es denant dit en la cauterizacio de atheyl en le capitol de cauteri.	And if you wish, cauterize the blister as previously mentioned in the cauterization of atherosclerosis at the head of the cautery.
De forma dels instrumentz que so aministratz a dar cristeri.	In the manner of the instruments that you administer to the patient.
Alcunas veguadas es fayt cristeri de argent o de lato o de eram fondut o malleat; e alcunas veguadas es fayt de aquels instrumentz petit e gran segon aquels als quals so aministratz, quar aquel que es aministrat en la curacio dels petitz enfants sia petit; e de aquel dels quals los culs son freuls o doloyrozes, les cristeris de aquels sian petitz.	Sometimes the cautery is made of silver or tin or elm that has been melted or hammered; sometimes it is made of those instruments small and large according to those you administer, for the one used in the treatment of small children should be small; and for those whose buttocks are swollen or painful, the cauteries for them should also be small.
La forma de cristeri gran e pauc:	The form of striking hard but few:
Le cap de la canula de lu desus en le qual es liada la borsa sia ampla segon aquesta manieyra; e sia a lu distinacio la on la borsa es liada ayssi cum vezes.	The head of the cannula above which the bag is tied should be broad according to this manner; and it should be placed so that the bag is tied in this way as you see.
E la extremitat de lu pus dejus, la qual es entromesa en le cul, sia sorda (so es no-uberta) mot leon, atrasent a subtilita; e en la un del latz de lu sian dos traucs, e en l’autre costat un trauc, e sia la amplesa del trauc segon la groseza dels rays e pus gros un petit.	And the lower end of it, which is inserted into the anus, should be closed (i.e., not open) like a lion's mouth, with some subtlety; and on one side of the tube there are two openings, and on the other side one opening, and the width of the opening should correspond to the size of the rays, with the larger one being slightly smaller.
E sia la borsa en la qual sian pausadas las medicinas de vesica de bestia o de pel de ovelha, e la razit de lu sia un palm.	And the bag in which the medicines for the beast's bladder or sheepskin are placed should be about a palm in size.
E sia perforada per motz traucs ayssi cum es revolvuda; e si l’espazi le qual es entre les traucs la grossetut del dit.	And it should be pierced with several openings as if it were wound around; and the space between the openings should be about the thickness of a finger.
E aprop entromet en aquels traucs fiel fort de fiel cru le qual sia de detz fiels, o enviro aquels; e ajusta am aquel la borsa; e quan es pausada en lu la borsa, sia streyt en le cap del cristeri entre dos distingentz am fort costriccio, e aprop cristeriza am aquel quascun trauc: Mays la qualitat de cristerizar am aquel es que tu omples la borsa de la medicina, que sia escalfada segon la quantitat de la tolleransa del malaute; e guarda te que no sia trop cauda ni trop freja.	Then place strong raw honey through those openings, using ten pieces of honeycomb or something similar; adjust the bag to that; when the bag is placed in it, stretch the head of the striker between two distinct points with firm tension, and then strike each opening: More importantly, the quality of striking should be such that you fill the bag with the medicine, which should be warmed according to the quantity that the patient can tolerate; make sure it is neither too viscous nor too cold.
E aprop le malaute sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos, e eleva las suas cambas en sus e pausa dejos lu un cuer sobre le qual ja so les homes o un lansol; e aprop unta la extramitat del cauteri am oli o am album de huou o am mucellage de fenugrec o de semblantz; e aprop entromet aquel en le cul am facilitat, e aprop le ministre prengua la borsa e exprema aquel am doas mas e essemps am vehemencia entro que sia evacuat en le budelh tot aquo que es en le cristeri; e aprop extra le cristeri e le malaute leva las suas cambas a la paret.	And the patient is supine on his back, elevates his legs and places him on a cushion or a pillow; then applies oil or honey wax or fenugreek seed paste to the tip of the cautery; inserts it into the anus carefully, then the minister takes the bag and squeezes out two more doses with great force so that all in the crista is evacuated into the intestine; finally removes the crista and the patient raises his legs against the wall.
E si la medicina forsa aquel a eyssiment, tengua le tant quant poyra; e si dorm am aquel per tota una nueyt, es mays derier en juvament.	And if the medicine forces it to evacuation, have it as much as it can; and if one sleeps all through the night, it is more effective in recovery.
Mays si tu cristerizas aquel en las malautias de solucio de ventre e l’eyssiment de lu le coyta, lahoras tu itera le cauteri entro que sia sanat.	More so if you intreatize that in the illnesses of solution of the belly and its evacuation, then iterate the cautery until it is healed.
E si en le cul so emorroydas o apostemas ledens, lahoras sia le cristeri mot subtil e leon, dels cristeris am les quals les enfantz so criterisatz.	And if in the anus there are hemorrhoids or abscesses, then use a fine cautery of iron, among those cauteries which children are accustomed to.
De curacio de las plaguas.	Of the treatment of wounds.
Yeu ja e dit en la divisio de la curacio de las plaguas aquo que convenia al libre, e yeu dic assi la curacio de aquelas am ma e am medicinas segon le conpliment.	And I have already said in the division of the treatment of wounds what is suitable for the free and the bound, and now I speak of the treatment of those who are more severe and require medicines.
Donc dic que las plaguas son diversificadas segon aquo en que son faytas las plaguas e segon le loc sobre le qual cazo las plaquas.	Therefore, it is said that wounds are diversified according to what they are caused by and according to the place where the plaques occur.
E las causas per que motas vetz son faytas las plaguas so ayssi cum getament de peyra, o inscisio d’espaza o de cotel, o percussio am lansa, o am fustz, o am sageta, o semblantz ad aquels de motas causas.	And the causes why wounds are made are thus: by a stone impact, or a slash with a sword or dagger, or a blow with a lance, or a club, or an arrow, or similar to those causes of impacts.
Mays las plaguas que so en les locz del cos so ayssi cum plagua la qual catz sobre le cap, o·l col, o·l pietz, o·l ventre, o·l fitge, e semblantz ad aquels dels membres.	More specifically, the wounds that occur in parts of the body are thus: a wound that occurs on the head, or the neck, or the foot, or the abdomen, or the thigh, and similar to those of the limbs.
E yeu so recomtant la curacio de alcunas plaguas per que pauses aquela ratiocinacio e regla sobre las autras plaguas.	And I hereby recommend the treatment of some wounds, as you will apply that reasoning and rule to other wounds.
E yeu comensare de las plaguas del cap simplas, quar la rememoracio de las compostas vindra al comensament del tertz capitol.	And I will begin with simple head ailments, for the recall of compound conditions will come at the beginning of the third chapter.
Donc dic que quan accideys en le cap plagua simpla e no es fractura, lahoras considera: si es per getament de peyra o de semblant, e ja ha trinquada la codena tant solament e es gran plagla e temes sobre aquel malaute havinement de apostema caut, lahoras tu te coyta e fleubotoma la cephalica tantost, e no tardas aquo; e extrats ad aquel del sanc segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu si no mes alcuna causa prohibent de fleubotomia, majorment si·l sanc que es eyssit de la plagua es pauc.	So say that when an injury to the head occurs and it is a simple headache and not a fracture, then consider: if it is due to a stone or something similar, and has caused swelling so much as to be a large bruise and you fear the sudden onset of an abscess in that area, then you should incise and perform bloodletting on the cephalic vein immediately, and do not delay this; and draw out from it as much blood as the strength of it allows, unless some reason prevents bloodletting, especially if the blood drawn from the bruise is limited.
E sia la flaubotomia del contrari de la partida plaguada; e guardase le malaute de replecio e de vi e de viandas grossas.	And the bloodletting should be on the opposite side of the injured area; and one must guard against swelling and against heavy food and drink.
Mays si de la minuicio prohibeys alcuna causa, lahoras sia aminorat de la vianda e no apropinque a carn ni a vi.	But if some reason prevents reduction, then diminish the food and do not approach meat or drink.
E pausa sobre la plagua, si a lu accideys apostema caut, coto enfus en oli rozat solet o en vi en le qual es stipticat.	And place your hand over the bruise, if an abscess has formed, applying oil rubbed with rosemary or in wine that contains astringents.
Mays si est segur de apostema caut, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua, si es recent am le sieu sanc e le ayre no ha mudat aquela la polvera la qual yeu recomtare aprop petit.	But if it is certain that an abscess will form, then place yourself over the wound, if it is recent with its own secretion and the air has not changed there spread the powder which I will describe to you shortly.
E si le ayre ja ha mudada aquela, lahoras pausa sobre alscus enguentz entro que sia sanada.	But if the air has already changed there, then place yourself over some ointments until it is healed.
Mays si la plagua es gran o es per inscizio d’espaza e de semblantz, e no so ajustadas las labias de lu per puvils, lahoras ajusta aquelas am sutura segon que yeu recomtare de la sutura de lor.	But if the wound is large or due to a rupture and the edges do not close properly with stitches, then adjust those with sutures according to the method of suturing that I will describe.
Mays si la plagua ja es discuberta del os e pen, e no es retencio de lu sino un petit suspensori, lahoras inscideys aquela e aprop cura la plagua am medicinas e restaura la carn aprop en loc de codena, e comanda al malaute que sia pescut de viandas en las quals es groceza: caps e formen coyt e semblantz a lor, entro que sia compost.	But if the wound is already open to bone and flesh, and it is not retention but only a small suspensory ligament, then cut into that and soon cure the wound with medicines and restore the flesh in its place. Command the patient to eat foods in which he takes pleasure: porridge and vegetables similar to them, until he recovers.
E si atrobas en la codena putrefaccio e no adhereys al os, lahoras tu inscideys tot aquo poyrit e geta aquo, e aprop cura aquo.	And if you find putrefaction in the flesh and it does not adhere to the bone, then cut out all of that and remove it, and soon cure it.
Mays si en aquestas plaguas es arteria o vena de la qual fluxs de sanc pot evenir, e no es abscindida per medicinas, lahoras tu inquier sobre la arteria, e si atrobas aquela no-inscidida, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am spatum, o lia aquela; e si necessitat te provoca que aquo que havem dit no comfereys, lahoras tu cauteriza entro que·l sanc sia abscidit.	If in these plaques the artery or vein from which the flux of blood can occur is present and cannot be treated by medicines, then you inquire about the artery. If you find that uncut one, then cut it with a blade or ligate it; if necessity prompts you that what we have said does not apply, then cauterize where the blood flow has been stopped.
E si aquestas plaguas son simplas e petitas, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiere; enayssi que tu polverizas sobre aquelas aquesta polvera, quar consolidada aquela denant que l’ayre mude aquelas.	If these plaques are small and few, the cause is light; sprinkle this powder over them, for before the air changes, it will consolidate those.
E la manieyra de la polvera es aquesta: recipe oli de enses partida una, de sanc de drago partida doas, de caus no-extincta partidas tres; sia tot mot trissat e crivellat, e de lu sia la plagua omplida, e sia constrengida per bona constriccio entro que be sobre aquela aderesca, e sia coagulada am le sanc.	The manner of the powder is this: take oil of enses divided one part, blood of dragon divided two parts, and caustic divided three parts; mix all these in equal parts and sift them, then fill the plaques with this mixture, confine it well by a good binding over that to which it adheres, and coagulate it with blood.
E aprop strengeys aquela desus am pulvils e leyssa aquela, e no la deslias mentre esta ayssi que no es apostemada, quar no es eredicada de lu la medicina entro que sia sanada.	Then strengthen it above with powder and leave it, and do not remove it while it is not coagulated, for the medicine will not be effective until it is healed.
E alcuna vetz fa aquo sola cautz, quan no es a tu en present enses e sanc de drago.	And sometimes this is done alone with a cautery, when it is not possible to see or touch the wound.
E ja fa aquesta meteyssa operacio en las grans plaguas quan conveneys que sia pausada sobre aquelas e sian streytas, e so plaguas recentz am le lor sanc, las quals le ayre no ha alteradas.	And this operation is performed on large wounds when you determine that they should be paused over those and stretched, and on recent wounds whose blood has not been altered by the air.
E si le ayre las ha alteradas, e majorment quan es en temps d’estiu, lahoras no es entencio a la posicio de aquesta polvera, mays adonc cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit, enayssi que tu pauses sobre aquelas alcus enguents degistius, o que pauses sobre aquelas pols de la farina del ordi am aygua e mel entro que getan poyredura; e aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And if the air has altered them, and especially when it is in the summer season, then I do not place this powder in its position. But then cure those as we have said, try to pause over those alcaus enguents degistius, or pause over those pols of the flour of ordi in water and honey that ferment; and then cure those among the other treatments until they are healed.
Mays si accideys am la plagua fractura en os, e es petita, lahoras tu extratz aquo am gesti.	But if there is a fracture in the bone of the wound, and it is small, then you extract this with forceps.
E yeu diyre la cura de las fracturas del cap en aquo que es envenidor.	And I will speak of the treatment for fractures of the head in what is venomous.
De las plaguas del col.	Of the wounds of the neck.
Mays si la plagua accideys en le col, lahoras no es en lu differencia en medicacio, e entre la plagua del cap quan es simpla.	If the wound occurs in the neck, there is no difference in treatment, and between head wounds when they are simple.
Mays si ja le nervi del col es inscis o arteria, lahoras si es nervi, no es en lu engen sino que sia evitada curacio de lu am aquo que fa vehement stipticitat, ayssi cum ziniar e zegi que es vetriol e semblantz a lor quar nozo als nervis e contrazo aquel.	But if the nerve of the neck is incised or an artery, when it is a nerve, there is no simple cure but that it should be avoided to treat it in such a way as zinc and zegi which are vitriol and resemble them in their sharpness against those nerves.
E no pauses sobre la plagua alcuna causa de tot freja, quar la sustancia dels nervis es freja e la continuacio de lu es am le cervel, le qual es le pus aut de totz les membres.	And do not place any cause over the wound from cold, for the substance of the nerves is cold and their continuity is in the brain, which is the core of all body parts.
E si’ aquo am que es curat de medicinas leugieras, ayssi cum es caus lavada am aygua dousa, alcuna veguada enfusa en oli rozat o no-rozat, e thucia quan es lavada am aygua dousa e las autras peyras minarantz segon aquesta manieyra, e enguentz humitz.	And if it is to be treated with light medicines, such as a wash with cold water twice, some times infused in olive oil (roasted or unroasted), and then applied with a compress when washed with cold water and the other toes in this manner, apply a moist ointment.
Mays si la plagua es gran, lahoras aministra sutura, o coarta las labias de lu, e aprop cura aquela am pulvils entro que sia sanada.	But if the wound is large, then administer stitches, or draw the edges of the wound together, and subsequently treat it with powders until it is healed.
Mays si a la plagua es profunditat o accideys en lu a la pus bassa partida poyredura, lahoras perfora aquela en le loc mays depremegut.	If there is depth to the wound or accidents at the lower part of the abscess, then perforate it in the most swollen area.
Mays si en la plagua ja es inscisa arteria e es conseguit flux de sanc, lahoras separa o secca aquela, o lia aquela, o cauteriza aquela si necessitat te provoca ad aquo.	If in the wound a vein is already incised and there is a flow of blood, then separate or dry it out, or ligate it, or cauterize it if necessity prompts you to do so.
Mays si ja ha insciditz les spondils del golayro o tot, e so salvadas las venas del col, lahoras tu ajusta las labias de la codena am sutura sobre la cana del golayro e no toques aquel; abantz egala aquel e reduzeys aquel sobre la sua figura natural, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent, e leyssa aquela per alcus jorns; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz en les quals es stipticitat e excitacio entro que sia sanat.	If the vertebrae of the shoulder are already incised or all, and the veins of the neck are saved, then you adjust the flaps of the wound by suturing over the bone of the shoulder and do not touch that; bandage it and return it to its natural figure, and strongly strengthen it with proper structure, and leave it for some days; then cure it with ointments in which there is astringency and excitation until it is healed.
Mays si la plagua ja en le os a fayta enprecio, lahoras percuireys aquela, e lahoras si en lu ha fragmentz de hos, extratz totz aquels que podes de lor; e aquo que a tu no es apparelhat, leyssa aquo entro que la plagua se poyrisca, e sia separat e la egrecio de lu sia alleujada.	If the wound in the bone has already become infected, then probe it, and if there are fragments of bone in it, extract all that you can from it; what your hand cannot reach, leave it until the wound becomes purulent, and is separated and the infection around it alleviated.
E si la plagua es recent lahoras polveriza sobre aquela polvera la qual t’e recomtada.	And if the wound is recent, then powder it with the powder that is recommended.
Mays si en la plagua es fayta fistula, lahoras cura aquela am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra aprop en le sieu capitol.	But if in the wound a fistula is formed, then cure that as well, and the remedy for it will be mentioned shortly in its own chapter.
De las plaguas del col o de semblantz quan fayta entre las spallas e es fayta am spaza o am cotel o am lansa o am semblantz.	Of the wounds of the neck or similar, when made between the shoulders and are caused by spatha or by couteau or by lance or by similar.
Si es percussio de lansa o de cotel, e vezes de lu la profunditat, lahoras considera mays si de la plagua yeys ventositat quan le malaute elena; lahoras sapias que la plagua es mortal.	If it is a wound from a spatha or couteau, and you determine its depth, then consider more whether the wound has ventosity when the evil enters; then know that the wound is fatal.
E si en lu no es profunditat e la plagua es recent am le sieu sanc, lahoras tu pauses en lu de la primieyra horo polvera, e no strenhas aquel per que no sia le sanc retengut en la profunditat de lu e que retorne al cor e que aucigua le malaute, mays pausa en lu enguent atractiu, e deslia aquela doas veguadas le dia.	And if there is no depth in it and the wound is recent with its bleeding, then you apply powder for the first hour, and do not press on it so that the blood is not retained in the depth of the wound and returns to the heart and brings back the evil again; instead, apply an attractive ointment and remove it after two days.
E si l’enguent no es a tu present, lahoras tu pausa en le orrifici de la plagua coto viel per que sucque aquo que yeys de las humiditatz; e fay que le malaute dorma sobre la plagua per que corra aquo que es en lu ajustat.	And if the ointment is not present, then pause at the openings of the wound like an old man so that what comes from the humidity may flow; and make the patient sleep on the wound so that what is within him flows appropriately.
Mays si ja de la plagua son passatz tres dias o mays e no accideys al malaute spasme ni tremor de cor mal ni strictura de ale, e vezes las autras dispozicios bonas de lu, lahoras sapias que plagua es salva; e adonc cura aquela am calguas e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanada.	But if from the wound more than three days have passed and you do not observe spasms or tremor of the bad heart nor constriction of the windpipe, and often use other good dispositions for it, then you may know that the wound is healed; and then treat that with garlic and the other cure until it is healed.
Mays si la sanacio de lu es excusada, e ja tot temps es uberta, lahoras sapias que ja es fayta fistula; cura donc aquela per le sieu capitol.	But if the healing of the wound is impossible, and all the time it remains open, you may know that a fistula has formed; treat it then according to its own chapter.
E si la plagua es per inscisio de spaza o de cotel, e es simpla en la superficia del pietz o del dos, lahoras cura aquela am aquo que es precedit de sutura, si es gran, o am polvera, si es petita.	And if the wound is from a stab or a cut, and is simple on the surface of the foot or the thigh, then treat it with what is preceded by suturing, if it is large, or with powder, if it is small.
Mays si ja ha fayta enprecio en le os, e so ja de lu inscizas pessas, lahoras tu torqua la plagua e coyta ad extrayre aquelas pessas, si so separadas.	But if it has already set in the bone, and you incise badly, then twist the wound and pull to extract those pieces, if they are separate.
Mays si no so separadas, lahoras leyssa las entro que se poyresca la plagua, que la extraccio de lor es alleujada.	But if they are not separated, let them lie still until the swelling subsides, as their extraction is alleviated.
E de las autras plaguas accidentz en les autres membres le juvament en curacio es le juvament de aquo que havem dit.	And for other swellings in other limbs the cure is the treatment we have said.
De las plaguas del ventre.	Of the swellings of the abdomen.
L’indisposicio la qual accideys en le ventre es o gran, o pauc, o migiera.	The discomfort that occurs in the abdomen is either severe, slight, or moderate.
De la gran alcunas veguadas yeys le budel o nervi del budel, per que es fayta intromissio de lor e la sutura de lor esser pus vehement e pus subtil.	For the severe case, sometimes cut the intestine or nerve of the intestine, so that there is an intervention in them and the stitching should be more vigorous and finer.
E disrupcio petita es fayta dificil per autra manieyra, e siec se que la reduccio de lor es pus dificil, si no te coytes de la intromissio de lor al sieu loc tantost, quar se ubre e es engrossat per que le intrament de lu es fayt difficil.	And for the small disruption, it is made difficult by another method. I believe that reducing them is more difficult if you do not immediately avoid the intervention in them at their place, as they open up and become swollen, making the instrument difficult to use.
E donc la milhor disrupcio es migiera, quar en aquela no es dificil la reduccio del budel, ayssi cum es dificil en las doas specias denant ditas.	And therefore, the best disruption is moderate, for in that case, the reduction of the intestine is not difficult, unlike in the two species mentioned before.
E sapias que sutura del ventre es segon quatre manieyras, mays doas suturas son comunas que conveneysso en suturas de las autras plaguas del cors.	And know that the stitch of the abdomen is according to four ways, but two stitches are common and suitable for stitching the other parts of the body.
E duas autras suturas proprias comunican a las autras plaguas, mays empero so mays proprias en la sutura del ventre.	And two other stitches proper communicate with the other parts, but more properly own in the stitch of the abdomen.
E yeu recomti a tu quascuna am exposicio e declaracio.	And I advise you for each exposure and declaration.
Donc dic que quan la plagua es petita e es eyssit alcuna causa del budel per aquela, e es fayt dificil a reduzir aquel, lahoras aquo es en una de doas manieyras: o per parvitat de la disrupcio ayssi cum havem dit, o quan al budel es venguda inflacio per la frigiditat de l’ayre.	So say that when the wound is small and a part of the intestine has herniated through it, making it difficult to reduce it back, then this is in one of two ways: either due to the smallness of the disruption as we have said, or when the intestine becomes inflamed due to the coldness of the air.
E donc quan aquo es ayssi, lahora cove que tu scalfes aquel enayssi que tu submerges una sponga ho drap humit en aygua tebeza sola, o que coguas en aygua squinant, e cyperum, e spic, e embroques am aquela le budel entro que la imflacio sia resolvuda.	And when this is so, then know that you should attempt to submerge a sponge or cloth soaked in pure wine, or gather juniper, spice, and brookweed, and place the intestine into it until the inflammation resolves.
E alcunas veguadas fa aquo vi en le qual ha stipticitat, e es milhor que la aygua sola en resolucio de la imflacio.	And sometimes in such cases, wine is used for stopping the inflammation, and it is better than water alone in resolving the inflammation.
E donc cum tu vezes la imflacio esser resolvuda, lahoras tu humecta le budel am aygua en la qual es coyta altea e malvas, quar per aquo es alleujat le intrament de lu am pauca causa.	And when you see the inflammation being resolved, then moisten the intestine in water in which it was previously kept with mallows, for by this means it is alleviated with little cause.
Mays si es escusat le intrament de lu aprop aquesta curacio, lahoras scindeys la disrupcio un petit am strument am le qual so inscididas emorroydas.	And if the intestine is damaged in this procedure, then incise the disruption a little with an instrument on which hemorrhoids are embedded.
E la curacio primieyra es milhor, quan es propriada que no es seccio, e no sia occupacio a seccar aprop necessitat e defaliment.	And the primary treatment is better when it is proper that no section is made, and not an occupation to dry up soon necessary and to cause fainting.
Del instrument, sec se la forma de lu:	Of the instrument, note its shape:
La una partida de lu torta aguda, e l’autra partida no-acuta, e la extremitat subtil, e no sia am la subtilitat de spatum, abantz sia obtusa un pauc.	One part of the blade is acute, and the other part is not-acute, and the tip is subtle, but not so subtle as a spatum, in front somewhat blunt.
E donc cum la plagua es amplificada e yeys fora le budel, lahoras cove que la sua reduccio sia segon la forma de lu natural, en le sieu loc propri, si es possible sobre aquo, quar milhor es.	And when the wound is enlarged and the intestine is pushed out, then ensure that its reduction is according to its natural form, in its proper place. If possible, do so over it, for this is better.
Mays quan la disrupcio es ampla, e es en la partida pu bassa del ventre, lahoras cove que tu fassas jazer le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa las suas cambas pus autas que·l sieu cap; e si es en la partida pus desus del ventre, lahoras tu pause le cap de lu e·l pietz pus autz que las partidas dejos.	When the rupture is wide, and it is in the lower part of the abdomen, then you must lay the patient on their back, and place their legs higher than their head; and if it is in the upper part of the abdomen, then you must place the head and feet higher than the other parts left.
E semblantment si la disrupcio es en una de las doas partz del ventre, lahoras pausa la tua entencio e la tua consideracio tostemps en aysso per que la partida en la qual es la plagua sia pus auta que l’autra.	And similarly, if the rupture is in one of the two parts of the abdomen, then you must pause your understanding and consideration for some time so that the part where the injury is higher than the other.
E ayssi cove que tu aministres aquo en las plaguas grans e en las plaguas migieras.	And similarly, you must administer this in large wounds and in medium-sized wounds.
E en las plaguas petitas, pausa aquo que es a tu preparat, e aprop fay que·l ministre sia entre las tuas mas pyatados, le qual tengua la disrupcio tota am la sua ma e ajusta las labias de lu, e aprop descuebre de aquela ad aquel que siec la sutura alcuna causa aprop autra.	And in small wounds, pause the preparation you have made, and then ensure that the minister is among your most skilled assistants. The assistant should hold the rupture entirely with their hand and adjust the edges of the wound, and then uncover it to the one who will suture for any cause nearby another.
E aquesta es la manieyra de sutura comuna: una que prenguas la agula, o comte de agula segon la cantitat de la amplitut de la plagua; e aprop layssa de la extremitat de la disrupcio del dit anular, e strenh la agula una, otre que tu no metas fiel en las doas extremitatz de la codena, am doas extremitatz del ciphac que es dejos la codena de las partidas dedintz, entro que fassas aquela penetrar de aquela partida; e tu ja has agreguadas doas extremitatz de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, e so faytas quatre ordes.	And this is the common method of suturing: take the needle, or count the needle according to the amount of the width of the wound; then leave from the extremity of the rupture near the ring finger, and secure the needle once, or ensure that you do not insert a thread at both extremities of the knot where the cord is left from the parts inside, before making that pass through that part; and you have already added two extremities of the thread and two extremities of the knot, and so you make four rounds.
E aprop strenh am fiel doble en le circuit de la agula, e alcunas veguadas de doas partz ensemps, e aprop agregua las doas labias e la plagua per agreguacio decent; e aprop layssa la grossitut del dit e fiqua una autra agulha en aquela, e aprop lia aquela am fiel ayssi cum fiest am la primieyra agulha; e no cesses far aquo si es necessitat am las agulhas entro que ajas complida tota la contriccio de la plagua.	And then strengthen the double thread on the circuit of the needle, and several times from both sides at once, and then add the two lips and the flap by decent addition; and then leave the thickness of the digit and place another needle there, and then tie that with thread as you did with the first needle; and do not cease doing this if necessary between the needles until all the contraction of the flap is completed.
E sian las agulhas migieras entre groceza e subtilitat, quar las agulhas subtils mot leugierament insciden la carn; e las grossas so de dificil intrament en la codena, e donc per aquo cove que sian migieras en subtilitat e grosseza.	And the needles should be of medium thickness between coarseness and subtlety, for the subtle ones penetrate the flesh lightly; and the coarse ones are difficult to handle in the operation, and therefore it is good that they be of medium thickness in terms of subtlety and coarseness.
E no cove que la agulha sia ficada en doas extremitatz de la codena propdana mot, per so que la carn no sia inscidida leugierament e que la plagua se huebra devant la sua consolidacio.	And it is not good to place the needle at two opposite ends of the wound closely together, for then the flesh might be penetrated lightly and the flap will heal before its proper consolidation.
E no sian prolonguadas de sutura per que la plagua no sia prohibida de consolidacio.	And they should not be overly prolonged in suturing so that the flap is not prevented from consolidating.
E aprop inscideys las extremitatz de las agulhas per so que no ledescan le malaute deves le sieu dormier; e pausaras sobre la sutura pulvils expanduts de tota partida, les quals tenguan las extremitatz de las agulhas; e layssa aquelas entro que sapias que la plagua ja es consolidada.	And then incise the ends of the needles so that they do not pass through the patient's flesh too deeply; place your hand over the suturing area with powders expanded from all parts, which cover the ends of the needles; and leave them there until you can tell that the flap is already consolidated.
E aquestas specias de sutura am agulhas en cal manieyra es pus convenient en las plaguas petitas, quar habasta en la sutura de lor una agulha o doas o entorn aquelas.	These kinds of stitches with needles are more convenient in small wounds, for only one or two needles are needed for their suture.
Mays la segonda sutura es cominal: e es que tu aministres am sutura las quatre extremitatz, de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, en una veguada, am agulha en la qual sia fiel envolopat engual en subtilitat e grosseza.	The second stitch is made as follows: you should suture the four extremities, from the thread and two ends of the needle, in one go, with a needle wrapped in thread of equal fineness and thickness.
E aprop quan am la agulha auras penetrat aquestas quatre extremitatz, reduzeys la agulha de aquela meteyssa partida de la qual comensest, per so que le fiel retrayt caja de la pus subirana partida a la plagua, per so que la sutura sia segon sutura de drap am la qual les draps so strengutz.	And then, when you have the needle penetrate these four extremities, withdraw the needle from that thread end where you started, so that the thread retracts and returns to the side of the wound, making the stitch secure like a piece of cloth that is tightly woven.
E pausa entre quascuna sutura la quantitat del gros del dit mendre.	And pause between each stitch the width of a small finger.
E aquesta sutura sabo les homes.	And this stitch is known to men.
E am tal sutura yeu cozegui la plagua la qual era accidida a un home en le sieu ventre le qual era stat plaguat am un cotel, e era la disrrumpcio de la plagua major de un palm, e era eyssit dels budels entorn dos palms del budel del mieg loc e era la disrupcio en le mieg del membre; e adonc yeu reduzegui aquel depus que le budel havia stat foro la plagua per xxiiii horas.	And with this stitch, I healed the wound that was inflicted on a man in his belly, which had been cut by a knife, and it was the rupture of the major wound about two palms wide, situated around half a palm from the middle of the member; and then I returned it after the intestine had passed through the wound for twenty-four hours.
E la plagua fo consolidada en le spazi de xv dias o entorn, e curegui aquel e es sanat; e aprop aquo visquec per motz ans, e es conversat en las suas disposicios.	And the wound is consolidated in the space of fifteen days or so, and heal it; then the viscera move again, and are restored to their positions.
E les autres metges havian jutgat que no fora sanat; e per miracle foc, quar yeu no curegui aquel am enguent, quar era en loc en le qual enguent no era atrobat ni deguna medicina, mays pausegui sobre la plagua coto viel dos veguadas lo dia e ablucio assiduo am aygua de mel entro que foc sanat.	And the other doctors had judged that it was not healed; by miracle of fire, for I did not heal it with ointment, for it was in a place where neither ointment nor any medicine could reach, but I placed my hand over the wound as an old woman would apply it twice a day and kept frequent washing with honey water until the fire healed.
Mays yeu diyre dos specias de sutura proprias segon narracio de Paraula.	And I will speak of two kinds of suturing properly according to the word of Paracelsus.
E es que tu comenses am sutura de la codena, e entrometas agulha de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz.	And you should start with the chain stitch, and insert the needle from the outside into the inside at the starting point.
E donc cum la agulha penetra en la codena e en aquel meteys lacertz segon rectetut e en longetut de tot le cos, e layssa la extremita del ciphac en le qual has entromesa la agulha; e fay penetrar en la autra extremitat la agulha de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo en l’autra extremitat del mihat.	And thus, as the needle penetrates through the chain stitch according to the straight line and along the entire length of the body, you leave the end of the thread on which you have inserted the needle; then pass the needle from the inside out through the other end of the stitch.
E don cum tu auras fayta aquela penetrar, lahoras tu fay aquela penetrar autra veguada en aquela meteyssa extremitat del mihat de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz; e leyssa la extramitat del ciphac que es en aquest latz, e fay penetrar la agulha en l’autra extremitat de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo.	And when you have made the penetration, then make another penetration in that limb at the external part going to the internal part; leave the end of the probe that is on this side, and insert the needle in the other internal part going to the external part.
E fay penetrar am aquela la tua penetracio am la qual fas aquela penetrar en le ciphac en la extremitat del mirat la qual es en la partida de lu entro que tot aquel penetre.	And make the penetration with your penetration which you make penetrate in the probe at the end of the limb which is on the inside until all of it penetrates.
E aprop comensa de aquest meteys costat e cus aquel am la extremitat que es del ciphac en l’autra latz, e extratz la agulha de la codena la qual penetrec, e aprop redutz aquela en aquela codena e cos la extremitat del ciphac que es en l’autra costat am aquesta extramitat del mirat; e extratz aquela de la codena la qual es de part de lu.	And then begin from this lateral side, insert the probe at the end that is on the inside of the probe in the other side, and extract the needle from the hole you just penetrated, then return it to the same hole using the end of the probe that is on the other side; and extract that one from the hole which belongs to it.
E fay aquo una veguada e autra, e fay aquo una veguada aprop autre veguada entro que tu cozes tot aquo que es deforo segon aquel eysemple.	And do this one time and another, and do it one more time or another time as you sew all of it that is on the outside according to that example.
E la suma de aquesta manieyra de sutura es que tu cozes am sutura de pellicies am la qual cozo las pels, enayssi que tu cozes le ciphac una veguada de la part de la extremitat de la codena, e que leysses aquela autra veguada entro que la ajas complida.	And the sum of this manner of suturing is that you sew with skin thread on which you sew the skins, endeavoring that you sew a circumference of the part of the extremity of the cord, and that you leave the other half inside until the operation is complete.
Mays la segonda specia de sutura propria la qual dieys eyssament Gualia , e aquest es de sermo de lu e per lu recomtat, es que tu cozas aquela segon semilitut am la qual alcus medicantz cozo aquela, enayssi que agreguan tota partida a la sua compar partida a lu convenient per natura; e aplican la extremitat de autre de lu e la extremitat del mirat al autra extremitat de lu, e aquo es fayt segon que yeu a tu recomti.	And the second species of suture which Gualia rightly employs, and this is by warming it and then sewing with it, is that you sew that part according to a thread thickness on which skilled physicians sew, endeavoring that all parts are added to their matching part in accordance with nature; and apply the extremity of one to the other extremity of the wound, and this is done as I have instructed you.
Cove que tu fiques la agulha en la extremitat del mirat a tu propdana de la partida deforo, e fassas aquela penetrar a la partida dedintz en aquel sol, e leysses dos extremitatz del ciphac; e aprop revolveys la agulha e fay aquela penetrar de foro a la dedintz en dos extremitatz del ciphac.	When you place the needle at the extremity of the wound on your proper side of the part from outside, make it penetrate into the part inside at that point, leaving two extremities of the thread; then turn the needle and make it penetrate from outside to inside through the other two extremities of the thread.
E aprop revolveys aquelas cascunas, e fay penetrar quascunas de la partida dededintz entro a la partida deforo en dos extremitatz del mirat autras que so en le latz contrari.	Then turn those individually, and make each part penetrate from inside to outside through the wound at the other two extremities on the opposite side.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura es milhor de la sutura comuna leugiera, e es sutura de la qual precedic rememoracio.	This method of suturing is better than the common light suturing, and this is the suturing about which I previously mentioned.
Aquest es le sermo de Gualia	This is the sermon of Gualia
E mays le diyssero alcus, sutura del ventre es rectificada am dos agulhas, so es que tu entrometas en aquestas a quascunas un fiel, e comensa am intromiccio de agulha de aquo que es deves tu, e fay aquela penetrar entro al autra latz segon sutura de aquels les quals cozo les cuers engualment.	And some would say that the suturing of the abdomen is corrected with two needles, so that you introduce into these some thread, and begin with the insertion of the needle from where you should start, and make that one penetrate through the other layer according to the stitching pattern in which I have equalized the layers.
E sapias que quan disrupcio es en le mieg loc del ventre, lahoras la sutura de lu es pus difficil que dels autres locs del ventre.	And know that when the disruption is in the middle part of the abdomen, the suturing of this area is more difficult than of other parts of the abdomen.
Mays le juguament de medicacio de plagua es jutgament de las autras plaguas.	And the judgment of medicinal treatment for plague is the judgment of other plagues.
La qual causa es quar quan tu consieguas la plagua recent am le sieu sanc denant que l’ayre altera aquela, e reduses le budel e cozes aquela e aptas aquela decentment, lahoras pausa sobre aquela polvera encarnativa.	And the cause is that when you acquire the recent plague from its own secretion before the air alters it, and reduce the hernia and suture it properly, then place it over that flesh-colored powder.
E si le ayre ja ha alterada la plagua, lahoras pausa sobre aquela alcus enguentz les quals so a tu presens entro que fassan peyra dura e cajan les fiels, e sian consolidatz ciphac e mirat; e aprop cura aquela ayssi cum es la curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And if the air has already affected the wound, then place over it woolen cloths which you have prepared beforehand so that they become hard and fill with pus, and be consolidated by chafing and inspected; then treat it as other wounds until it is healed.
Mays si a tu no so presens las medicinas, lahoras pausa sobre aquela tantost, pus que comensa a getar brac, coto viel, e permuta aquel dos veguadas le dia, ayssi cum a tu e ensenhat, entro que sia sanat, quar tu no indigeysses de autra medicacio en motas disposicios quan las plaguas so simplas.	And if you are not present with the medicines, then place over it frequently, until it starts to drain pus, and change it every two hours, as you have been shown, until it is healed, so that you do not need other medicaments in minor preparations when the wounds are simple.
Mays si tu temes que la plagua comunique en lesio als membres principals, lahoras cove que tu submergas lana leon en oli de trempada qualiditat, o en oli rozat, e pausa aquela en le circuit dels locs que so entre les angonas e dejos las aysselas.	And if you fear that the wound might communicate injury to the principal members, then immerse wool in oil of good quality or in refined oil, and place it over the area between the groins and leave the axillae.
E si sent dolor o putrefaccio en les sieus budels, quar motas veguadas aquo s’endeve, lahoras cristeriza aquel am vi stiptic negre tebe, e majorment si la poyredura es pervenguda en le budel e es fayta exitura penetrant entro la conquavitat de lu.	And if there is pain or putrefaction in their intestines, then for several hours apply that with a vinegar stiptic black bile, especially if the inflammation has affected the intestine and caused an exiture penetrating into the cavity of it.
E sapias que aquela que es del budel gros es de pus leugiera sanacio que aquela que es en les budels subtils.	And know that which comes from the large intestine is of a lighter and more healing nature than that which comes from the fine intestines.
E es de dificil sanacio quar le budel le qual es apelat “gegunu” no recep sanacio de plagua que caja en lu de tot; e aquo es per la gran multitut de venas que so en lu e per la magnitut de lu que so en aquelas, e per subtilitat del cos de aquel, e per propinquitat de aquel a natura de nervis.	And it is of difficult healing that which the intestine called "gut" does not receive cure from any plague that falls into it; this is due to the great number of veins in it and its large size, and because of the subtlety of that part, and its proximity to the nature of nerves.
Mays si aquo que procezeys de la plagua es la tela, e conseguas aquela recent, redutz aquela segon la tua rectetut am la qual reduzes les budels engualment.	But if the process from the plague is the tissue, and you manage to obtain it recently, reduce that according to your skill, and with it reduce the intestines equally.
Mays si es passat a lu spazi e ja es feyt vert o negre, lahoras que tu strenguas aquela am fiel sobre le loc que es denigrat de lu, per so que vengua fluxs de sanc, quar en la tela so venas e arterias.	But if it has passed into it and is now black or brown, when you strengthen that with a ligature at the place that is darkened, so that there may be a flow of pus, for in the tissue are veins and arteries.
E aprop inscideys aquo que es otra aquel liament, e pausa dos extremitatz del fiel pendentz de la partida dejos de la plagua foro lu, per que sobre tu sia alleujada la atraccio de lu deves le cazement de la tela e emissio del brac de la plagua.	And then incise that which is another in that ligature, and place the two ends of the ligature hanging from the cut off part of the plague, so that above you may be alleviated the attraction of it by closing the opening of the tissue and the emission of the arm of the plague.
Rememoracio de las plaguas quan accideysso en le budel.	Remembrance of the plagues when they occur in the intestine.
Quan accideys disrupcio en le budel e es petita, lahoras es possibla que sia resteurada en alcus homes, per aysso quar yeu vi aquel le qual era stat plaguat en le sieu ventre am percussio de lansa et era la plagua de la part dreyta del stomac, e la plagua era antiquada e fayta fistula, e eyssic de lu gestio e ventositat.	When disruption occurs in the intestine and is small, sometimes it can be restored in some individuals. This is why I saw one who had been wounded in his belly by the impact of a lance, and the wound was old, having become a fistula due to its chronic state and distension.
Adonc yeu pansegui la curacio de lu ja sia que no era confizat en la sanacio de lu, mays cessegui subtiliar aquel entro que foc sanat e le loc es consolidat.	Then I sought the cure for it, even though it was not completely healed. However, I succeeded in subtlely integrating that which is healthy into the area that has been cured and is consolidated.
E yeu pus que vi le loc ja consolidat, timegui sobre le malaute que endevengues sobre lu accident de mal en le sieu ventre; e no endevenc alcu per aquo mal accident e romas en las suas milhos disposicios mangant e bevent, e aprop entrec en banh e es exercitat en sos ditz.	And I saw that the area was already consolidated. I then treated the patient who had suffered an injury in his belly; and none were found to have been harmed by this unfortunate accident, but some suffered from their own poor dispositions, eating and drinking excessively, and frequently bathing and overexerting themselves.
E ja diysero alcus experimentados que quan endeve plagua en le budel, e es petita, lahoras cove que sia liada segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas fromiguas de grans caps; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua e pausa una fromigua de aquelas que aja la boca uberta sobre las doas labias de la plagua; donc quan pren sobre aquelas e strenh la sua boca, abscindeys le cap de lu, quar adhereys e no es dissolvut.	And some experienced ones have said that when a small wound occurs in the intestine, it should be tied in this manner: and you take large wafers; then tightly adjust the two edges of the wound and place one of those wafers with its mouth open over the two edges of the wound; so when it adheres to those and strongly seals, you cut off the head of the wafer, for it adheres without dissolving.
E aprop pausa autra formigua prop la primieyra, e no cesses aquo a far am formiguas una aprop autra segon la quantitat de tota la plagua.	And then place another blistering agent near the first one, and continue to make blisters one after another according to the size of the entire affected area.
E aprop reduzeys aquela e cos la plagua; e romanguan aquels caps annexces en le budel entro que·l budel sia sanat; e no accideys al malaute degun nocument.	And then reduce it and around the lesion; and drain those adjacent囊肿在囊袋内部愈合时排出；确保不要对患者造成不必要的伤害。
E ja es possible que·l budel sia liat am fiel subtil lo qual es fayt del budel de bestia annexs am lu, pus que es mes en agulha; e es que tu prenguas la extremitat de aquestz fiels de budel, e sia mot descarnat, e aprop lia la extremitat de lu am fiel de li, envolopat, e aprop entromet aquel fiel en agulhas e cos am aquel le budel, e areduzeys aquel en la disrupcio.	And it is possible that the intestine has been dried with fine vitriol made from the adjacent intestine of an animal, which is finer than a needle; and you should take the end of these intestine threads, making sure they are raw, and then place the end of them in vitriol wrapped, and gradually insert those threads into needles and through the intestine, and reduce that area in disruption.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura am formiguas no es sino segon via de fiducia e d’esperansa.	And this method of suturing with blisters is simply done out of trust and hope.
Mays si la plagua es gran e ampla, majorment si es en un dels budels subtils, quar lahoras no es engen sino subtiliacio, e no es sanacio de lu de tot.	But if the lesion is large and extensive, especially in one of the fine intestines, where there is no engagement but only drying, and it does not heal completely.
De curacio de zuchem e fistula.	Of the treatment of abscesses and fistulas.
Sapias que tota plagua e apostema quan se envilheseys e se Antiqua, e es fayt ulcus, e no es consolidat e geta braç tot temps e no es abscindit, lahoras, en qualque membre sia, universalment es nompnada fistula e nos la apelam aquela azukem.	Know that any boil or apostema when wrapped and allowed to mature, and forms an ulcer, but is not consolidated and keeps growing over time without being incised, in whatever part of the body it is, universally it is named a fistula and we call it a abscess.
E fistula segon veritat es nodacio feutrada, dura, blanqua am la qual no es dolor e a la qual es conquavitat ayssi cum es conquavitat de pena de ausel; e per aysso nompnat aquela alcus rizatz, id est pena.	And according to truth, a fistula is a festered node, hard and white, upon which there is no pain and which is enclosed just as an abscess is. Therefore, it is called a white ulcer, that is, a painless abscess.
E es en alcus homes humida, la qual geta brac; e fort leu la humiditat es abscidida en alcunas horas.	And in an abscess there is moisture, which keeps growing; and if the moisture is strong, it can be incised within a few hours.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta humiditat es mota, e es pauca, e es grossa, e es subtil.	And sometimes this moisture is thick, small, large, and thin.
E yeu ja he denant dit en la divisio, lahoras cum yeu diyssi las plaguas, que tot ulcus que no es sanat ni no es en lu nuda carn, no es aquo sino per una de ix causas: de las quals la una es o per pauquesa de sanc en le cos; o per malicia de lu; o quar entre lu e las labias es carn dura prohibent nativitat de carn; o quar es de mota legesa; o quar aquel ulcus en si meteys es poyrit e la materia que es a lu tramesa es de mala qualitat; o quar la medicina es enconvenient en la curacio de lu; o quan corrupcio catz en la regio, e es pestilencia; o per proprietat de regio ayssi cum endeve a Saragossa , en la qual es fayta difficil degestio de las malautias, e es tardada en aquela sanacio de apostema per natura; o quar en lu es os un, o motz osses.	And I have already previously stated in the division, when I spoke of abscesses, that any ulcer that is not healed and does not expose bare flesh is not an abscess but due to one of nine causes: of which one is either from a lack of healing within the body; or from malice; or because between it and the skin there is hard flesh preventing natural growth of flesh; or because it is thick pus; or because that ulcer itself contains corruption and the material that flows through it is of poor quality; or because the medicine used in its treatment is inappropriate; or when decay occurs in the region, and it is pestilential; or due to the nature of the region, such as in Saragossa, where digestion of illnesses becomes difficult, and healing of abscesses is delayed by nature; or because there is bone in it or numerous bones.
Ja e mostrat totas aquelas causas, e·ls senhals de aquelas e la curacio de lor am medicinas en la divisio.	All those causes have been shown, and the signs of them and the cure for them by medicine in this division.
E cove assi que yeu fassa a tu saber la curacio de fistula la qual es fayta per via de operacio am ma.	And cover thus so that you may know the cure for fistula which is caused by surgical operation with the hand.
E sapias que fistula accideys en totz les membres del cos; quar de aquelas son fistulas que perveno a las venas grantz e arterias, o als nervis, o al ciphac, o al budel, o a la vesica, o ad alcuna de las costas, o ad alcu dels spondils del dos, o ad alcuna de las juncturas compostas per composicio ayssi quo de la ma e del pe; e de aquelas so que dan a lu propinquitat del membre principal e de semblantz.	And know that fistula can occur in all parts of the body; for some fistulas extend to the large veins and arteries, or to the nerves, or to the bladder, or to one of the ribs, or to one of the vertebrae, or to any joint composed thus like those of the hand and foot; and these are those that are near the main part of the body and similar.
E donc aquela de aquestas fistulas que es segon aquesta manieyra es de las malautias de dificil sanacio, e no recep curacio, e occupacio am aquela es trebalh e ignorancia.	And thus of these fistulas that proceed in this manner they are among the illnesses of difficult cure, and do not receive a remedy or occupation; for such is travail and ignorance.
E si es de las fistulas alcuna la profunditat de la qual no perve ad aquestz locs que e dit, e esperas e confizas en la curacio de lu, e vols pervenir a cognicio de lu, lahoras pren tenta de eram o de ferr, e si la fistula va segon rectetut, e perquireys aquela am lu.	And if any of these fistulas is so deep that it does not reach the places mentioned, and you hope and confide in its cure, and want to arrive at knowledge of it, then take a test with a needle or probe, and if the fistula goes straight, inquire about it.
Mays si la fistula es tortuissitat, lahoras investigua aquela am tenta de plom subtil, quar plom am la levitat del sieu cors es alleujat e curvat deves la tortuositat.	If the fistula is tortuous, then investigate that with a thin lead wire, for lead being light of its body is alleviated and curved to relieve the tortuosity.
E si la fistula es havent motz horrificis, no es a tu possible que signifiques sobre lu am tenta.	And if the fistula has horrid movements, it is not possible for you to signify about it with a probe.
Adonc cristeriza le orrifici per sos orrificis, quar la humiditat per la qual clisterizas aquela va deves las autras orrificis e corr de lor.	Then christetrize the other orifices by their orifices, for the humidity with which you christetrize that one will be relieved of the others and flow from them.
E aprop inquier exquisitament, segon qual manieyra a tu es possible que conoguas si aqui has os o nervi, e es la conquavitat de la fistula longinqua o propdana, o es una fistula a la qual so motz orrificis e esta sobre aquo tot am la suma de la tua fortaleza, am la tua enterroguacio, am la qual enterroguas le malaute, e la invencio de la dolor deves la tua compressio am la ma sobre le loc, e semblantz de las significacios e de las causas accidentz al apostema.	And then inquire meticulously, according to the manner in which you can know whether here lies a vein or a nerve, and if the fistula's cavity is distant or nearby, or if it is a fistula of orifices alone, and this is above all with your strength, with your questioning, with which you question the patient, and from which you derive the cause of the pain with your compression on the area, and the signs and appearances of the significations and causes of the swelling.
E cum tu auras stat sobre totas aquelas causas am stacio veraya, lahoras ve a la curacio segon confidencia: e es que tu consideras lahoras si es fistula apparent propinqua o en loc sal, longinqua de junctura, o de nervi, o de arteria, o de vena, o de un dels locs les quals yeu a tu e ditz.	And when you have stood upon all those causes in true station, then go to the cure according to confidence: for you consider now if it is a proximate apparent fistula or in a place near a joint, distant from a joint, from a nerve, an artery, a vein, or one of the places which I and you call.
Lahoras tu secca la fistula segon que denant es dit de la naracio de lu, e osta aquo que es en aquela filtracio e de carns corrumpudas, e aquo que es nascut en le orrifici de la carn, o de theil e de semblantz, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	When you dry the fistula as previously described in its narration, stop what is within that filtration and of rotten flesh, and what is born in the opening of the flesh, or tissue and similar, cure that until it is healed.
Mays si la fistula es de longinqua profunditat, e es segon rectetut, lahoras cove que inscidas aquela en le preon atant quant a tu sira possible, e aprop mondifica aquela de totas las suas carns corrompudas; e aprop administra calguas envolopadas en medicinas acutas, e intromet aquelas entro a la conquavitat de la fistula, la qual has conprenduda am ferr.	But if the fistula is of great depth and straight, then delve into the prepuce until it is as far as possible, and remove all the rotten flesh; then apply bandages wrapped in sharp medicines, and insert those into the cavity of the fistula, which you have grasped with forceps.
E fay aquo am aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la medicina acuta corroda tot aquo que es romas en la conquavitat de la fistula de la corrupcio.	And do this with the sharp medicine several times until it dissolves everything that is rotten in the cavity of the fistula.
E aprop restaura aquela am enguentz les quals engendran carn sana entro que sia sanada.	And then restore it by applying ointments that generate healthy flesh until it is healed.
Mays si no es sanada per aquo, lahoras tu cauteriza aquela segon que havem recomtat.	But if it is not healed by this, then cauterize it as we have recommended.
Mays si la causa de fistula es os e es deves tu certificat aquo, lahoras tu inquireys aquela e secca aquela segon que havem recomtat, si tu no prohibeys alcuna causa de vena o de nervi o de membre principal ayssi cum havem dit.	If the cause of the fistula is bone and you must certify this, then inquire about that dry and that moist one according to what we have recommended, if you do not prohibit any cause of vein or of nerve or of principal member as we have said.
Mays si le os es a tu descubert e es en lu alcuna corrupcio e negror, lahoras tu ratz aquel entro que la corrupcio sia hostada tota; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que lu encarne entro que sia sanat.	But if the bone is exposed and there is some corruption and blackness in it, then you must incise that area where the corruption is completely halted; and place a drain where the flesh within is healed.
E si no es sana e gieta brac ayssi cum fazia, lahoras sapias que tu no est pervengut a la eradicacio tota de la corrupcio; e adonc tu descuebre sobre lu segondanament e exquisitament fay la razio de lu e la mundificacio de lu am la deriera fortalasa tieua, e aprop restaura aquel.	And if it is not yet healthy and you graft a piece of skin as you do, then you must know that you have not completely eradicated the corruption; then you uncover it again thoroughly and meticulously explain its condition and cleanse it with your final strengthening treatment, and then restore it.
E donc si es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras sapias que aquela corrupcio es en la profunditat longinqua del cors, la qual no ha conseguida, e adonc a tu en aquel no es engen sino laysar aquela.	And therefore if it is healthy, well and good; but if not, then you must know that the corruption is deep within the body, which has not been reached, and then in that case, you should merely leave it as it is.
E si le os corromput es petit, o es a tu possible atirar aquel, lahora tu le atira am forceps subtils las quals conveno ad aquo.	And if the corrupted bone is small, or if it is possible to extract it with forceps, then you extract it with fine forceps that fit well here.
E si so motz osses, lahoras exquisitament fay la extraccio de totz aquels, e de aquels no laysses denguna causa am la tua fortaleza.	And if the bones are displaced, then you must carefully perform the extraction of all of them, and from none of them do you leave any cause for future dislocation due to your lack of strength.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat alcuna causa de las humiditatz, e en lor inscizio no ha temor ni error, lahoras inscideys aquelas liaments o carns si so aqui, e deliura les osses.	And if at any time you face a cause of the humidity, and in their incision there is neither fear nor error, then incise those ligaments or flesh if they are here, and deliver the bones.
Mays si a tu no es preparacio de ostar les osses de la tua hora, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua aquo que poyresca la plagua aquela, e layssa aquela entro que aquo es al enviro de aquels osses de carns e de liamentz, e guarda la plagua que no sia consolidada, e sia constrengida la seccio la qual tu has inscidida en la tua operacio.	And if you are not prepared to extract the bones at your hour, then pause over the wound that which allows the wound there, and leave it within where that is near those bones of flesh and ligaments, and guard the wound that is not consolidated, and constrain the section which you have incised in your operation.
Habantz, si temes, pausa sobre lu coto submers en sopre trissat am oli, o coto submers en anguent egipciac, o en alcu dels enguentz vertz, quar quan poyriran aquelas liaments, e les osses son de lor seperatz la ablacio, e de aquels atraccio es alleujada.	Having done this, if you fear, pause over the wound submerged under a triple breath of oil, or a wound submerged in Egyptian unguent, or in any of the green unguents, for when they can be released, and the bones are from them separated, then the extraction is alleviated.
Mays si es un gran os ayssi cum le os de camba o de coyssa o semblantz ad aquels, e aquo que de lu es corromput es la facia de lu tant solament, lahoras ratz aquela am resio tant solament derriera entro que sia ostada aquela negror e corrupcio, e aprop restaura la plagua.	If it is a large bone such as the hip or rib or resembles those, and what is corrupted in it is only the surface, then quickly apply that resin only behind where the darkness and corruption are stopped, and then restore the wound.
Mays si aquo que de lu es corrumpyt es gran partida, e la corrupcio ja ha conseguida la medulla del os, lahoras es causa necessaria cerrar aquel e aquel tot inscidir entro al loc on es pervenguda la corrupcio, e lahoras cura aquel entro que sia consolidada.	If what is corrupted in it is a large part, and the corruption has reached the marrow of the bone, then it is necessary to close that and excise everything within the area where the corruption has spread, and then cure that until it is consolidated.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc ad un home en la sua coyssa per que pausez aquela a eyssempli e adjutori sobre la tua operacio.	And I advise you that when dealing with a patient in the thigh, have them lie on their side and use this as an example and aid for your operation.
Foc un home jove per etat entorn xxx ans, al qual accideys dolor en la sua cueyssa, e de las partidas dedintz mauguda es sobre la materia dedintz le cors entro que la materia es pervenguda a la cueyssa, e es materia de apostema am gran apostema, e no foc a lu causa extrinseca.	Let there be a young man around xxx years of age, who experiences pain in his thigh, and from the parts within is gout over the matter within the body where the matter has spread to the thigh, and the matter is that of an abscess, a large abscess, and it was not caused by external factors.
E adonc foc extendut le temps am aquela per la error dels metges entro que l’apostema es hubert, e acorrero de lu materias motas, e la sua curacio foc aprop pausada entro que la camba foc fistulada, e faytz son en lu motz orrificis les quals totz getavan poyredura e las humiditatz del cos.	And then the abscess was extended over time due to the error of the doctors where the abscess became hardened, and the matter within agitated. Its cure was nearly paused when the thigh became fistulized, and you made openings in the swelling through which pus and bodily fluids drained.
E adonc le curec multitut de metges entorn dos ans, e no foc en aquels savia ma en la art, entro que yeu fu appelat.	And then for about two years the cure was sought by many doctors, and none of them with their knowledge in this art, managed to do so.
E vi la camba de lu e las materias que corrian de lu aquels orrificis per gran cors; e ja le cos de aquel home era tot stabozit e la color de lu era citrina.	And there were the leg and the materials that flowed from those openings throughout his body; and already the condition of that man was totally stabilized, and the color of him was yellowish.
E adonc yeu intromesi la tenta ad un de aquels orrificis e pervenguec la tenta al os.	And then I inserted the probe into one of those openings and guided the probe to the mouth.
E aprop yeu e perscrutat tostz les orrificis e trobegui aquels pervenir a lor de totas partidas de la camba.	And then I examined all the openings closely and found which ones could be reached from all parts of the leg.
E adonc yeu me coytegui e inscidegui sobre un dels orrificis aquels entro que descrobegui una partida del os, e atrobegui aquel corromput, e ja era terros e corrumput e denigrat; e era ja corrumpuda una partida de la camba entro que havia penetrat entro a la mezola.	And then I opened myself and incised over one of the openings, exposing a part of the bone, and found the corrupted tissue, which was already terrible, corrupt, and deteriorated; and a part of the leg had already become corrupted where it had penetrated into the marrow.
E adon yeu serregui aquo que a mi era discubert e preparat del os descubert.	And then I tightened what to me was revealed and prepared the exposed bone.
E yeu cujegui que no fos en le os sino aquela corrupcio la qual abscidigui e serregui, e yeu ja havia derraziguada.	And I conclude that it is not in the bone but in that corruption which will be excised and sewn.
E aprop pausegui la restauracio de la plagua am medicina consolidativas per lonc temps, e no es consolidada.	And then proceed with the restoration of the wound using consolidative medicines for a long time, and it is not yet consolidated.
E aprop yeu iteregui e descubregui sobre le os segondament sobre le descubriment primier, e atrobegui continua corrupcio am le os.	And then you iterate and uncover over the bone according to the first uncovering, and detect continuous corruption in the bone.
E serregui aquo que a mi apares de aquela corrupcio, e aprop yeu fo perforsat fayre la curacio de lu e restauracio, e no es restaurat.	And sew that which appears from that corruption, and then I proceed to perform the cure and restoration, but it is not yet restored.
E adonc yeu descubri sobre lu autra veguada e no cessegui inscidir le os petit a petit particuladament e perforsa la restauracio de lu, e no es restaurat entro que inscidigui entorn un palm de lu, e aquel extraxi am la medula sua, e aprop restauregui aquel am medicinas, e es consolidat leugierament e sanat.	And then you uncover the other side and do not cease to incise the bone little by little particularly, and perform the restoration of it. But it is not restored until you incise around a palm's width of it, and extract its marrow. Then, you restore that using medicines, and it is lightly consolidated and healed.
E no es necessaria iteracio en la operacio de lu e seccio de lu sino per la disposicio de la freulesa de lu e per la paucitat de la tollerancia de lu e paor de lu de mort, quar a lu accidia en totas horas per superfluitat de evacuacio sincopi mala.	And there is no need for iteration in the operation of the section of it, but rather due to the position of the fracture and the lack of tolerance and fear of death in it, which causes it to accede in all hours due to excess of evacuation leading to bad syncope.
E donc sanat es per sanacio entiera, e nada es en loc de os carn dura; e es fayta bona la disposicio de lu en le sieu cors e retornec la vertut de lu; e es conversat en las suas disposicios e no fec a lu contrarietat en ambulacio ni nocument en denguna causa.	And thus health is through complete healing, and nothing is in place of good flesh lasting; and it is made well the disposition of him in his body and return the virtue of him; and it is changed in his dispositions and not forced against him in movement nor harm in any cause.
Mays si es os eminent en loc del cors ja trauquat, lahoras cove que tu secces aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas liament e strenh aquel en la extremitat de aquel os eminent, e comanda ad alcu que extenda aquel en sus; e pausa aquel liament de lana pus gros del primier liament; e aprop lia aquel sobre la carn que es dejos le os, e exten la extramitat de lu per que atires la carn a las partidas dejos, e tu descuebras la carn sobre le loc le qual voles serrar per que la serra no leda la carn.	If the bone is prominent in the affected area of the body, then cut it out according to this manner: you should firmly grasp and secure that part of the prominent bone at its extremity, commanding someone else to extend that part. Cover it with a larger woolen pad over the flesh left behind, extending the end of the pad so that it draws the flesh towards the area left empty, and you uncover the flesh in the location where you wish to cut, ensuring the blade does not damage the flesh.
E pausa fust o taula dejos le os decentment, quar quan tu fas aquo no es prohibida la serra que no secce la carn corrumpuda.	And place a rod or table properly under the bone, for when you do this, it is not forbidden to cut with the saw without damaging the broken flesh.
E cove que sia la serradura sobre le loc corrumput petit a petit, quar si es en la concavitat del os corrupcio e no appar en la sua apparicio al sentiment, e forssa a serratura de lu autra veguada.	And make sure the sawing is on the broken part little by little, for if the corruption is inside the bone and does not appear in its manifestation through sensation, you may have to make another pass with the saw.
E si le os es corrumput e no-eminent, abantz es la una partida continuada am la autra, e la corrupcio es al mieg loc o en partida de lu, lahoras tu descuebre la carn de totas partz tota; e aprop pausa fust dejos, e aprop serra aquel de la primiera partida la on es la corrupcio entro que sia continuada la serratura del autra partida.	And if the bone is corrupt and not protruding, there is one continuous part joined to the other, and the corruption is in the middle of it or in a part of it, then you uncover the flesh from all parts; and place fusts nearby, and join the incision where the corruption is with the continuity of the closure of the other part.
E sia la serradura segon le loc de la corrupcio un petit, segon que havem dit.	And the closure should be small according to the location of the corruption, as we have said.
E si la corrupcio es en la junctura, inscideys aquela junctura corrumpuda, e serra le os la on es continuat del autra part.	And if the corruption is in the joint, incise that corrupted joint, and set the bone where it continues from the other part.
E si de la corrupcio es en la continuacio de doas juncturas, lahoras no es en lu razio sino engen.	And if the corruption is in the continuity of two joints, then it is not in its proper place but out of alignment.
E si la corrupcio es en le pecte de la ma o del pe, es mot dificil; empero cove que tu inquieras la corrupcio en qual manieyra appareys a tu, e que abradas aquela, e mondes aquela segon quascuna disposicio la qual es a tu possibla, e am cascum engen sia rectificat a tu, quan no fa a tu contrarietat vena o nervi.	And if the corruption is in the axilla of the arm or the armpit, it is very difficult; however, you must inquire how the corruption appears and where it manifests. Incise that area, cleanse it according to any disposition which is within your ability, and adjust everything accordingly, ensuring that nothing goes against your judgment regarding veins or nerves.
E sapias qual es inscididors e las serras a inscidir aquestz osses son motz segon le situament dels osses, e la preparacio de aquels, e la grosseza de aquels, e la subtilitat e la grandeza e la parvitat de aquels, e la duricia e la lor raritat; per que cove que tu prepares a tota specia de operacio estrument convenient ad aquela opperacio.	And you must know which are the incisors and the saws to cut these bones according to the position of the bones, and the preparation of those, and their size, and their subtlety and greatness and smallness, and their hardness and rarity; so that you may prepare for every kind of operation an instrument suitable to that operation.
E sapias que aquela operacio significa a tu sobre la specia del strument del qual indigeysses; quan am tu es gran studi e lonc e conoyssensa de las manieyras de aquesta art, e testimoni de manieyras de malautias, quar lahoras ja tu las avias per tu meteys aquo que es convenient a lu dels sturmentz a tota malautia.	And you must know that that operation means to you concerning the type of instrument you need; when you have great study and long knowledge of the ways of this art, and experience with the ways of ailments, for when you have seen them, you will then put forth what is convenient for it from the instruments for all ailments.
E yeu so a tu formant en la fi de aquest capitol le nombre dels instrumentz les quals pausaras cum eyssimples am les quals proceziras a la tua prohibicio la qual experimentaras sobre las autras.	And you must inform at the end of this chapter the number of instruments which you will use as simple ones to which you will proceed according to your prohibition, which you will experience with the others.
Forma de serra:	Form of the saw:
Forma de autra serra:	Form of another saw:
Forma de autra serra:	Form of another saw:
Forma de autra serra gran:	Forma of another will be great:
Forma de ray:	Forma of the vein:
Sia le cap de aquest ray segon la forma de cap de clau stellat, e les puntz de lu sian segon la forma dels puntz alstefegi.	Let the head of this vein be in the shape of the head of a star key, and its points be in the shape of the points of a hammer.
E no conveneys sino que am aquel sian confricadatz les caps de las juncturas quan so corrumpudas, o es la boca gran ampla.	And you should not apply any friction to the heads of the joints when they are damaged, or to the large open mouth.
Forma de razori major dels autres:	Forma of the larger razor:
Forma de razori menor:	Forma of the smaller razor:
Forma de razori lat:	Forma of the side razor:
Forma de serra autra decentment fayta: sia fayt arc de lu pus sobira e la acuitat de lu de ferr, e le membre de lu de boys punhal descentment fayt.	Forma of another properly made saw: let it be an arc above and the sharpness of it of iron, and the member of it of a well-made pointed blade.
Forma de lu:	Forma of it:
Forma de razori en la qual ha concavitat:	Forma of the razor which has a cavity:
Forma de razori autra subtil:	Form of a razor or fine one:
Forma de autra razori de curvada extremitat:	Form of another razor with a curved extremity:
Forma de rasori petit semblant a tenta:	Form of a small razor resembling a needle:
Forma de incisori am le qual so inscidit les osses:	Form of a bone cutter with which one cuts the bones:
Forma de inscisori autra minor:	Form of another smaller incisor:
Forma de un autra inscissori; aquest semblant a ray, e la extremitat de lu es cum serra, e es exhibit en motz locs en la razio dels osses:	Form of another incisor; this resembles a ray, and its extremity is like a point, and it is used in various places in the proportion of the bones:
Forma de ray lo qual conveneys a rasio de aquel que es perforat dels osses:	Form like a ray which is used according to the proportion of the bone that is pierced:
E la extremitat de lu es triangulada e de aguda extremitat.	And its extremity is triangular and sharp.
E es fayt de ferr de India , e semblantment cove que totas las causas que havem ditas de rasoris e de inscissoris e de serras.	And it is made of iron from India, and similarly grooved like all the causes we have said about razors and incisors and saws.
De inscizio extremitatz e de la serratura dels osses.	For cutting bones and the jointing of bones.
Las extremitatz se poyresso o per causa intrinseca o per causa extrinseca, o cum tu auras medicat aquela corrupcio per curacio de aquelas medicinas e la curacio no comfereys, o vezes la corrupcio anar deves le membre la qual no percuteys denguna causa, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel membre entro aquo la hon acossec la corrupcio, per que le malaute evasesca per aquo de mort o de malicia que es major defeliment del membre.	The extremities may be affected either by an intrinsic cause or by an extrinsic one, or as you have medicated that corruption through the cure of those medicines and the cure did not succeed, or sometimes the corruption goes away from the member you do not perceive by any cause, then you must enter that member into this so that it accedes the corruption, in order to expel the malady either by death or by malice which is greater misfortune of the member.
E le senhal de aquel al qual accideys, es que·l membre es fayt negre entro que sia cujat que foc la ja comburit, o se poyreys aprop la negror entro que la poyredura aquela ane entro aquel membre que siec lu e que prengua tot le cors; e donc coyta te am inscizio de aquel.	The sign of him to whom this happens is that the member becomes black before it is cut, as if already burned by fire. You may notice the blackness in the vicinity where that burning has entered that limb and has spread throughout the body; therefore, you must incise that area.
E semblantment si es causa de la corrupcio percussio de alcunas causas venenosas ayssi cum de scorpio mari o de vupera o de rutela e de semblantz.	And similarly, if the cause of the corruption is a blow from some venomous causes such as a scorpion, viper, or rue, and similar.
E si la corrupcio o la percussio es en la extremitat del dit, lahoras tu inscideys le dit e no dones spazi a la corrupcio per que ane entro a la ma.	And if the corruption or the blow is at the extremity of the finger, then you must incise the finger and do not give space to the corruption so that it enters your hand.
E semblantment si accedeys a la ma, lahoras tu inscideys aquela de la razit del focil, e no dones spazi a la corrupcio entro que prengua en le focil del bras.	And when you approach the hand, then incise that of the elbow, and do not give space for corruption to enter within the arm.
E si envezeys aquel, lahoras inscideys le bras entro al coyde en la junctura.	And if you incise the other, then incise the arm between the elbow and the joint.
E si passa otra la corrupcio e la vezes enviro le coyde, lahoras en aquel es la mort del malaute; e aministrar autra causa otra aquo en curacio es quantitat de vertut.	And if corruption passes and spreads beyond the elbow, then in that case it is the death of the patient; and another cause given instead of this for cure is the quantity of virtue.
E semblantment fay del pe quan corrupcio envezeys le dit del pe, lahoras tu inscideys aquel entro ad un dels nozes.	And similarly handle the foot when corruption spreads to the toe of the foot, then incise that between one of the toes.
E si pren en la pente del pe, lahoras tu inscideys tot le pe.	And if it takes in the sole of the foot, then incise the entire foot.
Mays si pueja entro al denol, lahoras tu inscideys la camba entro a la junctura del denol.	But if it enters the sole, then incise the leg between the joint of the sole.
E si la corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denol, lahoras en lu no es engen sino dimissio, e layssar le malaute a la mort.	And if corruption has already penetrated the sole, then there is nothing but dismissal, and leave the patient to death.
E la manieyra de inscidir le membre o de serrar lu es que tu strenhas le liament en la partida pus dejos la qual voles inscidir, e strenh autre liament sobre le loc; e extenda le ministre un liament a las partidas dejos, e extenda le ministra autra liament en sus; e tu separa la carn la qual es entre dos liamentz ain spatum lat entro que sia descuberta tota la carn; e aprop sia inscidit o serrat.	And the manner of incising the member or closing it is that you hold the thread in one part and leave which you want to incise, and hold another thread over the place; extend the assistant one thread to the parts left, and extend the assistant another thread on their side; you separate the flesh which is between two threads so that all the flesh is uncovered within that space left between them, then it is to be incised or closed.
E cove que sia pausat drap de li de totas partidas per so que no toque le loc sa, e que vengua al malaute lesio ajustada e apostema caut.	And ensure that a cloth is placed from all sides so that it does not touch the affected area, and that when the wound is dressed, it fits tightly and securely.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc quan obras, lahoras tu cauteriza le loc coytadament, o pausa sus lu alcunas polveras restrenhentz le sanc; e aprop retorna a la tua medicacio entro que sia complida.	And if you happen to bleed when operating, then cauterize the area frequently, or place some astringent powders on it to stop the bleeding; then return to your surgery until it is completed.
E aprop lia le membre plaguat am liament al u convenient, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then bind the injured member with a bandage as necessary, and care for it until it is healed.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc a un home en le sieu pe, aquest meteys accident le qual yeu e a tu recomtat, le qual es quar accidic a lu negror en le sieu pe am adustio que era asemblada a combustio de foc.	And I advise you that if someone has an injury on their foot, when this accident happens which you and I have advised, it is a condition where blackness appears on their foot due to a burning that resembles the combustion of fire.
E aquela corrupcio accidic primierament en le sieu dit entro que tendec tot le pe.	And that corruption incidentally begins in its said part from which it tends throughout the body.
E adonc aquel home preparec per si meteys pus que vic la curacio anar al membre am la vehemencia de lu que atrobec de dolor e de adustrio de lu, e el inscidic aquel pe entro a la junctura, e foc sanat.	And then that person prepares himself to wait until the cure goes to the limb with the urgency of his pain from both the pain and the inflammation, and the disease enters the joint, and the limb is healed.
Lonc temps accidic a lu aquela meteyssa corrupcio en le dit de la ma indic.	Long time that corruption incident in his said hand occurs.
E adonc venc a mi, e so me perforsat repercutir aquela superfluitat am aquo que pausegui sobre la ma de las medicinas, aprop la mundificacio del cos de lu; e no es repercussa la superfluitat e comensec anar al autra dit entro que comensec en la ma.	And then it comes to me, and I perfuse it to reflect the excess on what is placed over the hand of the medicines, near the purification of the body; and the excess does not reflect but begins to go to the other part where it began in the hand.
E el apelec me a inscidir la ma de lu, e yeu no volgui far aquo sperant sobre la repercussio de aquela superfluitat, e mays que temegui deves la inscizio de la ma de lu mort, quar la vertut del malaute era sobre cazement.	And he asks me to incise his hand, and I do not want to do so hoping for the reflection of that excess, more because I fear the incision of his hand to death, for the virtue of the disease was powerful.
E pus que el se desperec de mi, es retornat en la sua terra e pervenguec a mi que aquel home preparec e inscidic la sua ma tota, e es sanat.	And after he awakens from me, he returns to his land and informs me that that person prepared and incised his hand entirely, and was healed.
E no he adhuzida aquesta narracio sino per que sia adjutori sobre aquo que catz de aquesta malautia, e que sia significacio per la qual sia significada e segon la qual sia obrat.	And I have added this narration only to serve as an aid regarding what is known about this illness, and as a guide by which it may be understood and treated.
De cura sinuum et qualitate clisterizationis cum medicinis.	On the care of colic and the quality of cathartic treatments with medicines.
Quan accideys apostema en alcus membres carnozes e·l spazi de l’apostema es prolonguat entro que fa colleccio de sania, e aprop es romput e perforat, e es eyssida de lu la sania, e roman le loc vuoyt quays cum si era vayssel, e la codena que es desobre lu ayssi cum drap subtiliat, e no es pervengut a deriera corrupcio, e no inprimeys en le os o en nervi ni en liament, es apelat sinu, e no es nompnat fistula.	When an abscess occurs in any fleshly member and the space of the abscess is prolonged such that it collects pus, and then it breaks and perforates, and the pus is expelled, and the location remains clean as if it were a vessel, and the cover above it is like a thin cloth, and no further corruption occurs, and it does not imprint on bone or nerve or ligament, it is called colic, and is not named fistula.
Mays empero si le spazi es prolonguat entro que la corrupcio enprema en alcun membre, lahoras es appelada fistula e no zukem.	But if the space is prolonged such that corruption presses into any member, then it is called a fistula.
E la cura de lu es que inscidas aquela codena tota ayssi cum es revolvut, e majorment quan es subtiliada e es fayta cum drap, e comfizas que no adhereys al loc per la sua corrupcio.	And the treatment for it is to insert that cover completely as if it were turned inside out, especially when it is thin and made like a cloth, and ensure that it does not stick to the area due to corruption.
Mays si tu speras que la codena adheresca e que aquela corrupcio no aja conseguit per deriera consecucio, e en la codena ha spassitut de cara, lahoras tu cura aquel am clisteri.	If you hope that the stricture adheres and that the corruption has not succeeded through such consequence, and in the stricture it has passed forward, then you cure that with a clyster.
E es que consideras al sinu, e lahoras si es gran, e·l brac que yeys es de fetent odor, lahoras clisteriza aquel am medicament egipciac le qual es de oli e vi agre e ziniar recebent partidas enguals, e sian ajustadas en un vayssel, e sian coytas sobre le foc entro que’l medicament se fassa rog e pervengua a specitut de mel.	And you consider the sinus, and if it is large and the hand that touches it emits an odor, then treat it with a clyster using a medicinal Egyptian mixture which consists of oil, wine, and honey, each part in equal shares, and be sure to mix them in a vessel until the medicine becomes warm and can reach the specific part.
E aprop tu pren de lu aquo que es necessari e dissolveys lu am aygua e mel; e clisteriza am aquel le sinu, e strenh le orrifici de lu, e layssa la medicina en lu per la quantitat de doas horas.	And then you take what is necessary and dissolve the medicine in water and honey; clysterize it into the sinus, strengthen its orifices, and leave the medicine in it for a quantity of two hours.
E aprop extratz aquela am sprecio; e fay aquo per tantz dias entro que sia mundificat le sinu e sia remauguda la pudor.	And then extract that medicine completely; do this for several days until the sinus is cleansed and the pain subsides.
E alcunas veguadas es clisterizat am aygua de cendre, quan no es a tu prezent aquest medicament; e es que tu prenguas la cendra de vitz, e met sobre lu aygua; e aprop cola aquela e clisteriza aquel am ela entro que te confizes que·l sinu lahoras es ostat.	And sometimes a clyster is made with ash water when this medicine is not available; you take the ashes from vitriol, put them in water; and then extract that and clysterize it until you are sure the sinus has been affected.
E si le malaute no ha tollerancia sobre le medicament egipciac ni l’aygua de la cendre, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aygua e mel e quays sia mesclat ziniar trissat, e clisteriza aquel am vi e mel mesclat, quar de proprietat de mel es que mondifique e lave, e le vi fa adherir le sinu, e majorment quan en le vi ha superfluitat de stipticitat e de siccitat.	And if the patient does not tolerate the Egyptian medicine or the water of the ashes, then prepare that mixture with water and honey mixed with ziniar trissat, and prepare that mixture with wine and honey mixed together. For the property of honey is to modify and wash, while the wine makes the sinew adhere, especially when there is an excess ofstringiness and dryness in the wine.
E cum tu fas aquo alcunas veguadas e te comfizes que·l sinu ja es remaugut, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aquo que fa naysser la carn en lu.	And when you have applied it several times and you are sure that the sinew is already relaxed, then administer that mixture with water to cause flesh to grow in it.
E es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e dissolveys aquel am oli rozat e vi stiptic; o que clisterizas aquel am alcunas medicinas e enguentz autres que hajan las proprietatz les quals ja he yeu scritz en le tractat dels enguents.	And you take a dye of dyafinicon, dissolve that mixture with olive oil and wine that isstringy; or you administer that mixture with certain medicines and apply others that have the properties which I have already written in the treatise on ointments.
E si le orrifici del sinu es streyt en le qual no es recebuda la canula del clisteri, lahoras tu le amplifique aquel am ferr petit a petit, e pausa en lu calgua envolopada en enguent egipciac o en enguent basilicon entro que sia amplificat.	And if the openings of the sinew are wide in such a way that the catheter of the enema is not received, then gradually enlarge those openings with a small iron instrument, and place it in lukewarm ointment wrapped in Egyptian or basilicon ointment while it is being enlarged.
E semblantment si le orrifici es ample, lahoras tu agregua las labias de lu am sutura e layssa de lu quantitat en la qual intre le clisteri ses addicio.	And if the opening is large, then you add the edges of it with a stitch and leave enough quantity in which the enema can be added.
E si le orrifici de lu del qual corr le brac es elevat a las partidas desus, lahoras secca aquel en le pus bas loc que es en lu per que le brac corra entro dejos, quar quan le brac es coartat en la preondeza de sinu la carn esser en lu engendrada.	And if the opening from which the stream flows is elevated above the upper parts, then dry that area below it so that the stream can flow into it. When the stream is restricted in the depth of the sinus, flesh will be generated in it.
E si no es a tu possible seccar le sinu entro al enviro del os pus bas segon que voles, lahoras te perforssa que prepares le membre am preparacio per la qual corr de lu le brac leugierament segon que es a tu apparelhat e que no sia en lu retengut alcuna causa del brac.	And if it is not possible to dry the sinus in the vicinity of the lower part as you wish, then you should puncture the member for preparation so that the stream flows slightly from it according to your ability and that no cause of the stream be retained.
E pren medicinas consolidativas que sian pausadas sobre le sinu convenientz ad aquo que vols exxten aquelas sobre drap de li.	And take consolatory medicines that are applied gently over the sinus in the place you want, extending them over a cloth.
E le drap sia de tan gran quantitat cum fa la comunicacio de tot le sinu; e aprop inscidey am las forfexs en le dreyt del orrifici del sinu un trauc pus ample un pauc que l’orrifici del sinu; e aprop exten sobre autre drap de li dels enguentz leons segon la quantitat del trauc, e pausa le sobre aquel per posicio longinqua del orrifici del sinu per que sia aleujat le eyssiment del brac de lu e no ostes le drap gran sino aprop alcus dyas una veguada.	And the cloth should be of such great quantity as to communicate with the entire sinus; then cut with scissors along the right side of the sinus opening a slit slightly wider than the sinus opening; then extend over another piece of cloth the lion ointment according to the length of the slit, and place it above that so that it is far from the sinus opening to alleviate the swelling of the stream and not disturb the cloth much but only for a few days once.
Mays aquel que es sobre le orrifici del sinu, le qual remauguas en tota hora per so que yesca aquo que es ajust en lu del brac.	May he who is over the opening of the sinus, who warm it at all times so that it does not come out what is stuck in it from the arm.
E per que sapias si aquo que corr de lu del brac es mot o pauc, o es digest, o es no-digest.	And that you may know if what flows from the arm is much or little, or is digestible, or is non-digestible.
E am aysso tu considera le loc de aquel sinu, si en lu sent le pacient dolor o no, e si es en lu apostema.	And thus you consider the place of that sinus, if in it the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess.
E cum la tua medicacio es prolonguada en la tal manieyra, e vesas la matiera que es gitada sobre le orrifici del sinu ja adhereys, o se apropria adherencia, lahoras le mayti tu le deslia o le tertz dia, e quan deslias la plagua, lahoras muda le drap per autre e renova le enguent.	And as your medication is prolonged in this manner, and you see the matter that is discharged over the opening of the sinus has already adhered, or there is a tendency to adhere, then hold it until it detaches itself, or remove it after one day, and when you remove the poultice, then change the cloth and renew the ointment.
Mays si del sinu aprop lon spazi yeys virus subtil, lahoras no te desperes de la adherencia de li, quar la sanacio de lu se apropria, quar so alcus homes en les quals tarda generacio de carn en las lors plaguas, e de aquels so en les quals es fayt le contrari de lu.	May it be that from the sinus there extends a subtle virus, then do not worry about the adherence of this, for the healing of it takes hold, for in some people the generation of flesh in their poultices is slow, and in those, the opposite occurs.
E si del sinu aprop motz dias es yssit brac indigest, lahoras sapias que·l sinu no adhereys; e si es tardada la adherencia del sinu e es la causa prolonguada, lahoras tu ajusta en exsiccacio de las medicinas, e si las medicinas so humidas en lor substancia e en la sua vertut, son seccas ayssi cum enguent dyafinicon, quan es en lu ajustada superfluitat de addicio de zegi.	And if from the sinus for nearly days it is sat brackish indigestion, then you perceive that the sinus does not adhere; and if the adherence of the sinus is delayed and the cause prolonged, then you adjust in drying of the medicines, and if the medicines are moist in their substance and in their virtue, they are dried thus like an ointment defninicon when there is overabundance in its addition of saffron.
E le mays derier am le qual es curat, es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e sia dissout en oli rozat, e sia sobre lu vojat vi antic engual en la sua substancia, e aprop comfeys aquel am lu, e usa de aquel.	And the best preparation for this is that you take an ointment of defninicon and dissolve it in sweet oil, and apply it to the affected area with a piece of soft cloth, covering it well, and use this.
E ja fa semblant en aquela accio, quan no y a brac, enguent dyafinicon, mel quan es coyt entro que sia engrossat, e usa de lu; o que prenguas mirra e aloen e enses, e trissa tot e polveriza sobre le mel quan es sus le foc, e aprop lineys aquo sobre drap e strenh aquel sobre le sinu; e lineys aquel am le mel le qual has cuoyt entro que es engrossat, e polveriza sobre drap e strenh aquel.	And make a semblance in that action, when there is no need for it, of applying an ointment of defninicon, honey when mixed in to be thickened, and use this. Or what you take myrrh and aloes and incense, and grind them all together over the fire with honey, then apply lines of this on cloth and strengthen it over the sinus; and apply lines of that to the honey which you have mixed and is thickened, and grind these over cloth and strengthen it.
E alcunas veguadas so administratz am lu aristologia longua e razitz de lili celesti (e es lili celesti) e farina de errs e centaurea, e usa de aquels simples o ajustatz, trissa aquels e cribela e polveriza sobre le mel le qual he recomtat; e husa de lu.	And sometimes it is administered to him long-lasting aromatic incense and the celestial lily (and the celestial lily) and powder of iris and centaury, and use those simples either alone or mixed, sift them and grind over the honey which I have recommended; and use it.
E si es prolonguat le sinu, e no es sanat per aquesta curacio, lahoras sapias que la corrupcio es en le preon de lu, e ja fa enquisicio en les osses o en les autres membres durs o als liaments; lahoras tu le cura am curacio fistular, ayssi cum desus es dit.	And if the sinus is prolonged and is not healed by this treatment, then you should know that the corruption is in the root of it, and seek inquiry in the bones or in other hard members or ligaments; then you treat it with a fistula cure, as was said above.
De curacio de panarici et unguis attritae et incisione digiti additi et sectione.	For the treatment of tumors, nail abrasion, and incision of the digit with additional sectioning.
Panarici es apostema le qual nays dejos la ungla del dit pous de la ma o del pe, e fort leu nays en les autres ditz, e cum es prolonguat e la sua curacio es mens prezada, o es apostemat de apostema caut, o es corrumput, e gieta brac entro que corrodeys la razitz de la ungla, e fort leu corromp aquela tota, e fort leu perve la sua corrupcio al os entro que es a lu odor fetent, e es fayta la extremitat del dit lada, e la color de lu es fayta fusca.	Panarici is an apostema which leaves the nail of the finger or toe, and is firm in other fingers, and as it is prolonged and its cure is less prized, or it becomes a cautery apostema, or it is corrupted, and a branch is inserted that corrodes the root of the nail, and corrupts it entirely, and allows its corruption to pervade the bone within which it emits an odor, and the tip of the finger is cut off, and the color of it becomes jaundiced.
E donc quan tu auras aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas am ferr tota la superfluitat que es romasa de la ungla e aprop cauteriza la plagla aprop aquo, quar cauteri mot es juvatiu en aysso.	And when you have done that as we have said in the division and do not concur with your cure, then cover that part where the bone is broken and place there a cautery, for a hot cautery is beneficial in this.
Mays si le os es sa e la ungla es sana, e las addicios de la ungla vuoydas ja compremen las carns a las partidas dedintz, e comensan lu punger e ledeysso aquela, lahoras cove que tu pauses ray subtil dejos le angle de la ungla que pungeys la carn, e impelleys aquela sus e inscideys aquela carn am facilitat, e pausa sobre aquo que roman de la carn de las medicinas comburentz corrosivas entro que sia tot remaugut; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	If the bone is sound and the joint diseases have already compressed the flesh at the internal parts, and begin to prick and lead that, then cover the angle of the joint that pricks the flesh, and push it out and incise that flesh with ease, and place your hand over what remains of the flesh where corrosive burning medicines are allowed to act until it is thoroughly treated; then cure that part with ointment once it is healed.
Mays si la corrupcio ja enprem en le os, lahoras cove que tu inscidas le os aquel e le extraguas, car nul temps no es sanat que sia en lu le os corrumput.	If the corruption has already invaded the bone, then you must incise the bone there and extract it, for no time will heal what is corrupted in the bone.
E si vezes la corrozio e la corupcio anar en le dit, lahoras tu inscideys aquel en un dels nozes segons que es premesa la sua rememoracio, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you see the corrosion and corruption spreading to that area, then incise there in one of the bones according to where the pain is remembered, and cure that part once it is healed.
Mays si a la ungla endeve percussio o atricio, e endeve en aquela dolor vehement, lahoras cove que tu al comensament fleubotomes le malaute, e aprop secca la ungla am spatum agut am seccio transversa desus en jus, e guarda te que la seccio no pervengua entro a la carn que es dejos la ungla, quar tu faras accidir al malaute dolor vehement, e sira causa a nativitat de la carn ajustada superflua en le loc; e aprop cura aquel loc am aquo que ceda dolor.	If at the joint upon percussion or friction there is intense pain, then at the beginning lance the patient, and draw out the humor with an incision above using a sharp blade for transverse extraction of fluid, and be careful that the incision does not reach the flesh left by the joint, for you will cause intense pain to the patient due to the nature of redundant adjusted flesh in that place; and treat that area so that it no longer hurts.
Mays dit ajustat, le qual es nat en las mas de alcus homes, fort leu es carnos tot, e fort leu so en lu osses, o fort leu es en lu ungla.	Moreover, this redundant adjusted flesh is found in many people, being very soft in the muscles and very hard in the bones, or very soft in the joint.
E alcus de lu son natz en la razit de la junctura, o es la nativitat de lu en alcus nozes dels ditz.	And some of it is found in the recesses of the joint, or the natural condition of it is located in certain nodules of the fingers.
Mays aquel que es nat en alcus nozes del dit no se mau, e aquest que es nat en las juncturas fort leu es maugut.	Moreover, that which is found in certain nodules of the fingers is not soft, and this which is found in the joints is much softer.
E de aquels que son natz carnoses, la seccio es leugiera, e es que tu inscidas aquel deves la sua razitz am spatum lat.	And for those that are naturally fleshy, the incision should be light, and you must cut into it at its recesses with a sharp blade.
Mays de aquel que es nat en la razitz de la junctura, la curacio es dificil; e donc guarda te de la abscizio de lu.	More difficult for that which is near the root of the joint; therefore guard it from cutting.
Mays en aquel que es nat en dit deves les nozes, cove que tu inscidas al comensament la carn de lu am inscizio redonda entro al os, e aprop serra am una de aquelas serras convenientz ad aquo, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	More difficult is that which is near the knee; ensure that you incise the beginning of the flesh at the joint with a round cut into the bone, and nearby it will be one of those convenient joints for this, and cure that inside until it is healed.
Mays consolidacio la qual accideys als ditz entre lor motas veguadas o per nativitat del home que nays enayssi, o per consolidacio de plagua o per combustio de foc, o per semblantz, adonc cove que secces aquela consolidacio entro que les ditz retorno a la sua forma natural.	More difficult is the consolidation which occurs to the fingers between their joints either by nature of the person who has them, or by natural consolidation, or by inflammation, or by burning, then you must cure that consolidation until the fingers return to their natural form.
E aprop pausa entre lor draps de li enfuzes en oli rozat per que no sian consolidatz leugierament, e separa entre aquels, o pausa entre aquels una lamina de plom subtil entro que sia consolidat segon que cove.	And place your hand between his sheets where you have applied oil to prevent the joints from consolidating lightly, and separate between them, or place a thin sheet of lead between them until they consolidate as needed.
E semblantment si accideys consolidacio en alcus ditz am la palma, lahoras tu secca aquela consolidacio segon que es preparada e conveneys a la figura del membre.	And similarly, if consolidation occurs in some fingers on the palm, then you must cure that consolidation as prepared and conform to the figure of the limb.
De inscizio de vices, so son varicas.	Of vein diseases, such are varicose veins.
Vices so son varicas, e so venas envolutas grossas plenas de superfluitatz melencolicas las quals veno en motz dels membres del cors, e le major adveniment de lor en las cambas, e majorment en las cambas dels itinerantz e dels laborantz e dels portantz.	Vein diseases are varicose veins, and such are swollen veins full of melancholic excesses that occur in the parts of the body, with the greatest occurrence in the groins, especially in the groins of those who travel much, work much, and carry things.
Adonc cove que tu administres purguacio del cors de colera negra alcunas veguadas am expulcio fort, e aprop sangna le pacient de la vena basilica.	Then administer a purge of the body with black bile several times until there is a strong expulsion, and then bleed the patient from the great vein.
Mays la curacio de lor am ferr es segon dos manieyras: la una es que sia inscizas e sia atirat aquel sanc negre, e l’autra manieyra es que sia elevada la vena e sia extrayta tota.	More often, the treatment for them is according to two methods: one is to incise and draw off that black blood, and the other method is to elevate the vein and extract it entirely.
La seccio de lu es segon aquesta manieyra: embroca al comensament la camba am aygua cauda mot entro que le sanc gros sia resolvut, que es feculent de la camba, e aprop strenh la camba del malaute a la partida pus sobirana de la coyssa entro a la partida dejos del denol am una benda, e aprop secca la vena en un loc, o en dos, o en tres am seccio ampla, e aprop eleva le sanc negra am la tieua ma de la partida dejos de la camba entro en sus, e desus en jus, entro que del sanc sia yssida la quantitat que voles e que vezes habastar, e la qual tollera la vertut del malaute.	The sectioning is done in this manner: moisten the beginning of the groin with hot water until the thick blood is resolved, which is from the groin. Then strengthen the area above the patient's thigh between the inner and outer parts of the leg with a bandage. Next, dry the vein in one, two, or three places with a wide drying technique. Use your hand to elevate the black blood from below the groin upwards, into and above it, until the quantity of blood that you desire has drained, which is sufficient to neutralize the effect of the disease.
E aprop lia aquela, e comanda a lu que abstengua de las viandas colera negra engendrantz.	And then raise her up, and command her to abstain from foods generating black bile.
E itera la curacio per fleubotomia quan las venas so umplidas e aquo notz al malaute.	And continue the cure through phlebotomy when the veins are full and this is noted by the patient.
Mays la elevacio de lor es segon aquesta manieyra: tu que razas la camba del malaute, si en lu so motz pels, e aprop met le en banh e embroca la camba de lu am aygua cauda entro que s’enrogesesca e las venas sian exuberadas; o que sia exercitat per exercici fort, si banh no es a tu present, entro que·l membre sia scalfat.	More specifically for the elevation of their legs: you lift the patient's thigh, if there are swellings in them, and then place them in hot water and wrap the thigh with wet cloth until it becomes red and the veins are prominent; or exercise them with strong activity if hot water is not available, until the limb is heated.
E aprop secsa la codena en le dreyt de la vena per seccio en le lonc o en le derier de lu deves le denol, o en le pus bas de lu deves lo talo.	And then dry the bandage along the vein by sectioning it in the length or at the end of it you should drain it, or at the lower part of it you should cut it.
E aprop uobre la codena am uncis e excorja la vena de tota part entro que appara al sentiment, e es deves la appericio de lu que vezes aquela roga declinant a negror.	And then cut the bandage with scissors and strip the vein from all parts until it appears by your feeling, and you should observe the appearance of that cord draining to black.
E donc cum evazeys e de la codena tu vezes aquela blanca quays sia corda.	And then, as you remove the bandage, you see that white which is the cord.
E aprop tu met dejos aquela le ray entro que sia elevada e sia gitada de la codena, e sospen aquela am onci orp leon.	And then you place that leg elevated and bent at the knee, suspending it on an armrest or lion's foot.
E aprop secsa autra seccio aprop aquela seccio per tres ditz, e aprop excorja la codena de la partida desus de la vena entro que apparia.	And then dry that area near that section for three digits, and then strip the knee from the upper part of the vein where it appears.
E aprop eleva aquela e inscideys aquela en deriera seccio deves le talo, e aprop extratz aquela e eleva aquela entro que sia yssida per la seccio segonda, e aprop extratz aquela de la seccio que es sobre aquela.	And then elevate that and incise the rear section of the tendon, and then extract it and elevate it where it enters through the second section, and then extract it from the section above that.
E fay aquo entro que extraguas aquela de la seccio que es pus sobirana o pus auta de totas las seccios, entro que tota es yssida; e lahoras inscideys aquela.	And do this where you extract it from the section that is higher above or above all other sections, where it is fully inserted; then incise it.
E si no obezeys a tu ad extrayre e elevar, lahoras intromet una agulha am fiel fort doble e ligua aquela e extratz la, o intromet dejos lu le ray e revolveys la tua ma a tota part entro qu’en sia getada.	And if you do not follow this to extract and elevate, then insert a strong doubled needle with a thread and tie it there, and then extract it. Or insert that needle and rotate your hand in all directions where it is bent.
E guarda te que no sia inscidida; quar si es trencada, es fayt a tu dificil elevar aquela mot e es vengut sobre le malaute per aquela nocument.	And make sure it is not incised; for if it is broken, it will be difficult to elevate that part and will have come over the wound through that damage.
E cum aquela tota auras fora-gitada, lahoras pausa sobre le loc de la plagua lana submerssa en vi e oli rozat e oli no-rozat, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And when all of it has been removed, then place over the wound wool soaked in wine and olive oil, whether well-filtered or not, and care for it until it is healed.
E si la vit es contrayta havent tortuositat a la qual sia envolucio a las partidas, e no es segon rectitut segon que havem dit, lahoras cove que tu fendas sobre aquela a tota partida de tortuositat de lu e als locs de envolucio de lu, e aprop suspen aquela am uncis entro que eleves aquela tota.	And if the vein is contracted having curvature in which there is wrapping at the parts, and it is not according to straightness as we have said, then cut into that completely at all parts of its curvature and at the places of its wrapping, and suspend that with strings so that you lift that entirely.
E guarda te deves la tua seccio que no inscidas la vena e que no plagues aquela, quar dificil sira a tu elevar aquela; e serva la tua prudencia en aquela.	And guard yourself in your section so that you do not cut the vein and that you do not damage that, for it will be difficult to lift that; and use your prudence there.
Forma del inscident am le qual es seccada vit:	Shape of the cut where the vein is dried:
Forma de unci orp:	Shape of the string knot:
No es a lu accuitat ayssi cum als uncis ni es de aguda extremitat per so que no plague la vena; e es de grossa flexibilitat leon, quar si era subtil, inscidira la vena per la sua subtilitat; habantz es en lu superflua grosseza ayssi cum havem dit.	It is not prepared like the strings, nor of sharp point for fear that it damage the vein; and it is of rough flexibility. If it were thin, it would cut the vein due to its thinness; hence, it is in its superfluous thickness as we have said.
De extraccio venae cruris.	From the extraction of the crus vein.
Aquesta vena es engendrada en las cambas en terras caudas ayssi cum al- Ategi en terra de Arabics e en las terras de India caudas e aridas de pauca teneritat e en las quals no nays erba ni aybre.	This vein is generated in the legs in lands of caudae as Al-Ategi describes in the land of Arabs and in the lands of India, which are arid and of little tenacity, in which no grass nor trees grow.
E fort leu es engendrada en autres locs del cors otra las cambas.	And the strong vein is generated in other parts of the body besides the legs.
E la gestacio de lu es de putrefaccio que ve dejos la codena ayssi cum venen dedintz le cors serpentz e vermps e scarides e verms engendrantz entre la codena e la carn.	And its generation is from putrefaction that breaks the chain as venom inside the body becomes serpents, worms, and lice, generating between the chain and the flesh.
E senhal de la suscepcio de l’adveniment de lu es de aquesta vena que accideys en la camba enflammacio vehement; e aprop le loc es vesicat; e aprop comensa la vena yssir del loc de aquela vesicacio quays sembla razit de planta.	And the sign of the susceptibility to the onset of this condition is when you encounter inflammation in the leg intensely; then, nearby, the area becomes blistered; and soon after, the vein starts to protrude from the location of that blistering, seeming like a plant sprouting.
E adonc cum appar de lu la extremitat, lahoras cove que tu envolvas sobre aquela una pessa de plom del qual sia le pes de una drac. entro a ii drac., e noza aquela e layssa le plom suspendut de la camba.	And when the extremity appears, then cover that area with a piece of lead weighing as much as one drachm. Place it there and let the lead hang from the leg.
E tantas veguadas cum yeys de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, envolveys aquo em plom e noza aquel.	And as often as some cause affects the parts outside, wrap this in lead and apply it.
E si mot es prolonguat, lahoras tu inscideys una partida de lu e envolopa le romanent; e no inscidas aquela de razit entro que sia fora yssida, quar si inscideys aquela es contrayta e intra en la carn e fa accidir apostema e poyredura en le loc e ulceracio mala.	And if the wound is prolonged, then you incise a part of it and cover the remainder; and do not incise that which is inside while that which is outside has been entered, for if you incise that, it will contract and enter the flesh and cause an abscess and foul swelling in the area and a bad ulcer.
Per que cove que sia tractada suaument e sia extrayta petit a petit, entro que sia fora-gitada del derier de lu e no remangua de lu alcuna causa en le cors.	Because it must be treated thoroughly and extracted little by little, until it is expelled from the rear end of the patient and no cause is left in the body.
E de aquesta vena es yssit en alcus homes que es en la sua longitut de v palms e de detz e ja es pervengut a mi que yssic un de xx palms.	And from this vein, one is extracted in some men that are its length about five or six palms, and I have been told that one was extracted that was twenty palms long.
E si es inscidida en la hora de la sua medicacio, lahoras intromet lo ray en le trauc de lu e perfora aquela am lonc trauc am le cors, entro que sia evacuat tot aquo que es en la materia, e administra putrefaccio del loc per alcus dias am medicinas; e aprop cura aquela per la curacio de apostemas.	And if it is incised at the time of its medication, then insert the probe into the wound and perforate that along the length of the wound, until all that is in the matter is evacuated, and administer putrefaction to the area for several days with medications; and then cure it through the treatment of abscesses.
E aquesta vena alcunas veguadas ha motz ramps, e majorment quan apar a la junctura del pe o en le pe, e veno a lu motz orrificis, e es yssit de quascu orrifici ram.	And this vein sometimes has protrusions, especially when it appears at the joint of the foot or in the foot, and brings with it many openings, each of which is situated differently.
E donc cura aquela ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio e am aquo que es desus dit.	And thus care for it as we have said in the division and above.
De sectione super vermes generatos sub cute et dicitur aegritudo bovina.	Of the section on worms generated under the skin, and it is called bovine illness.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en alcuna terra deves nos malautia bovina per so quar motas veguadas endeve als bious e es verm pauc un le qual es nat entre la codena e la carn, e va en tot le cos pujan e devalan, e es mostrat al sentiment deves le sieu anament de membre en membre entro que disromp la codena e yeys fora.	This illness is named in some lands as the bovine disease. It is caused by worms that appear frequently among cattle and these few worms are native between the skin and the flesh, and they move up and down throughout the body, and are felt by their own movement from member to member, breaking the skin and coming out.
E la generacio de lu es per putrefaccio de alcunas humors ayssi cum accideysso verms e serpentz e lombrics e ascaridas en le ventre.	And the generation of these worms occurs through the putrefaction of some humors, just as happens with maggots, snakes, worms, and ascarids in the belly.
E es temut per la malicia de lu, quar quan el va en le cors e es elevat al cap, e es pervengut al huel, lahoras fort leu uebre en lu e intra e destruzeys le huel, e aquo endeve motas veguadas.	And it is feared because of its malice, for when it goes in the body and rises to the head, and reaches the vein, then strongly inflames it and enters and destroys the vein, and this happens frequently.
E donc quan tu voles curar aquel e extraire lu, lahoras no se fa si no deves la sieua ambulacio e apparacio de lu al sentiment, e adonc cove que tu strenhas aquo que es sobre lu e aquo que es dejos lu am liament e constriccio fort, e aprop secca sobre lu e extratz aquel.	And when you want to cure it and extract it, it is not done without considering its circulation and appearance according to the sensation, then check what is over it and what is left it in compression and strong construction, and dry it thoroughly before extracting it.
E si es preondat en la carn e no le atrobes, lahoras tu pausa cauteri am foc sobre le loc entro que mora, e la major causa que es temuda es corrupcio de lu am la qual corrump le loc ayssi cum havem dit.	And if it is palpated in the flesh and you do not find it, then place a cautery on fire over the area where it resides, and the main fear is corruption of it, which corrupts the area as we have said.
May si tu vezes aquel esser pervengut al cap prop del huel, lahoras strenh sobre le sobrecil am fort strictura, e aprop secsa sobre lu, e extratz aquel; e cove que·l malaute use de mondificacio del sieu cors am medicinas evacuantz humors putridas malas, e guarda se de viandas generantz putrefaccio.	If you see it being carried to the head near the ear, then apply strong strictura over the supraorbital ridge, and dry it thoroughly, and extract it; then check that the illness uses modification of its body through medicines expelling corrupt bad humors, and avoid foods causing putrefaction.
De sectione super aegritudinem nafir.	On the section regarding the illness of the ear.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en nostra terra nafir, e es dolor la qual ve en alcus membres, e aprop es permudada de membre en membre.	This illness is called nafir in our land, and it is a pain that occurs in some members, and often is passed from member to member.
E yeu ja e vista aquela segon que yeu te recomtare.	And now I have seen that which I will describe to you.
Yeu fu apelat a una femna malauta ad una vila, e descubric le sieu bras e vi una imflacio petita en la vena funis del bras, e pus que fu romas per una hora, vi aquela imflacio anar ayssi cum va verm pujan ad aquest, mays pus leugierament que esser por, ayssi cum si fos argent viu quan corr de loc en loc.	I was called to a sick woman at a village, and upon examining her arm, I found a small swelling in the vein of the arm. After it had risen for about an hour, I saw that this swelling moved up like a worm climbing, though less urgently than feared, like live silver moving from place to place.
E adonc anet s’en la dolor de aquel loc e fiquet se en le muscle, e aprop aqui stec per una hora.	And then the pain was in that area, and a blister formed in the muscle, and there it stayed for about an hour.
E aprop correc en l’autre cors entro que pervenc al autre bras.	And then it moved to the other side of the body, entering the other arm.
E aprop recomtec a mi que revolvia se per tot le cors sieu segon que yeu vi; e fo trop meravelat de la permutacio de lu e de la velocitat de membre en membre.	And then I was told that she moved about the entire body as I observed; it was too wonderful to see the change in her and the speed with which it moved from one limb to another.
E yeu ja havia vist denant aquo en les mieus huels segon aquela manieyra, empero yeu he vistz motz les quals atroban dolor esser permutada de membra a membre.	And I had already seen this before in my patients in that manner, but I have also seen movements where the pain is found to be permuted from one limb to another.
Mays no vi aquo am les huels ayssi cum en la femna.	But not all have such symptoms as in the woman.
E yeu no cogiti esser aquo sino que es per aquo quar la femna era de viela, on so de secs cors e de venas descubertas, e en aquesta apparec al sentiment aquela ventositat permutada.	And I do not consider it to be so, but rather that it is because the woman was of slender body, with dry organs and veins exposed, and in this case the sensation of that swelling has changed.
E es necessari que no apparesca segon aquesta retro-curacio en aquels que son delicioses e am cors humitz de venas ameguadas.	And it is necessary that there be no such backward curvature in those who are delicate and have moist organs with enlarged veins.
E cum tu voles la curacio de lu, e le pacient sent aquela dolor, lahoras no es a tu aparent al huel ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras tu strenh sobre aquel e dejos lu leugierament e secse sobre aquel entro que sia yssida aquela ventositat coartada, e cauterize le loc.	And since you want the cure for it, and the patient feels that pain, when it does not appear as you expect in the way we have said, then strengthen that area and gently but firmly over it until the compressed swelling is inserted, and apply a cautery to the place.
Mays si tu no la vezes am los tieus huels, alhoras tu cura aquel am excussio del cors e am aquo que expelleys ventositatz, e carmina aquelas am pillulas fetidas e am pillulas de serapi e semblantz.	But if you do not see it in the swollen joints, then cure that by releasing the body and by what you expel of the swelling, and purge those with stinking pills and with serapian pills and similar.
De extraccio de sagetas.	From the extraction of arrows.
Sagetas son diversificadas segon las specias, e segon les locs dels cors en les quals cazo, quar la lor diversitat es que de aquellas so que han grans puntas, e petitas, e concavas, e sordas, so es solidas; e de lor so que han tres angles, e de aquelas a las quals so que han lenguas; e de aquelas a las quals so astelas.	Arrows are diverse according to the species, and according to the places of the body in which they lodge, for their diversity is that some have large points, small, concave, and dull, being solid; and some have three angles, and of those to which belong tongues; and of those to which belong feathers.
E aquela que es segon les membres e las pessas en las quals cazo es segon dos manieyras: quar les membres o so membres principals concaus, ayssi cum le cervel, le cor, e·l fitge, e le pulmo, e les ronhos, e les budels, e la vezica, e a lor semblantz; e donc quan catz en alcu de aquestz membres e aparo a tu senhals de mort, la qual causa yeu recomtare aprop, lahoras cove que tu evites extraccio de aquela sageta en aquels quar la mort siec aquel en le qual en las majors disposicios, e quan a tu no appareysso aquestz mals senhals, e la sageta no es amaguada en la profunditat del membre, lahoras tu extratz aquela e cura la plagua.	And that which is according to the members and the feet in which they lodge is according to two manners: for the members or are principal causes, thus such as the brain, the heart, the liver, the lungs, the intestines, the bladder, and their like; and therefore when it lodges in any of these members and appears to you signs of death, which cause I will recount shortly, then you should avoid the extraction of that arrow in those where death lies, especially in the major dispositions, and when to you do not appear these evil signs, and the arrow is not hidden in the depth of the member, then you extract it and cure the wound.
E dels senhals del servel es quan catz en lu sageta, e trespassa le os, e es yssit del cyphac le qual es sobre le cervel, quar accideys per lu soda vehement, e scotomia, e vertige, e rogor en les huels, e imflamacio e rogor de la lengua, e spasme e permixtio de entendament e vomi de colera, e fort leu es abscindida la paraula e es destruida la votz, e es yssit del loc de la plagua humiditat blanca semblant a pols, e yeys de lu semblant ad aquositat de la carn.	And of the signs of suffocation is when the arrow lodges in it, pierces the bone, and sits above the skull, which is over the brain, for it happens by strong acute pain, scotoma, vertigo, redness in the palms, inflammation and redness of the tongue, spasms and confusion of understanding, and vomiting of bile, and the speech is greatly impaired, the voice destroyed, and sitting at the site of the wound a white moisture resembling dust, and from it seeming like an excess of flesh.
E donc si appareyso a tu aquestz senhals, lahoras tu abste de la curacio e de la extraccio de la sageta, si non es fora.	And if you see these signs in this manner, then abstain from the cure and extraction of the arrow, unless it is outside.
Mays les senhals de la sageta quan catz en le cor, so que ela es prop de la mamila senestra, e sent am aquela quays sia ficada en causa dura, e no es causa vueda; e fort leu le movement de la sageta es semblant a movement del pols, e corr de la plagua sanc negra, e siec aquel fregiditat de las extremitatz, e suzor freja, e sincopi; e donc sapias que la mort descen ses tot dopte.	And the signs of the arrow when it has pierced the heart are that it is near the left nipple, and felt at that point where it was lodged in a hard substance, not visible; and the strong movement of the arrow seems like the pulse, and the flow of the black and foul blood, and the coldness at the extremities, pallor of the face, and syncope; and from this you would know that death descends suddenly.
E les senhals quan la sageta ha plaglat le pulmo so eyssiment de sanc spumos de la plagua, e les vayssels que so prop del col so apostematz, e es mudada la color del malaute, e expira sperit gran aut, e demanda atraccio de ayre freg.	And the signs when the arrow has pierced the lung are spitting of bloody foam from the wound, and the vessels near the neck are pulsating, and the color of the patient changes, and he breathes heavily or irregularly, and demands air with difficulty.
E si catz la sageta en le velament le qual es en le pietz, e la dolor lahoras es prop de las costas petitas, e es fayt le ale gran am vehement dolor e am sospir, e no so maugutz totz les membres dels muscles.	And if the arrow pierces the periosteum which is in the foot, and the pain then is near the small bones, and makes the swelling great with a strong and spasmodic pain, and does not affect all the members of the muscles.
E si catz la sageta en le stomac, lahoras fort leu yeys de la plagua vianda alcuna indigesta.	And if the arrow hits the stomach, then firmly press the wound to stop any indigestion.
E si catz la sageta en le ventre, e es ficada en lu, yeys alcuna fenda de la plagua, o la tela, o budel le qual es disromput, e no es speransa en la curacio de lu extraccio de la sageta.	And if the arrow hits the belly and is embedded in it, apply firm pressure to the wound or the skin, or the intestine which is ruptured, as there is no hope for the cure without removing the arrow.
E si la sageta catz en la vesica, e es yssida defora urina, e procesesca de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, e fort leu es dolor sobre le malaute, lahoras sapias que es mortal.	And if the arrow hits the bladder and pierces through causing urine to leak out, and any process of it reaches the parts outside, then intense pain in the wound indicates that it is fatal.
Mays les autres membres ayssi cum es la cara, le col, e·l golayro, e las spallas e le adjutori, e les spondils del dos, e la furcula, e la coysa, e la camba e a lor semblantz dels membres, son salvatz segon las majors disposicios quan la sageta no atroba vena ni arteria e no es sageta venenosa.	Moreover, the other members such as the face, neck, shoulder, arm, and ribs, the vertebrae of the back, the sternum, the pelvis, and their counterparts in the limbs, are saved according to major dispositions when the arrow does not find a vein or artery and is not a poisonous arrow.
E yeu recomtare aquo a tu que he vist del esser de aquestas sagetas, per que signifiques per aquo sobre la curacio tieua.	And I will recount to you what I have seen about the nature of these arrows, so that you may understand it regarding their treatment.
La qual causa es, quar en un home cazec sageta en le lacrimal del huel de lu en la razitz del nas, e yeu extrayssi aquela a lu del autra partida, dejos le grays de l’aurelha de lu, e es sanat, e no accidic en le huel de lu nocument.	The cause is that in a man an arrow struck the lacrimal gland of his eye in the root of his nose, and I extracted it from one side, left his ear gray, and he recovered, but nothing happened to his eye.
E extrayssi autra sageta a un Juzeu la qual cazec en lu en lo grays del sieu huel, dejos la palpebra pus dejos, e la sageta ja era occultada e no so conseguit de aquela sino una petita extremitat am la qual adhereys al sieu fust, e era gran sageta de las sagetas agudas dels Turcs , am ferr leon en la qual no havia aurelhas.	And I extracted another arrow from a Jew which struck him in the gray of his eye, leaving the eyelid behind, and the arrow was already hidden so that only a small extremity adhered to its shaft, and it was a large arrow among the sharp arrows of the Turks, embedded in iron where there were no ears.
E senat es le Juzieu , e no accidic en le sieu huel mal accident.	And the Jew is alive, and nothing happened to his eye, which was badly injured.
E extrayssi una autra sageta a un home Crestia la qual era cazuta en le golayro, e era sageta arabica, e es aquela a la qual so aurelhas; e adonc yeu inscidegui sobre aquela entre doas guidegi, e ja era submersa en le golayro de lu; e adonc yeu so subtiliat am aquela, e aprop extraxi aquela, e es sanat le Crestia .	And I extracted another arrow from a Christian man which was lodged in the groin, and it was an Arabic arrow, and that one had ears; then I incised over it between two bones, and it was already submerged in his groin; then I dissected around it, and soon extracted it, and the Christian recovered.
E extraxi autra sageta a un home la qual era cazuta en le sieu ventre, e cogitegui que moris per aquela; e donc, pus que foro passatz xxx dias e no es mudat sobre lu alcuna causa de las suas disposicios, inscidegui sobre la sageta e engenagui sobre aquela, e es sanat, e no accidic a lu accident mal.	And another arrow was extracted from a man which was embedded in his abdomen, and I perceived that he died of that; and therefore, after passing thirty days and no change occurring due to any cause of his condition, I incised over the arrow and managed it, and he was healed, and no ill accident befell him.
E vi mays un home en le qual cazec una sageta en le dos de lu, e consolidada es la plagua sobre lu, e pus que foc aprop set ans, yssic la sageta en la razitz de la coyssa.	And I found a man in whom an arrow was embedded in his back, and the wound had healed over it, and after approaching seven years, incise the arrow in the crease of the thigh.
E vi una femna a la qual cazec sageta en le sieu ventre, e la plagua es consolidada dedintz lu, e no es mudada en las suas disposicios en re, e la femna no atrobec nocument en alcunas de las suas opperacios naturals.	And I found a woman in whom an arrow was embedded in her abdomen, and the wound had healed inside it, and there was no change in her condition over time, and the woman did not experience any harm in any of her natural operations.
E vi un autre home al qual cazec sageta en la sua cara e consolidada es la plagua e romas la sageta, no atrobant aqui mota dolor, e motz semblantz ad aquestz.	And I found another man in whom an arrow was embedded in his face, and the wound had healed, with the arrow broken inside. He did not experience much pain, and appeared similar to others.
E extrayssi la sageta del home dels princeps del rey que era cazuda en le mieg loc del nas sieu e ja havia declinat a la partida dreyta un petit, e occultada era tota la sageta.	And I extracted the arrow from the king's principal man, who was embedded in the middle of his nose, and it had slightly shifted to the right side. The entire arrow was hidden.
E yeu fu appelat a la curacio de lu aprop le cazement de la sageta entro a tres dias.	And I was called for the treatment of him around the arrow wound within three days.
E adonc yeu atrobegui la plagua de la sageta mot streyta; e adonc yeu inquirigui aquela am tenta subtil, e no sentigui aquela; mays el la sentia puncio dejos la aurelha dreyta, e adonc speregui que aquela punccio era per la extremitat de la sageta.	And then you will find the wound of the arrow stretched out; and then you will inquire about the one that feels slightly tender, but does not feel it; yet he felt the puncture and let go of his right ear, and then you will suspect that this puncture was at the extremity of the arrow.
E amplastregui le loc am emplaustre en le qual es vertut atrectiva e digestiva, confizant de mi que·l loc se apostemes per que appares a mi le loc de la sageta, per que secces sobre aquela.	And apply the place to be applied with an attractive and digestive plaster, trusting that the place we place it will show me the location of the arrow, so that it dries on that.
E no accidic en le loc accident significant que la sageta hagues conseguit aquel loc; e yeu continuegui am le emplaustre sobre lu per motz dias e no accidic accident; e consolidada es la plagua entretant, e romas le malaute de la extreccio de lu per spazi de motz dias entro que un jorn sentic la sageta dintz le sieu nas e recontec aquo a mi.	And do not be deceived by the significant spot where the arrow struck; and continue applying the plaster over it for several days without incident; and during this time, the wound heals, and you remove the stitches from the extraction site over a period of several days until one day you feel the arrow inside its sheath and tell me so.
E adonc yeu pausegui sobre la plagua medicina acuta corrosiva per motz dias entro que foc ubert, e am la tenta yeu assagegui aquel, e atrobegui la extremitat de la sageta subtil, la qual adhereys al fust.	And then place a strong corrosive medicine on the wound for several days until it opens up. And by probing, you will find and locate the tip of the arrow, which adheres to the shaft.
E aprop yeu ajustegui en la apersio de la plagua per aquela medicina acuta entro que apparec a mi visiblament la extremitat de la sageta, e passec a mi temps am aquo per le spazi de temps entro quatre meses.	And then you adjust in the opening of the wound with that sharp medicine where I visibly see the tip of the arrow appear, and pass to my time for this within four months.
E aprop pus que la plagua foc amplificada, e foc a mi possible entrometre las forfexs en lu, e remaure aquela, e no obezic ad eyssiment, lahoras yeu no cessegui subtiliar e ingeniar sobre aquela am manieyras de engen, entro que comensegui un dia sobre aquela am manieyras de engens pendre lu am forceps descentment faytas, segon que vindra la forma de aquelas en la fi del capitol, entro que extraxi aquela; e aprop restauregui aquela plagua.	And then, when the wound is sufficiently enlarged, and it is possible for me to insert the forceps into it, I widen that, and without obstaunce from them, I do not cease to refine and devise various methods of engineering until one day I managed to grasp that with descending forceps made specifically, as will be described at the end of this chapter, and then I extracted it; and thereafter I restored that wound.
E alcus metges jutgavan que la cartillage del nas no es restaurada, e yeu restauregui aquela e la plagua es consolidada, e sanat es le malaute per sanetat entiera, e no noguec en lu en deguna causa.	And some doctors judged that the cartilage of the nose is not restored, but I restored that and the wound was consolidated, and the patient recovered completely, with no trace left in any way.
E yeu recomti a tu la qualitat de extraccio de alcunas sagetas per que pauses aquo regla e significacio sobre aquo que no he dit, quar las partidas de aquesta art e las difinicios de aquela no so conprehendudas am narracio ni no comprehen aquelas le libre.	And I recount to you the quality of extracting some arrows, so that you pause and consider this rule and significance of what I have not yet said, for the parts of this art and the definitions of those are not understood in the narration nor are they comprehended by the free will.
E le artifexs savi compara am pauc sobre mot; e am aquo que es present sobre aquo que es absent; e atroba operacio novela e instrument novel deves le descendement de las causas extranhas del art quan accideysso.	And the wise craftsmen compare a little on motion; and on what is present compared to what is absent; and find new operations and new instruments for the descent of foreign causes when they occur.
E donc yeu dic que sagetas no son fora-gitadas dels membres en les quals son ficadas sino segon dos manieyras: o per atraccio del loc en le qual intrec; o per le contrari de la autra partida.	And therefore I say that arrows are not removed from the members in which they are inserted but according to two manners: either by attraction of the place in which they enter; or by the contrary part.
E aquela que es gitada per le loc don es intrada, o es sageta procedent en loc carnos, e es atirada e fora-gitada.	And that which is removed by the place where entry was made, or the arrow proceeding in a fleshly location and being shot out.
E si no obezeys a eyssiment de la hora en la qual catz, lahoras cove que tu la laysses per alcus dias entro que poyresca la carn que es al enviro de lu, e sia alleujada l‘atraccio de lu e la sua egressio.	And if it does not obey the assessment of the hour at which it was shot, then you must leave it for a few days until the flesh around it can heal, and the attraction and its egress are alleviated.
E semblantment si es ficada en os e no obezeys a tu a eyssiment, lahoras layssa aquela per alcus dias e itera aquela am atraccio e mocio en quascun dia, e ja es fora-gitada.	And similarly, if it is inserted into bone and you do not obey your assessment, then leave that for a few days and apply attraction and motion each day, and it will be removed.
E si no obezeys a tu eyssiment aprop alcus dias, lahoras cove que tu perforas en le circuit de la sageta en aquel os de tota partida am taravel subtil entro que·l loc sia amplificat de la sageta, e aprop extratz aquela.	And if you do not obey your attempt for some days, then you should know that you have perforated in the circuit of the arrow at that bone of the entire part, making travel subtly between the area where the arrow is expanded, and then extract it.
E si la sageta es ficada en le os del cap e ja ha procezit en un dels ventres del cervel, e apparo en le malaute alcus de aquels accidentz les quals yeu e ditz, lahoras abste de la extraccio de la sageta e layssa aquela entro que·l sieu esser sia equat aprop alcus dias; quar si la sageta perve al ciphac, lahoras la mort no es a lu prolonguada.	And if the arrow is lodged in the bone of the head and has already pierced one of the ventricles of the brain, and appears in the patient some days later due to those accidents which you have named, then abstain from extracting the arrow and leave it there until its nature equates for some days; or if the arrow reaches the medulla, then death will not be prolonged.
E si la sageta no es ficada sino en le cors del os tant solament e no passa entro al ciphac, e roman le malaute per alcus dias, e no accideys a lu denguna causa de aquels accidentz, lahoras tu engenia en la atraccio de la sageta e en la atraccio de lu.	And if the arrow is not lodged in the bone of the head but only in the body and does not pass into the medulla, and remains in the patient for some days, and you do not suffer any of those accidents due to it, then you proceed with the extraction of the arrow and treat it.
Mays si es mot ficada e no obezeys a tu a extraccio, lahoras tu aministra taravels en le circuit de la sageta ayssi cum havem recomtat, e aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	But if it is lodged and you do not obey your extraction, then you administer travels in the circuit of the arrow as we have recommended, and then care for the area until it is healed.
Mays si la sageta ja es amaguada en le loc del cors, e es amaguada del sentiment, lahoras tu inquireys aquela am tenta, e si tu sentas aquela, lahoras atira aquela am alcus sturmentz les quals so convenientz a la atraccio de lu.	But if the arrow is already hidden in the place of the body and hidden from sensation, then you inquire about that area with your hand, and if you feel it, then probe with a few instruments which are suitable for the removal of it.
E si no podes sobre lu per la constriccio de la plagua e per la longitut del preon, e aqui no es os ni nervi ni vena, lahoras tu fen sobre la plagua entro que sia amplificada e que sia possible extrayre la sageta.	And if you cannot reach it due to the depth of the wound and the length of the arrow, and here there are neither nerves nor veins, then you cut into the wound when it is enlarged and it is possible to extract the arrow.
E si so a lu aurelhas am las quals sia tenguda, lahoras tu deliura la carn en la qual es ficada de tota partida am tot le engen que poyras far; e ingenia sobre aquo, si no podes sobre la evasio de la carn en la fractura de las aurelhas e en torssio de aquelas entro que obezesca.	And if it is in the ears where it is lodged, then you cut into the flesh in which it is embedded from every direction with all the skill you can muster; and use your ingenuity, if you cannot extract the flesh in the fracture of the ears and in the torsion of those areas that must yield.
E quan tu administras la extraccio de la sageta en quascun loc on sia, lahoras tu usa am torcio de la tua ma am forceps a totas partidas entro que fassa aquela obezir; e subtilia am deriera subtilitat que la sageta no sia trencada e que sia fayta a tu dificil atraccio de lu e de aquela extraccio.	And when you administer the extraction of the arrow in any place where it is, then you use your hand's torque and forceps from all directions until they make it yield; and with subtle skill ensure that the arrow is not broken and that it is made easy for its extraction and that of that extraction.
E si no podes sobre aquela de la tua hora, lahoras tu layssa per alcus dias entro que se poyrescan las partidas que so en le circuit de lu, e aprop itera aquela quar lahoras es alleujada.	And if you cannot do this at your hour, then you let it be for some days until the parts that are in the circuit of him heal, and then again iterate that which is alleviated.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat flux de sanc, lahoras tu administra aquo que havem dit de curacio en le sieu capitol.	But if it makes him contrary with a flow of sweat, then you administer what we have said for cure in its chapter.
E guarda la tua vertut de inscizio de vena o de nervi, o de corda, e aministra engen en tota manieyra a tu possibla de la evasio de la sageta; e fay aquo am facilitat e tranquillitat e tarditat e fermetat ayssi cum yeu e a tu recomtat.	And preserve your virtue from incision of vein or nerve, or cord, and administer engen in every manner for the evacuation of the arrow; and do this with facilitation and tranquility and tardiness and firmness as you have been taught.
E donc que fassas contrayre la sageta per so que·l malaute sia segon la figura segon la qual foc deves le cazement de la sageta en lu, quar es mays juvatiu.	And therefore make the arrow contract by itself so that the patient be according to the figure according to which you should place the tip of the arrow in him, for this is more advantageous.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible, lahoras tu aministra aquo que es a tu possible per las figuras.	But if this is not possible for you, then administer what is possible for you according to the figures.
Mays las sagetas que son fora-gitadas per le contrari del autra partida, o que ja de lu procezeys alcuna partida a las partidas de fora, o fa gilbositat la extramitat de la sageta per sentiment de la partida pus desus de la codena propdana e vezes aquela eminent; adonc tu secsa sobre aquela; e sia la seccio segon la quantitat en la qual prenguan las forceps; e aprop atira aquela, quar ela es fayta leugiera a eyssiment.	But the arrows that are counter-directed from another part, or that already have proceeded to some part of the outer parts, or increase the extramitigation of the arrow by the sensation of the part above the codena often eminent; then you secure over that; and let the section be according to the quantity in which the forceps take hold; and then pull that, for it is made light by eysisment.
Mays si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu tortz lama segon contrarietat entro que la sageta enprema en le os, e amplifique a si meteys, e aprop extratz aquela.	But if it is retained in the bone, then twist the limb according to the opposite direction where the arrow presses on the bone, and stretch it out, and place it carefully.
E sino, layssa aquela per alcus dias, e aprop itera aquela entro qu’en yesca.	But if not, leave it for a few days, and then reapply it where it burned.
E si le fust de la sageta es en aquela, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am lu.	But if the shaft of the arrow is there, then push it into place.
Mays si le fust es cazut e voles aministrar inpulsio, lahoras tu intromet e aquela, si es sorda, sturment concau per so que intre la concavitat de lu en la coa de la sageta e aprop impelleys aquela am lu.	But if the shaft is embedded and you want to administer pressure, then insert it there. If it is stuck, stir it gently with a concave tool so that its cavity engages with the arrow's head, and then push it into place.
Mays si la sageta es concava, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am sturment fort intrant en aquela, quar la sageta es alleujada per aquela.	But if the arrow is concave, then push it with strong stirring entering it, so that the arrow expands from within.
E si la sageta es entoxiguada, lahoras cove que tu concaves tota la carn en la qual es le vere, si es a tu possible aquo, e aprop cura aquela am aquo que si conveneys.	And if the arrow is poisoned, then make sure you concave all the flesh where it entered, if possible, and then treat it with what is appropriate.
E si la sageta catz en le pietz, o en le ventre, o en la vesica, o en le costat, e es propinqua per so que tu tocas aquela am la tenta, e es a tu possible secsar sobre aquela, lahoras secsa sobre aquela e guarda te de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e extratz aquela, e aprop cos la plagua si indigeys, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the arrow hits the foot, or the abdomen, or the bladder, or the side, and is close enough for you to touch it with your hand, and it is possible to extract it from there, then extract it and carefully remove any part of the wound where a vein or nerve might be, and cure that area until it is healed.
Forma de forceps am las quals so atiradas las sagetas:	The form of forceps with which arrows are drawn:
Sian las extremitatz de lor cum a bec de ausel que son faytas cum serra quan prendon sobre la sageta per so que no la layssen.	Let the ends be shaped like the mouth of an eagle, so that they can grasp the arrow when it is taken out without letting go.
E de aquelas son faytas motas specias, grans, paucas e migieras, segon la quantitat de la grandeza de la sageta e de la sieua pauqueza, e de la amplitud de la plagua, e de la constriccio de lu.	And these are made in special shapes, large, few, and medium-sized, according to the size of the arrow and its smallness, and the width of the wound, and the condition of it.
Forma de impellent concau de aquesta extremitat conquava ayssi cum pena de ausel per so que sia alleujat le intrament de la sageta en lu, e impulcio de aquela sorda:	The shape of the concave receiver at this end is made like the claw of an eagle so that it can facilitate the removal of the arrow from the wound, and impel the dull object:
Forma de impellent de sorda extremitat:	Form of pressing of silent extremity:
ayssi cum ray per so que sia alleujat le intrament de lu en la sageta concava e es impellida am aquel.	Thus, so that the instrument in the curved groove may be eased and pushed towards it.
De fleubotomia de las venas.	Of femoral vein puncture.
Las venas de fleubotomia de las quals corr costuma de fleubotomar so xxx, de las quals so en le cap xvi, so es doas venas pulsatils las quals so aprop las aurelhas, dic alhasisain; doas herbas que so en les dos templars apparentz; e doas venas que so en dos lacrimals de dos huels que son appeladas aspicientz; e la vena preparada en le mieg loc del front, e la vena que es en la extremitat del nas; e doas guidegi que so al col; e doas venas que so en la labia desus; e doas venas que so en la labia dejos; e — aquestas so las venas que so appeladas algelic —; e so doas venas que so dejos la lengua.	The veins for femoral puncture, of which it is customary to puncture two, located near the ears, as Alhazen says; two herbs that are on the two temples apparent; and two veins that are in two lacrimal glands of two eyes called asbestos; and the vein prepared in the middle part of the forehead, and the vein that is at the extremity of the nose; and two jugulars that are at the neck; and two veins that are in the upper lip; and two veins that are in the lower lip; and — these are the veins called algelic —; and there are two veins on the left side of the tongue.
Mays las venas que so fleubotomadas en les brasses so v; quar de aquelas es una cephalica, e es deves le latz silvestre; e le poble appela “la vena del cap”, e sorda, e es vena migiera, e es composta de un ram de la basilica, e de autre ram de la cephalica; e nomna aquela le poble “vena de tot le cors”, e basilica es vena la qual es pausada en le latz domestic, e es nomnada “citillar”, e nompnan aquela les vulguars “vena del ventre”; e funis del bras, e es pausada sobre le focil, e es aquela en la qual es fleubotomat, e es aquela que appar sobre le poutz per apparicio manifesta; e salvatella, e es la vena que es entre lo dit auricular e·l pus petit dit, e so en lu dos ramps.	More specifically, the veins that are punctured in the brachial region are v; of which one is cephalic, and is from the wild flax; the people call it “the vein of the head,” or sorda, and it is a median vein, composed of a branch of the basilica and another branch of the cephalic; they call the latter the people “vein of the whole body,” while the basilica is the vein that is placed on the domestic flax and is called “citillary,” and the vulgar call it “the vein of the belly”; from the funis brachialis, which is placed over the axilla, and it is in this one that puncture is made, and it is the one that appears above the elbow due to a clear appearance; salvatella, which is the vein between the said auricular and the small one, and it is in it two branches.
E en le pe e la camba so tres venas; la una de aquelas es que es dejos la curvatura del denolh del latz silvestre; e la segonda es sophena, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz domestic; e la vena sciatica, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz silvestre; e en la camba son autras venas semblantz ad aquelas.	In the foot and thigh there are three veins; one of them is that which gives curvature to the curve of the wild animal's heel; the second is sophena, and its place is in the thigh of the domestic animal; the sciatic vein, and its place is in the thigh of the wild animal; and in the thigh are other veins similar to those.
Le juvament de las venas que so aprop las aurelhas es a cataris antics e emigranea e sahafati e ulceracios del cap malas antiquas.	The health of the veins near the ears is related to catarrhs, headaches, and old maladies of the head.
E la qualitat de sagnar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: es que sia ras le cap del malaute, e sia freguat le cap del malaute en le occipiti en le loc de amdoas las venas am drap ample am bona fricacio; aprop strenha le malaute le sieu col am una benda entro que apparan las doas e les locs de lor so aprop las aurelhas en dos locs depremegutz del cap; e quereys aquela am le tieu dit, e si tu sentes le pols de aquelas am le dit tieu, aqui senha am tenta.	And the quality of bleeding those veins is according to what I will tell you: it should be done at the top of the patient's head, and the patient's head should be rubbed at the back of the skull where the two veins are located near the ears with a wide cloth in good friction; then firmly press the patient's neck with a bandage under which the two locations can be felt near the ears on two pressed areas of the head; and you want that at your right hand, and if you feel the pulse of those veins at your right hand, here it is to be tested.
Aprop tu pren la lancea cutellar, e es aquela que es inscident, e aprop tu intromet aquel dejos la vena en la codena entro que·l fleubotomi vengua al os.	Then take the surgical lancet, which is the one that will be used for incision, and then insert it near the vein between the points where the bloodletting will reach the mouth.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am la vena e la codena a las partidas desus e inscideys la vena am inscizio inscident.	Then raise your hand to the vein and needle it above the parts and incise the vein with an incident cut.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio la quantitat de dos ditz ajustatz o entorn de aquo; e fay yssir del sanc atant quant voles.	Let the length of the incision be the size of two fingers adjusted or around that; and let the blood flow out as much as you want.
E aprop strenh am pulvils e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	Then apply powder firmly and leave it there until it is healed.
E ja e precedit en le comensament del libre la inscizio de aquelas e de lor la cauterizacio.	And this has already been described at the beginning of the book regarding their incision and cautery.
Mays de las doas venas arterias que so als templars le juvament de la fleubotomia es a emigranea antiqua e sode malvada e obtalmia assidua e cors de superfluitatz acutas effusas als huels.	More of the two arterial veins that are near the temple, for the youthfulness of phlebotomy it is considered an ancient and evil emigranea, as well as frequent ophthalmia and a body full of acute effusions in the feet.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: constrengua le malaute le sieu col mot entro que apparan las doas venas al sentiment per appericio manifesta e sia demonstrat le pols de lor dejos le tieu dit; e lahoras tu senha am tenta.	And the quality of phlebotomizing those veins is as I will recount to you: constrict the patient's neck with your hand until the two veins appear by sentiment for a clear manifestation, and let the pulsation of their location be felt by your finger; and then you can proceed.
E aprop tu eleva la codena desobre la vena a las partidas desus am le tieu dit indic, e intromet le fleubotomi inscident dejos, e eleva la vena en sus; e inscidey aquela ayssi cum has fayt en las doas venas autras; e fay correr del sanc segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And then you elevate the codena above the vein at the parts superior to what you have just indicated, and insert the fleubotomi incidentially leaving it there, elevating the vein in them; and cut that as you have done in the two other veins; and let the blood flow according to the quantity of your necessity.
E aprop deslia la coartacio del malaute, e pausa le tieu dit sobre la vena per una hora, e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto e pulvils e strenh aquela desus am fort constriccio, e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	And then release the constriction of the malate, and place your hand over the vein for an hour, and then place there a clot or powder and strengthen that above with a strong constriction, and leave it until it is healed.
E ja es precedida la rememoracio de lor, e de aquelas la inscizio, e la atraccio en le comensament del libre.	And now the recollection of their cases, and after that the incision, and the cutting at the beginning of the book.
E donc le juvament de fleubotomia de la vena del front es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a las malautias antiquas de la cara e a emigranea e rogor e ulceracios fetidas.	And the treatment of bloodletting from the vein of the forehead is close to the bloodletting of the cephalic vein for ancient facial illnesses, headaches, inflammation, and foul ulcers.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es segon que yeu recomti a tu; so es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col am una benda entro que apparesca la vena; e aprop pren le insturment le qual es nompnat fossori del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the quality of the bloodletting from there is as I will recount to you; it is that the patient strengthens his side with a bandage in which the vein appears; and then take the instrument which is named a fossoir, of which this is the form:
Pausa la puncta eminent la qual es al cap del fossori sobre aquela vena e percuteys sobre lu am penche o am autre causa en la manieyra de lu, e layssa lo sanc correr segon la quantitat la qual voles; e aprop deslia la perforacio del malaute e strenh aquela entro que sia sanada.	Pause the point突出的那个点在排尿口的顶端，并且位于那条静脉上方，然后以适当的方式倾斜或出于其他原因敲打该点，让血自然流出你希望的数量；随后解除对膀胱的穿刺，并加强该部位使其愈合。
E alcunas veguadas es uberta am fleubotomi lat, empero no cove que·l fleubotomi sia de acuta extremitat ayssi cum les autres fleubotomis, abantz sia de lada extremitat, e fleubotoma aquela segon le tranvers, quar le os es propda e fort leu trencaria en lu le fleubotomi quan es subtil.	Sometimes it is opened with a venesection knife, but I do not know if the venesection should be of acute extremity as with other venesections, or beforehand from the lateral extremity, and venesection it according to the transverse, for the bone is close by and strong; the venesection would break the bone when so subtle.
Mays le juvament de las duas venas que so als lacrimals de dos huels per scabia del huels per rogor e sebol en les huels, e a las malautias de la cara.	More the youth of the two veins that are at the lacrimal glands of both eyes through the forehead by inflammation and pus in the eyes, and for face diseases.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia es que·l malaute strenha le col sieu am una benda, e aprop fleubotoma aquelas, e tu sias stant sobre le cap de lu.	And the quality of the venesection is that the bladder strengthens its column with a bandage, and then venesection them, and you stand over the head of the patient.
E sia fayta la fleubotomia segon le transvers a longitut un pauc am fleubotomi pauc, quar en le loc no es carn; e si le fleubotomi es subtil, fort leu la extremitat de lu es trencada.	And the venesection should be made according to the transverse length a little, for in that place there is no flesh; and if the venesection is subtle, make its extremity strong.
E aprop fay correr del sanc atant quant es a tu necessari, e pausa sobre aquelas coto, e strenh aquelas per una nueyt, e aprop deslia aquelas.	And then let the blood flow until it is as necessary for you, place your hand over those cuts, and strengthen them with one night, and then remove those.
Mays le fleubotomi de la vena del nas es conferent a febre acuta e a soda vehement, e a las malautias de la cara e emigranea e rogor que accideys en la cara, e majorment quan es antiqua.	May the femoral puncture of the vein near the nose be performed for acute fever and intense swelling, for facial ailments, migraines, and rash that occurs on the face, especially when it is chronic.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col e aprop te le sieu nas am la tua ma sinistra, e pren le fleubotomi subtil lonc e fica aquela en le mieg loc del cap del nas segon rectitut, quar la vena no appar al sentiment aqui, e quar le sanc comensa a fluir tantost.	And the quality of the femoral puncture is that the patient lies on his side with his nose to your left hand, and take the fine needle for the femoral puncture and place it in the middle location of the nose according to the correct position, as the vein does not appear here by sensation, and as the blood begins to flow soon.
Cove que tu ultimes la tua ma am le fleubotomi petit a petit e fassas correr del sanc segon la tua necessitat; e aprop lia aquela per una nuoyt, quar aquela es restaurada leugierament.	Cover your hand with the needle gradually and let the blood flow according to your need; then remove it after one night, as it is restored rather lightly.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de las doas guidegui a constriccio de ale e a comensament de lepra e a motas malautias e inpetige e malas ulceracios corrosivas ayssi cum herpotromeno.	May the juice of the femoral puncture cure stiffness of the limbs and the beginning of leprosy and various other ailments and corrosive ulcers similarly as in phlebotomy.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que el malaute strenha dejos quascuna en le sieu col am liament; e estia le artifexs sobre le cap del malaute, e le malaute sia sezent sobre una sezela.	And the quality of the femoral puncture is that the patient feels each one in his side with a needle; and the artisans are over the patient's head, and the patient lies on a bench.
E aprop fleubotoma la vena al lonc am fleubotomi ample petit a petit; e aprop extratz de sanc segon temprada quantitat o segon aquo que vezes de necessitat que es ad aquo; e aprop fay semblant del autra vena.	And gradually puncture the vein along its length with a small and ample flebotomy needle; and extract blood according to the season's quantity or according to what is needed; and make it seem as though you are dealing with another vein.
E aprop deslia le liament e strenh las doas venas am strictura migiera per so que·l malaute no sia prefocat, e laysa entro al mati quar la plagua es sanada.	And gradually remove the needle and strengthen the two veins with a mid-stricture to prevent the patient from feeling cold, and leave a scar where the plague is healed.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de las venas algerich, comfereys a petitas apostemas e pustulas de la boca e corrupcio de las gengivas e malas ulceracios e fissuras, e a malas ulceracios que so en le nas e en le circuit de lu.	And the benefit of the venesection for algire (a type of fever), it helps with small boils and pustules in the mouth, corruption of the gums, bad ulcers, and fissures, as well as bad ulcers that are in the nose and around it.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que fases cezer le malaute denant tu, e strenh le col de lu am una benda, e aprop revolveys las labias de lu e reguarda a doas venas de las quals la una es de la dextra de la labia e la segonda de la senestra; e la demonstracio de quascuna es per la negror de quascuna de amdos, e aquo mays es quar en le circuit de aquelas so venas menudas negras; e adonc inscideys cascuna per inscizio inscident.	And the quality of the femoral puncture is that you stand before the patient, strengthen his neck with a bandage, and then turn the lips and look at two veins, one on the right side of the lip and the second on the left; the demonstration of each is by the blackness of each one of both, and this more so where these are small black veins in the area. Then incise each one with an incisive incision.
Mays si dubitacio es dejos tu, e no sabes qual es de aquelas, lahoras tu enten a inscisio de la major de aquelas, e de la pus manifesta de aquelas.	But if you are in doubt, and do not know which of those is the most serious, then understand the incision of the largest of them, and of the most obvious.
E fay le semblant de las doas venas que so en las labias desus.	And make the appearance of the two veins that are above the lips.
Mays costuma corr mays a inscidir las doas venas que so en la labia dejos.	But it is customarily better to incise the two veins that are in the lip.
Mays de doas venas que so dejos la lengua le juvament es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a prefocacios que so en le guolayro, a la malautia de la uvula, e a malautias de la boca.	But of the two veins that are below the tongue, the juice is near the phlebotomy of the cephalic vein for conditions that are in the gullet, for the illness of the uvula, and for illnesses of the mouth.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es que segue le malaute entre las tuas mas denant le solel, e eleva la lengua de lu, e reguarda dejos la lengua, de la un latz de lu vena e del autre latz vena, e la color de quascuna es declinant a negror.	And the quality of phlebotomizing those veins is to follow the illness between your patient's shoulders before the sun, and to elevate the tongue, and look at the tongue, on one side of its vein and on the other side of its vein, and the color of each is declining to black.
E adonc fleubotoma quascuna; e guarda te que no ultimes la tua ma en fleubotoman aquelas, quar dejos aquelas so arterias.	And then phlebotomize each; and beware that you do not finish your hand in phlebotomizing those, for they are arteries.
E las tuas venas que so fleubotomadas en le coyde so en las quals corr costuma en totz les homes, e la fleubotomia de lor es fayta segon dos manieyras, o pongen am le fleubotomi mirtilat o olivar a subtilitat declinant; o secsar am fleubotomi cutellar, e apelha si alnessil, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And your veins which are lanced in the groin are in them what customarily occurs in all men, and the lancing of them is done according to two methods, or they place under the lancing a mirtille or olive needle of fine thickness; or dry lancing with a surgical knife, and call it alnessil, and this is its form:
E aquest alnessil es que conveneys a seccio e de aquels so specias latz e subtils segon la amplitut de las venas e segon la strictura de aquelas.	And this alnessil is that you apply to section and of those are species flax and fine according to the width of the veins and according to the structure of those.
Forma de fleubotomi mirti:	Form of lancing with mirtille needle:
sia le latz de lu ayssi cum vezes, e conveneys a obrir las venas concavas plenas procedentz apparentz grossas, e ad aquelas que conteno sanc gros torbat.	It is with flax that you do this, and you apply to opening the concave full veins from apparent large sources, and to those that contain thick turbid blood.
E aquesta es la forma de fleubotomi olivar:	And this is the form of lancing with olive needle:
E aquest fleubotomi es de menor latitut e de pus subtil extremitat, e conveneys a fleubotomia de venas subtils que conteno sanc subtil citri.	And this lancing is of lesser width and finer point, and you apply it to lancing thin veins that contain fine yellowish blood.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena basilica la qual es una de tres venas: quar extratz le sanc de las malautias que so dejos le guolayro e·l col, e de aquo que siec le pietz e·l ventre.	May the youth of the basilic vein phlebotomy, which is one of three veins: from which we extract the blood from the bad humors that leave the gout and the knee, and from what seeps from the foot and the belly.
E conveneys al fleubotomador, quan fleubotomia aquela, que guarde be aquela e sia sobre-temor en aquela, quar dejos lu ha arteria, e si erra e ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi, inscidira aquela arteria e accidira fluxs de sanc, per so que cove que no fleubotomes aquela am fleubotomi pungent, abantz sia sectant cum alnessil.	And it convenes to the phlebotomizer, when performing that phlebotomy, that he well guard that and be over-cautious about it, for if he leaves the artery there in the puncture of the phlebotomy, it will incise that artery and cause flows of blood, so you must ensure that you do not perform phlebotomy at a puncture before cutting like an assailant.
E si no appar la basilica per apparicio manifesta, lahoras cove que tu laysses aquela e que tu mudes a la autre, o que cerques alcun ram sieu; o que fleubotomes en loc de lu finis del bras, quar aquela es manifesta; e secsa aquela am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the basilic vein does not appear by manifest appearance, then you must leave that and change to the other, or seek some of its branches; or perform phlebotomy in a location at the end of the arm, for that is manifest; and stop phlebotomy with an assailant-like cut as we have said.
Mays si tu voles la fleubotomia de lu meteyssa, lahoras cove denant la strictura del bras que toques le loc entro que conogues le loc dels pols, e aprop senha sobre lu am tencha; e aprop lia le bras e secsa la vena am seccio concava am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit; e guarda te que caja la percussio per alcu spazi del loc de la arteria.	May you, if you wish the phlebotomy of the elbow, then before the constriction of the arm touch the location between where you know the pulse location, and place your hand over it with a firm grip; and raise the arm and stop the vein with a concave section for phlebotomy as we have said; and guard that the percussion does not fall in some space of the location of the artery.
E quan tu vezes, cum strenhes le liament, imflacio en le loc que has senhat am tencha, lahoras aquela inflacio es inflacio de la arteria, e donc squiva aquela.	And when you observe, as you tighten the ligament, inflammation in the area that you have touched feels hard, then that inflammation is arterial inflammation, and therefore avoid it.
E si vezes le sanc fluir en la fleubotomia ayssi cum aurina de enfant, e·l sanc es subtil rog, lahoras sapias que es del sanc de la arteria; e lahoras tu coyta e pausa le tieu dit sobre aquel per lonc spazi; e aprop osta le tieu dit, e si lo sanc es abscindit, quar motas veguadas es abscindit, lahoras tu strenh le bras e layssa aquel.	And if you observe the blood flow during phlebotomy as golden like a child's, thin and clear, then you know it is arterial blood; then withdraw your hand for some time over that place; and bring your hand closer to it, and if the blood has clotted, with four or five drops having clotted, then you tighten your arm and leave it there.
E guardes le malaute de la moccio de lu, e sia sobre-temor de lu e no maugua aquel per alcus dias entro que sia sanat.	And keep the patient from the moccio of the disease, and be over-cautious about it, not letting him get wet for a few days until he is healed.
Mays si le sanc no es abscindit, e vezes que deves tu no es present medicina ad aquo, lahoras tu inscideys la arteria, si appar a tu; quar la extremitat de lu es contrayta, e es abscindit le sanc; o que prenguas scorsa de fistic, e fen aquela, e pren la una maytat e strenh aquela sobre le loc de la vena am strictura descent am liament e am pulvils entro al autra dia.	And if the blood does not clot, and you realize that it is not present medicine for this, then you incise the artery if it appears to you; for its extremity will be constricted, and the blood will clot; or take some from a fistula, and do this, and take half of it and apply it strongly over the vein with strictura descent on the ligament and between other powders on the next day.
E lahoras si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, lahoras cura aquel am aquo del qual es precedit a la rememoracio del loc de las polveras abscindentz flux de sanc.	And if the wound is cut open, that is good; otherwise, then cure that as was mentioned before regarding the location of the powdered substances to stop the flow of blood.
E la abscizio del sanc de lu es dificil en motas disposicios per le loc petit de la plagua e la possibilitat del liament del bras.	And the cutting of the wound is difficult in many dispositions due to the small size of the wound and the possibility of stitching the arm.
Mays de la vena fusca la fleubotomia es juvament que extratz lo sanc de la partida subirana del cap e a la partida dejos del cors; per aquo quar es composta de ram de la basilica e de ram de cephalica, ayssi cum havem dit.	More from the dark vein, phlebotomy is beneficial that you extract the blood from the part superior to the head and from the part below the body; for this, it consists of a branch of the basilica vein and a branch of the cephalic vein, as we have said.
E cove al fleubotomant aquela que sia sobre-temor en la fleubotomia de lu, quar dejos aquela es un nervi; e adonc si ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi e atroba le nervi, accidira a lu stupor, e es difficil la sanacio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot, E aquest nervi motas veguadas apar al sentiment; e si es ocultat ad alcus homes e es subtil e no es monstrat, lahoras cove que tu pauses le fleubotomi am le qual tu fleubotomas am seccio de alnessil, e evita le nervi am la tua fortalesa.	And cover the phlebotomist if there is a nerve over the phlebotomy site; for that is a nerve; and then if you puncture the phlebotomy and find the nerve, it will cause stupor, and its recovery is difficult, and it is not fully cured even with strong treatment. This nerve often appears in sensations; and if it is hidden in some people and is fine and not visible, then cover the phlebotomy with a section of alnessil, and avoid the nerve with your strength.
E si la vena es entre dos nervis, lahoras tu fen la vena en la longitut.	And if the vein is between two nerves, then you incise the vein in its length.
Le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena cephalica es que atratz le sanc del cap e comfereys a las malautias dels huels.	The purpose of phlebotomy of the cephalic vein is to draw blood from the head and relieve ailments of the feet.
E cove en aquest propriament, si vols que la fleubotomes pungen am fleubotomi olivar o am fleubotomi mirti; quar es la pus salva de totas las venas, quar no es dejos lu arteria ni nervi.	And here specifically, if you want the phlebotomy to be performed with an olive branch or a myrtle branch; for it is the pure extract from all veins, for it does not leave the artery nor the nerves.
Mays empero conveneys a tu deves la fleubotomia que guardes que am le fleubotomi no punguas le cap del lacert tant solament, e cerques le loc pus leugier, e no notz a lu, si no es atrobat am la percussio primieyra que sia sobre aquela am fleubotomia alcunas veguadas.	However, you must perform the phlebotomy carefully, ensuring that you do not puncture the head of the lizard solely, and choose a lighter location, and do not notice it if not affected by the first percussion that is performed before the phlebotomy several times.
Mays empero fort leu es apostemat en alcus homes, quan no es fleubotomat en la primieyra percussio, mays no notz en re aquel apostema.	However, in some individuals, the abscess is strong, and when not phlebotomized in the first percussion, it may not become noticeable until later.
Mays la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquela e les accidentz de lu so motz, en les quals te cove cogitar en lor rectificacio.	Moreover, the quality of the phlebotomy and the accidents related to it are matters that you should consider in their correction.
Le primier de lu es del qual cove que sapias que fleubotomia no es aministrada sino en conservacio de sanetat e per speransa de lu e cautela de aveniment de malautias, e que sia fayta fleubotomia en la una de las venas que so en le coyde, so es: cephalica, fusca e basilica; e que sia fayta fleubotomia al comensament de primaveyra, sobre dejun en primaviera e autunppne, e en invern aprop la comestio, quan apparo significacios de replecio.	The first is that you should know that the venesection is not administered except for conservation of health and hope of it and caution against the occurrence of ailments, and that the venesection be made in one of the veins that are in the groin, namely: cephalic, femoral, and basilic; and that the venesection be made at the beginning of spring, after fasting in spring and autumn, and in winter near eating, when there appear signs of congestion.
E sia fayta fleubotomia e le tertz dia o al primier pus que del jorn siran passadas tres horas.	And the venesection be made on the third day or at the first opportunity after three hours of the day have passed.
Mays fleubotomia que es aministrada, mays quan provoca convenencia e necessitat ad aquo, o de nuoyt o de dia, en tota hora e en tot temps.	More venesection that is administered, more when it causes convenience and necessity at that hour, whether night or day, in any hour and at all times.
E cove que efant no sia fleubotomat entro que aja xiiii ans, e femna que sia prenhs no sia fleubotomada sino del quart mes entro al sete, e les viels no sian fleubotomatz les quals ja han passatz lx ans.	And you should know that an infant should not be venesectioned until it is four years old, and a woman who is pregnant should not be venesectioned except in the fourth month between the seventh and eighth months of pregnancy, and women who have passed their sixtieth year should not be venesectioned.
E cum alcu vol esser fleubotomat per qualque manieyra sia, cove que mondifique les sieus budels denant la fleubotomia am clisteri leon, si en aquels ha mota fenda retenguda, per so que las venas no atiro las superfluitatz en la fleubotomia dels budels, que son puridas, e que no noguan als membres principals.	And when one wishes to be flеботомated in some manner, ensure that his intestines are modified before the flеботомия with a leon enema, so that the veins do not carry superfluous fluids during the flеботomия of the intestines, which are purified and do not harm the main limbs.
E no sian fleubotomatz les pascientz naucea sacertiva e crapula, ni evasent de malautia ni de ebretat entro que aquo sia remaugut aquo de lor, ni malaute de ydropici, e mays que fleubotomia sia temuda aprop colica passio e aprop vomit, e aprop cos de ventre, e aprop multiplicacio de coyt e de trebal e de exercici de dejunis o de vigilias e de tota causa que dissolveys la vertut, o sia corpore28 o animal.	And the patient should not be flēbotomized if they have nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, or illness due to overindulgence in food or drink, nor for malaise from excess of heat or cold, and more importantly, flēbotomia should be avoided before colic pain, before vomiting, before abdominal distress, before increased sexual activity, before excessive work or exercise, before fasting or staying awake, and for any cause that dissolves virtue, whether bodily or animal.
E aprop considera en subtiliacio de humos denant aquo si le sanc es gros, am viandas e beures, e am medicinas si aquo es a lu possible ad aquo.	And consider the subtlety of the humors before performing this if the condition is severe, with foods and drinks, and medicines if it is possible for them.
E aprop intre en banh si alcuna causa no prohibeys, o sia excersitat per alcun exercici per so que·l sanc sia subtiliat.	And between the bath, if any cause does not prohibit it, or exercise due to some activity, so that the condition becomes more subtle.
E pausa la fleubotomia de lu en le pietz del dia, so es enviro la hora de tercia, ayssi cum havem dit.	And pause the femoral incision at the foot of the bed, so around three o'clock, as we have said.
E perforsa te que·l pietz de aquel sia guardat en aquel dia de totz mals accidentz animals, ayssi cum es angustia, ira, temor, e de totz accidentz corporals, ayssi cum es trebal e pena superflua e coyt e semblantz a lor.	And I assure you that the foot of that limb should be kept on the day of all evil accidents, as when there is anxiety, anger, fear, and all bodily accidents, as when there is toil or superfluous pain and similes thereof.
E a la sua sezelha fassa esser presentz las causas en le us de la qual corr costuma dels homes am aromaticitat e odorament e am bals e semblantz ad aquels segon la cantitat de possibilitat.	And to her assistance, have the causes be presented in their usual use by men, with aromatics and perfumes, and with balsams according to the quantity of possibility.
E segua le fleubotomador sobre un coyssi que sia pus aut que·l coyssi de aquel que deu esser fleubotomat.	And follow the femoral incision over a cushion that is placed higher than the cushion on which the patient lies.
E aprop extragua le sieu bras, e fregue aquel am la sua ma le fleubotomador doas o tres veguadas; e aprop strenha le liament am correia e involva aquel doas veguadas.	Then extract his thigh, and rub it with your hand the femoral incision two or three times; then tightly bind it with a bandage and wrap it twice.
E sia la strictura temprada, quar la strictura quant no es engual, o la strictura es am superfluitat, lahoras prohibeys de fluxs del sanc; o es am mollificacio, e lahoras prohibeys le cors del sanc eyssament.	And if the stricture is tempered, for when the stricture is not equal, or the stricture is due to excess, then prohibit the flow of blood; or if it is due to softening, then permit the body to release blood accordingly.
E aprop la strictura, cove que aquel que deu esser fleubotomat fregue las suas mas ensemps entre lor entro que las venas sian imfladas, e sian declaradas al sentiment.	And near the stricture, make sure that those who are to be lanced press their hands together between them where the veins are swollen and clearly felt.
E aprop le fleubotomador unte le sieu fleubotomi am un pauc de oli antic propriament; e aprop pausa le sieu di indic de la ma senestra sobre aquela vena, dejos le loc del qual vol la fleubotomia, per que la vena fuja un pauc, e la percussio sia sessada quar de las venas es la qual atrobas ayssi cum corda fugent deves la fleubotomia, e de aquelas es que es plena de ventositat e quan pauses le fleubotomi sobre aquela es contrayta deves le fleubotomi, e es desceubut le fleubotomador; e le fleubotomi no uobre la vena, e si uobre, aquela es streyta.	And near the lancer, anoint his lancet with a little ant oil properly; then place your hand on the vein with your left hand where you want the lancing to occur, allowing the vein to swell slightly so that the percussion is felt clearly. The vein should be like a fleeing cord when you lance it; this one is full of venosity. When you pause the lancing over that area, it contracts, and the lancer is revealed. If the lancing does not open the vein, and if it does, it is strayed.
E donc, per aquo cove que·l fleubotomador sia fermat e sia sollicit en totas aquestas causas.	And therefore, make sure that the lancer is attentive to all these causes.
E aprop depause le fleubotomi, mays si la vena es huberta en una veguada, lahoras bo es; e sino, tu itera aquo autra vaguada dejos aquel loc un pauc, o sobre lu am festinacio, si le loc no es apostemat.	And if the vein opens with a single puncture, then that is good. Otherwise, repeat this or another pass, allowing that area to swell slightly, or over it apply a cauterization if the area is not suppurating.
Et si le loc es apostemat, o le malaute se spauresca, lahoras tu le layssa per un dia o per dos, e no strenha le liament, quar fort leu atirara apostema caut, ni no intre en banh.	And if the area is suppurated, or the sore spreads, then you let it be for one or two days, and do not tighten the bandage, for fear that a severe abscess will form, nor immerse it in bath water.
E aprop itera la fleubotomia si la ama.	And then repeat the phlebotomy if necessary.
E si la apercio es petita e corr sanc subtilment, e temes que non yesca sanc la cantitat que voles, lahoras tu itera le fleubotomi en aquel trauc segon rectitut e ajusta en la appercio un pauc, e fay aquo am festinacio denant que·l loc sia apostemat, quar le loc es apostemat en motz homes deves pauca apercio.	And if the wound is small and the vein is thin, and you fear that it will not bleed enough, then repeat the phlebotomy in that area according to correctness and adjust slightly based on the appearance. Do this with urgency before the area becomes suppurated, for when the area does become suppurated, you should use a smaller wound.
Mays si vezes aquel ja apostemat, lahoras no iteres sobre lu, quar no escusa a tu alcuna causa; e pausa sobre aquel alcuna partida de la fenda de oli, quar alleuja le cors del sanc.	But if you find that it has already become suppurated, then do not operate on it further, for there is no need for any reason; instead, place a part of the wound over an incision in oil, which alleviates the pain from the sore.
E es milhor en aquest loc que oli e que les autres olis.	And it is better in this place than oil and other oils.
E semblantment aministra fenda de oli en tota fleubotomia am la qual fleubotomes las venas deves la prohibicio de cors de sanc, e fan aquo tyriaca alfadoc e sagzenea quan es pausat de la una de aquelas sobre le loc, quar le sanc es subtiliat e es revolvut quan es gros.	And similarly, administer an incision in oil in all phlebotomies where you have to cut the veins; they do this with tyriaca, alfadoc, and sagzenea when placed over one of those areas, for the blood becomes finer and is circulated when it is thick.
E si en le loc de la fleubotomia es engendrat gran apostema, quar motas veguadas accideys, e majorment ad aquel que no es stat sangnat sino aquela veguada, o en la apercio de la vena pauca, e lahoras tu coyta, e pausa sobre le loc sponja infuza en aygua e sal, un pauc scalfada, e strenh aquela per una hora, quar es dissolvut.	And if in the place of the incision a large abscess is formed, many vesicles occur, especially to that which has not been bled at all or during the appearance of the small vein, then you apply, and hold over the area a soaked sponge in water and salt, slightly heated, and keep it there for about an hour, for it dissolves.
E cove que fassa aquo aprop le yssiment del sanc de aquela vena am compliment de lu o de autra vena.	And make sure to do this near the end of the bleeding from that vein with consent of the patient or another vein.
E si roman en le loc per alcus dias alcuna negror o viriditat, no notz aquo; e si voles, pausa sobre aquel alcuna causa de aloen e de mirra dissolvut, o alcuna causa de suc de mentastre o de calament o semblant de lu.	And if any black or green color remains in the area for several days, do not note this; if you wish, place over it some decoction of aloes and myrrh, or some juice of mint or of camphor, or a similar preparation.
E motas veguadas accideysso apostemas e eminencias deves fleubotomia de la basilica.	And many vesicles occur and abscesses form from the incision of the basilica.
E donc pausa la tua ma sobre aquela, e si lahoras tu atrobas mollicia deves la tua compressio sobre aquela, lahoras aquela eminencia es malvada e mala; e adonc guarda te que pauses sobre aquela alcuna causa de aquo que havem dit, quar fort leu fluira de la arteria sanc.	And place your hand over it. If then you find softness in that area, apply your compress there, as that prominence is bad and harmful; and then be sure to place over it some of what we have said, for strong fluid will flow from the arterial blood.
E fay emplaustre am aquo en que es stipticitat, per que le loc sia endurat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And apply a poultice to it where there is stiffness, so that the area may become hardened, and then cure it with the other treatment until it is healed.
E cove que extraguas del sanc a tot hom segon la quantitat de la sua vertut e segon la color vencent sobrc le sanc segon que appar.	And know that you must extract from the wound all humors according to the quantity of its virtue and according to the color prevailing over the blood according to what appears.
Quar si le sanc es negre, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia rog; e semblantment si tu le vezes gros, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia subtiliat; e semblantment si es agut, entro que sia ostada la acuitat de lu.	If the blood is black, let it remain until it is resolved; and similarly, if you see it thick, let it remain until it becomes more subtle; and similarly, if it is acute, let it remain until its sharpness is moderated.
E cove ad aquel que es ple e fort e ha necessitat de extraccio de sanc en una veguada, que sia amplificada la fleubotomia de la vena e le fleubotomi sia lat.	And know that for one who is swollen and strong and has the need for a bloodletting of blood in one session, the incision of the vein should be enlarged, and the bloodletting should be thorough.
E en aquel que es freul, sia fayt le contrari de aquel, e cove que extragua aquel en tropas veguadas, e que le trauc sia streyt.	And for one who is weak, do the opposite, and know that you must extract it in several sessions, and that you should do so gradually.
E le milhor que es administrat en fleubotomia de vena es que sia la seccio transversa, no punctura.	And the best method for bloodletting from a vein is a transverse section, not a puncture.
E aquesta manieyra de fleubotomia es salva de flux de sanc e de inscizio de nervi, e es pus lausabla e pus salva que fleubotomia segon latitut e longitut.	This method of femoral puncture avoids the flow of blood and damage to nerves, and is more advantageous and safer than puncture according to length and breadth.
E a la qual es acostumat sobrevenir sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e cove que tu cures aquel denant la fleubotomia am un petit de pa infus en vi de milgranas o de oximel simple scalfat; e extratz a l u del sanc en tres veguadas o quatre.	And in which it is accustomed for syncope to occur after the puncture, take a little of powder infused in vinegar or simple oxymel before the puncture; and extract from the upper part of the blood in three or four draughts.
E si es enfregiditat de compleccio, lahoras prengua denant la fleubotomia pa infus en eyssarop de mirra o en eyssarop de mel aromatizat am specias ayssi cum am pebre, canela, gingiebre e semblantz, o en eyssarop aromatizat e mot odorant.	And if it is a sensation of fullness, then take before the puncture a powder infused in myrrh syrup or in aromatic honey syrup flavored with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and similar, or in an aromatic and fragrant syrup.
E si accideys sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e es causa de lu issiment de mot sanc, lahoras cove que prengua en beure aygua de carn e eyssarop mot odorant subtil; e use de aromaticitat am algualea, e sia linit le sieu pietz am aquela.	And if syncope occurs after the puncture, and it is caused by the escape of foul blood, then take before drinking a mixture of meat water and subtle fragrant syrup; use its aroma, and place your hand on their foot.
E usa de las autras causas que havem ditas en la divisio en le capitol de sincopi per evacuacio.	And use the other causes that we have said in the division on syncope by evacuation.
E qui vol eventar le sieu bras e dissolver le sieu sanc segonda veguada, cove a lu del qual la fleubotomia es per mota evacuacio, e la vertut de lu es freol, que evacue le sanc petit a petit, so es segon la quantitat de la vertut en les dias continuables.	And here you want to fan his arm and dissolve his blood for the second time, start with him from which the venefication is by main evacuation, and the virtue of it is freol, which evacuates the blood little by little, so according to the quantity of the virtue in the continuous days.
Mays qui vol eventar le sieu bras, e gitar lo sieu sanc segonda vetz, e le sieu cors es fort, lahoras fassa aquo aprop vii horas o ix de la primieyra fleubotomia.	And when you want to fan his arm and draw his blood for the second time, and his body is strong, then do this about seven or nine hours after the first venefication.
Mays qui vol atirar le sanc del cors sieu al contrari de la partida a la qual declina, cove que sia eventat en le segon dia o le tertz.	And when you want to draw the blood from his body in the direction opposite to which it naturally flows, do so on the second or third day after it has been fanned.
Mays aquel cors en le qual es mot sanc ja scalfat e es acuit e fa accidir febre, cove que sia gitat de lu sanc en una veguada e sia de lu gitada gran cantitat e sia amplificada la apercio entro que accidesca sincopi, pus que tu auras conservadas totas las condicios de fleubotomia; e que pauses la tua ma sobre le pols de lu deves le cors del sanc, per que no endevengua mort en loc de sincopi, quar motas veguadas endeve aquo quan le fleubotomador es ignorant e negligent.	And when the body has already heated up with blood and is causing fever, draw all the blood at once in one session and ensure a large quantity is drawn. Amplify the sensation so that it happens before syncope occurs; since you have maintained all the conditions for venefication. Place your hand on the patient's pulse to control the body's blood flow, so that it does not end in death instead of syncope. When the veneficator is ignorant and negligent, this must be done over several sessions.
E no cove quan tu voles desliar le bras e evacua le sanc segonda veguada, cum ja sia claus le orrifici de la vena e sia fayt difficil issiment del sanc, que tu premas subre aquel am vehemencia e encurvat sia extendut leugierament, quar aquo es trop mal.	And do not remove the arm when you want to release it and evacuate the blood for a second time, as already the orifices of the vein are closed and it is made difficult for the blood to exit, so press upon it with firmness and slightly extend it lightly, for this is too bad.
Habantz le layssa entro que sia fleubotomat segondament; o remau aquo am la acuitat del fleubotomi que es coagulat del sanc en le orrifici de la vena; o pausa sobre aquel de tyriaca alfarach, o de sagzenea, e comprem aquel am compressio leugiera entro que·l sanc sia fora yssit.	Let it remain in the state of being phlebotomized as before; or keep this at the acuity of the phlebotomy that is coagulated by blood in the orifices of the vein; or place over it a tyriaca compress, or a sagenea, and hold that with light compression until the blood has settled.
E si la vena es apostemada, lahoras layssa aquela e no la toques entro que·l apostema sia sedat.	And if the vein is apostematized, then leave it alone and do not touch it until the apostema is sedated.
E si necessitat te provoca a evacuar le sanc segondament, e no es excusacio, lahoras tu sagna aquel sobre aquel loc o en l’autre bras en autra vena.	And if necessity prompts you to release the blood again, and there is no excuse, then let it flow from another place or on that same location or from the other arm in another vein.
E la vena apelada “funis del bras” es fleubotomada en loc de la fusca o de la basilica, quan no so atrobadas o so amaguadas, quar es composta de aquelas.	And the vein called "funis del bras" is phlebotomized in place of the funica or basilica, when they are not found or are hidden, for it consists of those.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intrometa la sua ma en aygua cauda entro que·l focil se enrogezesca e que la vena apparia manifestament.	And the quality of the femoral puncture is that the patient inserts his hand in water cauda when the vein becomes clearly visible and engorged.
E aprop sia strengut sobre aquel am liament am strictura migana; e aprop fleubotoma segon le tranvers petit, no latitudinalment ni segon la longitut.	And then bind tightly over that area of the lump with a string in the middle; and then perform a femoral puncture according to the small transverse axis, neither longitudinally nor laterally.
E sia la apercio ampla e sia la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas aquela sobre la junctura de la ma un petit.	And let the incision be wide, and let your femoral puncture be at that spot where you make it over the joint of the hand, a little.
E si es prohibit le fluxs del sanc, lahoras tu itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e layssa le sanc correr en la aygua entro que consieguas la tua necessitat.	And if the flow of blood is prohibited, then repeatedly immerse your hand in water cauda until you achieve your necessity and let the blood run into the water.
Mays si tu eras en les dias d’estiu, lahoras tu yest excusat de la iteracio de la ma en l’aygua cauda, e le mes es pausat le cors del sanc en aygua cauda en temps de yvern.	But if you are in the days of summer, then you are excused from repeatedly immersing your hand in water cauda. Instead, allow the body to rest with the blood in water cauda during winter.
E la fleubotomia de aquesta vena es pus salva que de totas las autras venas, quar dejos lu no ha vena pulsatil, ni nervi.	And the femoral puncture of this vein is safer than of all other veins, for it has no pulse or nerve.
E la fleubotomia de la savatella de la ma dreyta es conferent a las malautias del fetge.	And the phlebotomy of the vein in the right hand is related to liver diseases.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que tu strenguas la ma am liament o am la tua ma, pus que tu l’as mesa en ayga cauda, entro que la vena sia imflada e sia be demostrada al vezement; e aprop fleubotoma aquela transversan; e si inscidas aquela de tot no nozera aquo en re.	And the quality of the phlebotomy in the liver is that you tense the hand with a ligament or with your own hand, placing it more at the base of the artery, when the vein is swollen and well demonstrated; then puncture that one transversely; and if you incise it completely, this will not cause any harm.
E conserve que no ultimes la tua ma am la fleubotomi, quar dejos lu so les nervis dels ditz denudatz de carn.	And ensure that you do not withdraw your hand from the phlebotomy, leaving it with the nerves of the fingers exposed and naked.
E aprop itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e laysse correr le sanc en aquela, quar si tu no iteras aquela en l’aygua cauda, le sanc sira coagulat en lo orrifici de la vena, e es prohibit de flux.	And place your hand in the basal artery and let the blood flow through it, for if you do not place it in the basal artery, the blood will coagulate in the opening of the vein, which is forbidden to occur.
E cum es extrayt le sanc segon la quantitat de necessitat, lahoras tu pausa sobre la vena oli e sal, per que no sia consolidada coytadament; e semblantment cove que tu fassas en tot ram streyt.	And when the blood is extracted in the quantity needed, then pause over the vein with oil and salt, so that it does not become completely constricted; similarly ensure that you do this for all related areas.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de aquela de la ma senestra, es que es conferent a las malautias de la melsa.	The treatment of the femoral vein puncture on the left side is that it is related to the diseases of the thigh.
E fay semblantment en la fleubotomia de lu ayssi cum has fayt en l’autra.	And perform the femoral vein puncture on the other side in the same manner as you have done on the other.
E le juvament de la vena sephena de la fleubotomia es a las malautias que so en la partida dejos del cos, ayssi cum so malautias de la mayre, e a retencio de mestruas, et a las malautias dels ronhos e ulceracios de coyssas e de cambas antiquas, e a lor semblantz de las malautias.	And the treatment of the femoral vein puncture is for diseases in the lower part of the body, such as diseases of the veins, retention of menses, and diseases of old sores and chest ulcers, and their similar conditions of diseases.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute entrometa lo sieu pe en aygua cauda e fassa sobre aquel fricacio entro que be apparen las venas; e lia sobre la junctura del pe am correia; e le loc de la vena le talo apparent deves le dit pous, e de aquela so ramificatz en la facia del pe motz ramps.	And the quality of the femoral vein puncture is that the patient inserts his foot in warm water and makes friction thereon, whereupon the veins become apparent; then place a bandage over the joint of the foot; and cut the location of the vein which is apparent from there, with its branches on the side of the foot.
E donc fleubotoma le pus ample ram o dejos la camba deves le talo deves la agreguacio de lu, quar es milhor e pus sal.	And therefore, for the femoral vein puncture, cut the larger branch or the side of the chest, and cut the location where the continuity is best and cleaner.
E si fleubotomas aquela en la facia del pe, lahoras tu te guarda dels nervis que so dejos aquela sobre la facia del pe, e pausa la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas per le travers, quays cum si tu la volias inscidir.	And if you make a ligation there on the surface of the foot, then you must guard the nerves that are left there on the surface of the foot, and place your ligation at the point where you ligate transversely, as if you wanted to incise it.
E sia le fleubotomi vosil.	And let the ligation be secure.
Mays si es prohibit le issiment del sanc; lahoras tu itera le pe de lu en l’aygua cauda e layssa correr le sanc en aquela entro que sia evacuat.	But if the discharge of the blood is forbidden; then you must immerse the foot in cold water and let the blood flow into that where it is to be evacuated.
E si le fleubotomador erra en la primieyra veguada, lahoras itera am le fleubotomi en sus un pauc, quar le loc es sal; e no temes de lu malician, mays que te guardes dels nervis ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the ligation is made incorrectly in the first attempt, then redo the ligation with a small amount more, for the location is salted; and do not fear its malignity, but guard the nerves as we have said.
E semblantment fay de la sophena del autre pe engualment.	And similarly perform the ligation on the other foot equally.
E de la vena sciatica, le loc ayssi cum havem dit es deves le talo dejos la cavilha de la partida silvestra.	And for the sciatic vein, as we have said, you should cut the tendon at the point where the wild arrowroot bone is.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de lu es a dolo de anca quan es per sanc caut.	And the success of the femoral incision is when pain in the hip occurs when it is seared.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intre en banh, e festine e strenha la cueyssa de lu del latz de la ancha entro desus le talo desus quatre ditz an una benda longua subtil, quar no appar sino per aquo.	And the quality of the femoral incision is that the patient enters bath, expedites and strengthens the thigh of the sick person with a thin long bandage under four fingers, so that it does not appear except through this.
E donc quan appar, lahoras tu fleubotoma aquela segon cascun engen que es a tu possible e segon le tranvers, e es milhor; o inscidas aquela per inscizio o secces aquela per seccio, quar le loc de lu es sal.	And when it appears, then perform the femoral incision according to any method that is possible and according to the transverse, which is better. Or incise there through an incision or extract there through extraction, for the place is clean.
E ela es en motz homes mot ameguada; e si atrobas aquela, e no appar al sentiment de tot, lahoras fleubotoma alcun ram de lu, e es aquel que appar en le dos del pe enves le dit auricular e le anular.	And it is often well opened; and if you find it but do not appear by the sense of touch, then perform a femoral incision on some part of it, and that is the one that appears between the two toes opposite the auricular and the ring finger.
E guarda te dels nervis, e fay correr del sanc la quantitat que voles.	And guard the nerves, and let the amount of blood flow that you desire.
E aprop deslia la strictura e pausa sobre le loc de la fleubotomia coto e strenh le loc, quar leugierament es sanat.	Then release the tension and place your hand over the site of the femoral incision to strengthen the area, for it heals readily.
De ventozacio e de las qualitatz de uzar de aquelas.	Of ventilation and of the qualities of using those.
Ventozas so de corns, o de eram, o de veyre.	Ventos are of the lungs, or of the heart, or of the eye.
E ventozacio es fayta segon doas manieyras: la una de lor es am scarificacio e extracio de sanc, e l’autra es ventozacio ses scarificacio.	And ventilation is done in two ways: one way is by scarification and extraction of blood, and the other way is ventilation without scarification.
E aquesta ventozacio que es ses scarificacio es segon doas manieyras, quar o es am foc o ses foc.	And this ventilation without scarification is done in two ways, either by fire or with fire.
E a las ventozas que so administradas am scarificacio e extraccio de sanc son xiiii locs del cors, dels quals la un en lo qual so pausadas ventozas es alnocrati, e es la deriera partida del cap; e le mieg loc d’el de doas partz del col ensemp; e ventozas del mento dejos la mandibula pus dejos de la boca; e ventozas de doas spatulas; e ventozas de alohoster, e es sobre la fi de la coeta; e ventozas de dos focils, e so de dos brasses; e ventozas de doas cavilhas; e ventozas de doas cuoyssas.	And for the ventilations administered with scarification and blood extraction, there are four parts of the body, of which one part where continuous ventilation is applied is the back of the head; and the middle part of the neck in two halves; ventilation of the chin leaves the jaw behind and the mouth; ventilation of the cheeks; ventilation of the armpits, which is on the end of the shoulder blade; ventilation of the elbows, each being two inches wide; ventilation of the knees, each being two inches wide; and ventilation of the thighs, each being two inches wide.
E ventozacio no extratz le sanc sino de las venas menudas sparssas en la carn, e per aquo no catz la vertut per aquelas, ayssi cum es cazement per fleubotomia; ni no cove que ventozacio sia fayta am foc o ses foc en alcuna malautia fayta per replecio entro que le cors tot sia evacuat.	And do not extract the blood from the wound but only from the fine, scattered veins in the flesh, and by this do not lose its virtue as with phlebotomy; nor should you let a cupping be done by fire or any fires in any illness caused by congestion where the body is fully evacuated.
Mays si necessitat provoca a ventozacio per malautia o per continua, aministrem aquela en tota hora al comensament del mes e en la fi de lu, e en le mieg loc de lu e en qualque temps sia.	But if necessity provokes to cupping for illness or during pregnancy, we administer it at the beginning of the month and at its end, and in the middle of the month and at any time.
La qual causa es quar dels homes es en les quals es sanc multiplicat entro que indigeys de extraccio de lu per ventozacio e atroba en le sieu cap graveza e soda; e de aquels es que atroba replecio e rogor en la sua cara e en le sieu cap, e en le sieu col; e de aquels es que atroba pruziment en la sua cara e en le sieu front e tenebrositat e hebetut en les sieus huels; e de aquels que gieta le loc de la sua ventozacio; e de aquels es que le lor ris es multiplicat; e de aquels es que atroba gustament de sanc en la sua boca, o que la lengua es apostemada e escup sanc; e de aquels es que lor dormir es multiplicat, e de aquels que vetz sanc en lo dormir rogor e antics e plaguas e autras causas a lor semblantz.	The cause is that in those men in whom the blood is multiplied inside without extraction through cupping and finds a heavy and hot sensation in their head; and of those who find congestion and redness on their face and in their head, and in their neck; and of those who find pain on their face and forehead with darkness and dullness in their eyes; and of those who change the place of their cupping; and of those whose laughter is multiplied; and of those who find a taste of blood in their mouth, or whose tongue is swollen and they spit blood; and of those who sleep more, and of those who see blood on their sleep with redness, marks, and other similar causes.
E donc quan vezes en alcuna causa de aquelas, e propriament si es en le tertz o miga del mes, lahoras comandam ventozacio esser fayta pus que so passadas del dia dos o tres horas.	And when times in any cause of those, and properly if it is in the third or fourth day, then command ventilation to be made more than so passed of one or two hours.
E juvament de ventozacio de la nuca es que quan aquela confereys a gravitat en le cap e ad aquo que es efondit als huels; mays cove que aquo sia aprop evacuacio de tot le cors.	And the purpose of ventilation of the neck is that when you apply pressure to the head and what is inserted in the heels; more correct is that this be closely followed by evacuation of the entire body.
E aquesta ventoza es en le loc de fleubotomia de la cephalica.	And this ventilation is at the site of phlebotomy for cephalic purposes.
E no es legut que use de lu aquel que es de frega complecio, o en le qual es catarr, quar dona ad aquel gran nocument.	And it is not advisable to use for this that which is inflamed or in which there is a cold, as it gives great discomfort.
E per aquo no cove que uso de aquela les vielhs, e en les caps dels quals so malautias frejas.	And for this reason, it is not advisable to use the old ones, in which there are gouty maladies.
Mays ad aquel que sobre aquela es continuant sobre lu es fayta oblivio; e per aquo cove que tu comandes al ventozador que depause la sua ma un petit am la ventosa a las partidas dejos, temen de la generacio de oblivio.	More correct is to apply the suction continuously to that area; and for this reason, you should command the ventillator to keep his hand slightly on the ventosa at the affected parts, to prevent the generation of forgetfulness.
Mays ventozacio de alkehel es en loc de fleubotomia de la vena fusca e de la basilica: e per aquo confereys a asma, e a la constriccio de ale e a la scissura del sturment de ale, e a tos, e a replecio.	More vaporation of alkali is in the place of femoral and basilic vein ligation: and through this you contribute to asthma, and to the constriction of arteries and to the rupture of the artery's wall, and to coughing, and to congestion.
E cove que sia enpellida la ventoza alkehel un petit, quar si es pausada dejos, engendra debilitat en le cors e en le stomac.	And ensure that the alkali vapor is applied only slightly, for if it is paused, it generates weakness in the body and stomach.
E la ventozacio de alhagdahan confereys a las dolors accident en le cap e a obtalmia, e emigranea, e prefocacio, e a dolors en las razitz de las dentz; e es en loc de fleubotomia de la basiliqua.	And the vaporization of alum generates headaches and eye diseases, as well as migraines, and nasal congestion, and toothaches; it is in place of basilic vein ligation.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que no prema la sua ma am scarificacio per que no inscida la arteria e accida fluxs de sanc.	And ensure that you command the vaporizer not to press his hand over the scarification so as not to injure the artery and interrupt the flow of blood.
E ventozacio dejos le mento comfereys a alcola en la boca, e a corrupcio de la gingiva, e a semblantz a lor de las malautias que so en la boca, e stan en loc de fleubotomia de aliheric que so en las doas labias.	And if the vaporization is applied to the chin, it causes sore throat, gum decay, and appearances similar to illnesses in the mouth, which are in place of alergic vein ligation located in the cheeks.
Mays la ventozacio que es fayta sobre las doas spatulas confereys a caphatan, le qual es fayt per replecio de caliditat.	More importantly, the ventilation that is performed over the two spoons you apply should be conducted by capillarity, which is achieved through the transfer of heat.
E la ventosacio de las doas partidas dedintz dels focils confereys juvament de la fleubotomia de tres venas, so es de la basilica, fusca e cephalica, quar aquela atratz le sanc de totas aquelas venas pus manudas que so en la carn, e aquelas venas menudas de las autras venas pus grossas entro que pervengua la atraccio a las tres venas.	And the ventilation of the two openings inside the forks contributes to the benefit of the femoral bloodletting from three veins, which are the basilica, fusca, and cephalica. For the larger veins contain much blood, and the smaller veins between them carry the attraction to the three veins.
E comanda al ventozador que trop no procezesca en scarificacio, quar le loc es denudat de carn, e dejos lu so nervis e arterias.	And command the ventilation to not proceed with incision, for the area is naked of flesh, and leave only the nerves and arteries.
E es una ventoza am la qual es ventozat sobre alshosses e confereys a las emorroydas del cul e a las ulceracios pus dejos.	And it is a ventilation where you ventilate the anus and contribute to the hemorrhoids of the buttocks and the ulcers, leaving them alone.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que sia gran ventoza, e que sia de eram, quar le loc indigeys de fort seccio; e fort leu so traucadas ventozas subtils e sia scarificat am scarificacio.	And command that the ventilation be a large one, and made of wool, for the area requires strong desiccation; and incise it with an incision using fine but strong ventilations.
Mays ventozas de las cambas minueysso per minuicio manifesta, quar atiran le sanc de tot le cors, e comfereysso a dolors antiquas dels ronhos e de la mayre, e de la vesica; e provocan las mestruas, e comfereysso a bothor e ademil; e stan en loc de fleubotomia de doas sophenas, e alahorcoben, e de doas cavilhas.	More winds in the legs decrease manifestly, for they carry the scab from all parts of the body, and bring about ancient pains in the hips and the stomach; and provoke menstruation, and bring about bothorrhea and adenitis; and are in place of a double phlebotomy of sophenas, and hanged, and of double calves.
Enpero mot debelitan tot le cors e fan accidir sincopi en motz homes.	But they thicken the whole body and cause syncope in many men.
E de las ventozas alahorcoben le juvament es propda al juvament a las ventozas de doas cambas.	And of the winds they hanged the youth near the winds of the two hips.
E la qualitat de la posicio de las ventozas es que pauses la ventoza al comensament vueda e sucguas per succio temprada, e no prolongues la posicio de las ventozas, mays pausa aquelas leugierament, e reman aquelas coytadament, e que las humors venguan al loc per adveniment engual.	And the quality of the position of the winds is that you place the cautery at the beginning viewable and moisten it by slight suction, and do not prolong the position of the winds, but pause them slightly, and remain them constantly, so that the humors come to the area by natural means.
E no cesses iterar aquo e continuar entro que veja le loc ja enrojezir e inflar e que appara la rogor del sanc.	And do not cease to repeat this until you see the area already reddening and swelling, and the scab appear.
E lahoras tu scarifiqua e itera la succio pauc a pauc, e aprop considera en la dispozicio dels cors.	And then you incise and continue the evacuation little by little, and place yourself in the disposition of the body.
Quar aquel home que es de tendra carn de rars pors, cove que tu le scarifiques una veguada e no pus, per que le loc no sia ulcerat.	For a man who has tender flesh, incise him only once and not more, so that the place does not become ulcerated.
E comanda al ventozador que amplifique la scarificacio e pronde un pauc, e atempre la succio am facilitat.	And command the fan to enlarge the incision slightly, and allow the evacuation to proceed more easily.
E si en le sanc es grossitut, lahoras cove que scarifiques doas veguadas, quar en la primieyra veguada es uberta la via de subtiliacio al sanc e a la aquositat de lu.	And if in the wound it becomes large, then you must incise twice; for in the first incision, open the way for the exudate in the wound and its moisture.
Mays en la segunda a la perscrutacio aquisida de la extraccio del sanc gros.	More in the second incision, for the thorough evacuation of the large wound.
E si le sanc es mot feculent, lahoras sia fayta scarificacio la tersa veguada per que consiegua le derier.	And if the wound is moist and fetid, then make the third incision to achieve cleanliness.
E derierament, quan volem extrayre le sanc pauc a pauc o un petit, abasta a nos una scarificacio.	Finally, when we want to extract the wound fluid little by little or just a little, enough for us one incision.
E si volem extraccio de mot sanc, scarificam am mota scarificacio; e si nos conoyssem que·l sanc es gros, lahoras cove que scarifiquem per scarificacio preonda.	And if we want an extraction of foul blood, perform a cut with the lancet; and if we know that the blood is thick, then make the cut more extensive.
E le terme de scarificacio en la qual es la profunditat de la codena tant solament.	And the term of scarification in which is the depth of the incision merely.
E si aquel del qual la codena es grossa, dura, fusca, e les sieus pors so streytz, cove que les locs de las ventosas sian untatz lenitius, apertius resolutius; si es en temps d’estiu, ayssi cum es oli de aloen o oli de violat, o oli de amellas dossas, o oli de cemensa de coja; e si es en temps ivern, lahoras oli narci, o oli de liri, o oli de camamilla, o de sanc, e ad aquels semblantz.	And if the part where the incision is thick, hard, dark, and its pores are strait, then the places for the cups should be gently anointed with a penetrating resolvent; if it is in summer, such as olive oil of aloes or olive oil of violets, or olive oil of ambergris, or olive oil of balsam; and if it is in winter, then use olive oil of narcissus, or olive oil of lavender, or olive oil of chamomile, or blood oil, and to those similar.
E si la superfluitat es grossa, freja, lahoras le oli sia amaranti, o oli de balsamita, o oli de aloen, o oli aneti, e a lor semblantz.	And if the superfluity is thick, apply, then oil of amber, or balsam oil, or oil of aloes, or olive oil, and to those similar.
Mays si le ventozador es de amples pors de tendra carn, lahoras cove que sia prohibit de oli, e cove que ad aquest les locs de ventozas de lor aprop la ventozacio sian lavatz am ayguaros o am aygua freja de solatrum, o am aygua de coja, o am aygua de bordolaguas, e semblantz ad aquelas.	Moreover, if the cupper has ample pores of tender flesh, then it should be prohibited from oil, and it should be treated with water boiled with aloes or cold water, or water of jasmine, or water of rosemary, and similar to those.
E aquel del qual le sanc es de mota humiditat, lava las suas ventozas am vi agre, o am aygua de mirt e sumac e semblant ad aquels.	And that of which the discharge is due to a humid matter, wash his bowels with wine or water of myrtle and sumac and similar.
E de aquel del qual las superfluitatz son grossas, lava las suas ventozas am vi antic, o am aygua de sansuc, que es majorana, o de decoccio de anet, o de camamilla, e a lor semblantz.	And of that of which the superfluities are large, wash his bowels with old wine, or water of safflower, which is marigold, or decoction of santoppi, or chamomile, and similar to them.
E cove que la ventozacio sia guardada denant de banh; habantz cove que sia aministrada aprop issiment del banh per una hora o per doas, e cove que dorma aprop la ventozacio.	And ensure that the bowel movement is taken before bathing; have it administered shortly after bathing for one or two hours, and ensure that he sleeps near the bowel movement.
Quid est quo oportet ut regatur ventosandus aus phlebotomatus ante ventosationem.	What must be done before a phlebotomy and bowel movement.
Cove que consideras al comensament: lahoras si le ventozador o aquel que·s deu fleubotomar es coleric e ventz sobre lu sanc agut e imflamacio, lahoras cove que prengua causas infrigidantz, ayssi cum milgranas acetosas, e endivia an vi agre e laytuguas, e secanabin, e julep, e a lor semblantz.	Ensure that you consider the beginning: if the patient who needs to have a bowel movement or be phlebotomized is choleric and has acute pain and inflammation, then ensure that he takes cooling causes, such as acetic milks, endive in wine, laxatives, julep, and similar remedies.
E pausa a lor viandas ayssi cum poletz, e carns de auzels serbiges, e viandas conditas am agras, e a lu semblantz.	And feed them thus like pears, chicken livers, and spiced game birds, and foods seasoned with garlic, similar to these.
E de aquel del qual la compleccio es freja, cove que prengua en beure eyssarop almiva, o eyssarop de alsecanabin de semensas, e sumac, e vi mot odorant migier entre viel et noel; e que a lu sia comendat que use de paucitat de beure e de mangar, e pausa las viandas de lu poletz e canabir e pissers e petitz auzels e colombat.	And for that one whose complexion is fair, let him take to drink essarop of almond milk, or essarop of alekanabin of seeds, sumac, and wine mixed with honey and vinegar; and let him be advised to use moderation in drinking and eating, and limit his foods to pears, onions, peaches, small game birds, and squab.
E cove que en lo dia de ventozacio e de fleubotomia le beure sia major que la vianda.	And let him drink more than he eats on the day of ventilation and phlebotomy.
E cove que sia donat en beure en alcunas horas ad alcus homes tyriaca alpharac, o medicamentz de musc, so es muscada, o alcelita denant la ventozacio o denant fleubotomia o aprop, per so que·ls membres principals sian confortatz e que·l sanc sia subtiliat; e no cove que prenguan aquela scalfatz.	And let him be given to drink in some hours for some men tyriaca alfarac, or medicines of musk, such as muscada or acelita before ventilation or before phlebotomy or shortly after, so that the principal members may be comforted and the wound subtiled; and do not let them take any scalding.
Mays las ventozas que so ses scarificacio sian ventozas que so pausadas sus le fetge, e sobre la melsa e podagra, e sobre le umbelic, en les locs dels jonolhs, e la pixida del ancha, quar aquestz membres no suffertan scarificacio sobre si.	More the vents that are his scarsifications should be vents made over the liver, and on the belly, gout, and on the umbilicus, in the places of the joints, and the side of the liver, for these members do not suffer scarifications upon themselves.
E no es querit per aquelas sino atraccio de sanc de membre, ayssi cum pausam ventosa sobre mamilha en malautia de flux de sanc del sanc de las nars; e usam de aquela per que sia dissolvuda ventositat freja inviscade del membre, ayssi cum pausam sobre le ventre e l’umbelic; quar aquela rarifique le membre e scalfa lu e ramau la dolor quar resolveys ventositat.	And this is not sought by those rather than an attraction of soreness of the member, thus as we apply a cupping device on the breast in illness of flux of blood from the blood of the nose; and we use that so that there may be dissolved phlegm free from the viscera of the member, thus as we apply over the abdomen and the umbilicus; for which it thins out the member and warms it and lessens the pain which resolves phlegm.
E ja es pausada sobre les ronhos quan accideys en lor opilacio o poyra, quar per vertut de atraccio fort leu huobre opilacio e erradica le poyra de son loc.	And it is cupped on the sores when they occur in their operation or suppuration, for by virtue of attraction it strengthens the operation and eradicates the pus from its place.
E semblantment fa quan es pausada sobre le fetge e la melsa deves ventositat en aquels enclausa.	And it seems to work when applied to the liver and spleen to dissolve phlegm in those areas.
E aquestas ventozas so administradas vuedas amb succio tant solament; e alcunas veguadas so administradas am foc.	And these cupping devices are applied with suction only sometimes; and at other times, they are applied with fire.
E alcunas veguadas so administradas plenas de aygua tebeza en las malautias de la melsa.	And at other times, they are applied full of clear water in illnesses of the spleen.
E aquo es per que la ventoza sia umplida e sia pus gran, so es aygua cauda sola o aygua en la qual sian cuytas herbas ad aquo convenientz.	And this is so that the cupping device may be filled and become large, sometimes with water alone or with water in which herbs suitable for the condition are steeped.
Forma de ventoza aministrada am foc: sia la amplitud del orrifici de dos ditz, segon que nos la havem formada; e la quantitat del preon sia la maytat de un palm; e sia en lo latz de lu, en le loc que es en le circuit, la maytat de lu, le trauc sia petit segon la quantitat que intre en lu una agulha.	Form the suction cup with fire: let the diameter of the opening be two fingers wide, as we have formed it; and the amount of air be half a palm; and place it in the middle, at the location that is in the circuit, to the extent of its size, I draw out according to the quantity that enters it with a needle.
Sia fayta de eram rog o citri, de grosses marges, leon, enguals e terses per so que no leda le membre deves la sua posicio sobre lu.	Let it be made of elm or citrus wood, with thick edges, equal and smooth so that it does not cause the member to deviate from its position upon it.
E sia al mieg de lu vergua transversa de eram o de ferr, on es pausada candela am lo foc.	And let it be at the center of the elm or iron transverse beam where the candle is placed upon the fire.
E ja sia aquesta ventoza gran major de aquela la qual havem recomtat; e la pauca mendre de aquela segon las malautias e la etat de aquel que usa de aquela.	And let this suction cup be much larger than the one we have tested; and use a smaller amount of air according to the illness and the condition of the one who will use it.
E las ventosas dels efantz e extenuatz so autres que las ventozas dels joves e de grosses corssas.	And the suction cups for children and those who are weak are different from those for young and robust people.
E la qualitat de pausar aquesta ventoza am foc sobre le membre es que extenda la meca am foc de lenha decentment denant una pauca candela de cera, e pausa aquela sobre le mieg de la vergua transversa en le mieg loc de la ventoza, per que le foc sia accendut enviro la partida dejos per que no sia comburit le cors del malaute.	And the quality of placing this suction cup on the body is to extend the heat from the fire of decently burning wood in front of a small wax candle, and place that over the center of the transverse beam at the center location of the suction cup, so that the fire is ignited around the area where it will be placed without burning the patient's body.
E aprop sia pausada sobre le membre del malaute, e le dit sia sobre le trauc que havem dit, entro que quan tenem las ventozas e non indigem que osten le dit e que yesca la vapor sobre aquel trauc, lahoras la ventoza sira tantost dissolvuda.	And then place yourself over the limb of the patient, and tell them as we have said before, meaning when we have the fumigations and do not intend for them to hold the said and that vapor rises over that fumigation, then the fumigation will soon be dissolved.
E prop igneys la meca segon la sua manieyra, e itera aquela si indigeyssas de aquela.	And then apply the fire to the member according to its nature, and repeat that if needed.
Mays en ventosa que es aministrada en la malautia de plauressi, am aygua, en la qual no ha vergua transversa ni trauc, e no es aministrada sino que sia umplida de aygua, e es pausada sobre le membre tant solament.	More in fumigations that are administered in the disease of pleurisy, with water, in which there is no transversal or fumigation, and it is not administered unless it is filled with water, and is placed over the limb only for so long.
E aquesta es la forma de lu: E aquesta ventoza quant plus es gran, tant es milhor, per que puya recebre gran quantitat de aygua.	And this is the form of it: And this fumigation the larger it is, the better, so that it can receive a great quantity of water.
Capitol .xcvii.	Capitol. xcvi.
Sanguissuguas no so administradas en motz membres sino en les membres en les quals non es possible posicio de ventosas, per la parvitat de aquels, ayssi cum le pot e gingiva e semblantz a lor; o en membre denudat de carn, ayssi cum le dit e·l nas e lors semblantz.	Sanguisugations are not administered in most members but only in the members in which a position of cups is impossible due to their small size, such as the lips and similar parts; or on a member stripped of flesh, such as the nose and similar areas.
E la qualitat de usar de aquelas que si has trobadas sanguisugas que so en las ayguas dossas de poyredura mundas.	And the quality of using those that you have found leeches in the waters from putrefied bodies.
E aprop sian layssadas le dia e la nueyt en aygua dossa entro que sian famolentas, e que no romangua alcuna causa en le ventre de aquelas; e aprop sia evacuat le cors en le comensament am fleubotomia e am ventozas; e aprop fregua le membre del malaute entro que s’enrojezesca; e aprop sian pausadas sobre lu.	And soon let them lie in warm water for a day and a night until they swell, without any cause affecting their belly; and soon evacuate the body at the beginning with bloodletting and fomentations; and soon rub the part of the patient where it turns red; and soon place them over it.
E cum son umplidas e caso.	And when they are full and swollen.
E si es possible succio del loc am ventoza, es mays derier en juvament.	And if possible, apply the fomentation to the area where it is needed more.
E sino, lahoras lava le loc am vi agre e aprop am mota aygua; e sia freguat e expremut.	And if not, then wash the area with water mixed with wine and apply warm water; and rub and squeeze it.
E si es prolonguat le cors del sanc aprop le cazement de las sanguissuguas, e es aquo resudan, lahoras tu enfon un drap de li en aygua freja, e pausa aquel de sobre entro que sia abdida la resudacio.	And if the bleeding of the body is prolonged at the end of applying leeches, and if this continues, then insert a cloth in cold water, and place it over the area until the bleeding stops.
E si le sanc es multiplicat, lahoras polveriza sobre lu vitriol trissat, o guallas e semblantz a lor de las causas stipticas, entro que·l sanc sia abscidit; o sian pausadas sobre le loc las maytatz de favas excocicadas, e sian layssadas entro que las favas aderescan al loc, e es le sanc abscidit.	And if the bleeding is excessive, then powder vitriol trisulphate or substances similar to those causing contraction over it until the bleeding is arrested; or place warm split peas over the area and let them adhere to the area until the bleeding stops.
E cove, si es necessaria, iteracio de sanguissuguas, quan es possible mudar aquelas.	And clean, if necessary, the wound, when possible changing those.
E si las sanguissuguas son prohibidas de suspenssio, lahoras sia freguat le loc am sanc recent o fique una agulha en les locs entro que yesca sanc; e aprop sian pausadas, quar aquelas quan sento alcun sanc tantost adarysso.	And if bloodletting is prohibited, then apply heat to the area with recent bleeding or place a needle in the areas until the bleeding stops; and subsequently stop it when any bleeding occurs soon after.
E quan voles que cajan, polveriza sobre aquelas un pauc de aloen trissat, o sal, o cendre, e cazo tantost.	And when you want them to stop, powder the areas with a little bitter almond trisulphate, or salt, or ashes, and cauterize soon.
Ayssi comensa lo prolec de la tersa partida: de restauracio.	Thus start the proceedings of the third part: of restoration.
Aquest capitol es motas veguadas necessari en la art de medicina; e es restauracio de fractura e de dislocacio accident en les osses.	This chapter is necessary knowledge in the art of medicine; and it concerns the restoration of fractures and dislocations in the bones.
O, filh, sapiatz que jactan se de aquest capitol les fols metges e les vulguars e aquels que degun temps no reguardero les libres dels Antics ni legiro de aquels una letra.	Oh, son, know that both the false doctors and the vulgar ones, as well as those who for some time have not read the works of the Ancients or have not read even a letter of their writings, claim this chapter.
E per aquesta causa es fayt que aquesta manieyra dels scients in terra nostra es privat; e yeu no ho e obliat en aquo degun temps be de tot; e no he adhibit aquo que apres, sino per longitut de lectio dels libres dels Antics e studi sobre le entendement de aquels, entro que extrayssi la sciencia de aquels.	And for this reason, this method of the scientists in our land is kept private; and I have not forgotten it during all that time; and I have not adopted what follows, except through a long period of reading the works of the Ancients and study over my understanding of them, from which I extracted the science.
E aprop adirigui a experiment e studi en la longitut de la mieua vida.	And I have directed this experiment and study throughout the length of my life.
E yeu ja he de aquo descrit en aquest capitol tot aquo que conte la mieua sciencia e sobre le qual es passat lo mieu experiment; pus que agui abreujat aquo a vos autres e deliuregui aquo de occupacio de elonguacio; e abreujegui aquo en la fi de abreujacio; et e monstrat aquo en la fi de declaracio; e formegui en aquo motas formas dels sturmentz que so administratz en aquel, cum es fayt per addicio de declaracio, ayssi cum he fayt en dos capitols precedentz.	And I have already described in this chapter all that pertains to my science and on which my experiment has passed; now I abridge this for you others and deliver this from long narration; and I abridge this at the end of the abridgment; and I show this at the end of the declaration; and I form these into shapes of instruments that are administered in it, as is done by addition of declaration, just as I have done in the two preceding chapters.
Capitol primier.	First chapter.
Summae et collectiones ex esse fracturae ossium, ex eis quarum praemissio necessaria est, antequam incipiamus rememorationem membrorum fraftorum et diversorum si uniuscuiusque.	Summary and collections from the necessity of fractures of bones, of which the introduction is necessary before we begin the recollection of limb fractures and various types, of each one.
Cove donc que diguam en le prohemi de aquest capitol las summas del sermo; e les capitols al entendament dels quals en le comensament es forsat le artifexs e a stacio sobre la veritat de aquels; so es vos e aquels que so promptz que sapian o aprenguan aquesta art nobla autres de vos.	Therefore, let us begin this chapter by summarizing the discourse; and the chapters which must be understood at the beginning are those that the craftsmen must stand upon the truth of. These are you and they who are quick to know or learn this noble art over others.
E donc dic que quan accideys a alcu fractura o dislocacio o torcio o cazement, lahoras cove que tu te coytes al comensament am fleubotomia o aleyar aquel, o quascu ensemps, si no prohibeys alcuna causa, ayssi cum debelitat de vertut, o es aquel al qual accideys effant, o viel en decrepitat, o es temps de vehement calor, o de vehement freg.	And therefore, say that when a fracture or dislocation or twist or setting occurs, you must immediately turn to the beginning for a venous incision or realign it, or both, unless some cause prohibits it, such as a lack of virtue, or if it is the one upon which it has occurred, or in decrepitude, or at a time of intense heat or intense cold.
E aprop sia content en vianda sieua de erbas frejas e de carns de auzels e de crabotz; e prohibem carns grossas e umplir si de viandas e de tota vianda que umple las venas de sanc, entro que siras segurat de apostema caut, e si no temes efusio de materia al membre.	And moreover, let it be in food of fresh herbs and of meat from pigeons and crabs; and forbid fatty meats and those filling with all kinds of food that fill the veins with phlegm, until you are safe from abscess caut, and if you fear effusion of matter in the limb.
E lahoras retorne le malaute al sieu regiment primier am le qual corr costuma de lu.	And then return the patient to his primary position according to the custom of doing so.
E donc cum le os trencat comensa esser restaurat, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia pascut de viandas nutritivas de nutriment mot e gros e greu en les quals sia viscositat, ayssi cum so viandas faytas de froment cueyt am aygua, e ris, e caps, e pes, e ventres de vacas, e huous, e peys fresc, e vi gros e semblants ad aquels, e am aquest regiment es fayta coagulacio de fractura pus leugierament e miels.	And so, when the broken bone begins to be restored, then ensure that the patient consumes nutritious foods rich in both liquid and solid and heavy substances, with viscosity similar to cooked wheat, rice, eggs, fish, cow's stomachs, nuts, fresh meat, and other similar substances. And with this regimen, coagulation of the fracture is facilitated slightly with honey.
E sapias que les osses trinquatz quan so en les homes que so en la primiera vilura e en los decrepitz, no es possible que sian continuatz e sian consolidatz segon lur natura per la exsiccacio dels membres de lor.	And know that broken bones in young men and old people, due to the drying out of their limbs, cannot be continuously joined and consolidated according to their nature.
E son consolidatz e continuatz segon lor natura tot temps per la exsiccacio de aquels membres, e so continuatz e consolidatz aquels que so de lor en la fi de la lenitat, ayssi cum les osses dels petitz effantz.	And they are continuously joined and consolidated according to their nature at all times due to the drying out of those limbs. Those that are of them in the end of their childhood, such as the bones of young animals.
Mays empero natura ajusta e amnecteys sobre le os trencat de tota partida alcuna causa semblant a glut en le qual es grossitut que adhereys e strenh aquel entro que so ensemps conglutinatz e liatz ensemps, entro que venen la fi de fortitut e de fermesa, ayssi cum foc al comensament, entro que denguna causa no prohibeys aquel de las suas obres.	But nature adjusts and ameliorates over the broken bone from any part, like glue in which it thickens to adhere and strengthen it together with conglutination and firmness, similar to fire at the beginning. In no case should any cause prevent this from its works.
E per aquesta causa es necessari que pauses las viandas del malaute, viandas en las quals so gravitat e viscozitat e grosseza, ayssi cum havem dit.	And for this reason, it is necessary to place foodstuffs of the patient, foodstuffs in which there is density and viscosity and coarseness, as we have said.
Mota diversitat de fractura segon diversitat del membre.	Various types of fracture according to the diversity of the limb.
E sapias que las specias de fractura son diversas segon la diversitat dels membres, quar fractura del os de la camba es diversa de la fractura del os del cap; e la fractura del os del pietz es divers de la fractura del os del dos; e semblantment totz les autres membres son diverses entre lor.	And know that the types of fracture are diverse according to the diversity of the limbs, for a fracture of the thigh bone is different from a fracture of the skull骨骨折；而脚骨的骨折不同于手骨的骨折；同样，其他所有肢体的骨折之间也各不相同。
E yeu venc am rememoracio de tota specia de fractura, expausada en le sieu capitol distincta del autre.	And I will recall all types of fracture, each explained in its own chapter distinct from the others.
Mota diversitat de fractura en si meteyssa.	Various types of fracture in themselves.
E son diversificadas las specias de fractura del os en lor meteyssas; quar es fayta fractura arcuada otra aquo que accidan en lu stellas; e alcunas veguadas es fayta fractura segon la longitut del os: e so las fracturas de lu satagia e astelhas e addicios procedentz e no-procedentz, ayssi cum es fayt en la pena quan es preparada a escriure, e es fractura am plagua e disrupcio en le cap, e es fractura fissura petita.	And the types of fracture in the bone are diverse; for some fractures are arcuate or those that occur at the sutures; and some fractures occur according to the length of the bone: such as fractures of the suture lines, tiles, and additions, both primary and secondary, as when a pen is prepared to write, where there is a fracture by breakage and disruption in the head, and a small fissure-like fracture.
E a tota specia es engen o turment propri en restauracio de lu segon que vindra rememoracio de lu distincta en les sieus locs.	And for each case, there is a specific remedy or torment proper in restoring it according to the distinct recall of its place.
Mota senhal de fractura del os.	A sign of fracture of the bone.
E per aquo es conoguda fractura del os: es tortuositat de lu, e de aquel eminencia e appericio de lu al sentiment, e so de lu quan compremes aquel am la tua ma.	And by this, a bone fracture is known: it shows a tortuousness of the bone, and an elevation and prominence of the area upon touch, and the pain felt when pressing on that part with your hand.
E donc quan no es en le loc tortuositat apparent ni so no es feyt deves le tieu tocament quan toques le os am agitacio e le malaute no atroba gran dolor, lahoras no es aqui fractura.	And when there is neither obvious tortuousness nor pain, you should test by touching the bone with some movement; if the patient does not experience great pain, then it is not a fracture.
Habantz es possible que sia tortuositat o petita fissura, adon no cove que tu mauguas aquel am la tua ma e am compressio de tot; habantz pausa sobre lu de las medicinas de las quals ve rememoracio aprop aquel moment le qual conveneys al loc; e aprop sia streyt per strictura subtil.	It is possible that it is tortuousness or a small crack. Touch the area with your hand and apply compression; pause over the place where you recall the remedy just at that moment, which corresponds to the location; and gradually straighten due to subtle constriction.
E sapias que·l loc quan es arcuat e no es scindit en dos o otra aquo que no accidan en lu satagie, cum es remauguda tota partida de la sua compar, lahoras cove que comenses de la tua hora a rectificacio de lu habantz que a lu accida apostema caut.	And perceive that the area when curved and not split into two or another part as nothing happens to it in its state, when the whole part is inflamed; then you should start from your hour of applying correction to it, having an abscess form over it with a cautery.
E si a lu accida apostema caut, lahoras layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que cesse le apostema; e aprop engualha aquel segon quascuna manieyra que podes de levitat e de engen.	And if an abscess occurs in him, let that be left for some days until the abscess ceases; then equalize it according to any method you can of levitation and engendering.
E sapias que restauracio de lu e agulacio de lu es pus leugiera que del os en le qual accideysso sathagie.	And know that the restoration and ligation of it is lighter than the one in which you are operating.
E aprop strenh aquel segon que vindra la rememoracio de lu.	And then strengthen it according to the recall of the operation that will come.
Mays si en le os so satagias, lahoras es necessaria extencio de aquest membre trencat de doas partz, si es la ma o le pe; o am la tua ma si le membre es petit; o am doas cordas o am una corda e la ma.	More if in the bone you are operating, then when an extension of this broken member into two parts is necessary, whether it be the hand or the foot; or with your hand if the member is small; or with two cords or one cord and the hand.
E sia la tua posicio am la qual pauses le membre loc engual segon la sua figura natural, mentre que las partidas so extandudas del membre trenquat, lahoras te perforsa que fassas retornar aquelas addicios am engen e segon quascuna manieyra que poyras en lor locs.	And place your hand in such a way that you equalize the member's position according to its natural shape, while the parts are extended from the broken member, then force yourself to return those additions by engendering and according to any method you can in their places.
E guarda te segon la tua forssa que no accida sobre le malaute per la tua operacio delor ni lesio; e perforsa te segon le tieu poder que tu appliques la un os am l’autre son companho segon lors milhors formas.	And see to it that your strength does not cause pain or injury to the patient during your operation; and force yourself according to your power to apply one bone to its companion bone according to their best forms.
E cove que en aquela hora aprofitablament tu toques am la tua ma aquel, e si vezes aqui alcuna causa diversa, rectifiqua aquel e enguala aquel per la quantitat de la tua vertut.	And ensure that at that opportune moment you touch it with your hand, and if you see any other cause different, correct it and equalize it by the quantity of your virtue.
E exquiva vehement extenssio e compressio, ayssi cum fan mots fols metges que motas veguadas fan accidir apostema caut per la sua operacio, o fan accidir contraccio en le membre ayssi cum havem vist aquo per la operacio de lor motas veguadas.	And avoid excessive extension and compression, as foolish doctors sometimes cause an abscess through their operations or cause contraction in the member, as we have seen through their operations.
E aprop annecteys, aprop equacio e decent operacio e strictura de aquel membre, e repaus e tranquilitat; amoneste le malaute sobre aquo e fay le squivar que no maugua aquel en la hora de las suas vigilias e del sieu dormir, e ves la sua revolucio e agitacio, e deves la sua egestio, e deves totz les sieus movementz am tota la sua vertut; e aguarda se que la posicio del membre sia posicio am la qual sia asegurada la dolor, la qual causa es quar quan sent en la disposicio de la posicio del membre delor o lesio; lahoras cove que permutes aquel ad autra disposicio de aquela am la qual non senta dolor; e guarda am aquo que la posicio de lu aquela sia dreyta e engual, per so que al membre non accida tortuositat quan es restaurat.	And ensure the connection, balance, and proper operation of that member, along with rest and tranquility; admonish the patient about this and make sure they avoid causing it during their waking hours and while sleeping, and observe its revolution and agitation, and adjust its digestion and all its movements according to your virtue; wait until the position of the member is in a position where pain is assuredly prevented, as pain or injury arises from the disposition of the member's position; then ensure you change that position to another where no pain is felt; and observe that the position itself is straight and equal, so that when the member is restored, it does not suffer any distortion.
E la qualitat de la strictura del membre tranquat es aquela que yeu recomti; per que sapias que·ls membres trencatz so diversificatz en lor parvitat e en lor grandeza e en la forma de aquels.	The quality of the constriction of the affected limb is what I recount; so that you may know that the limbs broken are diverse in their smallness and in their largeness and in the form of those.
E de aquels que son petits ayssi cum le bras e·l dit e·l focil e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras cove que la envolucio sia de drap mol subtil.	And of those that are small like the arm and the thigh and similar to those, see that the envelopment be of soft fine cloth.
Mays aquels que so grosses ayssi cum la cuoyssa o la camba, cove que en aquels sia envolucio lada e dura, quar la liadura lada connecteys le membre gran e strenh aquel de tota part am strictura engual, enayssi que en lu no intre macula.	And of those that are large like the thigh or the chest, see that in those there be envelopment hard and firm, for the firm binding connects the large and strong member from all parts with the constriction equally, try that no stain enters.
E aprop comensa, aprop la tua evacuacio de equacio, pausar liament convenient ad aquo, sobre le loc de aquela fractura am tres envolucios o quatre segon que·l membre mereys; e strenh la tua ma un petit am le liament.	And then begin, after your first binding, conveniently pause about three or four times over the place of that fracture; and strengthen your hand a little with the binding.
E aprop ve am aquel a la partida pus sobirana del loc de la fractura, e strenh mens que no foc la tua strictura am la qual has strengut le loc de la fractura.	And then go to the uppermost part of the place of the fracture, and strengthen more so that your binding is greater than the one you strengthened around the place of the fracture.
E aprop elongua te am envolucio del loc de la fractura un pauc, e mollifiqua la strictura petit a petit, entro que prenguas del loc sa una gran partida.	And then slightly extend the bandage around the fracture area, gradually soften the tension little by little, while you remove a considerable part from the area.
E aprop pren una autra benda e envolveys aquela autra veguada sobre le loc trenquat am envolucio, e aprop ve am las envolucios a la partida pus dejos de la fractura; e sia la tua operacio en la strictura de la envolucio e en mollificacio de aquela segon que havem dit en la envolucio primieyra desus.	And then take another bandage and wrap it around the fractured area over the initial wrapping, and gradually adjust the wrappings to the part of the fracture; and your operation should focus on the tension in the wrapping and the softening as we said in the first wrapping section above.
E aprop pausa entre las volucios de stopa leon o drap am le qual sia engualada la tortuositat de la fractura, si en lu es tortuositat; e sino, no pauses en lu alcuna causa.	And then place the stopa or cloth wrap evenly over the tortuous part of the fracture, if there is a tortuous part; otherwise, do not pause at any point.
E aprop pausa sobre lu autra benda, e aprop enguala sobre aquestas envolucios stelhas decentment faytas tantost, si en le loc no es imflacio o apostema caut, e lahoras pausa sobre lu aquo que sede le apostema aquel e que oste la imflacio; e layssa aquela per alcus jorns; e lahoras tu strenh sobre lu las stelhas.	And then pause over the other bandage, and evenly place these silk wraps properly around these areas, if there is no swelling or abscess in the location; otherwise, pause over what is the abscess area and what causes the swelling; leave that for a few days; then strengthen the silk wraps.
E sian las stelhas de la maytat de canna lada raza, e be formada saviament; o sian de fust de pi; o de ramps de palma ; e sia le ample de quascuna stelha segon aquesta forma e aquesta figura:	And let the silk wraps be of the size of canna ladra root, well-formed; or made of elm wood; or from palm ribs; and let the width of each silk wrap be according to this form and figure:
Empero cove que la astelha que es pausada sobre aquela fractura sia pus grossa e pus lada un petit que las autras astelhas, e la longitut de la stela segon qu’es legut al membre en magnitut e parvitat; e aprop strenh sobre las astelhas am autra benda segon la tua primieyra strictura; e aprop lia desus am fiel decentment segon que havem dit de strictura, e es que sia la tua strictura segon le loc de la fractura mes, e quant mes es alonguat de la fractura, es mendre la strictura.	But ensure that the bandage placed over that fracture is thicker and a little wider than the other bandages, and the length of the strip according to what is read concerning the member in size and smallness; then strengthen on the other side with another bandage according to your first stricture; then place it from above decently according to our discussion of stricture, and that be your stricture more at that location, and the more it is elongated from the fracture, the less the stricture.
E cove que les fils sian migiers en grossesa e subtilitat, e sian de li mol; e si les fils so grosses, ayssi cum yeu he vist per la operacio de alcus fols pausantz les lors fils de cordas de li tort, e es error gran, quan catz la strictura fora equalitat.	But ensure that the threads are strong in thickness and fineness, and be of fine quality; if the threads are thick, as I have seen in some cases when surgeons used thick cords for bandaging, it is a great error when they attempt to achieve equality in stricture.
E eyssament fils subtils no so convenientz, quar tu no consaguiras per strictura am aquels aquo que voles, e no cove que entre astela e astela haja mens de un dit.	But very fine threads are not convenient, for you will not be able to achieve the stricture that you want, and it is not advisable that there be less than an inch between each bandage.
E si le malaute es ledit per las extremitatz de las stelas aprop la strictura en les locs sas, lahoras pausa dejos aquelas de stopa leon o lana carmenada entro que aquo no li fassa lesio.	But if the patient is led to believe that the bandages are close to the stricture at the locations, then place some soft wool or dyed wool between them so that it does not cause injury.
Alcunas veguadas fractura es am plagua, e accideys disrupcio en la codena, e yeu vindre am rememoracio en aquela en le capitol segon singularitat.	Some fractures occur through a blow, and accidents disrupt the chain, and I will recall this in that part of the Capitol according to its singularity.
E sapias que ges tot membre trencat no es streyt am stelhas al primier dia; la qual causa es quar le membre, quan es gran, no cove que pauses sobre lu stelhas sino aprop v dias o vii o mays, segon la tua seguratat de adveniment de apostema caut.	And know that for all broken members, they are not straightened with stakes on the first day; this is because the member, when large, cannot be held down by stakes but requires about 5 days or 7 or more, according to your safety of the onset of abscess.
E aquesta es la manieyra dels emplaustres am les quals les Antics restauravan, les quals so pausatz sobre fractura e dislocacio e torcio.	And this is the way of the plasters with which the Ancients restored, which are applied over fractures and dislocations and twists.
Manieyra de emplaustra comu abruejat de restaurament de fractura, convenient a motas compleccios e majorment a las femnas e als efantz, quar es de aquo sobre le qual no ventz calor ni freg: e es que prenguas de polvera de moli, e es la medula de la farina que pen deves le movement de la mola en las paretz del moli.	Method of plastering for the opening of restoration of fractures, suitable for complex cases and especially for women and children, which is of that on which no heat or cold is applied: and you should take powder of mill, which is the marrow of the flour that comes from the movement of the mill in its walls.
E comfeys aquel ayssi cum es, sino que cribelles aquel am album de huou, e pausa la comfeccio de lu no-spessa ni subtil; e aprop usa de aquela.	And prepare it thus as you can, but sieve it with white oak, and keep the preparation of the not-too-thick or too-subtle variety; and then use that.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre restaurant fractura e dislocacio e torcio: recipe de assafetida, de lapdanum, de acacia, de enula, e migrach, que es razit de milgraner salvage, de totz ana drac. x; de mirra e aloen ana drac. v; alochil ana drac. xx; totz sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian mesclatz am aygua alichil o am album de huou si la compleccio del malaute es scalfada; e aprop usa de aquest emplaustre, quar es de bona composicio e restaura les osses trencatz leugierament, e confereys a motz homes.	Another way of applying plaster for the restoration of fractures, dislocations, and sprains: take asafetida, lapdanum, acacia, enula, and migrach, which is razit from wild myrrh tree, all in drachms 20. Take myrrh and aloes each in drachms 5. Take alochil in drachms 20. All these are to be ground and sieved, then mixed with alcohol or egg white if the patient's skin is sensitive; and use of this plaster, which is of good composition, will restore lightly broken bones and apply it to men.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre le qual comfereys a fractura e torcio: recipe migrach e met de altea blanca ana drac. x; de mirra e de aloen ana drac v; de acacia drac. vi; de bol armenic drac. .xx.	Another way of applying plaster which will help with fractures and sprains: take migrach and 20 drachms of white althea. Take myrrh and aloes each in 5 drachms. Take acacia in 6 drachms. Take Armenian bark in 20 drachms.
Totz sian trissatz en mortier am mota contricio, e sian cribellatz, e sian comfitz am aygua o am album de huou e sia administrat.	All these are to be ground in a mortar with a strong mixture, then sieved, and prepared with water or egg white and administered.
Manieyra de emplaustre a juncturas e osses separatz de lors locs, e seda dolor accident en aquels e a fissuras e fractaduras: sia presa lana sutza e sia submersa en vi agre e oli cuyt e sia pausat sobre le loc.	Another way of applying plaster to joints and bones separated from their places, and for sedating pain in those areas and treating fissures and fractures: take fine wool and immerse it in vinegar and boiled oil, then place it over the area.
Mays en aquest emplastre no es vertut de restauracio, de apostema caut e expelleys dolors propriament.	But in this plaster there is no virtue of restoration, of cauterization and you expel pains properly.
Autra manieyra de emplastre que restaura os trancat: pren fuelas de figuier sort e fuelas de papaver salvatge; contereys tot e fay emplastre de lor.	Another method of plaster for healing wounds: take leaves of fig tree and leaves of wild poppy; mix them all and make a plaster from them.
Manieyra de emplastre abreujat aministrat deves la restauracio de fractura de os e quan tu voles resolucio del romanent de apostema: recipe razitz de altea, de camamilla e flors de violes, de farina de ers, de totz ana partida i; sian totz trissatz e sian cofitz am vi, si·l membre no es scalfat.	Method of a shortened plaster to administer for the restoration of bone fracture and when you want resolution of abscess: take root of althaea, chamomile, flowers of violets, flour of rush, all in equal parts; mix them all together and steep them in vinegar. If the limb is not scabbed over.
Mays si es scalfat, lahoras comfeys aquel am aygua de coliandre humit o am aygua e usa de lu.	But if it is scabbed over, then compress it with water of fennel or with water and use it.
Autra manieyra de emplastra pus fort en resolucio que aquest primier, quan accideys apostema dur deves la restauracio del membre: recipe de razitz de altea e de semensa de li, e de balaustia, e mellilot, majorana, flors de viol, de camamilla, de totz ana partida i engual; totz sian trissatz e sian cofitz am aygua de sauze o am aygua dousa o am vi, tot aquo segon la qualitat del membre e le repaus de la color de lu.	Another stronger method of plaster for resolving abscesses, when you apply it for restoration of the limb: take root of althaea, seed of flax, safflower, sweet clover, marigold, flowers of violet, chamomile, all in equal parts and equal; mix them all together and steep them in water of hazel or water mixed (with another ingredient) or in vinegar, according to the quality of the limb and the color thereof.
Mays Ypocras no diyssec en le sieu libre que sia pausat sobre le membre trenquat deves la restauracio de lu sino cerot fayt de cera e de oli e no autre causa; e recomtec que sia migier entre grossitut e subtilitat.	May Hippocrates not say in his book that it should be placed over the member soaked you must perform the restoration of it rather a cauterization made of wax and oil and no other cause; and recommend that it be mixed between coarseness and subtlety.
Mays a Gualia es vist que sian pausatz sobre le membre trencat deves la restauracio de lu e las causas en las quals es exsiccacio am petit de caliditat so ayssi cum mirra, enses e semblantz a lor de aquelas causas que havem recomtadas.	May Galen, however, be seen as saying that it should be placed over the broken member to perform the restoration of it and the causes in which drying of small quality of heat is thus like myrrh, resin, and similar to those causes that we have recommended.
Manieyra de emplastre que comfereys a lesio e dolor: recipe migat, de cezes, de pels de home inscizes o pena de auzel, e de altea, e sal, partidas enguals; sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian cofitz, e sia fayt emplastre.	Method of poultice that comforts injury and pain: mix equal parts of cinnamon, peel of cut human skin or hazel branch, alum, and salt; boil them, strain and sieve them, and make the poultice.
Mays la quantitat segon la qual cove que romangua la liadura e aprop sia disliada, es que consideres si no es accidit dolor ni pruziment ni le os es trencat no es maugut de son loc, lahoras tu no deslies de motz jorns.	May the quantity with which you should boil the lotion and then dissolve it be such that if no pain has occurred nor any swelling, and the bone is not broken, do not dissolve it for many days.
E si accideys al loc dolor vehement o prusiment o imflacio, lahoras tu te coyte o deslie aquel en la hora, e osta le emplastre de lu.	And if pain intense or swelling occurs at the site, then you should cauterize or dissolve it immediately, and apply the poultice to it.
E pren drap de li e spongia marina leon humida, e submergeys aquela en aygua tebeza, e am aquela lava le loc entro que cesse aquel pruziment e la dolor sia sedada; e aprop layssa repausar le membre per una hora; e aprop pausa sobre lu lana sutza submersa en vi agre e oli o oli rozat, e lia sobre lu per una nuoyt entro que sias segur de apostema caut, e que repause la imflacio del membre, e sia remauguda la dolor de lu.	And take a cloth and a sponge soaked in mule urine, submerge that in clear water, and with it wash the area until the swelling and pain cease; then place the member to rest for an hour; afterwards cover it with well-soaked linen in vinegar and oil or rubbed oil, and wrap it overnight until you are sure of no abscess forming, and that the inflammation of the member subsides, and the pain is alleviated.
E aprop itera aquela strictura subtil e emplastre petit e no·l strenhas per la tua constriccio primieyra, e subtilia am aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then apply that subtle bandage lightly and do not strengthen your original binding, but keep the area subtle until it is healed.
E si vezes que le apostema e la rogor e la dolor e la imflacio e tots les accidentz ja so remaugutz de tot, e indigeysses de emplastre e de strictura, lahoras tu itera aquel ayssi cum has fayt al comensant engualment.	And if you see that the abscess and redness and pain and inflammation and all these accidents are already alleviated, and there is no need for a poultice or bandage, then proceed to apply it as you did at the beginning.
E si no accideys al membre alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no deslies aquel sino aprop tres dias o quatre o v o vii; e alcunas veguadas tot aquo es layssat per xx dias segon que a tu appar per la desliadura del membre, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que la fractura adhereys, e se acosta a la coagulacio de la carn sobre aquel.	And if no cause of the conditions we have mentioned occurs in the member, then keep it wrapped for three to four days or five to seven. Sometimes all this is left on for twenty days according to how you find by the healing of the member, as we have said, until the fracture adheres and settles into the coagulation of the flesh around it.
E lahoras ajusta en la strictura mays que en la tua strictura primieyra tota, e ayusta en la engrossacio de la vianda del malaute, segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu.	And then adjust the tightness more than in your first constriction, and adjust according to the distension of the patient's abdomen, as reminded by the previous memory.
Mays si tu vezes le loc de la fractura ja desiccar e extenuar mays que no cove, lahoras sapias que·l nutriment es prohibit pervenir ad aquel; e donc embroca aquel am aygua tebeza deves tota veguada que delias aquel; e sia aquo en totz tres dias; e alleuja la strictura un petit, e per aquesta operacio corr al membre le nutriment, e es sanat leugierament.	And if you see that the place of the fracture is already drying and shrinking more than hollow, then observe that the nourishment is forbidden to reach there; therefore, soak that area with water of whey for the whole day that affected that; let this be done in all three days; and adjust the tightness a little, and by this operation supply the member with nourishment, and it will heal slightly.
Mays aquo que fan les fols restauradors de la fractura del membre autra veguada quan no es restaurat al comensament, segon que cove, e es restaurat segon tortuositat, es error segon la operacio de lor, e temor gran, e si fos dreyturier aquo agrandit les Antics en lors libres e agueran am aquo obrat.	And what the healing leaves do another time when the member is not restored to its original state, according to how hollow it is, and is restored according to tortuosity, is an error in their operation, and a great fear; if they were right about this, they would enlarge the Ancients' works on their books and have done this operation.
E yeu no he vist ad alcu de lor aquo far, per que es pus razonable que aquo no fassa.	And I have not seen them do this, so it is more reasonable that they do not do it.
Capitol segon: De fractura quan accideys en le cap.	Capitol second: Of fracture when it happens in the head.
Las specias de fracturas son motas, e las figuras de lor son diversas, e las causas son distinctas, quar de fracturas alcuna es fayta per percussio de spaza, e la percussio osta tot le os entro al ciphac, le qual es dejos le os, ayssi cum fay ayssa en le fust, e per aquo aquesta specia es nompnada ascial; o la spaza inscideys alcuna partida del os, e inscideys la carn de lu e no passa la inscizio entro al derier de lu; e aquesta specia de fractura es nompnada levatio absoluta.	The species of fractures are motas, and their figures are various, and their causes are distinct. For some fractures, they are caused by the impact of spaza, and the impact breaks all the bone into pieces, leaving the bone thus as if split in wood, and for this reason, this species is named ascial; or the spaza incides on some part of the bone, and cuts the flesh but does not pass the incision to the marrow of it; and this species of fracture is named levatio absoluta.
E la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca, e de fractura que es contricio o atricio; e causa de lu es percussio am poyra o cazement sobre peyra, e a lor semblantz.	And the pain of these two fractures is great or small, and of the fracture that is contric和平，您想了解这段文本的翻译吗？还是有其他问题需要帮助？
E aquesta fractura o es penetrant que ja apropinqua al pannicol le qual es dejos le os; o es en la facia del os, e la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca.	And this fracture is penetrating, which nearly reaches the periosteum, which covers the bone; or it is in the face of the bone, and the pain of these two fractures is great or small.
E de fractura es que es ameguada en le os, en la subtilitat del cabel petita, e per aquo es nompnada aquesta specia fractura capillar.	And of fracture, it is weakened in the bone, in the subtlety of the hair-like fibers, and for this reason, this species is named the capillary fracture.
E es fractura que es fayta o per cazement o per percussio de peyra e a lu semblantz, que fa intrar alcuna lamina del os a las partidas dedintz, e es fayta en le loc concavitat ayssi cum accideys als payroles de eram quan accideys a lor percussio e es partida de lor intrada a las partidas dedintz.	And it is a fracture that is caused either by compression or by the strike of a shoe, which causes some lamina of the bone to enter the internal parts, and it occurs in the concave location as when you strike an earthenware pot, and it is part of their entry into the internal parts.
E majorment es fayt aquo en les cors de osses humitz, ayssi cum so caps de efantz.	And mostly it is found in the bodies of humid bones, such as those of children.
E so a totas aquestas specias fracturas satagias, so son pessas ayssi cum stelhas separadas.	And to all these species of closed fractures, they are usually painful as if by separate stellae.
E yeu vindre am reremoracio de tot aquo en son loc.	And I will return to the recollection of all this in its place.
E conoyssem totas aquestas specias de fractura per deteccio sobre aquelas e per inquisicio de lor am tentas e ostament de carn corrumpuda que es sobre lor.	And we know all these species of fracture through detection by touch and by inquiry about their appearance and the sign of corrupted flesh that is upon them.
E specia capillar es conoguda per aysso que es descubert sobre le os, e es abstergit, e linit sobre lu am tentha, quar la fractura appar negra.	And the capillary species is known because it is discovered on the bone, is scraped, and limits over it by touch, for the fracture appears black.
Mays en la curacio de fractura considera al comensament les accidentz del malaute, e lahoras si tu vezes per los accidentz que signifique per significacio manifesta sobre paor, ayssi cum es vomit de colera, e extencio, e perdement de entendament, e abscizio de votz, e sincopi, e febre acuta, e eyssiment dels huels e rogor de aquels, e semblantz a lor dels accidentz en las majors disposicios, ses dopte no es sanat.	In the cure of fracture consider at the beginning the accidents of the patient, and when you see by the accidents that there is a manifest signification over fear, such as vomiting of colera, extension, loss of understanding, absence of voice, syncope, acute fever, and sensation in them and redness of those, and likenesses to them of the accidents in the major dispositions, then do thou suppose it is not healed.
E si vezes accidentz no-correntz tu speras salut, lahoras tu comensa la curacio de lu.	And if you see unusual accidents, you hope for health, and then you begin the cure of it.
La qual causa es quar si es vengut a tu le plaguat en le comensament cum es plaguat e aquo es en les dias de ivern, lahoras cove que tu studias en le ostament del os denant le dia xiiii segon tota disposicio.	And the cause is that if the injured person comes to you in the beginning of the injury and the injury is from the winter days, then consider that you study in the bone's membrane before the fourteenth day according to all disposition.
E si es en les dias d’estiu, lahoras cove que te coytes ostar le os denant le vii dia, habantz que aquo que es dejos le os sia corromput del pannicol, e que accidescan les accidentz que havem recomtatz.	And if it is from the days of summer, then consider that you cut to expose the bone on the seventh day, having that what has been left on the bone is corrupted by the fatty tissue, and that unusual accidents occur which we have recounted.
E si la fractura ja es pervenguda al pannicol cubrent le cervel, e es am partidas menudas e atricio, lahoras cove que inscidas la partida conminuta e atrita, segon que yeu recomtare a tu.	And if the fracture has already reached the fatty tissue covering the brain and is very fragmented and rubbed, then consider that you incise the fragmentated part and rub it, according to what I have recounted to you.
E es que tu razas le cap del malaute plaguat, e descuebres sobre le os segon costuma e manieyra a tu possible segon la figura de la plagua, e que sia leugier sobre le malaute.	And you should raise the head of the patient and uncover over the bone according to custom and your manner as is possible according to the shape of the wound, and let it be light over the patient.
E si accideys a tu deves la deteccio del os, fluxs de sanc o apostema caut, lahora tu te oppausa a lu am aquo que cove, e es que huemplas le loc de draps infuzes en vi e oli rozat, e fassa repausar la plagua entro que sia sedat le apostema, e sies segur de fluxs del sanc; e aprop comensa en la circuicio del os e en la ablatio de lu.	And if it happens to you to detect the bone, flow of blood or abscess caut, then you should press upon it with what covers, and it is that you fill the area with wrappings infused in wine and rubbed oil, and make the wound rest until the abscess is subdued, and you are sure of the flow of blood; and then begin at the circumference of the bone and in its excision.
E aquo sia segon una de dos manieyras de operacio.	And this should be according to one of two ways of operation.
E la una manieyra es que tu inscidas le os am inscisori de streyt tal, e aquesta es la forma de lu: E aprop administra un autre inscissori aquest, un pauc pus lat que aquel; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And one way is that you incise the bone with an incisor straight such, and this is its form: And then administer another incisor here, a little more lateral than the first; and this is its form:
E aprop administra mays le inscissori pus lat que·l segon.	And then use more the incisor more lateral than the second.
E cove que sia deves tu nombre de inscissoris diverses, dels quals alcus so pus latz que alcus autres; e alcus de lor so pus breus que·ls autres e sian en le derier de acuitat de las suas extremitatz, e sian de ferr indi o felod.	And note that you should name the incisions variously, of which some are longer than others; and some of them are shorter than the others and located at the ends of the acuity of their extremities, and they be made of iron or steel.
E usa de lor am facilitat en percussio sobre le inscissori per so que no concutesca le cap e leda aquel.	And use them with ease in percussion over the incisions so that the head does not concute and leads it.
E si le os es fort, dur, lahoras cove que perfores en le circuit de lu denant que tu administres los inscissoris am les taravels, les quals so nomnatz taravels no-profundantz.	And if the bone is strong and hard, then note that you should perforate in the circumference of it before you administer the incisions along the travels, which you name shallow incisions.
E no so nomnatz ayssi sino quar aquels no pausan le terme de l’os del test ad aquo que es aprop lu, per so quar al taravel es redonda extremitat o marge sobre aquel que es dejos le cap de lu agut semblant a marge o a cercle petit, le qual prohibeys esser submergit e passar la spissitut del os.	And they are named thus only four of them, which do not reach the end of the bone until they are near it, so that the travel has a rounded extremity or margin over that upon which the head of the needle is left acute, resembling a small margin or circle, which must not be submerged and pass the thickness of the bone.
E es convenient que tu prenguas de aquestz taravels gran nombre dels quals quascu convenesca a la spicitut de quascun os, entro que sia a tu present en tottz testz del cervel la extremitat del qual sia aguda, la quantitat en longitut e brevitat sia segon la quantitat de spicitut de aquest test.	And it is convenient that you take many of these incisions, of which each suits the thickness of each bone. Within this, ensure that the extremity of all is acute, and the quantity in length and brevity be according to the quantity of thickness of this bone.
E aquesta es la forma de tres specias de teravels: La qualitat de perforar en le circuit del os trencat es que pauses le teravel sobre le os e revolvas aquel am les tieus ditz entro que sapias que l’os ja es penetrat; e aprop permuda le terevel ad autre loc, e pausa aquo que es entre tot trauc la quantitat de la grosseza del ray o enviro aquo.	This is the form of three species of travel: The quality of perforating in the circuit of the broken bone is that you place the traveler over the bone and turn it with your fingers until you know that the bone has already been penetrated; then, remove the traveler to another location, and pause where all goes through the quantity of the size of the ray or around it.
E aprop inscideys am inscissoris aquo que es entre quascun trauc del os, e fay aquel pus subtil que podes sobre aquo en fi de levitat, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que erradiques le os, o am la tua ma, o am alcuna autra causa per alcus sturmentz les quals auras apparelhatz ad aquo, ayssi cum tanalhas e forceps subtils.	And then incise with the scalpel that which is between each part of the bone, and make that subtle cut over it at the end due to levitation, as we have said, while you are removing the bone, or by your hand, or by some other cause through certain instruments which you will apply to it, such as forceps and fine tongs.
E cove que tu guardes am tota cautela que l’inscissori no toque alcuna causa del ciphac.	And make sure that the scalpel does not touch any part of the cavity.
E donc cum auras circuit le os perforan, e sira separat del ciphac si es continuat am lu, e auras aquel extrayt, cove que razas e enguales aquel en la asperitat de lu de aquo que es en le os am autra sturment semblant a inscissori, mays empero cove que sia pus teon e pus subtil que les autres inscissoris.	And so, after you have perforated the bone and separated it from the cavity if it continues with it, and you have extracted that, make sure to rasp and level it with the roughness of what is in the bone using another instrument resembling a scalpel, but let it be sharper and more subtle than other scalpels.
E si roman alcuna partida dels osses petitz e satagias, lahoras pren aquela am facilitat am aquo que es deves tu dels sturmentz; e aprop aquo cura la plagua am lichinis e enguentz les quals havem ditz.	And if some small part of the bones is cracked and shattered, then take that facilitating material which you should use for the splints; and then cure the wound with lint and ointments which we have said.
E l’autra manieyra de operacio es leugiera, longinqua de paor, la qual diyssec Gualia e la lauzec per gran lausor; e aquest es le sermo de lu: necessari es a tu en le comensament que comenses descobrir la partida del os del loc en le qual es la fractura pus vehement e pus manifesta, entro que quan auras descubert aquela partida e auras pausat dejos lu la extremitat de aquest inscissori lent e alegre del qual aquesta es la forma:	And the other method of operation is lighter, far from fear, which dissects Gualia and cuts it with great caution; this is its saying: at the beginning you must necessarily start uncovering the part of the bone in the area where the fracture is most severe and most evident. When you have uncovered that part and placed your hand on the extremity of this slow and cheerful scalpel, which has this form:
E es que la partida lenticular es leon e no inscideys alcuna causa, e la partida aguda es de lu en dos latz avantz en longitut, ayssi cum vezes; que la partida lenticular sia ajustada al ciphac am la facia de lu inscident aguda en le os.	And it is that the lenticular part is flat and you should not incise for any reason, and the acute part is divided into two cuts lengthwise, as you see; so that the lenticular part is fitted to the keyhole at the face of the incising acute part on the bone.
E aprop percuteys sobre le inscissori de una partida am un petit malhet entro que inscidas tot le os am facilitat ayssi cum es revolvut, e tu sias segur del pannicol que no accida en lu accident que temas en denguna manieyra, e si le medicant14 era le pus fol de totz les homes e le mays ignorant de lor; certament, e si era dorment.	And then strike on the incising part with a small hammer as you incise the entire bone with ease, and you be certain of the panniculus that it does not occur in the accident you fear in any way, and if the surgeon was the most foolish of all men and the most ignorant of them; certainly, if he were sleeping.
Lahoras si romania alcuna causa annexa al os del pannicol en alcus locs de os, inscidira aquel de lu am la extremitat del inscissori aquel lenticular, e deliuraria aquel de lu am facilitat, quar es deliurat de lu ses nocument e ses paor.	When any fracture occurs in the region of the foot at certain bone locations, it will incise that part at the extremity of the cut bone, and will deliver that part with ease, for it is relieved of its harm and fear.
E si fractura del os no penetra entro al pannicol, e aquo que es abscidit o es ostat del os es la facia de lu, e roman en lu asperitat e satagias subtils, lahoras cove que razas aquela asperitat e erradiques aquelas satagias am razoris subtils per les quals tu has preparat le nombre, de diversas quantitatz per que sia a tu possible administrar de aquels en tot loc les pus convenientz de lor e le pus dreyt de aquels segon aquo en que te perduzeys la tua operacio aquel os trencat e la figura de lu.	And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate into the foot, and what is severed or remains from the bone is its surface, and it stays there rough and fine particles underneath, then you must rasp that roughness away and eradicate those fine particles with fine razors, which you have prepared in various quantities so that you can administer them most conveniently in all places and according to the right place for your operation on that broken bone and its figure.
E cove que administres en la tua razio am la qual razes le os al comensament le pus lat de aquels razoris, e aprop usa aprop lu del pus subtil de lu, e no cesses far aquo segon continuitat entro que pervenguas ad aministrar le pus teon e·l pus subtil de totz aquels.	And you must administer according to your judgment, using the edge of the razor to start the cut and then proceed with the finer part of it, and do not cease doing this continuously until you reach the point where you can administer the thick and the fine part of all.
Mays en quascuna de las autras fracturas petitas capillars e fractura subtil, cove que administres cura segon aquo que perduseys ad rectificacio de lu.	In any other small fractures or fine fractures, you must administer care according to what you have done for correction of it.
E es causa que no es ameguada sobre totz les quals han studi en aquela art.	And it is because they are not taught about all those who have studied that art.
E stec sobre aquo que nos scriut havem mostrat en grans fracturas.	And place this over what we have written about in great fractures.
E si le pannicol es retangut quan tu erradiques le os, lahoras cove que prenguas drap de li segon la quantitat de la plagua, e submergeys aquel en oli rozat, e pausa aquel sobre le orrifici de la plagua; e aprop pren autre drap doblat o triplicat e submergeys lu en vi e oli rozat e pausa aquel sobre drap prim e fay aquo al pus leugierament que podes sobre aquel, que no graves le ciphac; e aprop administra sobre aquel liament lat, e no strenhas aquel sino per quantitat que tengua la plagua tant solament.	And if the bandage is torn when you are extracting the bone, then take cloth according to the size of the wound, and immerse that in olive oil, and place it over the opening of the wound; then take another piece of folded or triple-folded cloth, immerse it in wine and olive oil, and place it over the first one, doing this lightly enough so as not to weigh down the dressing. And administer salt on top of that, but do not press too hard except according to the size of the wound.
E layssa aquel am aquesta cura per un dia o per dos entro que sias segur de apostema caut; e aprop deslia aquel e aprop aministra medicinas am las quals es superflua siccitat, ayssi cum razitz de lin e farina de errs, e polvera de enses e de aristologia, e de semblantz ad aquels.	Leave it to this treatment for one day or two until you are sure of no abscess forming; then remove that and administer medicines if there is excessive dryness, such as linseed and wheat flour, powder of thyme and arsenic, and similar substances.
E es que tu fassas de aquestas medicinas polvera que sia pulverizada sobre la plagua, ayssi cum son secas; e universalment, administra en aquel tota medicina de proprietat de la qual es que abstergesca e no mordique.	And you make these medicines into a powder to be撒布于伤口之上，如同干燥的粉末；普遍而言，应使用具有洗涤和不刺激作用的所有药物。
E guarda te segon la tua vertut que la plagua en la tua curacio sia neta; e no sia en lu surdicia de enguent ni autra; ni no layssas agreguar virulencia en lu; quar quan es ajustada sobre le pannicol del cervel, corromp aquel e poyreys aquel, e accideys sobre le malaute aprop aquo malicia maligna.	And guard that the wound in your cure be clean; and do not let it become surdy of ointment or other; nor leave to add virulence in it; for when adjusted over the linen of the brain, corrupt that and spoil that, and chance upon the evil aprop that malice malign.
E accideys en le ciphac del cap, cum de lu es mondificat le os e majorment quan es menspresada la cura de lu, e es negror en la superficia de lu; e donc considera lahoras si accideys al malaute les accidentz que havem ditz, sapias que es parnicios ses tot dopte.	And it happens in the scapha of the head, as from it is modified the bone and most especially when the cure of it is neglected, and blackness in the surface of it; and therefore consider when it happens to the evil that the accidents that we have said, know that it is pernicious and totally hopeless.
E si no accideys negror sino de la medicina que es pausada desus, e es en vertut de aquela medicina que fassa aquela negror, lahoras cove que tu prenguas de mel una partida e de oli rozat partidas iii, e am aquels linieys un drap, e aprop pausa aquel sobre le ciphac; e aprop cura aquel am las specias de curacio que conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if no blackness happens but from the medicine that is applied over it, and is in virtue of that medicine which causes that blackness, then take a part of honey and three parts of rubbed oil, and line those with a cloth, and place it over the scapha; and cure it with the species of cure that you find appropriate until it is healed.
Capitol .iii.	Capitol. iii.
De restauracio del nas quan es trincat.	Of the restoration of the nose when it is broken.
Sapias que no es trencat del nas sino doas partidas ensemps pus sobiranas, o una de aquelas alcunas veguadas, per so quar en lu has dos osses, quar la partida dejos es cartillaginosa, e no es trencada e no accideys a lu sino atricio e tortuositat e sinuitat.	Know that it is not the nose itself that is broken, but two parts together with some additional cartilage above, or one of those few cracks, because in the nose there are two bones. The part you leave intact is cartilaginous and is not broken; therefore, do not damage it but apply friction and soothing.
Mays si es trencada la una de las doas partidas de lu, lahoras cove que tu intrometas le dit petit en le sieu nas, e que engualhas aquela fractura dedintz am le tieu dit indic, e am le dit pous defora, entro que retorne le nas segon la sua figura natural.	But if one of the two parts is broken, then you must introduce the small piece into the nostril, and equalize the fracture inside according to your previous indication, and outside with your thumb, so that the nose returns to its natural shape.
E sia fayt aquo per tu am facilitat, e guarda te que no caja per aquela tua operacio sobre le malaute delor.	And do this as I have facilitated for you, and make sure that the pain in the patient does not worsen due to your operation.
E si la fractura es en la pus sobirana partida del nas, e le dit no perve ad aquela, lahoras cove que sia equat am la extremitat del ray en le qual sia petita grossitut.	And if the fracture is in the upper part of the nose, and you cannot reach it, then you must equalize it at the extremity of the ridge where there is a small swelling.
E si la fractura es en doas partidas, lahoras tu fay le semblant de aquo.	And if the fracture is in two parts, then you make it appear as such.
E coyta te am restauracio de lu en le primier dia de la fractura, si es possible; e sino, lahoras aprop le vii o·l x deves le repaus del apostema caut.	And if the limb has restoration on it in the first day of the fracture, if possible; otherwise, as soon as the seventh or half a month, you should give it rest from the apsema caut.
E aprop entromet en la extremitat del nas una meca de drap de li, si la fractura es en una partida, o metz doas calguas, si la fractura es en doas partidas, e sia en la calgua grossitut de tanta quantitat que umpla le trauc del nas.	And then insert into the extremity of the nose a piece of cloth wick, if the fracture is in one part, or two cloths, if the fracture is in two parts, and let the larger quantity swell to fill the nose.
E diysso alcus dels antics restauradors que las calguas sian enfundudas en boder, e sian permudadas en tot dia, mays no es vist a mi; habantz cove que la meca sia enfunduda en album de huou comfit am polvera de moli; e aprop layssa la qualgua entro que l’os sia fermat e sia endurazida la cartillage.	And thus some of the ancient restorers say that the cloths should be soaked in broth, and changed throughout the day, but I have not seen this; instead, use a cove where the wick is soaked in honey comfit powder; and leave the cloth until the bone is firmly set and the cartilage is hardened.
E alcunas veguadas sia entromes en le nas, en loc de calgua, pena de auca pus que es envolopada de drap de li leon; e sia que ja te la fractura del nas pus vehement e que le malaute no sia prohibit de inspiracio.	And sometimes insert into the nose instead of a cloth, a hot pack wrapped in linen cloth; and do this when the nasal fracture is severe and breathing is not prohibited.
E aquesta causa no es a tu necessaria; e si voles, fay aquo, e si voles, fay calguas.	And this cause is not necessary for you; and if you wish, do this, and if you wish, use cloths.
E si accideys autra veguada apostema caut, emplastra le nas am cerot o am coto enfus en vi agre e oli rozat, o am diaquilon.	And if another abscess occurs, apply a cauterization, plaster the nose with wax or cloth soaked in vinegar and oil, or with a diaphoretic.
Mays si no accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que emplaustres aquel defora am farina de sizami e am polvera de enses cofitz am album de huou; e aprop pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e no lies le nas am alcuna causa.	And if no abscess occurs, when it is necessary to plaster that area externally with sesame seed flour and pine bark powder in honey; then place your hand on the patient's forehead, and do not touch the nose for any reason.
Mays si so trencats les osses del nas am fractura petita o so conminuitz, lahoras cove que scindas sobre aquels, e extraguas aquels am insturmentz que conveno ad aquels; e aprop cos la scissura, e cura aquela am aquo que encarna e consolida, e am emplastres ad aquo convenientz.	And if the nose bones are broken by a small fracture or are comminuted, it is necessary to split those areas, and extract them with instruments suitable for those; then close the incision, and treat that area with what encases and consolidates, and with plasters appropriate for this.
E si accideys plagua dedintz le nas, lahoras cove que cures aquela am calguas e administra canulas de plom entro que sia de tot sanat.	And if a swelling occurs inside the nose, it is necessary to treat that with washes and administer lead pipes internally until it is completely healed.
Capitol .iiii.	Chapter IV.
De restauracio de la mandibula quan es trincada.	On the restoration of the jaw when it is broken.
Quan la mandibula dejos es rompuda e la fractura de lu no es am plagua, reguarda lahoras si la fractura es deforas tant solament, e no es trencada en dos e es curvada a las partidas dedintz, lahoras la sua cognicio es leugiera.	When the jaw is broken and the fracture is not displaced, consider whether the fracture is only superficial, not broken into two pieces and bent inwardly, in which case its perception is light.
E cove donc, si la fractura es en la part dreyta, que tu intrometas le tieu indic senestre en la boca del malaute; e semblantment si la fractura es an la mandibula senestra, lahoras intromet le dit indic de la ma dreyta; e impelleys am aquel la gilbositat de la fractura dedintz am facilitat a las partidas defora, am la tua autra ma de la partida defora del os; am aquel decentment equa aquelam.	And thus, if the fracture is on the right side, you should insert your left index finger into the mouth of the patient; similarly, if the fracture is on the left jaw, then insert your right index finger; and push the softness of the fracture inward with ease to the parts outward, with your other hand on the part outward of the bone; do this properly as much as that.
E si la fractura de la mandibula ja es separada en doas, lahoras cove que administres extensio de doas partz segon rectitut entro que sia possibla la equacio de lu.	And if the fracture of the jaw is already separated into two parts, then you should apply extension to both parts according to rightness so that the alignment of them is possible.
E si accideys conmocio de dentz a disrupcio, lahoras strenh aquelas de las quals speras que romandran am fil de aur o de argent o de ceda; e aprop pausa sobre la mandibula trencada cerot, e aprop pausa sobre lu drap duplicat, e pausa sobre le drap gran stelha decentment fayta, o una pessa de sola engual a la longitut de la mandibula; e aprop lia aquela desus segon que a tu es apparelhada la liadura de lu e que conveneys la applicacio, entro que no es destruida.	And if you notice the loss of teeth along with disruption, then strengthen those from which you expect the roots to be of gold or silver or cedar; and place your hand over the broken jaw, and place another hand on the doubled cloth, and place a large star-shaped stake decently made, or a single piece equal in length to the jaw; and place that above as it suits your bandage and application, so long as it is not destroyed.
E comanda al malaute que use de repaus e tranquilitat, e pausa la vianda de lu sorbicios leons.	And command the patient to take rest and tranquility, and stop his food intake for a while.
E si extimas que ja es alterada la figura en alcuna manieyra, lahoras tu te coyta e deslia aquel al tertz dia; e aprop rectifica aquo que ja es alterat de lu e emplaustra aquel am polvera de moli, am album de huou, o am farina de cisami, pus que tu auras ostat le cerot de lu, e pausa sobre le emplastra lana leon.	And if you think that the figure has already been altered in any way, on the seventh day you incise and remove it; then correct what is already altered in him and plaster the area with powder of molybdenum, or with ocher, or with flour of comfrey, provided that you have bathed his wound, and place a lion's wool bandage over the plaster.
E adonc cum sta annex e ajustat aquel emplastre sobre lu, e la disposicio del os no es alterada, layssa aquel, que no le deslies entro que sia sanat e strenh la fractura; quar motas veguadas aquesta fractura es streyta en tres sempmanas.	And then, once this plaster is properly applied to him, and the position of the bone has not been altered, leave it as it is, without removing it until the fracture is healed and strong; for major fractures take three weeks to heal.
E si autra veguada accida apostema caut, lahoras administra aquo que havem dit motas veguadas en la sedacio de lu entro que sia sanat, e sia remaugut aquel apostema.	And if another time an abscess occurs, then administer what we have said about major fractures in the treatment of it until it is healed and drained.
E si la fractura es am plagua, lahoras considera si es pessa del os separada o satagias, lahoras tu te subtilia que ostes aquelas satagias am aquo que conveneys ad aquo en la remocio de aquelas dels sturmentz.	And if the fracture is comminuted, then consider whether it is a severe bone separation or displacement. Then you should carefully handle those displacements as needed during the removal of the fragments.
E si le orrifici de la plagua es streyt, lahoras tu le amplifique am le fleubotomi segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And if the openings of the wound are narrow, then enlarge them according to the quantity of your necessity using the flebotomy.
E aprop quan tu auras ostat aquelas satagias, e de aquelas no sira remaugut re, lahoras tu cos le orrifici de la plagua si es ampla; e sino, pausa sobre aquela un dels emplaustres que conveneysso ad aquo e encarnan aquela, entro que sia sanada.	And when you have completed those stages, and there is no longer any need to remain at those steps, then use the openings of the wound if they are wide; otherwise, place over it one of the plasters that suit this and cover the area until it heals.
Capitol .v.	Capitol V.
De restauracio de la furcula quan es trinquada.	For the restoration of the furcula when it is broken.
Motas veguadas es trencada la furcula de la partida denant deves le muscle, e aquela fractura es fayta en una de tres manieyras.	When the scapula is broken, you must treat the muscle of the anterior part, and that fracture can occur in one of three ways.
Quar o es trencada, o seperada, o es seperada en doas partz otra que no accidan satagias; e es leugier a la restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que accideysso en lu satagias, e es dificil a restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que la fractura es am plagua.	When it is broken, separated, or completely severed into two parts without requiring stages, the restoration is easier. When such separation occurs with stages, the restoration is more difficult. Or when the fracture involves the wound.
E la operacio en aquela, quan la fractura es ses plagua, es que tu fassas esser present dos ministres, per so que la un tengua le adjutori e siegua la furcula trencada, e l’autre extenda le col ves aquela partida.	And the operation in this case, when the fracture involves the wound, is that you have two ministers present, so that one holds the assistant and guides the broken scapula, and the other extends the neck towards that part.
E aprop enguala la fractura am les tieus ditz entro que sia fayta la forma de lu segon que cove, e no sia en lu eminencia pauca ni concavitat.	And then equalize the fracture by placing it in the groins as it is made to form according to its nature, neither on a too prominent part nor in a concavity.
E si indigeysses mes de extencio, lahoras cove que pauses dejos le titillic del malaute spera de drap o de lana, e sia la grandesa de lu segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat; e exten e eleva la furcula e coarta la spera am la tua ma entro que enguales la frectura segon que cove.	And if you need more extension, then place a fold of the patient's clothing or wool, and let its size be according to your necessity; extend and elevate the fork and press the fold with your hand as you equalize the fracture according to its nature.
E si no podes atirar la extremitat de la furcula a las partidas defora, per so quar es pervenguda al preon, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e pauses sobre le muscle de lu un coyssi migier en grandeza.	And if you cannot stretch the end of the fork to the parts outside, because it is obstructed by the hip, then place the patient on his side with his neck bent, and place a half-cushion over the muscle.
E le ministre prema le muscle de lu a las partidas dejos entro que l’os de la furcula sia elevat que es en le preon en sus, e lahoras tu rectifique la fractura e enguala aquela am les tieus ditz.	And the minister presses the muscle on the sides until the bone of the fork reaches the hip, and then you correct the fracture and equalize it in the groins.
Mays si sentes satagias de la furcula e so maugudas, lahoras cove que fendes sobre aquela e extraguas aquelas satagias am facilitat.	But if you feel the tendons of the fork and they are swollen, then cut over that area and extract those tendons easily.
E si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu ingenia inscisio de lu am un dels inscissoris les quals has apparelhatz ad aquo, pus que havias pausat dejos la furcula le sturment que serve le ciphac; e es sturment de fust o de ferr del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if it is retained in the bone, then you will make an incision in it with one of the bistouri tools which you have prepared for this, after having placed your hand on the greater trochanter to guide the instrument; and this instrument is either a wooden or iron rod, of which this is the form:
E es semblant a culier del qual aquesta es la concavitat; e sia la sua latitut segon aquo que has necessitat de lu, segon la grandeza del os o la pauqueza de lu.	And it is similar to a spoon, of which this is the cavity; and its width according to that which you have needed from it, according to the size of the bone or its smallness.
Mays la longitut de lu sia segon que es a tu possible a la operacio; que haja doas extremitatz ayssi cum vezes, e la una extremitat sia ample e l’autre streyta.	But the length of it should be according to what is possible for the operation; that it have two extremities thus like a fork, and one extremity broad and the other narrow.
E si la disrupcio de la plagua la qual has inscidida quan has extraytas la satagia del os es ampla, e yest segur de apostema caut, lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura.	And if the disruption of the wound which you have incised when you have extracted the fragment of the bone is wide, and you are certain of a carbuncle forming, then you adjust the two lips of the wound with sutures.
E si la disrupcio es pauca, o temes apostema caut, lahoras tu uemple la plagua am draps e pulvils segon la quantitat de la scissura de la plagua.	And if the disruption is small, or you fear a carbuncle forming, then you manage the wound with cloths and powders according to the quantity of the incision in the wound.
E si accideys apostema caut, lahoras infon drap en vi agre e oli rozat e vi, e pausa sobre aquel.	And if an abscess occurs, then fill a cloth with warm oil and wine, and place it over that area.
Mays la strictura del os quan es ses plagua e ses seccio, es que pauses emplastre fayt de farina de moli am album de huou, e pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e aprop pausa la spera dejos le titillic de lu, si indigeyssas de aquela, e aprop pren humemate, so es torca la qual teno les Sarrazis , que sia mot longua, e sia latitut de lu de un palm o entorn aquel; e aprop pausa pulvils duplicatz sobre la stopa e l’emplastre; e aprop pren una stela de taula subtil de la qual la latitut d’ela sia de tres ditz e en longitut semblantment; e aprop envolopa aquela en drap, e aprop envolopa aquel drap am la stela en lo loc sobre le loc de la fractura; e aprop pausa humemati ayssi cum es revout, e revol aquela sobre le col de lu e dejos le titillic de lu sa e dejos le titillic de lu malaute, e reduzeys aquela sobre tota partida, e quan vezes que la strictura de la fractura am strictura descent, e es aquo que no es occultat sobre tu.	When the bone structure is swollen and painful, you should pause to apply a plaster made of flour mixed with honey, place it over the lion's stop, and then place the splint if needed. If a splint is required, use one that is long enough to cover about a palm's width; then place a double powder over the plaster and the splint. Next, take a thin table stick whose width is about three fingers and length similar to it; wrap this in cloth, and wrap the cloth around the splintered area on the fracture location. Then pause to apply the plaster again, and repeatedly cover it around the splinter's neck, leaving some of the splinter exposed for infection to drain out, and return everything to its proper place, and when the swelling of the fracture subsides, this is what is not hidden from you.
E tot, que no sia mauguda la stelha desobre le os trencat; e per so cove que tu vejas le malaute quascun dia, que quan le liament es mollificat o vezas la stela ja esser remauguda, lahoras tu rectifica aquo e strenh la liadura.	And always ensure that the splint is not too tight on the broken bone; and so cover that you may see the wound daily, for when the dressing becomes moist or you see the splint already loosened, then you adjust this and strengthen the binding.
E aprop pausa le dormir del malaute sobre le col de lu, e pausa dejos le titillic de lu deves le dormir de lu en la nueyt un petit coyssi; per so que am aquel sia elevat le adjutori de lu del latz de aquel, e donc es elevada la la fractura de la furcula a elevacio del muscle; o sia le bras de lu liat al col de aquel.	And then place the patient's head on their pillow, and place a cushion under their neck, to elevate the support of that part during sleep; thus the fracture of the furcula is elevated to the elevation of the muscle; or the arm is laid against the side of that.
E no deslies le liament si no accideys en le loc prusiment o apostema, entro a xii dias.	And do not remove the bandage unless there is an accident or abscess in the place, within twelve days.
E aprop renovelha le emplastre si has vista la facia de lu ad aquo, e ajusta en la strictura e restaura aquel e layssa entro que sia restaurat e sia coagulat la fractura de la furcula.	And then renew the plaster if you see the face of it indicating this, and adjust to the constriction and restore that, and let the fracture of the furcula be restored and coagulated.
E es strenguda e comfortada segon le mes en xxviii dias, e alcunas veguadas en alcus homes es fayt en mens de temps de aquel.	And it is strengthened and made comfortable according to the need in twenty-eight days, and in some cases, it is done in less than that time.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter VI.
De restauracio de fractura de la spalla.	On the restoration of the fracture of the shoulder.
Spatula tart es trencada en le loc lat de lu e no so trencatz de lu sino les marges.	The spatula tart is broken in the middle of the fracture and not from the fracture itself but from the margins.
E donc quan es trencat le loc de lu — e es trencat en le mieg loc de lu — e no es conogut sino per tocament, lahoras segon que es la figura de la fractura sforsa te la preparacio de lu e reduzir aquela segon la figura natural en tota manieyra de engen la qual es a tu possible.	And when the location is broken — and it is broken in the middle of the location — and it is not known otherwise by touch, then according to the figure of the fractured bone, prepare that place and reduce it according to the natural figure in every manner of the technique which is within your ability.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc polvera de moli am album de huou e stopa leon; e aprop pausa pulvil de drap duplicat; e aprop pausa sobre lu stela lada de taula subtil segon la quantitat de la spatula tota o mays un pauc.	And then place on the area powder of ground alum and stopover; and then place dust of doubled cloth; and then place over the splint on the table a thin strip according to the quantity of the spoon all or a little more.
Mays si dejos la stela es concavitat en alcu dels locs de la spatula, lahoras tu enguala aquela concavitat am stopa leon, e aprop pueja la stela segon equalitat.	But if you leave the splint concave in some parts of the spoon's location, then you equalize that concavity with stopover; and then place the splint according to equality.
E aprop strenh desus am humemati longua ab constriccio decent e am fermesa de la stela entro que no sia remauguda del sieu loc.	And then strengthen above with adhesive ligature long and firm, and firmly place the splint so that it is not displaced from its location.
E considera le liament en quascun dia; e totas veguadas que sia mollificat, lia autra veguada e stren le e equa la stela si es remauguda del sieu loc.	And consider the bandage on any day; and every time it becomes moist, reapply another time and strengthen and equalize the splint if it is displaced from its location.
E jagua le malaute sobre le sieu latz sa.	And place the patient on their side.
E la spatula es restaurada en xx dias o en .xxv.	The spatula is restored in xx days or in .xxv.
E donc quan es complit aquest nombre, lahoras tu dissolveys le liament, e que tu scias ensegurat quar aquela es dels osses dels quals la cominicio no es temuda ni lor dissolucio.	And when this number is completed, then you dissolve the bond, and that you know securely which one is from the bones whose beginning was not feared nor their dissolution.
E si procezeys del loc del os pessa e pongeys dejos la codena, lahoras tu scindeys sobre lu, e osta le, e fay segon que havem dit en la fractura de la furcula de sadacio de apostema caut si accideys aqui.	And if you proceed from the place of the bone to the joint, then place a ligature there, cut over it, and hold it, doing as we have said in the fracture of the scapula with an apostematous abscess.
Capitol .vii.	Capitol VII.
De restauracio de la fractura del pietz.	On the restoration of the fracture of the foot.
Le pietz alcunas veguadas es romput en le mieg loc de lu e aquo tart endeve; mays las extremitatz de lu mot endeve que so ciccadas e comminuidas.	The foot sometimes breaks in the middle of its location; however, its ends continue to be constricted and fragmented.
E dels accidentz de lu quan es trencat le mieg de lu es que declina a las partidas dedintz e accideys a lu gran dolor, e dificultat en lo hale, e tos, e fort leu e vomeys sanc; e es declarada en lu cavitat en le os trencat e no es occulta al sentiment.	And the accidents when the foot breaks in its middle decline towards the internal parts, causing great pain, difficulty in walking, coughing, swelling, and vomiting; these are declared in the cavity of the broken bone and are not hidden from sensation.
E la restauracio de lu es que sia resupinat le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa entre las spallas de lu un coyssi; e aprop prem als muscles de lu, e ajusta las costas de lu am las mas de dos costatz, e subtilia te en la operacio de lu e en la equacio segon tota manieyra que es ad aquo possibla e que conveneys ad aquo, entro que retorne la figura del os segon que cove.	And the restoration is that they are laid on their back, and a cushion is placed between their shoulders; then press on their muscles, adjust their spine against the backs of two chairs, and carefully perform the operation and equate everything in every way possible until the figure of the bone returns as it should.
E aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e estopa e pausa desobre astela de taula subtil de sauze o de caligi e de a lor semblantz en levitat, pus que tu envolopas aquela en drap; e aprop subtilia te en lian aquela sobre le os trencat que no sia maugut; e vay am liadura segon retonditat al dors alcunas veguadas, e strenh aquel am strictura decent; e aprop considera la liadura en tota hora, e quan es mollificada strenh aquela.	And then place it on the plaster and sponge, and place it over a thin wooden board covered with tulle or cloth similar in lightness, so you wrap that with a cloth; then carefully place it around the broken bone so it is not too tight; and tie it firmly but decently several times along the back. And consider the bandage at all times, and when it becomes softened, strengthen it.
E si necessitat provoca a desliament de aquela deves corrossio o pruziment, o dolor, o apostema que accideysso en le loc, lahoras tu coyta e deslia aquela e erradica le emplastre e rectifique aquo que accideys per aquo am manieyra de curacio de lu; e aprop reduzeys le emplastre, si vezes ad aquo la facia; e ajusta a lu strictura entro que sia sanat.	And if necessity causes an abscess or pus, pain, or boil to develop in that area, then you should incise and drain it, relieve the pain, or treat the boil. After you do this, remove the plaster and correct whatever has occurred by treating it according to the method of healing; then reduce the amount of plaster if needed, and adjust the bandage as it heals.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter VIII.
De restauracio de las costas quan son trincadas.	For the restoration of the ribs when they are fractured.
Sapias que fractura de las costas no catz sino en locs grosses que siegon le dos; e de las extremitatz de lor de la partida denant no accideys ad aquelas contricio sino per aquo quar so cartillaginosas.	Know that a fracture of the ribs occurs only in large bones that join at the two ends; and from the extremities of the front part, such contact does not cause fractures because they are cartilaginous.
E cognicio de lu no es amaguada al sentiment deves la inquisicio de lu am les ditz.	And the knowledge of this is not hidden from you through the examination with your hands.
E la restauracio sia ayssi que enguales la fractura am les ditz segon la manieyra possibla, entro que sia engulhat segon que cove, e aprop emplastre e strenh le os trencat am stela, si indigeys de aquel.	And the restoration should be done such that you equalize the fracture with your hands according to the possible method, ensuring it is properly set according to how it fits, and then apply a plaster and strengthen the broken bone with a splint if needed.
E si la fractura de las costas es declinant a las partidas dedintz, lahoras accideys al malaute dolor vehement e punctura, ayssi cum punctura que accideys ad aquel que ha pleureci, e per aquo quar le os ponh le velament; e accideys a lu difficultat de hanelit, e tos, e vomit de mot sanc; e aquesta es de dificil curacio.	And if the fracture of the ribs is inclining towards the inner parts, then it causes severe and piercing pain in the patient, similar to the pain that occurs when there is pleurisy. For this reason, you apply a dressing to the bone; and it leads to difficulty in breathing, coughing, and vomiting due to irritation; and this is of difficult cure.
E ja les Antixs so engeniatz en aquela am motz engientz.	And already the Ancients were ingenious in that matter engaging themselves.
E de lor so que diso: cove que pauses viandas del malaute que engendro imflacio e ventositat, per que le ventre sia imflat e sia extendut, e la fractura sia impellida a las partidas defora.	And from them it is said that you place the patient in a position where foods generate inflammation and distension, so that the belly becomes swollen and extended, and the fracture is driven to the outward parts.
Mays nos avoreyssem aquo per so que no sia causa leugiera a generar apostema caut, si no accideys; e si ja accideys, lahoras ja ajuda ad aquo.	But let us consider this so that it is not a trivial cause to generate a carbuncle inadvertently; and if it does happen inadvertently, then help is already on its way.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia pausada desus ventoza e aprop que sucque am fortitut; e es semblant a ratiocinacio, mays empero es temut que la ventoza atire las superfluitatz al loc per la debilitat.	And some of them said that it should be positioned above the abdomen and near where sweat exits with strength; and this seems like reasoning, but nevertheless it is feared that the abdomen might drive the superfluities to the area due to weakness.
E diyssero alcus de lor: cove que·l loc sia cubert am lana que ja es submersa en oli caut, e sian pausatz pulvils entre las costas entro que sia umplida, que sia la liadura engual quan envolopas aquela segon retonditat; e aprop sia curat le malaute am curacio de pleuresi de vianda e de medicina.	And some of them said: that the area should be covered with wool that is already submerged in oil, and powders should be placed between the ribs until it is full, which should be bound equally as you wrap it according to its roundness; and then treat the patient with a regimen of food therapy and medicine.
E si causa vehement constrenh le malaute la qual no sufferta, e le os punh le velament am punctura ledent, temem sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que fendam sobre le loc, descubram de la costa trencada, e aprop pausem desobre aquela instrument que conserve le ciphac, la rememoracio del qual es precedida, e que inscidam le os am facilitat, e extraguam aquel.	And if the patient is strongly constrained in such a way that they cannot endure it, and you puncture the skin with a knife to drain the fluid, be careful about the patient, then cut over the place, uncovering from the broken rib, and place ourselves above that instrument which we hold ready, remembering the action beforehand, and cut the bone easily, and remove that.
E aprop que ajustem las doas labias de la plagua, si es gran, am cozidura, e curem aquela am emplastres entro que sia sanada.	And when we adjust the two edges of the wound, if it is large, with缝合，我们用药膏敷直到愈合。
E si accideys dedintz apostema, lahoras tu coyta e enfon pulvils en oli rozat e pausa sobre le loc, e que sia curat le malaute am aquo que cove a la apostema dedintz.	And if an abscess occurs inside, then incise and insert powders in diluted oil, place your hand over the area, and cure the patient with what is appropriate for the abscess inside.
E sia ressupinat sobre le latz sobre le qual dorm, entro que sia sanat.	And let it be wrapped in linen over which he sleeps, until it is healed.
Capitol .ix.	Capitol. ix.
De restauracio de fractura del spondil del dos e del col.	On the restoration of fractures of the vertebrae of the spine and neck.
Alcunas veguadas endeve fractura als osses del col, e tart endeve a lor atricio, e semblantment als spondils del dos.	In some cases, when fractures occur in the bones of the neck, one should apply traction and friction, similar to that used for vertebrae of the spine.
E cum aquo accideys ad alcu e voles saber si sara sanat o no, lahoras considera, quar si vezes las sieuas mas ja mollificadas e stupefaytas e mortas e no pot maure aquelas ni extendre ni strenher aquelas e quan constrenges aquelas am les tieus ditz o punges aquelas am agulha e no sent en aquelas dolor, lahoras sapias que no es sanat, e en las mes de disposicios es mortal.	And when this happens to someone and you want to know if they will recover or not, then consider whether their pulses are already softened, numbed, and dead and cannot increase nor extend nor strengthen those, and when you press them with your fingers or poke them with a needle and do not feel pain in them, then you know that it is not healing, and in such cases it is fatal.
E si mau aquelas e sent en aquelas constriccio am les ditz e punctura, lahoras sapias que la nucha de l’os es salva e que le malaute guereys am curacio.	And if you press them and feel pain in the area with your fingers or poke it, then you know that the bone's marrow is saved and that the illness will heal by cure.
E si ve als spondils del col le semblant ad aquo e voles saber si sira sanat o no, lahoras considera als pes de lu.	And if you examine the vertebrae of the neck and its appearance related to this, and you want to know if it will recover or not, then consider the pulse in his feet.
Lahoras si tu vezes que so ja mollificatz, accideys ad aquels aquo que es accidit en las mas, e aprop quan jatz sobre le sieu dos, yeys ventozitat e egestio ses la sua volontat, e alcunas veguadas es resupinat sobre le sieu dos e vol urinar e no pot, lahoras sapias que es mortal, e adonc no trebales en la curacio de lu.	And if you find that they are already softened, accede to what happens in the pulses, and when they press on their thighs, let them breathe and eat as they wish, and sometimes lie on their backs and want to urinate and cannot, then you know it is fatal, and then do not bother with the cure of them.
Mays si no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, la causa es milhor e pus leugiera.	If no other cause occurs, the cause is better and more slight.
E la curacio de lu es que te perforses a la sedacio del apostema caut que pauses sobre le spondil atrissat oli rozat sol, o am mugols de huous asatz; pausa sobre aquela aquel alcunas veguadas le dia entro que sia sedat le apostema caut.	And the cure for this is to perforate for the extraction of the abscess caut that you place over the lower or lateral part of the spine, or with slices of fresh garlic; place over it for several days until the abscess is extracted.
E lahoras pausa un dels emplastres confortantz e exsitans, e strenh sobre aquel am liament; e comanda al malaute que use de repaus e de tranquillitat e que no dorme sobre la partida am la qual atroba dolor entro que sia sanat.	And then place one of the comforting and soothing plasters, and cover it with a layer of lint; order the patient to take rest and be tranquil, and not to sleep on the part where he feels pain until he is healed.
E si accideys deves la atricio del os satagias o alcuna causa que ja es seperada de lu, lahoras cove que secces sobre la codena e que ostes aquel os; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua, am sutura si es gran; e aprop cura aquela am alcu encarnatiu dels enguentz, entro que sia sanat.	And if it happens that you need to scrape the bone surface or any cause already separated from it, then make sure to dry the wound and hold that bone; then close the two edges of the wound,缝合如果伤口较大；然后用一些膏药敷在那块肉上，直到它愈合。
Mays si es trencat le derier del os alhoses, e es la fi de la coeta, lahoras cove que tu entrometas le dit pous de la ma senestra en le cul, e que enguales le os trencat am l’autra ma segon que es possible per equacio segonda; e aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e astelha, si indigeysses de aquels, e aprop strenh aquel.	And if the heel of the tibia is broken, and it is near the knee, then you should insert your left thumb into the wound, and align the broken bone with your other hand as much as possible by second intention; then place a plaster and bandage over it, if needed, and strengthen it.
E si sentes satagias trencadas en lu, lahoras tu fen sobre aquela, e osta aquel, e cura la plagua am la curacio que es precedida entro que sia sanada.	And if you feel broken phases in it, then work on that, stop the bleeding, and treat the wound with the cure that comes after it is healed.
Capitol .x.	Capitol.
De restauracio de la ancha.	For the restoration of health.
Les osses de las anchas tart so trencats, e si trencan, lahoras la fractura de lor no es sino communicio en las extremitatz de aquelas e son inscidas en la longitut e declinan a las partidas dedintz; e accideys al malaute dolor en le loc e punctura, e la camba es stupefacta quan es fractura.	The bones of the feet are broken, and if they break, then the fracture is merely communication at the extremities of those bones and they split along their length and decline toward the inner parts; and accidents occur in the patient with pain at the site and puncture, and the leg is stupefied when it is fractured.
E la restauracio de lu es que tu extendas la tua ma sobre aquel entro que sia sobre la fractura qual es la figura de lu.	And the restoration is that you place your hand over it while it is still at the fracture, which is the shape of the leg.
E si fractura es en la extremitat de lu tant solament, lahoras tu enguala aquela segon que a tu es apparelhat per equacio engual entro que sia asemblat a la sua figura natural.	And if the fracture is only at the extremity of the leg, then you straighten it according to how it appears to you by equilibrium, and place it so that it resembles its natural figure.
Mays si la fractura es en le lonc o que ja declina a las partidas dejos, lahoras tu fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu ventre entro que sia preparada a tu la restauracio de aquela fractura.	But if the fracture is in the length or has already declined toward the inner parts, then you place the patient on his side and prepare to restore that fracture.
E donc quan auras engualada aquela, pausa sobre lu emplastre, e aprop pausa sobre aquel astela de fust o de codena, e strenh per strictura sobre la qual no temas punctacio de fractura ni remocio de la stelha.	And when you have equalized it, place a plaster over it, then place the wooden or copper rod over it, and strongly bind it without fearing puncture or removal of the rod.
E enguala la concavitat am aquo que uempla aquela entro que aquela prengua la strictura segon equalitat, e comanda al malaute que dorma sobre le sieu dos o desobre le sieu costat sa.	And equalize the cavity so that it fills the space in which it will receive the binding according to equality, and command the patient to lie on his back or on his side.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu cessa de extencio de lu e de la sua restauracio entro que sia sedat le apostema caut, e pausa sobre lu aquo que sede aquel segon que es precedit; e aprop retorna a la restauracio de lu, e strenh aquel ayssi cum cove.	But if an abscess forms during the extension and its restoration, stop the extension and its restoration until the abscess is sedated with the cautery, then place a salve over it according to what has been previously described; then return to the restoration of the wound, and bind it thus tightly.
E si accideysso en le os satagias o son comminuidas, lahoras tu las tratz.	And if this happens in the bone during fragmentation or comminution, then treat it accordingly.
Capitol .xi.	Capitol.xi.
De restauracio de la fractura del adjutori.	Of the restoration of the fracture of the adjutrix.
Adjutori es aquo que es entre le coyde entro al cap de la spalla.	Adjutrix is that which is between the codex (or cubitus) and the head of the shoulder.
E si es trencat, lahoras la restauracio de lu es en una de doas manieyras, de las quals es la una que tu prenguas fust pla de migiera groceza segon aquesta forma:	And if it is broken, the restoration of it is in one of two ways, of which one is that you take a strip of coarse cloth according to this form:
E sian liatz en doas extremitatz dos liamentz, e aprop sia suspendut del loc elevat.	And attach two threads at the ends, and then suspend them from the elevated area.
E segua le malaute sobre una sezela; e aprop gieta fora le sieu bras trencat sobre le fust entro que pervengua al titillic de lu en le mieg loc del qual sia annexa la curvitat del fust.	And place the patient on a cushion; and then throw its broken arm onto the strip so that it reaches the midline of where the curvature of the strip is attached.
E aprop suspen sobre aquel alcuna causa greu, o·l minestre extenda aquel a las partidas dejos; e aprop le metge eque la fractura am las sieuas mas ensemps, entro que la fractura retorne segon que cove.	And place it over that with some heavy weight, or the servant extend it to the sides. And then the doctor ensure the fracture is held in place together, while the fracture returns to its proper position.
E l’autra manieyra es que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sieua cervitz e suspen la ma del col de lu am liament; e aprop comanda a dos ministres que la un de lor tengua aquo que es desobre la fractura am las suas mas; e l’autre tengua le pus dejos de lu; e quascu de lor extenda a la sua partida.	And the other way is that the patient be reversed on their back and suspend the neck with a thread; and then command two servants that one holds what is above the fracture with their hands; and the other holds the lower part of them; and each hold it in their respective side.
E si voles que la extencio sia pus fort, lahoras tu strenh sobre la fractura am liament e sobre aquela am autre liament, e quascu dels dos ministres extendan a doas suas partidas.	And if you want the extension to be stronger, then strengthen over the fracture with one splint and over another place another splint, and each of the two servants stretch at their parts.
E donc si la fractura es propinquada a la extremitat del muscle, lahoras cove que sia pausat la mitat del liament sobre le citillic e l’autre dejos la fractura deves le coyde.	And if the fracture is near the extremity of the muscle, then place the middle part of the splint on the tendon and leave the other end over the fracture to hold it.
E semblantment si la fractura es propdana al coyde, lahoras cove que sia pausat le liament sobre aquel loc e sobre aquel coyde.	And similarly if the fracture is near the knee, then place the splint in that location and over that knee.
Enguala aquela am facilitat e ses trebal, e aprop quant sira engualada segon que cove e es applicada per bona applicacio, lahoras strenh aquela si no accideys apostema caut.	Equalize that with ease and your work, and when it is equalized according to what is needed and applied properly, then strengthen it if no abscess occurs.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras layssa la strictura entro al vii dia, e pausa sobre lu lana sutza enbeguda en vi agre e oli rozat entro que repause le apostema, e lahoras tu stren aquela.	But if an abscess does occur, then leave the stricture for five days, and place a clean bandage soaked in vinegar and rubbed with oil over it until the abscess subsides, and then strengthen it.
E la manieyra de strenher aquela es que pauses emplastre sobre la fractura, e aprop pausa envolopament de drap nau sobre le emplastre; e aprop ajuste le bras sobre aquel adjutori, e pause la sua ma uberta sobre le sieu muscle.	And the way to strengthen it is to place a plaster over the fracture, and then wrap a cloth bandage around the plaster; and adjust the arm over that support, and place your hand open over its muscle.
E pausa le drap e strenh sobre le adjutori le bras per so que·l bras sia en loc de stelhas, si no prohibeys de aquo alcuna causa del os trencat.	And place the cloth firmly over the assistant's arm so that the arm is in the position of a splint, without prohibiting anything due to a broken bone.
E lahoras usa de stelhas.	And then use splints.
E es que pauses sobre la fractura aquela stela que sia pus lada e pus fort de las autras stelas; e pausa entre quascuna stela la latitut del dit, e sia la longitut de las stelas segon la trencadura am addicio de tres ditz de tota partida.	And you should place that splint over the fracture which is wider and stronger than the other splints; and place the width of each splint at the width of the finger, and the length of the splints according to the breakage plus three fingers in total.
E aprop strenh sobre las stelas am la strictura la qual he dita al comensament del capitol.	And then firmly place the cloth around the splint which I mentioned at the beginning of this chapter.
E es que la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura sia pus streyt.	And make sure that your cloth is tightly around the area of the fracture.
E quant pus es alonguada la fractura sia la strictura menor.	And when the fracture is longer, make the cloth less tight.
E donc si vezes le situament de las stelas e la strictura ayssi cum havem dit en la hora en la qual restauras le membre al sieu assituament, lahoras tu fay.	And so, if you adjust the position of the splints and the cloth as we have said in the hour when you restore the member to its position, then do this.
E si temes apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la strictura e las stelas entro al dia vii ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you fear an abscess, then leave the string and needles for seven days as we have said.
E aprop considera le liament en totas partidas per tres dias per so que no accida en le loc pruziment o imflacio; o es prohibida la vianda pervenir al membre per disposicio de superfluitat de strictura; e donc rectifiqua tot aquo segon que havem dit.	And then consider the string in all parts for three days so that no accident occurs at the puncture site or inflammation; or is forbidden food to reach the member by virtue of the superfluous tension of the string; and therefore adjust all this according to what we have said.
Mays si tu yest sobre confizanssa que no accida alcuna causa de aquo, lahoras no deslias la liguadura sino aprop tres dias o mays.	But if you are confident that no cause of this will occur, then do not release the ligature for at least three days or more.
E sia la sua dormicio del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e las sieuas mas sian sobre le stomac.	And let the patient's head be on their back, and their hands on their stomach.
E pausa sobre le adjutori cocena plena de lana engualment, e considera en tota hora de la nueyt o del dia que no sia deliada ni dissolta la figura del membre trencat, o que sia le liament mollificat, donc rectifica aquo tot am la tua vertut.	And place yourself over the assistant who is holding a full pot of woolen cloth, and consider at all times during the night or day that the figure of the broken limb should not be distorted, or that the string should not become loose, therefore adjust this according to your skill.
E pausa la vianda del malaute segon le orde le qual havem denant mes, enayssi que la vianda sia subtil en le comensament entro que es comensat strenher; e lahoras cove que egrossas la vianda de lu.	And administer food to the patient according to the order we have mentioned before, ensuring that the food is subtle at the beginning until strength begins to return; then increase the amount of food.
Quar de constuma del adjutori e de la camba de lu es que sian strengutz en xl dias; e lahoras cove que sian desliatz e sia administrat banh e sia medicat am enguentz los quals rectifican aquel.	Four days after the assistance and support of his legs are provided, they should be strengthened for ten days; then it is good that they be loosened and a bath should be administered and ointments applied which correct that.
E si la fractura es layha atrita, lahoras tu no deslies de aquela le liament e las stelhas entro a l dias o entro a dos meses.	And if the fracture is still tender, then do not loosen it for ten days or two months.
Capitol .xii.	Capitol. XII.
De restauracio de fractura del bras.	On the restoration of fracture of the arm.
Bras es compost de dos osses les quals so appelatz dos focils; dels quals la un es petit, e es aquel que siec le dit pous, e l’autre es gran e es aquel le qual es pausat dejos le petit dit, de la partida pus dejus.	The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the ulna and the radius; of which the former is small, and is that which we call the humerus, while the latter is large and is that which rests on top of the smaller one.
E fort leu es trencat le focil major solament, o le petit, e fort leu son trincatz ensemps.	And if the major bone is broken alone, or the minor one, and both are fractured together.
E quan es trencat le focil petit desus, lahoras la restauracio de lu es leugiera, e la sanacio de lu es pus leugiera.	And when the minor bone is broken above, then the restoration of it is easier, and its recovery is more easy.
E quan es trencat le focil de lu dejos la fractura de lu es mala, e la sanacio de lu es dificil.	And when the fracture of the thigh is broken, I leave the fracture bad, and the healing of it is difficult.
E pus mala de aquela es quan son trencatz dos osses essemps.	And worse when those two bones are broken.
Donc si l’os le qual es trencat es le focil petit desus, lahoras es convenient al metge, deves la restauracio de lu, que pauze petita extencio am facilitat entro que aquel sia engualhat.	Therefore, if the bone that is broken is the small thigh bone, then it is convenient for the doctor to restore it, which involves a slight extension facilitated by equalizing the parts.
Mays si le focil gran es aquo que es trincat, lahoras cove que pause extencio pus vehement.	But if the large thigh bone is broken, then you must apply more extension.
E si les dos focils so ensemps trincatz, lahoras cove que tu pauses la extritura mot pus fort.	And if both thigh bones are broken together, then you must apply stronger traction.
E cove que pauses la figura de la ma deves la restauracio de lu e la extencio de lu estenduda sobre un coyssi, e sia le pols de la ma a las partidas desus, pus aut que totz les autres ditz, e le dit auricular sia pus bas dels autres ditz, e le malaute sia cezent sobre una cezela cayrada.	And you must place your hand firmly to restore it and extend it over a cushion, while placing the wrist of the hand above, more than the others. And the big toe should be lower than the other toes, and the thigh should be placed on a tilted bench.
E sia un coyssi denant lu en la altetut o endreyt de lu, per so que·l malaute no encorra trebalh.	And place a cushion in front of it at its height or straight, so that the thigh does not have to work.
E aprop le ministre extenda le bras de la partida pus dejos am la sieua ma o am liament, e autre ministre extenda desus semblantment.	And then the minister extend the arm of the affected side and place it either on his hand or linen, and another minister extend similarly above.
E aprop le metge engualhe le os entro que redugua aquel segon la milhor figura que pot.	And then the doctor realigns the bone within the joint according to the best form that can be achieved.
E si en la factura del os so satagias, lahoras te perforsa raduzir tota pessa en le sieu loc am la tua vertut.	And if there are complications in the fracture of the bone, then you must thoroughly reduce the entire piece to its place with your virtue.
E si appar en lu satagia separada que punh la codena e no es a tu speransa en la restauracio de lu, lahoras tu fen sobre lu e osta aquela segon la manieyra la qual havem dita desus.	And if there appears a separated complication that cannot be rejoined as hoped in the restoration of it, then you must set it and bind it according to the manner we have said above.
Mays si la fractura es am plagua, yeu ja he fayt ad aquo capitol singular, e donc pren la curacio de aquel.	But if the fracture is comminuted, I have dealt with that in a separate chapter, and therefore take up the treatment of it.
E si accideys apostema caut al comensament de la tua restauracio, lahoras tu lineys un drap am cerot fayt de oli rozat e cera blanca, e sia migier entre specitut e subtilitat, e strenh drap sobre aquel am strictura subtil entro que le apostema sia cedat; e lahoras remau le cerot e pausa emplastre preparat de polvera de moli am clayre de huou, e aprop pausa stelhas; e sia la stela la qual es pauzada sobre aquela fractura pus lada e pus fort.	And if an abscess occurs at the beginning of your restoration, then you apply a linen cloth soaked in oil and white wax, making it intermediate between thick and thin, and tightly wrap the linen over it with a fine thread so that the abscess can be drawn out; then remove the wax and apply a plaster prepared from powder of malachite mixed with olive oil, and place a bandage over it; ensure that the stellate bandage is placed on that fracture more laterally and stronger.
E sapias que·l nombre de las stelas del bras so vi en las majors disposicios, o sia la fractura en un focil o en dos focils ensemps.	And you shall know that the number of ribs in the arm I see in the major dispositions, or rather the fracture in one bone or two bones together.
E aprop pausa la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura pus fort e pus vehement, e quan mays sira la extrictura a las partidas desus de la fractura o a las partidas pus bassas de lu, pausa la strictura un pauc pus molh segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu en le comensament del capitol.	And return your compression firmly and vigorously over the location of the fracture. When the compression is most intense either above or below the fracture, apply it a little more strongly according to how the memory of it is recalled at the beginning of the chapter.
E les draps que so envolopatz sobre la fractura sian draps mols humitz, e no sian durs ni aspres, e·l fiel am le qual es strenhut sia de li propriament migier entre subtil e gros, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And the cloths that you wrap around the fracture should be moistened cloths, neither hard nor rough. The strong flax, which is strengthened, should be of properly mixed thickness between fine and coarse, as we have recommended.
E considera le membre e·l liament aprop alcus dias.	And consider the limb and ligament for several days.
E si accideys alcuna causa de la qual rectificacio es necessaria, ayssi cum prusiment le qual accideys al membre, e lahoras cove que tu enbroques le membre am aygua cauda entro que cesse aquel pruziment.	And if any cause arises for which correction is necessary, as often happens to the limb, then you must immerse the limb in water until that pain ceases.
E leysses le membre no costreyt entro que repause, e aprop torna la strictura.	And let the limb not be bound until it has rested, and then return the compression.
E si la extrictura ja es mollificada e l’os ja es remaugut e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras rectifiqua tot aquo am la tua vertut.	And if the stricture is already softened and the bone is healed and appears like those, then correct all of this with your virtue.
E considera mays si le nutriment es prohibit pervenir al membre per superfluitat de strictura, quar lahoras cove que mollifiques aquel un petit e laysses aquel per alcus dias entro que corra ad aquel le nutriment, e aprop strenh aquel.	And consider more if the nourishment is prohibited from reaching the member due to excess stricture, so that you soften that a little and leave it for some days until the nourishment flows to that, and then strengthen that.
Mays si al malaute no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no cove que sia desliat entro aprop xx dias o enviro de aquels.	And if to the patient none of the causes we have mentioned occur, then you should not let it dissipate within about 20 days or around those.
E aprop sia suspenduda la ma del malaute per la sua vertut de movement agitatius, e fay aquel dormir sobre le sieu dos.	And place the hand of the patient above its virtue of movement agitators, and make him sleep on his back.
E sapias que aquesta fractura es restaurada en xxx dias o en xxxii dias, o fort leu es restaurada en xxviii dias, e tot aquo es segon la disposicio de las compleccios e las disposicios de la vertut.	And know that this fracture is restored in 30 days or in 32 days, or less severely in 28 days, and all of this depends on the complexity and disposition of the virtue.
Capitol .xiii.	Capitol.xiii.
De restauracio de fractura de la pinche de la ma e dels ditz.	On the restoration of fractures of the thumb and fingers.
Sapias que a la pinche de la ma e als nuzes dels ditz tart endeve fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio motas veguadas.	Know that at the wrist of the hand and the knuckles of the fingers there may be fracture, and do not damage them but rub them gently.
E quan accideys a la ma fractura o atrissio, lahoras cove que·l malaute segua cayrat e denant lu lies cezent segon equalitat, e aprop pausa la ma de lu sobre aquela extenduda.	And when fracture or rubbing occurs to the hand, then make sure the patient remains lying down and in front of the limb for about a hundred seconds according to equality, and place your hand over the extended one.
E aprop le ministre extenda les osses trencatz e·l metge engualhe aquels entro que sian congongitz am bona congoncio.	And then extend the broken bones and the doctor align them where they should be with good alignment.
E lahoras cove que pause emplastre e estopa, si no accideys apostema caut; e aprop pausa stela desus segon la quantitat del loc, e tu ja has envolopada aquela en drap de li.	And then place plaster and cotton, if no abscess forms use a cauterization; and then place the candle above according to the size of the area, and you have already wrapped that in linen.
Mays si la trincadura es en las partidas dedintz deves le ventre de la palma, e lahoras fay semblant de spera de drap, e comanda al malaute que strenha aquela am la sua palma trincada; aprop sia strenguda am drap lonc.	More so if the tear is inside the palm, then make a bandage like a half circle of cloth, and command the patient to hold it tightly with the torn palm; and then have it wrapped long on the hand.
E sia la stelha de cuer am drap en le qual sia levitat, per so que le cuer sia aplicat a la palma; e strenh aquela segon que cove.	And let the candle be of cloth in which there is grease, so that the cloth adheres to the palm; and hold it tightly as needed.
Mays si la fractura es a las partidas defora, lahoras cove que pauses desus stela e autre estela de la partida dejos en la palma, per so que la ma sia uberta e dreyta; e aprop pausa la strictura, ayssi cum es revolvuda la ma a la rateta entre les ditz am liamentz.	If the fracture is in the outer parts, then you should place another piece of wood above the bone and another below the part, so that your hand is open and straight; then place the splint, as if you were turning your hand at the wrist between the fingers with grains.
E si accideys fractura a alcu dels nozes dels ditz, lahoras si es le dit pous, sia engualat segon que cove e aprop sia strenhut am la palma e si·t voles, pausa a lu astela petita dreyta per so que sia elevada la fractura e no sia mauguda.	If you happen to fracture one of the bones in the fingers, then if it is the base of the finger, adjust it according to what you can see and then strengthen it on the palm side; if you wish, place a small piece of wood on the right side so that the fracture is elevated and not displaced.
Mays si la fractura es en les autres ditz, ayssi cum en aquel del mieg loc, o en le indic, o en le auricular, o en le anular, lahoras sia engualhat e liat am le dit sa le qual siec aquel; o sian totz liatz segon continuacio, e es milhor; o pausa sobre aquel stela petita, ayssi cum havem dit en le pous.	If the fracture is in the other fingers, as in the middle finger, or the index, or the ring finger, then adjust and splint it on the finger where the fracture occurs; or splint all of them according to their continuity, which is better; or place a small piece of wood over the fracture, as we said for the base of the finger.
E considera, en la tua restauracio, e aprop aquela, la disposicio de apostema caut e oppose — am la tieua operacio — am aquo que cove quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, segon que es iterada la narracio de lu.	And consider, in your restoration, and subsequently, the placement of cauteries and opposites—during your operation—according to what you see when any cause from those cases arises, as per the repeated narration of the case.
Capitol .xiv.	Chapter XIV.
De restauracio de fractura del os de la coyssa.	For the restoration of fracture of the iliac bone.
Le os de la cueyssa motas veguadas es trencat e es declarat al sentiment segon que es convertit a la partida denant e a la pus sobirana.	The iliac bone, when fractured, is felt according to where it protrudes forward and where it rises above.
E la restauracio de lu se fa enayssi que·l liament es strenhut sobre la fractura e autre liament dejos la fractura, e le malaute sia prostrat sobre le sieu ventre e sobre la cara.	And the restoration is done by strengthening the ligament over the fracture and another ligament below the fracture, while the patient lies on their abdomen and face.
E aprop le ministre extenda tot le liament a la sua partida segon la qualitat, quan la fractura es en le mieg loc del os.	And then the minister extends the ligament to its proper place according to its quality when the fracture is in the middle of the bone.
Mays si es propdana a la razitz de la cueyssa, lahoras sia le liament propda al denolh a la partida del pentenilh, per so que la extencio caja en sus, e le autre liament dejos la fractura.	But if it is near the rim of the iliac bone, then place the ligament at the outer part of the hip joint, so that the extension fits there, and another ligament below the fracture.
E semblantment si la trencadura es propdana al denolh, lahoras sia fayt le liament propda al denol, e sia la extencio a las partidas dejos.	And similarly, if the fracture is near the hip joint, then place the ligament at the hip, and the extension to the parts below.
E aprop le metge enguale le os am amduas las sieuas mas entro que reduzesca aquel segon la semblansa natural e l’os es conjungit per bona conjunccio; lahoras cove que pauses emplastre e strictura, si no accideys al membre apostema.	And then the doctor aligns the bone by bringing his hands close to where you have reduced it according to the natural form, and the bone is joined by good conjunction; then apply a plaster and bandage, so as not to infect the member with an abscess.
Mays si accideys en lu apostema, lahoras tu layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que l’apostema caut sia cedat, e aprop retorna a la tua curacio.	But if an abscess does occur, then you let it be for a few days until the abscess is ready to be cauterized, and then return to your treatment.
La strictura de lu sia ayssi fayta: cove que envolopes sobre la fractura una benda dura, e dobla aquela dos o tres veguadas, e remaugua de lu superfluitat; e aprop envolopa la camba entro que pervengua al talo e a la razitz de la cueyssa.	The bandage should be done as follows: first, wrap a hard bandage around the fracture, fold it two or three times, and tie off any excess; then wrap the bandage until it reaches the talus and the ligament of the thigh.
E intromet lonc fiel entre la cueyssa e la camba prop del denol a las partidas dejos, e venguan las extremitatz del fiel de la partida pus sobirana de las doas partz, e aprop revolveys sobre la camba e la cueyssa aquo que superflueys de la benda.	And insert a long piece of flax between the thigh and the leg bandage near the wound, so that the ends of the flax extend above both parts, then wrap this over the bandage and thigh with any excess from the bandage.
E aprop pausa sobre la cueyssa en le loc de aquela fractura astelhas, e pausa de aquelas una stela sobre le os de la camba.	And then place something on the thigh at the location of the fracture, and place a stick over the bone of the leg.
E aprop uempli las vacuitatz entre la camba e la cuoyssa am draps mols, per so que sia coagulada la extrictura.	And then fill the void between the waist and thigh with soft cloth, so that the constriction may be constricted.
E aprop comensa am strictura fort del mieg sobre le loc de la fractura am tres envolucios o quatre, e quant mays tu te alonhas am liament del loc de la fractura, la tua strictura sia menor e pus leugiera e pus molha.	And then begin the strong constriction around the middle over the place of the fracture with three or four wraps, and the farther you are from the site of the fracture, your wraps should be lesser and lighter and more flexible.
E aprop exten a doas extremitatz del fiel a las partidas dejos entro que pervengua a la cavilha del pe, e strenh amdoas las extremitatz de las stelhas del autra part per so que·l liament no sia remaugut del sieu loc.	And then extend the two ends of the bandage to the parts where it reaches the foot's cavity, and tighten both ends of the straps on the other side so that the padding does not shift from its place.
E aprop leyssa la strectura sobre aquel, don esta ayssi que no accideys al membre corrosio ni apostema caut ni emflacio e semblantz ad aquels; e si accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, adonc cueta te am desliament de lu, e rectifica aquo que accideys tot aprop, segon que havem dit motas veguadas.	And then place the constriction over it such that it does not interfere with the limb's corrosion, abscess, or inflammation and resembles those conditions; if any of these conditions occur due to some cause, then note it down, and adjust what has occurred as soon as possible, according to what we have said previously.
Mays si en le os es pessa del os la qual pongua, lahoras cove que tu engualhes aquel segon que a tu es possibla; e sino, fen sobre lu e remau aquel, e cura am aquo del qual es precedida la rememoracio entro que sia sanat.	More so if the bone is badly damaged where it should be placed, then make sure you align it as much as possible; otherwise, set it in place and immobilize it, and treat the area from which the memory was recalled until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es strenhuda aquesta fractura de la coyssa otra aquo que sian ajustadas a lu stelhas, ayssi cum havem dit en le adjutori e·n le bras.	Sometimes this fracture of the hip is strengthened by adjusting it with stays, as we have said in the assistant and in the arm.
Mays empero en la restauracio de lu en tal manieyra fayta no accideys al malaute claudicacio; e si es restaurada sola, otra aquo que li sia applicada l’autra camba, lahoras es necessari que claudique aquel del qual es tostemps.	But more importantly in the restoration in such a manner, it does not cause the patient to limp; and if it is restored alone, or another side is applied, then it is necessary that the one from which it was taken should limp.
E sapias que la coyssa es strenhuda en xl dias o un pauc mes o un pauc mens, e tot aquo es segon la diversitat de las compleccios e de las autras dispozicios.	And know that the hip is strengthened in ten days or a few more months, and all this depends on the diversity of the complexities and other arrangements.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter XV.
De restauracio de la fractura de la rodela del denolh.	On the restoration of the fracture of the tibia.
Sapias que fractura de la rodela del denol tart endeve, mays accideys a lu motas veguadas atrissio.	Know that the fracture of the tibia occurs less frequently, but it often causes more severe and prolonged atrophy.
Mays si accideys a lu fractura, lahoras no es sino fissura o trauc en las suas partidas, e aquo es am plagua o ses plagua, e sobre aquo tot es estat am le sentiment.	But if it does occur as a fracture, then it is merely a crack or tear in its parts, and this can be one or several cracks, and above all it is characterized by pain.
E la restauracio de lu es enayssi que sia engualat aquo que es romput de las partidas de lu am les ditz entro que sia agreguat e conjongit segon que es possible per equacio e facilitat e fabricacio.	And the restoration of it is attempted to be equalized where what is broken from the parts of it among the fingers is added and joined according to what is possible by equality, facilitation, and fabrication.
E aprop pausa emplastre e pausa sobre aquel stela redonda, si indigeysses de aquela; e strenh desus am strictura ad aquo convenient.	And then place the plaster and cover over that round stencil, if you need it; strengthen it above on the stricture to what is appropriate.
E aprop considera totas las disposicios las quals havem recomtadas en las autras fracturas, ayssi cum es apostema caut e semblant ad aquels enaissi que se oppause a tot accident am aquo que a lu es convenient entro que sia sanat.	And then consider all the dispositional measures which we have recommended in other fractures, thus as for an abscess, cauterize and apply a poultice to those injuries that are opposed to any accident to what is appropriate for it until it is healed.
Capitol .xvi.	Capitol. XVI.
De restauracio de la fractura de la camba.	Of the restoration of the fracture of the flank.
Sapias que en la camba so dos osses dels quals la un es gros, e es le nompnat per nom de la camba; e l’autra es subtil, e es nompnat focil.	Know that in the flank there are two bones, of which one is large and is named after the flank itself; the other is thin and is named false.
E accideys a quascus de las specias de fractura aquo que accideys als dos osses del bras, e per aquo es fayta restauracio de lu ayssi cum restauracio del bras engualment, e la operacio de lu es una.	And accidents to the species of fracture occur as they do in the two bones of the arm, and for this reason the restoration of it is done equally as the restoration of the arm, and its operation is one.
E si so trincatz dos osses ensemps, la camba es convertida a totas partidas.	And if you need to break two bones together, the joint becomes dislocated in all directions.
E si es trinquat le os pus subtil, la camba es convertida a las partidas Denant.	And if the thinner bone is broken, the joint becomes dislocated in front.
E si es trincat le os pus gros, atrobas aquel dejos, e es de aquelas causas que no so a tu ameguadas.	And if the thicker bone is broken, you find the fracture, and it is one of those causes that are beyond your control.
E aprop aministra extencio e equacio e liguacio de las astelas segon aquel engualment.	And then administer extension, reduction, and ligature of the tendons according to this method.
Mays empero cove, si la fractura de la camba es laja havent motas satagias, que la extencio sia mendre e pus leugiera, e alleuja am la tua vertut.	However, if the joint fracture is old with visible spots, let the extension be less and lighter, and rely more on your virtue.
E en la camba es alcuna causa de operacio sobre le bras, e es quan tu engualas las stelhas e que comples tota la tieua operacio, lahoras tu prendras pessas de fustz de pi le qual es pausat dejos las cauzas las quals so pausades en solies, e so faytas eyssament de brancas de palma; aligeys de aquelas a las quals es petita groceza, e no sia ges de las manudas, e sia la longuesa de aquelas segon la longuesa de la camba, e del denol entro al pus dejos.	And in the joint, if there is any reason for operating on the arm, when you align the tendons and complete your entire operation, then take pieces of wood from the bottom, which are placed under the causes that are stopped in shoes, and make them from palm branches; choose those with little thickness, not too thick like those used for binding, and let their length be according to the length of the joint and the space between the foot.
E aprop envolopa sobre quascuna drap en doas envolucios segon la longitut de lu, e pausa la una sobre la partida de la camba de la una part e l’autra del autra part, e sian del denol entro al pus bas loc del pe.	And then wrap each one in two layers of cloth according to the length of the foot, and place one layer over the top part of the leg on one side and the other layer on the other side, and let them be placed below at the base location of the foot.
E aprop lias las doas stelhas en tres locs de doas extremitatz e al mieg loc, quar am aquesta strectura la camba es prohibida de clinar a la partida dextra e sinistra, e sta per bona stacio.	And then place the two stakes in three positions of both extremities and the middle position. For this structure, the leg is prohibited from leaning to the right or left side, and it should be kept in good position.
E ja es aministrat un brasset de fust segon la longuesa de la camba; e sia pausada en lu la camba per so que conserve aquel de movement.	And then administer a brace of wood according to the length of the leg; and place the leg in such a position that it maintains its movement.
E majorment cove que tu fassas aquo en fractura, e quan am aquela es plagua propriament.	And especially ensure that you do this in fractures, and when there is swelling properly.
E aprop considera en quascun jorn la camba e studia am aquel per derier studi, e tu le guardes de apostema e de imflacio o de autres causas semblantz; e cum accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, lahoras opausa te a lu am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	And then consider the leg on each day and study it carefully, and keep it free from boils and inflammation or other similar causes; and if any of these causes occur, immediately treat it accordingly until it is healed.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter XVII.
De la fractura del talo e dels osses del pe e dels ditz.	Of the fracture of the tarsus and the bones of the foot and toes.
Al talo no accideys fractura de tot; mays als osses del pe accideys fractura alcunas veguadas; e als ditz del pe pauc accideys fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio en las mes de disposicio.	Fractures do not occur in the tarsus as a whole; more often fractures affect the bones of the foot; and fractures of the toes of the foot rarely occur, and do not fracture but are treated in their proper place.
E si als osses del pe endeve fractura e vezes aquels osses esser elevatz sobre si entre lor, lahoras le malaute pause le sieu pe sobre la terra preparat ayssi cum anant.	And if fractures occur in the bones of the foot and sometimes those bones are displaced relative to each other, then the patient should place their foot on a prepared surface as shown.
E aprop pausa la un pe sobre aquo que es elevat de aquels osses, e aprop calca aquels, e prem, e engualha aquels entro que torno en los locs.	Then place the other foot on what is elevated beneath those bones, and apply pressure, and align those bones back into their proper places.
E aprop pausa emplastre e stopa desus, e pausa dejos le ventre del pe una petita taula a la qual sian dos caps plas.	Then apply a plaster and bandage over it, and place the foot on a small table with two pads.
E aprop strenh aquela am le pe am strectura descent, pus que tu has envolopada aquela am draps e am autres causes de las quals indigeys.	Then tightly wrap the foot with the bandage in a proper manner, as you have already wrapped it with cloths and other materials.
E cum a lu passan tres dias o quatre, lahoras tu deslia le liament, quar tu atrobaras les osses engualatz, o sian trincatz o sian dislocatz, e la operacio en aquels es ayssi co coneysses.	And when three or four days have passed, then you untie the bandage, for you will find the bones equalized, or broken, or dislocated, and the operation in those cases is as you know.
Mays si alcus ditz son trincatz, lahoras restaura aquels, e enguala aquels ayssi cum yeu e recomtat a tu en la restauracio dels ditz de la ma.	And if some bones are said to be broken, then restore those, and equalize them as I and have shown you in the restoration of the fingers of the hand.
E aprop pausa al dit trincat stela segon la longitut del dit, e sia pus lada de lu un pauc; e aprop dejos le pe aquesta taula la qual e a tu recomtada, e strenh aquela am strictura decent.	And then place the broken finger straight according to the length of the finger, and slightly to one side. Then lay the skin on this table, which you have previously prepared, and tightly bind it with a bandage.
Mays si aquo que es trincat dels osses so dos o tres o mays, lahoras tu pausa sobre quascun dit astela de la sua quantitat envolopada en drap leon, e strenh la taula en le pus bas del pe, e sia stant sobre la un dels caps de la taula foro le ventre del pe per que la tengua am bona retencio.	And if what is broken of the bones are two or three or more, then you place each finger straight according to its quantity wrapped in a linen cloth, and support the table under the base of the foot, and standing on one of the ends of the table cut into the sole of the foot so that it has good retention.
E es convenient a tu que no oblides que no consideres totas las causas las quals que e ditas a tu en las autras fracturas dels accidentz que havem dit; e opausa te a tot accident am aquo que cove.	And it is important for you not to forget that you should not consider all the causes that we have mentioned in other fractures of the accidents we have discussed; and support thee in every accident as one should.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter XVIII.
De fractura del conh de la femna e del os del pentenilh e de la vergua del home.	Of the fracture of the thigh bone and the patella bone and the groin of the man.
Quan le conh de la femna es trincat, lahoras fay aquela ceser en cezela cayrada, e aprop enclina aquela a la partida del dos un petit, e sia tenguda detras.	When the thigh bone is fractured, place that piece in the inclined groove, and then slightly incline it towards the upper part of the leg by a little, and keep it stable behind.
E aprop la matrona umpla le conh de coto, e sia fayt en le conh de lu ayssi cum spera; e aprop la femna sia concutida, e eleva le dos de lu petit a petit, quar tot aquo es fora-getat entro que sia denant la partida del conh ayssi cum spera e l’os trincat retorna.	And then the midwife fills the bone with cement, and it is done in the thigh as desired; then the woman is anesthetized, and her leg is gradually elevated little by little, for all of this must be done before the part of the thigh as desired so that the fractured bone returns.
E aprop pausa pulvils sobre le dos de lu, e quan vol urinar remaugua le coto am facilitat e aprop urine, e reduzeys e retorna aquel segon la manieyra segon la qual mezist aquel al comensament, e aprop retorne al sieu pulvil primier.	And then place powders on the leg, and when she wants to urinate, moisten the cement to facilitate it; then let her urinate, return to that position according to the method in which you placed it at the beginning, and then return to her original powder.
E fassa ayssi per vii dias o enviro aquels, quar aquel es restaurat.	And do so for seven days or until it is restored.
E si voles, pren una vezica de ovela e strenh sobre le trauc de lu una canula de canavera; e entromet tota la vesica en le conh de lu, e aprop ensuffla en la canula am vertut entro que la vesica sia imflada dedintz le conh, quar la fractura retorna.	And if you wish, take a sheep's bladder and tightly sew over the wound a cannula of reed; then insert the entire bladder into the wound, and soon blow into the cannula to impart virtue within that the bladder be inflated inside the wound, for the fracture returns.
E aprop sia umplida de coto e estia per alcus dias segon que havem recomtat, entro que sia sanat.	And it should be filled with pus and left for some days as we have recommended, until it is healed.
E quan le os del pentenil de home o de femna es trincat, lahoras aministra en la restauracio e agulacio de lu aquo que havem recomtat en l’os del anca.	And when the bone of the thigh of a man or a woman is broken, then administer in the restoration and needle treatment of it what we have recommended for the bone of the hip.
E aquo que es dreyt no es occultat en aquestas fracturas proprinquas e que pauc endeveno, majorment ad aquel al qual es alcun studi e us e enten aquest meu libre mot; quar aquela fractura significa a tu en las majors disposicios via dreyturiera en la restauracio e en la strictura de lu, e donc enten be.	And what is right is not hidden in these nearby fractures and those that rarely occur, especially to him who has some study and use and understands this my free will; for that fracture means to you in the major disposals via rightful in the restoration and in the stricture of it, and therefore understand well.
Mays en la vergua del home quan es trincada, pren guarguamela de auca, e met la vergua en aquela; e aprop pausa sobre lu envolucio de drap, e sia envolopada, e aprop sia layssada per tres dias o enviro aquels, e sia sanada.	In the case of the thigh of a man when it is broken, protect it from infection, and insert the thigh into it; then place it over the wrapping of cloth, and let it be wrapped, and let it be left for three days or about that time, and may it be healed.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XV.
De restauracio de fractura dels osses quan es am plagua.	For the restoration of bone fractures when they are dislocated.
Convenient es ad aquel al qual accideys fractura am plagua, e majorment si le os es gran ayssi cum es le os de la cuoyssa o de l’adjutori, o semblant ad aquel, que tu te cuoytes e fleubotomes aquel tantost si las condicios de fleubotomia a tu o testifican ayssi cum desus havem dit.	It is convenient to treat those upon whom a fracture dislocation occurs, especially if the bone is large, such as the thigh bone or the shoulder blade, or similar. You should set and bleed that part frequently, provided that the conditions for bloodletting are as we have said above.
E si la plagua eflueys sanc, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la retencio de lu enayssi que tu polverizes sobre lu zegi trissat, si a tu autra causa no es present.	And if the dislocation flows pus, then you should set it with retention, attempting to sprinkle over it zinc trisulfate, unless another cause is present.
E aprop comensa restaurar la fractura en aquel meteys dia, e no prolongues aquo, si no accideys apostema.	And soon begin to restore the fracture on that same day, and do not delay this, if an abscess does not occur.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la restauracio de lu entro al ix dia, entro que sia cedat le apostema, e no apropinques a lu en le tertz dia e·l iiii de tot, quar tu faras accidir mals accidentz.	But if an abscess does occur, then you should delay the restoration until the sixth day, once the abscess is lanced, and not approach it on the seventh or eighth day, for then you will bring about worse accidents.
Mays si le os trencat es eminent sobre la codena descubert, lahoras cove que te perforses reduzir aquel e engualar aquel am las tuas mas am facilitat e am pauca extencio.	If the bone is broken and protrudes outside the joint, then you must puncture to reduce it and equalize it with your hands with as much ease and little extension as possible.
Mays si extencio no es a tu preparada e la equacio de lu am las tieuas mas, lahoras tu reduzeys aquel am las tuas mas am aquest sturment; e es sturment le qual es fayt de ferr, la longitut del qual es de vii ditz o de viii e la latitut del qual es segon la quantitat de la plagua; e per aquo es necessari al metge que prengua de aquels tres o quatre segon la quantitat que indigeys ad aquo en la curacio en tota specia de fractura.	If the extension is not easily reducible with your hands, then you must reduce it with this instrument; and this instrument is made of iron, its length being about seven or eight inches and its width according to the size of the wound; and for this, the doctor must take one or two of these according to the quantity needed in the treatment for all types of fracture.
E sia redon, e sia en lu pauca groceza per so que no sia doblat deves la comprecio sobre aquel en la hora de la operacio.	And it should be round, and of small thickness so that it does not bend during the operation.
E sia de aguda extremitat al qual sia marge en las sieuas extremitatz; e sia le desus de lu a grossetut tendent, e de la maytat de lu entro a las partidas.	And it should have sharp ends, with edges at the outer ends; and be thicker at the top, thinner in the middle.
E aquesta es la forma de lu:	And this is the form of it:
E es nompnat en grec “labre volentz atelarem”, so es paleta pauca.	And it is named in Greek as "labre volentz atelarem," so it is a small palette.
Per que cove que sia pausada la extremitat de lu acuda elevada sobre la extremitat del os eminent.	In order that the extremity of the limb may be raised above the end of the prominent bone.
E inpelleys aquel en una veguada entro que retorne le os, e sia engualat am alcuna equacio.	And push it in quickly so that the bone returns and is aligned with some equation.
E donc esforsa te engualar las extremitatz de la fractura entre lor, e si la extremitat de lu trencada es subtil, e no pren aquela le sturment per bona axcepcio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas la extremitat de aquel os entro que l’insturment haja poder de aquo.	And strive to align the extremities of the fracture with each other. If the broken extremity is slender and does not take hold with the instrument for a good reason, then you must insert the extremity of that bone where the instrument has the power to do so.
Mays si no podes reduzir le os de tot am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras enscideys aquel am aquo que coveneys a lu dels inscizoris les quals havem ditz; o serra aquel am una de las serras en qualque manieyra sia a tu possible.	But if you cannot reduce the bone in this manner, then incise that part as seems fit to you among the incisors we have mentioned; it may be one of the bones in any manner it is possible for you.
E aprop ratz aquel que roman en le os de asperitat e de scorsas menudas.	And quickly remove that which remains in the bone of roughness and small fragments.
E cum le os es reduzit, e aprop la reduccio le malaute atroba dolor vehement ledent, lahoras sapias que le os no es retornat al sieu loc natural; e adonc fay aquo quar tu confereyses al malaute gran juvament.	And when the bone is reduced, and after reduction, if the patient finds great pain in the limb, then you should know that the bone has not returned to its natural place; then do what you will find greatly beneficial for the patient.
Cum es complida la tua restauracio la qual fas al os, e lahoras submergeys drap en vi stiptic negre, e propriament si es en estiu, e no pauses sobre la plagua cerot ni autre causa en la qual sia oli, per so que no fassa en lu accidir poyredura e corropcio.	When your restoration of the mouth is completed, and then submerge a cloth in vitriolic vinegar tightly bound black, and properly in summer, and do not pause over the wound to cauterize or any other cause which might be oil, so that no accident of burning or corruption happens.
E aprop aministra stelas en la hora del tieu compliment de la restauracio de l’os, e layssa la plagua descuberta enayssi que inscidas le trauc am forfexs e uses de envolucios segon la quantitat de la plagua.	And then administer steams at the hour of the full moon following the restoration of the bone, and leave the wound uncovered to see if it heals with scissors and use coverings according to the size of the wound.
E guarda te am tota cautela que no strenhas la plagua am la fractura, quar motas veguadas an fayt aquo les fols metges, e fero accidir sobre les sieus malautes mort o malautia corrodent o zuthement, so es sania.	And take great care that you do not strain the wound with the fracture, for many times doctors have caused harm to their patients, leading to death or a severe, corrosive illness, which is unhealthful.
E si la tieua strictura leugiera, molli, diversa de la strictura de las autras fracturas.	And if the lunar eclipse is slight, moist, different from the strictures of other fractures.
E si la plagua es gran o es plagua mala, e temes sobre aquel alcus accidentz mals les quals havem recomtatz, e atrobas dolor en le loc, lahoras no cove que pauses sobre aquel astelas, mays fay ad aquel envolucio de draps durs en loc de stelas e strenh lu am aquelas.	And if the wound is large or a bad wound, and you fear certain adverse accidents which we have mentioned, and you find pain in the area, then do not pause over applying steams, but rather use hard cloth coverings instead of steams and strain it with those.
E cum aprop un dia o dos vezes ja la plagua comensar, que en lu sia engendrat brac, lahoras tu osta desus le drap le qual havias pausat sobre aquel am vi, e aprop aministra calguas, enguentz am les quals de nostra constuma es que mediquem las plaguas, ayssi cum enguentz tetrafarmacon e semblantz ad aquel.	And when after one or two days the plague begins to appear, with a braza (a measure of length), then you lift the cloth which you had placed over that arm, and then administer calxes, ointments which according to our custom we use to treat plagues, thus with tetrafarmacon and similar.
E conveneys a tu que deslias le liament e considera la plagua en quascun dia mati e vespre entro que sia consolidada e fermada, e cove que·l membre sia preparat en tal manieyra que la poyredura corra de lu a las partidas dejos am facilitat.	And you should remove the bandage and observe the plague at each day in the morning and evening until it is consolidated and closed, and ensure that the member is prepared in such a manner that the suppuration flows from it to the parts left open.
si a la plagua passan motz dias, e no es consolidada ni es abscindit de lu le brac, lahoras sapias que aqui so satagias de las petitas per que cove enquieras la plagua am tenta.	If the plague persists for many days and is not consolidated or separated from the arm, then you should know that here you are dealing with serious cases, so carefully examine the plague by touch.
E de aquelas satagias aquelas que so separadas remau e extratz, aquelas que de lor no so separadas e pongen le membre e fan accidir dolor, perforsa te a inscidir aquelas segon que a tu aquo es possibla.	And of those serious cases that are separated and extracted, and those from which the member does not separate and causes pain, forcefully incise them according to what is possible for you.
E si accideys a la plagua zuchem o eluchen, so es stiomenios, o autra specia de corrupcio e de putrefaccio, lahoras cove que pauses a quada un de aquels am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio del qual es precedida narracio en le sieu capitol.	And if you find pus or corruption in the plague, it is stiomenia or some other form of decay and putrefaction. Then you should know that this requires treatment, for which there is a preceding narrative described in its own chapter.
E de aquo en le qual cove que stia lo mieu sermo e tu fassas present la tua pessa: quan os gros es trincat, emineys sobre le membre ayssi cum le os de la coyssa e del ajutori e semblantz ad aquels dels membres grans, e que no presumas atraccio de lu, ni la extraccio de lu quar motas veguadas accideys per aquo la mort; habantz layssa aquel entro que poyresca, quar fort leu cayra per si aprop xx dias o xxx; e lahoras cura la plagua si a tu es vist, e si no layssa aquela.	And in that which hole the lesser worm is located and you make present your hand: when the large bone is broken, you will lie over the limb thus as the bone of the thigh and of the helper and resemble those of the great limbs, and do not presume its traction nor the extraction of it because certain motas may happen by this to the death; having left that which can rot, for strong it will fall by itself in about 20 days or 30; and then cure the wound if you see it, and if not leave that.
Capitol .xx.	Capitol.xx.
De la curacio de nodacio que accideys en le vestigi de alcuna fractura.	For the cure of nodation that occurs in the vicinity of any fracture.
Motas veguadas accideys aquesta nodacio en le vestigi de sanacio de fractura, e majorment que es prop de las juncturas, e es orrasada per lu la figura del membre; e fort leu prohibeys le membre de la sua operacio natural.	Motas visible occur in this nodation near the site of fracture healing, especially close to the joints, and alter the appearance of the limb; therefore, you strongly prohibit the limb from its natural movement.
Adonc considera si la nodacio es recent e aministra en aquela medicinas que han stipticat ayssi co es aloen, e enses, e mira, e sercacollo, e acrassia, e semblantz ad aquels; enayssi que prenguas de aquela alcunas o totas, e comfesiys aquelas am vi stiptic, o am album de huou, o am vi agre, e pausa aquela sobre la nodacio en estopa, e constringeys aquelas sobre lu per bona constriccio.	Then consider if the nodation is recent and administer those medicines that have astringent properties, such as aloes, enses, mira, cercacollo, acrassia, and resemble those; try to take some or all of them, confirm that they are either bitter astringents or bitter of hooey, or bitter agreeable, place one of these on the nodation in lint, and constrict them over it with good constriction.
E leyssa extrictura que no deslies aquela per motz dias; e aprop deslia aquela e itera autra, entro que sia remauguda la nodacio; o strenh sobre aquela lamina de plom descentment, quar plom ha proprietat de remaure tot aquo que es imflat en les membres.	Leave the compression bandage on for several days; then remove it and put on another, while the knot is being loosened; or strengthen the lead sheet hanging down, as lead has the property of tightening whatever is swollen in the limbs.
Mays si nodacio ja es en peyra convertida e streyta es e nessessitat provoca a ostar aquela coytadament, e lahoras scindeys aquela per la partida pus sobirana de lu, e inscideys la superfluitat e eminent, o ratz aquela am alcus rezoris entro que sia remauguda; e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But if the knot has already turned into a sore and strengthened, and necessity requires to completely open it, then split it along its upper part, and incise the superfluous and prominent part, or cut that away with forceps while it is being loosened; and treat the area until it heals.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI.
De restauracio de fractura quan es restaurada e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul no segon la sieua natura.	For the restoration of fractures when restored and then, approximately, the limb returns to its natural state.
Quan fractura de os es restaurada, e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul, lahoras aquo no es fayt sino per motas causas: de las quals la una es multitut de solucio del liament e de la liguacio de lu fayta no segon que cove; o per superfluitat de strictura dels liamentz entro que·l nutriment sia prohibit correr al membre; o per multitut de embrocaccio superflua; o per movement superfluent no en la sua hora; o per pauquesa de sanc en le cors del malaute e per debelitat de lu.	When a bone fracture is restored, and then the limb returns to its natural state, this is not done for many reasons: one reason is the abundance of solution of the ligament and the joining of it is not done according to what is proper; or due to excess compression of the ligaments while nutrition is prohibited from flowing to the limb; or due to excess ointment application; or due to excessive movement at an improper time; or due to insufficient strength in the body of the patient and its weakness.
E curacio de aquo es dar a mengar al malaute e far le cor de lu tendre entro que·l sanc sia multiplicat en lu; e aministra banh; e entromet gaug e leticia sobre lu.	And the treatment for this is to give the patient something to eat and make the body of the patient weak until the pain increases in the patient; administer baths; and insert cautery and joy into him.
E aprop pausa pegua sobre le membre, per so que la pegua atire a lu mot nutriment, o continua embrocacio de lu am aygua tebeza, entro que·l nutriment corr e retorne a la sua figura natural.	And then place your hand over the limb, so that the hand draws in nourishment, or continue the wet compress with bitter water, until the nourishment flows and returns to its natural form.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter 22.
De curacio dels osses trincatz quan so restauratz tortuozament e prohibeys la operacio de lor de aquo que cove.	For the treatment of broken bones when they are reduced tortuously and prohibit the operation from which this results.
Quan accideys al membre ja restaurat aprop la sanacio de lu de tortuositat e eminencia al os trincat e nodacio, e es per aquo fededa de forma del membre, mays empero le membre no es prohibit de la sieua operacio natural, lahora no cove que tu recipias la paraula de aquel que exsistima aquel membre sia de novel trincat.	When the limb, already reduced, is nearing recovery from tortuosity and prominence of the broken bone and healing, and this is due to the shape of the limb itself, nonetheless the limb is not prohibited from its natural operation, so you do not need to receive the opinion of someone who believes that part of the limb is newly broken.
Mays ja so statz motz fols metges e restauradors les quals han fayt aquo en nostra tera; e aquesta operacio es mot vituperable perduzent a gran temor le senhal de la qual es mortal.	Nevertheless, there are many skilled surgeons and restorers who have done this in our land; this operation is greatly reproachable as it leads to great fear from the sign of which is fatal.
Mays si claudicacio e nodacio son recentz, lahoras cove que sian enbrocatz am aygua tebeza en la qual so coytas erbas mollificantz, ayssi cum son fuelas de altea e razitz de lu, e mellilot, e semblantz ad aquels; e sia fayt a lu emplastre am emplastre mollificatio ayssi cum dyallaquilon ben fayt; o que sia preza mucillage de razit de altea e sia contucida am gray de gualina o am oli de cirami, e sia emplastrat am aquel; o que sian prezes figuas grassas e sian trissadas am fems de colom, e semblantz ad aquels de las medicinas que son nompnadas amermans consolidacio.	If claudication and nodulation are recent, then soak them in water of a color similar to that of bile in which are infused soft herbs, such as those of hyssop, centaury, and melilot, resembling those; and let it be made into a poultice with a poultice of softening, like well-prepared duckweed; or what is pressed from the juice of centaury and is wrapped in gray of flax or oil of cinnamon, and applied with that; or what are pressed figs and are steeped in goose feathers, resembling those of the medicines named as amber consolidations.
E alcunas vetz es dissolvuda am assidua fricacio leugiera que sia am las mas humidas, e sia administrat movement del membre a tota partida en totas horas.	And sometimes it is dissolved by frequent light friction applied to the more humid areas, and movement of the limb should be administered at all times in all hours.
Mays si tortuositat ja es anada denant e es fayta fort e convertida es en peyra e provocada es necessitat a curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que sia le pus desus cecsat e la continuacio del os sia dissolvut, e sia inscidit aquo que superflueys de nodacio de aquel meteys am le os am inscissoris subtils, e sia aministrada facilitat en aquel am sollicitut e studi.	And if tortuosity has already gone before and is made strong, turning into a stone and necessitating its cure by knife, then it must be that the pus above the cecum is removed and the continuity of the bone is dissolved and incised. What is superfluous from the nodulation of that method should be administered on the bone with fine incisors, and facilitated in that with solicitude and study.
Capitol .xxiii.	Chapter XXIII.
De sermo en dislocacio.	Of speech on dislocation.
Dislocacio es eyssiment de alcuna de las juncturas del sieu loc, per que es prohibida de movement, e es orrezada la figura del membre, e fa venir sobre le malaute dolors e lesios grans.	Dislocation is the displacement of one of the joints of that location, rendering movement prohibited and distorting the figure of the limb, causing great pain and injuries to the patient.
Donc quan accideys ad alcu dislocacio, lahoras cove tantost perforsar que sia reduzit, e no tarde aquela reduzir, quar si es tardada, le loc es apostemat e fort leu am aquo es fayta dificil la reduccio de dislocaccio.	Therefore, when a dislocation occurs, it is important to immediately attempt to reduce it, and not delay the reduction process. If delayed, the area can become infected, making the reduction of the dislocation much more difficult.
E per aysso no cove que sia maugut ni stendut en la hora de la apostemacio, quar motas veguadas fa venir spasme e dolors ledentz.	And for this reason, it should not be cut or stretched during the time of infection, as severe spasms and intense pains can occur.
Mays quan aquo accideys, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la flaubotomia del malaute, e aprop sia layssat entro que repause le apostema; e aprop le membre sia embrocat am aygua cauda e oli, e aprop sia reduzit am facilitat.	More specifically, when this occurs, you should prepare for an incision in the foot to drain the infection, and allow it to rest until the abscess has subsided; then, apply warm water compresses and oil to the limb, and attempt to reduce the dislocation with ease.
E tot membre sia curat am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra en son loc.	And each member be treated with the water of which the memory will come to its place.
E yeu ja e ordenatz les capitols de dislocacio segon que es precedit en fractura; de la partida del cos pus sobirana entro a la partida pus dejos.	And I have already and ordered the chapters of dislocation according to what is preceded in fracture; from the part of the body first up to the part next, then leave.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter 24.
De curacio de dislocacio de la mandibula dejos.	For the treatment of dislocation of the jaw, proceed.
So dislocadas las doas mandibulas si no tart; e la dislocacio de amdos es fayta segon una de dos manieyras: que o son remaugudas de lurs locs per pauca remocio, e so mollificadas un petit; o so dislocadas per entiera dislocacio e complida, entro que sian mollificadas a la partida de la junctura entro que corro saliva del malaute e que no puesca tenir aquela ni puesca claure la sua boca, e la lengua de lu sia envolopada en sa paraula.	When both jaws are dislocated without a tooth; and the dislocation of both is caused according to one of two methods: either they are slightly moved from their places and made somewhat softer; or they are completely dislocated, and at the part where the jaw meets, saliva flows from the patient's mouth, so that neither can have it nor close its mouth, and the tongue of the patient is wrapped in a cloth.
Mays quan la dislocacio de lu es pauca, lahoras en las majors disposicios retorna per si an pauca causa.	More often than not, when the dislocation is slight, it returns to its place by itself with little cause.
Mays si la dislocacio es entiera e complida, lahoras cove que sia administrada reduccio de lu leugierament, e no sia tardada de tot.	More often than not, when the dislocation is complete and full, it must be reduced gently, and should not be delayed entirely.
E es que·l ministre tengua le cap del malaute, e entrometa lo metge le dit pous de la una sieua ma en la razit de la dislocacio de la mandibula dedintz la boca de lu, si la dislocacio es de la una part; o que entrometa les sieus dos pouzes ensemps, si la dislocacio es de doas partz, e les autres ditz de las mas de lu sian defora am les quals enguale; e comanda al malaute que cesse las suas mandibulas e absolva aquelas anar de quascuna partida; e le metge engualhe la mandibula e enpellisca la mandibula entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And the minister hold the patient's head, and the doctor insert his thumb from one hand into the corner of the dislocated jaw inside the mouth, if the dislocation is on one side; or he inserts both thumbs together if the dislocation is on both sides, and the other fingers of his hands remain outside and equalize; and command the patient to cease moving his jaw and allow those to return from any part; and the doctor equalize the jaw and push it back into its place.
E si dificil es la reducio de lu, e majorment si amdos las mandibulas so essemps dislocadas, lahoras aministra evoporacio am aygua cauda e oli, entro que sia fayta leugiera la reduccio de amdos e no tardes la reduccio de amdos de tot, ayssi quo havem dit.	And if the reduction is difficult, especially if both jaws are completely dislocated, then administer evaporation with hot water and oil, while performing a light reduction of both and do not delay the reduction of both entirely, as we have said before.
E donc cum retornam e so engualadas, e es clausa la boca del malaute e no es mollificada, lahoras pausa sobre aquelas polvils de drap am cerot, e sia fayt de cera e oli rozat; e aprop sia liat am facilitat am liamens mols.	And when returned and equalized, and the mouth of the patient is closed and not softened, then place it on powders of cloth with cerate, made of wax and rubbed oil; and apply it with several soft cloths.
E sia le dormir del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e·l cap de lu sia stant entre dos aurelhes, per so que no maugue aquel a la partida dreyta ni a la sinistra; e no li fassas per forsa masteguar alcuna causa; habans la sieua vianda sia forbicio leon, entro que quan las dolors sian remaugudas e las mandibulas so nozadas, lahoras maugue aquo que vol.	And let the patient sleep on their back, with their head standing between two pillows, so that it does not get wet on either side; do not force them to gargle for any reason; having their food ready by a lion skin, when the pains subside and their jaws are moistened, then wet what they want.
E aquo sia aministrat am facilita, e no trebalhe sobre la apercio de la boca deves la comestio e beure e ocitatio, entro que la mandibula sia nozada e sanada.	And this should be given easily, and you must not work on the aperture of the mouth; let them eat, drink, and breathe freely, when their jaw is healed.
E si es dificil la reduccio de duas mandibulas quan so dislocadas en alcuna hora e no so convertidas als lors locs, lahoras motas veguadas accideysso febres e soda assidua, e fort leu es alerguat le ventre del malaute, e fort leu e vomeys colera pura.	And if the reduction of two jaws when dislocated at any time and cannot be returned to their proper places, then blisters often occur, causing frequent fever and a constant dryness. The belly of the patient is also strongly swollen, with severe vomiting of pure bile.
E quan tu vezes aquo, lahoras sapias que es perdicio; e motas veguadas mor aquel al qual accideys aquo en x dias.	And when you see this, then know it is fatal; and blisters often occur to those upon whom this happens in a few days.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter XXV.
De reduccio de la dislocacio de la furcula e de la extremitat del muscle.	Of reducing the dislocation of the furcula and the extremity of the muscle.
Furcula no es dislocada del latz dedintz per la sua continuacio am le pietz; e alcunas veguadas es dislocada a la partida defora, e aquo es declarat al sentiment.	The furcula is not dislocated from the leg inside by its continuation to the foot; and sometimes it is dislocated at the outer part, and this is declared by the sensation.
E la restauracio de lu es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos e extenda les sieus brasses.	And the restoration of it is that the patient lies on his back and extends his legs.
E aprop coarta le loc am la tua palma am fort coartacio, quar ela retornara.	And then apply your palm to the area with strong pressure, for it will return.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre e pulvils e strenh aquela.	And then place your hand over the area with the plaster and powder, and strengthen that.
Mays la extremitat de aquel que siec le coyde e·s continuat am aquel, no es dislocada en alcun dia; lahoras cove que sia reduzida e engualhada segon que havem dit e segon que es a tu aparelhat.	More so, the extremity of that which is connected to the coccyx does not get dislocated in any day; therefore, it should be reduced and equalized as we have said and according to what you have at hand.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre, e pulvils, e extrictura, e comanda al malaute adherir a trenquilitat e a repaus entro que sia sanat.	And then place your hand over the area with the plaster, powder, and extract, and command the patient to adhere to tranquility and rest until it is healed.
E am aquesta meteyssa curacio es reduzida la extremita del muscle quan es separada del sieu loc.	And in this cure, the extremity of the muscle is reduced when it is separated from its place.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter XXVI.
De la reduccio de la dislocacio del muscle.	On the reduction of the dislocation of the muscle.
Sapias que·l muscle no es dislocat sino segon tres manieras, de las quals es la una que sia dislocat a la partida del titillic a la partida dejos.	Know that the muscle is not dislocated in any manner other than three ways, of which one is when it is dislocated from the tendon to the bone.
E la segonda es que sia dislocat a la partida desus del muscle, e aquo es fayt tart; e no es dislocat a las partidas detras per la spalla; e no es dislocat a las partidas denant per les nervis.	And the second is when it is dislocated above the muscle, which is called tart; and it is not dislocated at the back parts by the shoulder; and it is not dislocated at the front parts by the nerves.
E majorment es dislocat e defora eyssit a las partidas dejos deves le titillic, e majorment en aquels dels quals las carns son paucas, leugierament es dislocat; mays en aquels en les quals so motas carns, es eyssit fora am dificultat.	And it is mostly dislocated outward at the lower parts of the tendon, especially in those where the muscles are few, it is easily dislocated; more so in those where there are many muscles, it occurs with difficulty.
E fort leu accideys ad alcus homes percussio o cazement, e le muscle de lu es apostemat de apostema caut, e es cujat per aquo que ja sia dislocat.	And often such persons suffer from a blow or strike, and the muscle of the person develops an abscess due to a boil, and becomes inflamed because it is already dislocated.
Adonc cove que tu sproes aquo entro que estias sobre-sertetut de lu, e lahoras procesiscas en la curacio de lu.	Then cover what you are especially over them with, and then proceed in the cure of them.
E es conoguda la dislocacio de lu quan es a las partidas dejos deves le titillic; per so que distingescas entre le muscle dislocat e·l muscle sa, quar tu atrobas entre aquels diversitat manifesta; e atrobas en le cap del muscle concavitat e dejos le titillic deves le tocament del cap del muscle ayssi quo un huou, e al malaute no pot redusir la sua ma a la sieua aurelha, ni maure aquela per totz movementz.	And the dislocation is known when it is in the parts; then you must palpate; so that you distinguish between the displaced muscle and the proper muscle, for which you find a clear difference; and you find a concavity at the head of the muscle. When you palpate the head of the muscle, it feels like a hollow space, and the patient cannot bring his hand to his ear, nor can he move it with all movements.
Si es dislocat deves le pietz o ensus, e tu lahoras atrobas manifest tocament, e no es amaguat.	If it is dislocated, you must palpate the foot or upwards, and then you will find a clear touch, and it is not hidden.
E de aquesta dislocacio es fayta leugiera reduccio quan es fresca e le malaute es enfant.	And for this dislocation, a gentle reduction is made when it is fresh and the patient is in pain.
E la reduccio de lu es que·l ministre eleva la ma de lu a las partidas desus; e aprop pause les tieus pouses dejos le titillic de lu, e eleva la junctura am fortaleza en sus al sieu loc, e·l ministre eleva la ma de lu, e extenda aquela en sus; e aprop pausa aquela dejos quar ela retorna leugierament.	And the reduction is that the minister raises the patient's hand from above; then places his fingers on the dislocated parts and palpates them, elevating the joint with strength at its place, and the minister raises the patient's hand and extends it properly; then places his fingers there so that it returns gently.
Mays si per aquo que havem dit no retorna, e so del comensament que accidic la dislocacio, motz dias, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia banhat en aygua cauda e sia aministrada enbrocacio que mollifique e liniesca ayssi cum si so coytz razitz de altea, e fenugrec, e melillot en aygua, e sia administrada.	If, however, it does not return through what we have said, and only from the beginning of the dislocation accident, for several days, then it should be bathed in cold water and a moistening poultice applied, as if made with roots of plantain, fenugreek, and melilot in water, and this should be administered.
E aprop le malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu dos e sia pausat dejos le titillic de lu espera de lana que sia engual entre levitat e strictura, e aprop le metge pause le sieu talo sobre la spera, e eleva le cap del muscle am vertut, e atire la ma del malaute per que no sia mauguda a las partidas dejos, e autre ministre tengua le cap del malaute, que no sia maugut a las partidas dejos, quar aquela tantost retorna al sieu loc.	And then the patient is laid on his back and placed in a position where the titillate of the skin is equal between levity and stiffness, and the doctor places his hand on the spina, elevating the head of the muscle by its virtue, and pulls the hand of the patient so that it does not suffer from the parts below, and another minister holds the head of the patient, so that it does not suffer from the parts below, for then it quickly returns to its place.
E si voles, reduzeys aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu fassas esser prezent un home le qual sia pus lonc que·l malaute, e estia de la part de aquel latz, e entrometa le sieu muscle dejos le titillic del malaute e eleve le titillic de lu a las partidas desus entro que·l malaute sia suspendut en ayre, e autre ministre tire la ma del malaute de las partidas dejos del sieu ventre.	And if you wish, return the second in this manner: and it is that you make a person present who is longer than the patient, standing on the side of that lathe, and insert his muscle under the titillate of the patient, elevating the titillate above the parts above while the patient hangs in the air, and another minister pulls the hand of the patient from the parts below of his abdomen.
Mays si le malaute es leugier, lahoras cove que am lu que autre causa sia suspenduda, per so que grave aquel, quar la dislocacio retorna tantost.	But if the patient is light, then see that something else is suspended, so that the gravity of the injury returns quickly.
E es reduzit eysament segon autra manieyra: e es que sia ficat en terra un fust lonc le cap del qual sia redon de figura, ayssi cum pilo de mortier, que no sia gros ni subtil, e aprop sia pausat dejos le malaute; pus que so pausatz sobre·l cap del fust draps leons, e·l malaute sia stant segon la longitut del fust, e aprop sia extenduda la ma de lu a las partidas dejos del autra part; e sia extendut le cos de lu del autre part am fortaleza, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And it is reduced gradually in another manner: and it is that a long pole be placed with its head round in shape, like the brim of a mortar, neither too thick nor too thin, and placed under the patient; then place cloths on top of the pole's head, and the patient standing according to the length of the pole. And extend the hand on both sides of the patient; and stretch the body of the patient with strength, for the joint returns to its place quickly.
E si es dificil reduccio de lu per totas las causas que havem ditas, lahoras usa de aquesta cura: e es que tu prenguas un fust la quantitat del qual sia en le lonc de dos brasses, e latitut de aquel sia de quatre ditz, e la grossetut de lu sia aleujat en le preon del tittilic segon aquesta forma:	And if the reduction is difficult due to all the causes we have said, then use this cure: and you should take a pole whose length is two braccia, its width four fingers, and its thickness increased in the palm of your hand according to this form.
E aprop sobre le cap redon sian liatz drap leons per so que·l fust no ledesca le malaute.	And place cloths on the round head of the pole so that the pole does not press against the patient.
E aprop sia pausat dejos le titillic del malaute, e sia extenduda la ma o le bras sobre·l fust entro a las partidas dejos, e sia liat le fust sobre le adjutori e le bras e la extremitat de la ma.	And then place the patient's thigh, and extend your hand or arm along the shaft between the parts, and lay the shaft on the helper and arm and the extremity of the hand.
Aprop sia pausat le bras sobre un scalo de scala segon la latitut, e la ma sia extenduda a las partidas dejos, e l’autre cos sia suspendut de l’autre part, quar la junctura intra tantost.	And then place the arm on a step of the stairs according to its width, and the hand extended along the parts, and the other side be suspended from the other part, that the joint may soon heal.
E cum le intrament de lu es complit segon quascuna maniera que es a tu possibla, e lahoras cove que tu pauses dejos le titillic spera de lana de engual quantitat; e aprop pauza emplastre perparat de polvera de moli am enses e album de huou sobre tot le muscle, ayssi quo es revolvut desus, e aprop strenh dejos le titillic am strictura decent; e le liament sia revolvut sobre le emplastre, e la ma de lu sia annectida al col de lu, e sia leyssat, e no sia mauguda la ma de lu per vii dias.	And when the instrument for it is completed according to any manner that is at your disposal, and then cover the affected area with a cloth of equal quantity; then place an ointment prepared from powder of mallow seeds and honey over all the muscle, thus thoroughly mixed above, and firmly fix the cloth over the ointment, with the hand attached to its neck, and let it be, without moving the hand for seven days.
E cove que sia pausada la vianda del malaute pauca, entro que·l membre sia confortat, quar es pus leugier a la sanacio de lu.	And ensure that the diet of the patient is light, until the limb is strengthened, for this is more conducive to the healing of the condition.
E aprop la vianda sia donada major aprop vii o v e sia exercitat un movement; e donc si es fermat e no es mollificat, lahoras ja es sanat.	And then the food should be given more than seven or five times, and an exercise should be performed. And therefore, if it is closed and not softened, then it is healed.
Mays si la junctura es dislocada motas veguadas per humiditat que accideys a lu o per autra causa, lahoras cove que en aquela sia administrat cauteri am tres traucs, segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri.	And if the joint is dislocated due to repeated attacks by humidity or for another cause, then it is necessary to apply a cautery three times, as previously said in the chapter on cautery.
E si tot aysso es fayt e aprop vii dias es desliat le liament e la junctura no es fermada, e le emplastre e la strictura son reduzitz sobre lu alcunas veguadas, e no es fermada e catz e no pot elevar aquel bras a las partidas desus, lahoras sapias que·ls nervis de lu, les quals so al cap del muscle, ja so inscizes o extendutz o mollificatz, e sapia que la junctura nul temps no sira ficada en loc sieu.	And if all this is done and after seven days the ligament and joint are not healed, and the plaster and stricture are reduced over it several times, and still not healed with cauterization and cannot lift that arm to parts above, then you should know that the nerves of it, which are at the head of the muscle, are either incised or extended or softened, and you should know that the joint will never be fixed in its place.
De la dislocacio de aquela qu’es fayta deves le pietz e la mamilha o las partidas detras, la reduccio es fayta am impulcio e extencio am las mas, entro que retorne.	For the dislocation of that which is caused, you should pull the foot and the calf or the parts behind, the reduction is performed by impulse and extension with the hands, while it returns.
E sia administrada en aquela l’autra strictura, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And it should be applied to the other structure, and care should be taken that it be cured.
E si accideys aprop la sanacio gravitat en le membre e tarditat en le movement de lu, lahoras le malaute uze de banh motas veguadas entro que aquela gravitat sia alleujada e que retorne a la natura de lu primiera.	And if there is a delay in the healing and a decrease in the movement of the limb, then the patient uses warm baths until the swelling is relieved and returns to its natural state.
Capitol .xxvii.	 Chapter XXVII.
De curacio de dislocacio del coyde.	On the cure of dislocation of the shoulder.
Sapias que la junctura del coyde es dislocada am difficultat e semblantment retorna am difficultat; e aquela es dislocada a totas partidas, e majorment a la partida denant a la partida detras, e la dislocacio de lu no es amaguada a tu quar es cazent dejos le vezement o dejos le tocament segon qualque figura sia dislocat, e quan ajustes le coyde disloguat am le sa, aquo es a tu declarat manifestament, quar la junctura es concavada e no pot doblar le bras, ni tocar am aquel le sieu muscle.	Know that the shoulder joint is dislocated with difficulty and seems to return with difficulty; it can be dislocated in all directions, but most commonly in front and behind. The dislocation of the shoulder is not hidden; whether you observe it quickly or feel it by touch, depending on the shape of the displacement. When you reduce the dislocated shoulder into place, this is clearly evident to you because the joint is concave and cannot bend the arm or reach its own muscle.
E cove que·t coytes, e reduzescas la dislocacio tantost denant que vengua a lu apostema caut, quar si ve a lu apostema caut, dificil es la reduccio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot; e majorment quan es a las partidas detras, quar pus mala es de totas las autras specias de dislocacio, e de major dolor, e motas veguadas deyssen am aquela la mort.	And note that if an apostema (abscess) has formed, reduce the dislocation as soon as possible before it reaches the apostema. For if it does reach the apostema, the reduction becomes difficult, and even with strong measures, it may not be completely healed. Especially when it is in the rear parts, for this type of dislocation is worse than all others, causing more pain and often leading to death if not treated promptly.
E la restauracio de lu, quan es aquela que es possibla reduzir, es que la ma de lu sia extenduda am doas mas, e le bras de lu sia expandut, e las mas del metge sian sobre le coyde e dejos lu, e el empellisca la junctura am les pouzes de las suas mas ensemps, o am la razit de la sua palma entro que torne en son loc.	And the restoration of it, when that is possible to reduce, is that his hand be extended between two others, and his arm be stretched out, and the hands of the doctor be on the knees and leave him, and he push the joint with the heels of his hands or with the edge of his palm as it returns to its place.
Mays si la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras retorna ayssi que dobla la ma am la sua ma, entro que percuta le coyde am la razit de la sua palma.	And if the dislocation is in the front parts, then return it thus by bending his hand towards his own hand, striking the knee with the edge of his palm.
E si la dislocacio no obezeys a la reduccio, lahoras aministra vehement extencio e mot fort.	And if the dislocation does not yield to reduction, then administer strong extension and vigorous movement.
E es que dos ministres extendan le bras, e tenguan aquel eyssament dos ministres per so que no sia remaugut deves la extencio.	And have two ministers stretch out their arms, and hold that position with two ministers so that the extension is not disturbed.
E aprop sia revolvut le bras deves tota part, pus que es envolopat drap doblat lonc sobre la ma de lu, o liament.	And then rotate the arm completely around, since it is wrapped in a long folded cloth around the patient's hand, or bandage.
E quant le metge toca la junctura am la sua ma, unte aquela am alcun oli per so que aquo sia aquelas causas las quals ajudan en lubricitat de la junctura am facilitat; e aprop empellesca la junctura am empulcio vehement entro que retorne.	And when the doctor touches the joint with his hand, anoint that area with some oil so that it helps in the lubrication of the joint for ease of movement; and then push the joint with strong pressure as it returns.
E aprop la reduccio de lu cove que sia pausat sobre aquela empastre en le qual sia stipticitat e excequacio am album de huou, e sia extrenhut am strictura descent, e·l bras sia suspendut del col, e sia layssat per alcus dias.	And after the reduction of the cavity let it be placed on that cushion where there is inflammation and exudation from white pus, and be extended in a downward position, and the arm be suspended from the neck, and let it be left for some days.
E aprop sia desliat; e donc si la junctura es formada en le sieu loc, lahoras tu deslia le liament de lu e layssa aquela.	And then it should be released; and therefore if the joint is formed in that location, then you release the ligament and leave it.
E si vezas la junctura no be strenher, lahoras tu itera le emplastre e·l liament, e layssa aquela per alcus dias entro que sia extrenhuda; e aprop deslia aquela.	And if you see the joint not well strengthened, then iterate the poultice and ligament, and leave it for some days until it is extended; and then release it.
Mays si accideys a lu gravitat aprop la reduccio de la junctura, e la disposicio de lu es en movement, lahoras aministra humectacio en banh e fricacio subtil, e comprecio, entro que sia aleujat; o pausa sobre la junctura aleliati, so es coyssa de moto grassa; e aprop sia liada, e layssa aquela sobre le os le dia e la nueyt.	Moreover, if it happens to it that gravity affects the reduction of the joint, and its position is in movement, then administer moistening in bath and subtle friction and compression, until it is alleviated; or pause over the joint for a time, so it is a matter of much motion; and then bind it, and leave it over the bone day and night.
E aprop osta aquela, e met aquel en banh; e quan suza, lahoras tu fregua la junctura am fricacio temprada, e aprop itera sobre aquela aleliati, so es ronhonal de moto, una veguada, e la segonda, e la .iii.a.,	And then immerse it in water, and when soaked, then friction the joint with tempered friction, and then iterate over it for a time, so it is a matter of much motion, one time, and the second, and the third.
am intrament de banh, entro que sia linit.	by means of bathing, when it is warm.
E si voles, pausa sobre aquela fenda de vaca humida e scalfada am boder e stren sobre aquel; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas, quar aquela es humida e reduzeys a la sua disposicio.	And if you wish, place your hand over that wet and flaccid groove at the edge and press strongly upon it; do this several times, for that is wet and you are restoring it to its proper state.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter XXVIII.
De curacio de dislocacio de malassen, so es de la junctura que es entre·l bras e la ma.	For the treatment of shoulder dislocation, it is the joint where the arm meets the hand.
Malassen de la ma alcunas vetz es deslocada, e la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es leugiera, e·l contrari es de las autras juncturas, mays empero cove que sia velocitat en la reduccio de lu en la hora en la qual es deslocada, denant que le loc sia apostemat o que accida en lu apostema caut.	Shoulder of the hand is sometimes dislocated, and the reduction of this dislocation is easy. The opposite is true for other joints; however, more importantly, it is crucial that there be speed in the reduction when it is dislocated, before the area becomes inflamed or an abscess occurs.
E la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es que tu pauses la junctura de la ma del malaute sobre una taula e le ministre extenda la ma de aquel, e le metge pause la sua ma o o la sua palma sobre la iminencia de la junctura, e empellisca aquela entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And the reduction of the shoulder dislocation is that you place the patient's hand joint on a table and have them extend their arm. The physician then places their hand or palm over the vicinity of the joint and gently push it back into its proper place.
Mays empero cove que sia considerat si la palma ja es ostada al ventre de la ma, lahoras le malaute pause le dos de la sua ma sobre una taula deves la extencio e la reduccio; e si la dislocacio es precedent deves le dos de la ma, lahoras sia la posicio de la ma de aquel intrinicequement sobre la taula, per so que la ma del metge caja sobre aquela iminencia de la junctura.	But rather it should be considered if the palm is already placed on the abdomen of the hand, then the patient pause the two of his hand on a table for extension and reduction; and if the dislocation is prior, then place the two of his hand, so that the position of the hand of the physician precisely on the table, in order that the hand of the doctor falls over that potential of the joint.
E donc si retorna tantost, bon es; e sino, lahoras strenh aquela am empastre cedant le apostema e layssa aquel; e no iteres aquo, quar sino, no soferta ni no podes sobre la reduccio de lu pus que passan a lu dias.	And so, if it returns quickly, that is good; otherwise, then strengthen that and apply a compress yielding to the abscess and leave it; and do not repeat this, for if you do not, do not suffer nor be unable regarding the reduction of it until days pass.
Mays empero la junctura roman segon la sua tortuositat; e no notz al malaute alcuna causa, sino que la ma es mollificada e no pot strenher alcuna causa; lahoras sapias que les nervis son trincatz o trissatz, e lahoras no es engen en lu sino que sia strenhuda am cauteri prop le cazament de lu e fort leu aquo confereys alcuna causa.	But rather the joint is to be reduced according to its tortuosity; and do not note any cause in the patient, but let the hand be softened and cannot strengthen any cause; then you know that the nerves are torn or cut, and then there is nothing in it but that it be strengthened with a cautery near the site and fortify it with this you confer some cause.
Donc cum malassem es retornada, lahoras pausa sobre lu empastre le qual havem recomtat, e sia layssat e strenhut per v dias; e aprop sia desliat e sia layssat e la ma de lu sia excercitada.	And since the gout has returned, then place over the compress which we have recommended, and let it be softened and strengthened for five days; and then release it and leave it, and exercise the hand of the patient.
Mays si le movement de lu es ostat e accideys en lu alcuna gravitat, lahoras leniys aquela am aygua cauda e am fricacio alcunas veguadas, entro que sia alleujat.	If the movement in it is stopped and some gravity occurs, then loosen that with water cautery and some friction several times, until it is alleviated.
Capitol .xxix.	Capitol.xxix.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels ditz.	Of the cure of dislocation of the fingers.
Alcunas veguadas so dislocatz les ditz a tota partida.	In some cases, dislocate the fingers all at once.
E quan es dislocat alcun dit de aquels al dos de la palma o al ventre de lu, lahoras sten le dit e impelleys la dislocacio de lu am les tieus pouses, entro que retorne.	And when one of those fingers is dislocated on the side of the palm or in its middle part, then hold the finger and push the dislocation back with your thumbs until it returns.
E aprop sostenta le cap del dit, e suspen aquel deves la part a la qual es dislocat, e layssa aquel per dos dias.	Then hold the base of the finger, suspend that part which was dislocated, and leave it for two days.
E aprop suspen aquel e exten aquel entro que dreyt sia engualhat en aquel sieu dia.	Then suspend that part and extend it until the finger is straight in that same day.
E quan sira noyt, lia aquel segon aquela narracio, e no cesses desliar aquel en le dia e exercitar am movement, e lia aquel en la noyt; e fay aquo per alcus dias entro que sia streyt.	And when it is night, treat that part according to the aforementioned method, and do not cease to loosen and move it during the day, and treat it at night; do this for several days until it is straight.
E fay semblant am aquo, si es dislocat al ventre de la ma, e lia aquel ad aquela partida e fay am aquo la tieua primiera operacio, entro que sia sanat.	And make it seem as if you are doing that, if it is dislocated in the abdomen by your hand, hold that part and do your first operation, until it is healed.
E semblantment fay am aquo quan es dislocat a las autres partidas.	And make it seem as if you are doing that when it is dislocated in other parts.
Capitol .xxx.	Capitol.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels spondils del dos.	For the treatment of dislocation of the second lumbar vertebra.
Quan accideys ad alcun dels spondils del dos o del col dislocacio complida, e so remaugutz motz spondils de lors locs, lahoras en aquela no es curacio, quar la mort se coyta al malaute.	When a complete dislocation occurs in any of the lumbar or cervical vertebrae, and multiple vertebrae are displaced from their proper position, then there is no cure for that part, and death follows the patient.
E senhal de aquo es que la egestio del malaute es fora-eyssida ses voluntat, e no pot retenir aquela; e motas veguadas so mollificatz alcus membres de lu o doas cambas de lu o dos brasses de lu, o un de aquels; o es remaugut un spondil de son loc, quar motas veguadas es remaugut e motas veguadas es fayta la remocio de aquels a quatre partidas.	The sign of this is that the patient's excretion is forcibly expelled against their will and they cannot retain it; often, several members of the patient or both hips or two arms of the patient, or one of those, are softened. Or a vertebra is displaced from its place, for multiple times it is displaced and multiple times the removal of those to four parts is performed.
Donc aquela ja es remauguda a las partidas detras e es nompnada gelbozitat.	Then it is already mended at the rear parts and named jaundice.
Mays la curacio de lu es que lahoras consideras si la gelbozitat accidey de puerissia, quar lahoras en aquela no es curacio ni de aquela no es sanacio de tot.	May the cure of it be that when you consider whether jaundice arises from retention, then in that case there is no cure and neither does it heal entirely.
Mays en aquela que ve per cazement o per percussio o per semblant ad aquels, ja diyssero les Antics las manieras de curacio am sermo prolixs, del qual lo mays retorna am profieyt; mays yeu ja e abreujat de aquel del qual lo pauc escusa del trop de lu, per la mieua propinquitat a la entencio mieua exposicio, am la qual he aquo expausat et format ex instrument divers de aquel am le qual mostrero aquo e espausero aquel.	May it be that in those cases where jaundice arises from congestion or percussion or semblance thereof, the Ancients have already detailed the methods of cure at length, in which the most returns to a prophecy; but I will now abbreviate that of which the few exceptions from too much of it are for my proximity to your understanding, by which I have herein expanded and formed various instruments from which I shall show and expand that.
E dic que en gelbosita que accideys de la partida denant en le pietz, no es engen ni sanacio de aquela; e semblantment en aquela que es fayta a dos latz.	And I say that in jaundice which arises from the front part of the foot, it neither worsens nor heals; similarly in that which affects two sides.
E de aquelas no es curada sino aquela que accideys en le dos propriament am aquo que yeu recomti.	And of those, only the one that arises in the two sides is cured as I recommend.
E es que·l malaute sia extendut sobre la sua cara sobre pug engual prop de paret, e sia extendut dejos lu esturment molh per so que no sia lidit le pietz de lu.	And the patient should be extended on his back as close to the wall as possible, and kept moistened with a cloth so that his feet are not irritated.
E aprop un fust dreyt sia pausat, ficat en la terra en la extremitat del pug entorn le cap de lu, e autra fust en aviro les pes de lu en l’autra extremitat del pueg.	And place a straight stick, inserted into the ground at the end of the arm near its head, and another stick across his feet at the other end of the pole.
E·l ministre tengua le fust, e no sia fermat en fossa; e autre ministre tengua l’autre segon aquela forma.	The minister should hold the stick, and it should not be fixed in the ground; another minister should hold the other end according to that form.
E aprop envolopa sobre le cap del malaute e dejos les titillic liamen leon ferm; e exten la extremitat del liamel al fust le qual es deves le cap de lu, e lia aquel en lu; e aprop strenh l’autre liament sobre las ancas de lu les denols de lu, e deves las cambas de lu; e aprop ajusta totz les liamentz e lia aquels en l’autre fust le qual es deves les pes de lu.	And wrap cloth around the head of the patient and tie it tightly with a ligature; extend the end of the ligature to the stick which is placed at the head, and tie that there. And wrap strong ligatures around the hips of the patient under his armpits, and support his legs; and adjust all the ligatures and tie those to the other stick which is placed at the feet.
E aprop le ministre cascu extenda le liament a la partida del fust, e no sian remaugutz les dos fustz e les liamentz dels sieus locs en les quals son ficatz, mays empero no so fermatz ayssi cum havem dit.	And the minister should extend the ligature to the part of the stick, and do not move both sticks and the ligatures in which they are placed, but they should not be fixed exactly as we have said.
E le metge pause las suas palmas sobre le spondil am fortaleza entro que retorne, o que pause sobre aquela una taula, e aprop que ajuste sobre la taula les sieus pes entro que retorne.	And the doctor places his palms on the spine with strength so that it returns, or he places one hand on a table and adjusts his feet on the table so that it returns.
Mays si no retorna per aquesta forma, lahoras pren una taula de la qual la latitut o la longitut sia en aviro de tres brassas, e cava en la paret de la qual havem dit que es prop le malaute un loc en le qual intre la extremitat de la taula.	And if it does not return in this way, then take a table whose width or length is about three braccia, and dig a hole in the wall where we said was near the hernia, in which between the ends of the table.
E aprop pausa la maytat de la taula sobre le spondilh, e·l metge pause les sieus pes sobre l’autre extremitat, e estrenha be entro que le spondil sia coartat e que retorne al sieu loc.	And then place the greater part of the table on the spine, and the doctor places his feet on the other end. He presses well so that the spine is compressed and returns to its place.
E si tu voles, obre am torn le qual es revolvut am la ma; e es que tu fiques en terra deves le cap del malaute en le derier del pug dos fustz, la longitut dels quals sia d’un bras, e deves le cap de lu en le derier del pug eyssament dos fustz; e sia la longitut que es entre quascun fust un palm, e ja es fayt en quascun fust trauc en le qual corr torn, e quascun sia mot fermat en terra per so que no sia maugut.	And if you wish, open a turn which is revolved in your hand; and when you stand on the ground, place the base of the hernia at the heel of two sticks, whose length is that of one arm, and place its top at the heel of two sticks similarly positioned. The distance between each stick should be about one palm. In each stick, thread a cord, and secure each end firmly to the ground so it does not move.
E sia mes un fust redon en le qual es le torn, e sia revolvut en les dos traucs dels dos fustz.	And there should be a round stick for the turning, and it should be rotated in the two holes of the two sticks.
E en la extremitat de lu es un trauc en le qual es format le fust, la longueza del qual es un palm am aquo que es revolvut; e en les dos autres fustz es semblant de aquel.	And at the end of it is a hole through which the stick passes, the length of which is one palm's breadth as it is rotated; and in the two other sticks, it is similar to that.
E aprop strenh les liamentz que has streyt en le pietz del malaute en le trau le qual es deves le cap de lu, e les liamentz que has streyts en las coyssas de lu en le torn le qual es deves les pes de lu.	And then strengthen the ligaments you have stretched in the feet of the patient in the hole through which you place its head, and the ligaments you have stretched in the thighs of the patient in the turn where you place its feet.
E aprop deves quascun torn e stia un ministre que torssa le torn am la sua ma, e le metge engualhe le spondil segon que havem dit.	And then you should place each turn and have a minister twist the turn with his hand, and the doctor straighten the spine as we have said.
E aquesta es la forma del torn:	And this is the form of the turn:
E aprop pus que le spondil es retornat, e le loc es engualhat, lahoras cove que pauses empastre exciccatiu am album de huou, e aprop estopa; e aprop pause sobre le empastre astela de taula de la qual la latitut sia de tres ditz o enviro aquels, e la longitut de lu sia quantitat que prengua le loc de la gelbositat, e sobre la partida del spondil sa.	And when the spine is returned and the area is straightened, then cover it with a paste of honey, and some wool; place a slice of table about three fingers or slightly wider in diameter, and the length should fit the area of the swelling, and on the part of the spine.
E aprop sia liat am liament le qual havem dit, e uze le malaute de nutriment subtil entro que sia sanat.	And then apply the honey which we have said, and use the patient of subtle nourishment until it is healed.
E si roman alcuna iminencia en le loc en la fi de la sanacio, lahoras cove que sian aministradas medicinas que moilifico e liniscan am aministracio de la taula per lonc temps, la qual havem recomtada; e ja es aministrada en aquel loc lamina de plom.	And if there is any danger at the site near the end of healing, then ensure that medicines that mitigate and relieve are administered for a long time through the table as we have recommended; and already a sheet of lead is applied in that location.
E alcunas veguadas accideys imminencia en le derier dels spondils del dos, e es cujat per aquela dislocacio; e es aquel os le qual ja imineys per que no cove que sia fayta prosompcio a lu am aquesta medicina, quar fort leu fara a tu accidir mort.	And sometimes accidents occur near the end of the vertebrae in the back, and are caused by that dislocation; and it is that bone for which you should already anticipate so that no suspicion arises about it with this medicine, as it will greatly affect you and cause death.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter XXXI.
De curacio de anca dislocada.	On the treatment of dislocated hip.
Sapias que la junctura del ancha e la junctura del muscle no endeve sino dislocacio tant solament, e no accideys ad aquelas aquo que accideys a las autras juncturas de petita remocio e concavitat.	Know that the joint of the hip and the joint of the muscle should occur only due to dislocation, and not due to what occurs in other small joints with little movement and concavity.
E la junctura de la ancha es dislocada segon quatre manieyras, quar es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, o a las partidas defora, o a las partidas denant, o a las partidas detras.	And the joint of the elbow can be dislocated in four ways, namely dislocated to the internal parts, or to the external parts, or to the anterior parts, or to the posterior parts.
E majorment es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, e pauc a las partidas denant o a las partidas detras.	And primarily it is dislocated to the internal parts, and little to the anterior or posterior parts.
E senhal de la dislocacio de lu a las partidas de dintz es quar, quan tu ajustas la camba del malaute sana am la malaute, es pus longua e·l denolh es pus heminent que de la sana, e·l malaute no pot doblar le sieu pe deves le lenguonar, e es le loc que siec le lengonar apostemat de apostema caut, per so que·l cap de la coyssa ja es pervengut aqui.	And the sign of dislocation to the internal parts is that when you adjust the healthy leg's knee against the sick one, the unhealthy knee becomes longer and more prominent than the healthy one. The sick leg cannot bend its foot; this is the place where you should cautery the felon, so that the head of the swelling is treated here.
E·l senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio es a las partidas defora, es que les accidentz de lu so contraris ad aquest accident.	And the sign of one who experiences dislocation to the external parts is that the symptoms of this condition are contrary to this accident.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas denant es quar expan la camba sieua segon compliment, mays empero no dobla aquela ses dolor que es en le denol, e si se perforsa ad anar e no pot sobre aquo a las partidas denant; e la urina de lu es retenguda e l’engonar de lu es apostemat, e deves la ambulacio de lu sobre le talo.	And the sign of one who experiences dislocation to the anterior parts is that the knee swells according to the complement, but does not bend, and the pain in the kneecap persists. If it is forced further向前翻译这句话：“并且，对于那些希望将区块链技术应用于实际项目的人来说，了解如何选择合适的共识机制至关重要。”
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas detras es que no expande le denol, ni no puesca doblar aquel denant que doble le engonar, e la camba de lu es pus breva que l’autra, e l’engonar es mollificat, e·l cap de la coyssa es deves aquel loc.	And a sign of dislocation in the rear parts is that the hollow does not expand, nor can what is in front bend what is behind, and the thigh is shorter than the other, and the hip is softened, and the head of the thigh bone is displaced from that place.
Mays reduccio de las specias de aquesta dislocacio es que tu consideras, lahoras, si la dislocacio es vetusta et antiqua, que ja es anticada am le havent aquela aprop tu aministras reduccio de lu e roman segon la sua disposicio, lahoras no es en aquela curacio de tot; e adonc no cove que en aquela sia fayta prosompcio.	The main sign of this dislocation is that you consider whether the dislocation is old, and if it is an ancient one, you have already treated it nearby by reducing it according to its position. However, this is not part of the entire treatment; then, you should not guess or form a presumption about it.
Mays en aquel del qual la dislocacio es recent, e es una de las quatre specias de dislocacio, lahoras te coyta ad aquo que volvas la junctura e extendas aquela a las partidas dedintz e a las partidas defora, e mau aquela a la dextra e sinistra, quar fort leu retorna e no indigeys de autra cura.	For the recent dislocation, which is one of the four species of dislocation, you should reduce it by returning the joint to its proper position and extending it to the internal and external parts, and manipulate it to the right and left sides, for it will naturally return and you will not need any other treatment.
Mays, si no retorna en aquesta manieyra, lahoras cove que tu prepares ministre fort e extendas la camba de lu de la partida pus dejos, o am las suas mas, o am liament lo qual es liat sobre la camba desus le denol; e autre ministre extenda la ma de aquel desus enayssi que meta las suas mas dejos les titillics de lu; e aprop strenha am liament leon sobre la razit de la coyssa, e tengua autre ministre ters le extremitat del liament.	Moreover, if it does not return in this manner, you should prepare a strong counterpoise and extend the thigh from the part behind or from its hands, or with linseed which is soaked over the hollow; another minister should stretch the hand above to try to grasp the tendons of the foot; then, strongly apply linseed on the back of the thigh, and have another minister hold the end of the linseed.
E sia extencio de lu o de la partida dedintz a l’angonar a la partida de la furcula, o de la partida detras a la partida del dos.	And it is the extension from his side inside to the angle at the side of the furcula, or from the back side to the side of the diaphragm.
E sia la extencio de totz aquels en una veguada entro que·l malaute sia elevat am le sieu cos de terra e que romangua pendent.	And it is the extension of all those in one piece so that the patient's body is elevated from the ground and hangs suspended.
E aquesta specia de extencio es specia cominal a totas quatre.	And this type of extension is special for all four.
E donc si la dislocacio retorna am aquo que havem dit, sira bo; e sino, lahoras es necessari a tota specia aquo que dire de la propria curacio.	And so, if the dislocation returns as we have said, it will be good; otherwise, for every type, it is necessary to do what I will say about its own treatment.
En la reduccio de lu propria, quan es dislocada, e la dislocacio es a las partidas dedintz, cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu latz sa; e aprop pausa les liamentz sobre la razit de la coyssa en aquel loc le qual entre le cap de la coyssa e·l loc que es dejos le langonar; e aprop exten le liament en sus de la part del angonar a la pus auta partida de la furcula.	In the reduction of its own, when dislocated, and the dislocation is on the inside parts, ensure that the patient's body is revolved over their side; then place the bandages around the ribcage in that location where it lies between the head of the ribcage and the place where the angle is located; then extend the bandage above the part of the angle to the other side of the furcula.
E aprop autre ministre fort prengua les brasses de lu, e amerme le loc gros de la coyssa malaute e extenda a las partidas deforo per extencio vehement, quar aquela retorna en le sieu loc.	And then another minister firmly takes hold of the thighs, and compresses the area around the bad hernia and extends it outward forcefully, for that which returns to its place.
E aquesta specia es de pus leugiera curacio am la qual aquest membre es reduzit que las autres specias.	And this species is of a gentle cure for which that member is reduced compared to other species.
Mays si es excusat sobre tu e no obezeys al entrament am aquesta specia de curacio de tot, lahoras cove que sian liatz les dos pes del malaute ensemps am liament fort, leugier, sobre amdos les talos e amdos les denols.	But if you excuse yourself and do not follow the instruction for this cure, then carefully bind both feet of the patient together firmly, gently, over both the ankles and both the insteps.
E sia la longitut de quascun de son par la quantitat de quatre ditz, e sia la camba malaute extenduda mays que l’autre per quantitat de dos ditz.	And let the length of each be the quantity of four fingers, and let the bad hernia's flap be extended more than the other by the quantity of two fingers.
E aprop le malaute sia suspendut sobre le cap del fust, e que sia en la mayso; e sia la longitut de lu de la terra la quantitat de dos brasses.	And then the hernia is suspended over the top of the stake, and it should be in the hand; let the length of it from the ground be the quantity of two braccia.
E aprop comanda a un jove fort que minuesca le cap de la coyssa, e sia suspendut am le malaute autre jove, e l’autre jove minuent la coysa am fortaleza empellesca, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And command a strong youth to hold the thigh, and let him suspend it above the hernia, while another youth holds the thigh with great strength, for the joint returns to its place quickly.
Mays en la reducio propria, quan es dislocacio a la partida defora, cove que·l malaute jaga sobre pug segon que havem recomtat en le havent gelbozitat; e sia strenhut le liament sobre la camba malauta propriament e sobre le pietz de lu.	In the proper reduction, when dislocation is at the upper part, guide the patient's leg according to what we have recommended in the healing of gout; and strengthen the ligament on the side of the affected thigh and on its knee.
E aprop dos fustz sian pausatz, la un als pes de lu, e l’autre al cap; e aprop sian pausatz fustz ajustatz al mieg del pueg ficat sobre·l qual draps humitz sian envolopatz, per so que·l malaute no sia dampnajat per que·l fust sia entre las coyssas de lu, per que deves la extencio a las partidas dejos no sia atirat.	And then place two poles to hold him, one on his foot and the other on his head; and let the poles be adjusted above the peg inserted under which wet cloths are wrapped, so that the patient is not damaged by the pole being between his thighs, for you need to maintain the extension of the parts left in place.
E aprop quascun ministre extenda a la sua part, e·l metge am la sua ma enguala la reduccio segon l’art.	And then each minister extend to his part, and the doctor with his hand equalize the reduction according to the art.
Donc, si obezeys a revercio, sira bo grandament; e sino, pausa sobre aquela diligentment e ayssi quo havem dit en gelbozitat per aquela engualment.	Then, if you adhere to the reversal, it will be very good; and otherwise, place your hand diligently over it, just as we have said in the healing of gout regarding equalization.
Mays cove que·l malaute jagua sobre les sieus latz sa quetament.	Then guide the patient's leg gently and steadily.
E quan la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras cove que la camba sia extenduda leugierament, e es segon aquesta meteyssa narracio sobre pueg; e le metge pause la palma de la sua ma dreyta sobre·l langonar malaute, e aprop coarte aquel am l’autra ma, e am aquela coartacio pausa aquel extendut a las partidas dejos a la partida del denol.	When the dislocation is in the front parts, then you should slightly extend the thigh, and proceed according to this narrative about the leg; the doctor places the palm of his right hand on the popliteal region of the injured side, and then cuts with the other hand, and by that cut extends it to the front parts leaving it at the place of the kneecap.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas detras, lahoras no cove que·l malaute sia extendut a las partidas dejos, e es elevat sobre la terra; habantz cove que sia pausat sobre causa dura, ayssi cum cove le eyssament si l’ancha de lu es dislocada a las partidas defora, segon aquo que havem dit del jasement de lu sobre dos anchas; e es sobre la sua cara e les liamentz sian extendutz, segon que havem dit, no ha guayre.	If the dislocation is in the rear parts, then you should not extend the limb to the front, but elevate it above the ground; having done this, you should place it on a hard surface, as if it were similarly situated when the wide end is dislocated outward, as we have said regarding its position between two flat surfaces; and it should be placed with its face up and the ligaments extended, as we have said, not in any other manner.
E cove que sia aministrada compressio am taula sobre le loc al qual yeys la junctura.	A compress should be applied on the area where the joint is displaced.
Donc cum la reducio es complida segon que cove — e·l senhal de la reduccio de lu no es amaguat a tu, e es que tu extendas del malaute doas cambas, e quan tu vezes aquelas enguals e le malaute extrenh la sieua camba e expandeys aquela ses excusacio, lahoras sapias que·l membre segon que cove es retornat — e lahoras tu ajusta doas coyssas e pausa empastre e extrenh am benda ayssi que la ancha no sia mauguda en alcuna de las partidas; e adheresca le malaute a repaus per tres dias o per quatre.	Then, once the reduction is completed as it should be — and you notice the sign of the reduction, which is that you can extend both knees from the injured side, and when you see them equal and the limb expands its usual space, then you know that the member has been returned to its proper place — then adjust two cushions and wrap tightly with a bandage so that the width is not altered in any of the parts; adhere the limb to rest for three or four days.
E aprop deslia le liament e l’empastre, e compara la una camba am l’autra.	And then compare one leg with the other, after separating the linen and wrapping.
Lahoras, si vezas aquelas enguals en vustament, lahoras sapias que la dislocacio ja es fermada, e adonc layssa le malaute anar.	When you see them equal in swelling, then know that the dislocation is healed, and then let the patient go.
E si vezas alcuna causa de mollificacio, lahoras tu retorna e emplastra aquel, e extrenh aquel segon la tua primiera strectura, e layssa aquel en tres dias.	And if you see any cause of swelling, then return and apply a poultice to that area, and extend it according to your first structure, and leave it for three days.
E aprop deslia aquel, e fay aquel tardar en ambulacio sobre quascu per alcus dias, entro que sia confortat.	And then allow that area to gradually recover its mobility over each part for some days, until it is comfortable.
Capitol .xxxii.	Capitol.xxxii.
De curacio de dislocacio del denolh.	On the treatment of dislocation of the shoulder.
Le denolh es dislocat segon tres manieyras, quar es dislocat a las partidas defora, e a las partidas dedintz, e a las partidas dejos mays a las partidas detras; e a las partidas denant no es dislocat.	The shoulder can be dislocated in three ways: it can be dislocated to the outer parts, to the inner parts, and to the back parts more than to the front parts; and it does not dislocate to the front parts.
E le senhal de dislocacio de lu es que comandes al malaute que aplique la sua camba am la coyssa; lahoras sapias que·l denol es dislocat.	And the sign of shoulder dislocation is that when you command the patient to apply their arm to their hip; then you know that the shoulder is dislocated.
E la restauracio de totas las manieyras de lu es que fassas cezer le malaute dreyt, enayssi que ja extenda la sieua camba, si pot sobre aquo; adherir le tieu dos a la cara de lu, e pausa le pe de lu entre les tieus pes; e aprop fay adherir le denol de lu am las tuas palmas, e rete aquelas entre les tieus ditz sobre le denolh de lu am fortaleza, e autre ministre extenda le sieu pe entro que·l denol retorne a son loc.	And the restoration of all manners of it is that you make cease the labour straight, essay that it already extends its limb over this; attach your two hands to the face of it, and place his foot between your feet; then return his soles to your palms, and keep those between your thumbs on his soles with strength, and another minister extend his foot so that the sole returns to its place.
E senhal de reddicio de lu es que la sua camba adharesca am la coyssa am levitat no-laboroza.	And the sign of its submission is that its limb attaches to the thigh with light, non-laboring effort.
E aprop emplastra aquel e fay adhirir la camba am la coyssa, e aprop lia aquelas emsemps am una benda per tres dias o per quatre, e aprop deslia aquelas.	And then apply that and attach the limb to the thigh, and place those constantly with a bandage for three or four days, and then remove those.
E no uze le malaute de ambulacio per alcus dias, entro que sia sanat e cofortat.	And do not use the labor of ambulation for some days until it is healed and comforted.
Mays si la reduccio de lu a tu es excusada, lahoras aministra fort extencio am liamentz dels quals en la curacio de la hancha precedit narracio.	But if the reduction of it is excused to you, then administer strong extension to the limbs of which in the cure of the hip the preceding narration was given.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Capitol.xxxiii.
De la curacio de la dislocacio del talo.	Of the cure of the dislocation of the ankle.
Le talo alcunas veguadas es remaugut per petita remocio, e alcunas veguadas es dislocat segon compliment, e la dislocacio de lu es fayta o a las partidas dedintz o a las partidas deforo.	The ankle is sometimes reduced by a small movement, and sometimes dislocated according to the injury, and the dislocation of the ankle is performed either on the inner side or on the outer side.
E le senhal de la dislocacio de lu es que vezes le talo imflat procedent a la partida a la qual es dislocat.	And the sign of the dislocation of the ankle is that you see the ankle swollen from the side where it is dislocated.
Mays la curacio de la remocio de lu es de leugiera reddicio, e es que sia extendut am facilitat am las mas e sia engualhat entro que retorne.	More the cure of the reduction of the ankle is by gentle stretching, and it should be done with ease so that it returns to its normal position.
Mays en la curacio de lu quan es dislocat segon compliment, cove que fasses cezer le malaute dreyt, e tengua aquel un ministre fort e valent de la partida detras del dos de aquel en le mieg loc de lu.	More in the cure of the ankle when it is dislocated according to the injury, make sure you straighten the limb properly, and have a strong and brave assistant at the back of the injured leg in the middle of the location.
E aprop te tu am la tieua ma dreyta le pe de la pus sobirana part, e am la tua ma sinistra de la part pus dejos del pe en le loc de la cavilha.	And then place your right hand on the upper part of the foot, and with your left hand, hold the lower part of the foot at the location of the ankle.
E aprop atira le pe a tu am la tua ma dreyta, e aprop am la sinistra per dos veguadas, e aprop exten am la sinistra; e empelleys le pietz del pe am la dreyta deves la camba ses trebalh.	And then draw the foot to your right hand, and towards the left side twice, and extend the left side; and push the foot's sole towards the right, let the leg bend as it works.
E fay aquo doas veguadas segon que havem comtat.	And do this twice according to how we have counted.
E aprop empelleys le pietz del pe a la camba la tersa veguada, e tu es a la cavilha.	And then push the foot's sole towards the third bend of the leg, and you are at the knee.
Donc si retorna en una veguada o en dos segon aquesta manieyra, e si vezes le pe engualhat, es bo; e sino, lahoras sobre lu itera la operacio, quar aquel retorna.	So if it returns in one or two pushes according to this manner, and if you press the foot well, that is good; otherwise, then iterate the operation, for when it does not return.
Mays si a tu es prohibida la reduccio de lu am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu dos sobre terra, e estrenh un paysel mot en terra fermat, e que caja entre las coyssas de lu, e tu ja has envolopat sobre lu drap per so que no ledesca le malaute.	But if the reduction is forbidden to you as we have advised, then place the foot on a board on the ground, and fix a stick firmly in the ground, and let it pass between the patient's thighs, and you have already wrapped a cloth around it so that the foot does not slip.
E aprop le ministre de lu tengua las suas coyssas, e aprop autre ministre extenda le pe am las suas mas o am liament que lie sobre le col del pe; e aprop extenda aquel quascun ministre contre extencio del sieu par, e le payssel sia extant entre las coyssas del malaute retinent aquel, per so que·l cos de lu no sia atirat a las partidas dejos deves la sua extencio.	And then the minister holds their thighs, and another minister extends the foot with their hands or with the cloth tied around the back of the foot; and each minister extends themselves against the extension of their part, and the stick remains between the patient's thighs, holding that in place, so that the body of the patient is not drawn towards the left side as you maintain its extension.
E aprop le metge enguala la dislocacio am las sieuas mas, e autre ministre tengua la coyssa sana a las partidas dejos, quar la dislocacio retorna am la facilitat.	And then the doctor equalizes the dislocation with his hands, while another assistant holds the healthy thigh at the place left vacant, so that the dislocation returns with ease.
E donc cum retorna la dislocacio e es declarada a tu la sanetat de la reduccio de lu, lahoras pausa emplastre e extrenh aquela am liamentz fortment, e ligua le pe am liament a la camba.	And then as the dislocation returns and you declare the health of the reduction, then apply a strong plaster to it, and bind the foot with lint to the leg.
E cove que temes o te guardes dels nervis les quals so detras sobre le talo, per que le liament sobre aquel no sia vehement e leda aquel fortment.	And beware of the nerves behind the tibia, for the lint over that area should not be strong and severely irritate it.
E aprop layssa aquel per dos dias o per tres; e si le liament es mollificat, extrenh aquel.	And then leave it for two or three days; and if the lint is moist, replace it.
E aprop deslia aquel en le ters dia o en le quart, e prohibeys le malaute de anament per xl dias.	And then remove the lint on the third day or the fourth, and prohibit the patient from walking for forty days.
Mays si es forsat de anar denant aquel spazi, no es fayta segurtat que la dislocacio no sia sobre lu dissolvuda e corrumpuda, e aprop aquo que no recipia curacio.	But if it is necessary for the patient to walk before that time, then there is no guarantee that the dislocation has not been dissolved and corrupted, and that it does not receive treatment.
E si accideys a lu apostema caut, lahoras cove que tu aministre en la cedacio de lu aquo en lo qual precedic la nostra narracio, en autre loc de curacio e de embrocacio, entro que sia remauguda.	And if an abscess occurs during the operation, then you should manage it at the place where we previously described in our narrative, in another location for treatment and fomentation, until it is ripe.
Capitol .xxxiiii.	Chapter XXXIV.
De curacio de dislocacio dels ditz dels pes.	For the treatment of dislocation of the toes in the feet.
Cove que aquel qu’es dislocat sia engualhat am pauca extencio ses trebal; e aquo que no es dificil, abantz es leugier.	Make sure that which is dislocated is reduced with slight extension; and what is not difficult, beforehand is easy.
Mays si la dislocacio es en alcus nozes del dos del pe, lahoras cove que fassas cezer le malaute le sieu pe sobre loc engual de la terra o sobre taula, e sia estant ayssi cum si anava.	But if the dislocation is in some of the toes of the foot, then you should place the patient's foot on the ground or on a table, and keep it thus as if walking.
E aprop tu sta de pes, e pausa le tieu pe sobre aquo que imineys de las juncturas, e aprop calca aquel am le tieu pe am vertut entro que retorne, e que vejas aquel ja engualhat e no aparesca en le loc eminencia.	Then place your foot on the ground, and keep your own foot above the area where the joints are located. Gently press that part with your foot using force, so that it returns to its proper position, and observe that it is reduced without any prominence appearing in that location.
E aprop pausa dejos le ventre del pe de lu una taula que prengua tot le pe, a la qual sian dos caps, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent e ferma per tres dias; e aprop deslia aquel e fay aquel repausar de ambulacio per motz dias, entro que sia estrenhut e de reddicio sia assegurat.	Then place the abdomen of the foot on a table that can hold the entire foot, which should have two ends. Gently stretch and maintain this structure firmly for three days; then release it and allow the walking rest for several days until it is strengthened and its recovery is assured.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter XXXV.
De las specias de dislocacio que sian faytas am plagua o am fractura o am quascuna ensemps.	Of the types of displacement that occur due to sprain or fracture or any other cause.
Quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, e tu te perforssas en la curacio de aquela e en la restauracio de lu, motas veguadas succezeys la mort.	When any of these causes occur, and you are involved in the treatment and restoration of it, mistakes can lead to death.
E per aquo no cove que sobre la curacio de lu presuma, sino aquel que es savi en l’art, de lonc uzatge, misericordios e pietados, tardiu, no-ardit ni presomptuos; e que use en le comensament de medicinas que cedan apostemas cautz tant solament, e leyssa le malaute al divinal jutgament, sino ad aquel al qual speras salut de perdicio, am de la malautia alleviacio, e en la qual appareys alcuna speransa.	And for this reason, you must not presume in the treatment of it, but only someone who is skilled in the art, long accustomed to its use, merciful and pious; and who delays, neither burning nor presumptuous. And who uses at the beginning of medicines that lead to the cautery as much as necessary, leaving the cure to the divine judgment, rather than to him to whom you hope for a healing from loss, in alleviation of the disease, and in which any hope appears.
E adonc esforsa te tantost far de lu la reduccio en le comensament de la causa, denant que endevengua apostema caut.	And then strive to perform the reduction at the beginning of the cause, before it develops into an abscess that requires cautery.
E adonc si le membre retorna segon que volem, lahoras aministra regiment le qual ceda apostema caut e cura la plagua am aquo que conveneys a lu dels enguentz desiccatius.	And then, if the limb returns as we wish, proceed to administer treatment that leads to the cautery of the abscess and heals the sprain with what is suitable for it from the drying ointments.
E si dislocacio es am fractura e accideys en le os satagias separadas, lahoras tu perforsa le stement de lor, e fay en aquo so que havem dit en las malautias simplas de aquo que es precedit en les locz de aquels.	And if dislocation is accompanied by a fracture and accidents in the separated bones, then you must realign their joints, doing so as we have said in simple ailments that precede these locations in the earlier parts.
E guarda e esquiva segon la tua vertut aquel del intrament en las vias de temor segon que a tu es precedida la mia predicacio; quar aquo es milhor a tu deves le tieu Creator, e mays permanent a la tua gloria, e mays saludos al tieu cos verays aquels en le tieu temps.	And guard and avoid according to your virtue that of the instrument in the ways of fear according to which my preaching precedes you; for this is better to you from your Creator, and more permanent to your glory, and more greetings to your true self those in your time.
Ayssi fineysso las paraulas de Albucasim perfieytament de las quals Dieus ne sia benezeyt.	Thus you finish the words of Albucasim perfectly of which may God bless.
Amen.	Amen.
