Ayssi comensan las paraulas de Albucasim .	Thus begin the words of Albucasim.
O, filhs, pus yeu he a vos complit aquest libre, le qual es le derier de la sciencia de medicina, per le compliment de lu so consequit la fi en lu, e per las exposicios de lu, e per las declaracios de lu, es a mi vist que yeu complesca aquel a vos am aquest tractat, le qual es partida de la operacio am ma, so es cyrurgia.	Oh, children, now that I have completed this book, which is the last of the science of medicine, for the completion of which I have labored to its end, and through its explanations and declarations, it is clear to me that I have fully covered those matters in this treatise, which deals with surgical operations.
Quar la operacio am ma es prostrada en nostre regio e en nostre temps de tot privada, entro que fort leu peric la sciencia de lu, e le vistigi de lu es ostat; e no romasero de lu sino alcunas petitas descripcios en les libres dels Antics, les quals mudero las mas e endevenc ad aquels error e heyssitacio entro que son clausas las entencios de lu e es elonguada la forsa de lu e l’art.	Since the operation of surgery is proscribed in our region and our time, it has been almost entirely abandoned; yet, this science is important, and its methods are well-known. Only some brief descriptions remain in the works of the Ancients, which have corrected many errors and hesitations, but have left the understanding of it incomplete and have extended its practice.
E es vist a mi que yeu vivifique aquela am ordenacio de aquest tractat en aquela segon la via de exposicio e de declaracio e de abreviacio; e per que vengua am las formas dels ferramentz de cautheri e dels autres instrumentz de la obra cum sia per addicio de la declaracio, e per preparacio de lu, la qual causa es necessaria.	And it is clear to me that I should revitalize that order in this treatise according to the way of explanation and declaration and abbreviation; so that it can include the forms of the cautery tools and other instruments of the work through the addition of declarations and preparation, which are necessary causes.
Mays la causa per la qual no es atrobat bo artifex am la sieua ma en aquest nostre temps, es quar la art de medicina es longua, e que cove le sieu actor denant aquo esser excercitat en la sciencia de anotomia la qual recontec Gualia entro que sapia les juvament dels membres e las formas de aquels, e la conjunctio e la separacio de lor; e haia la conoyssensa dels osses, dels nervis e dels lacertz, e·l nombre de aquels, e la egrecio de lor; e de las venas pulsatils e de las quietas, e dels locs del eyssiment de lor.	More the reason why a good craftsman does not apply his hand in this our time is that the art of medicine is lengthy, and it requires one's actor to be exercised beforehand in the science of anatomy, which Gualia knew well, knowing the youth of the members and their forms, as well as their conjunction and separation; and had knowledge of the bones, nerves, and sinews, their number, and their disease; and of the veins pulsatile and quiet, and of their places of effusion.
E per aquo ditz Ypocras que am u nom es mot, mays en l’obra petit, e majorment en la art de la ma.	And for this Hippocrates says that in the name is small, more in the work itself, and especially in the art of the hand.
Mays nos ja avem dit de aquel en l’introit de aquest libre; quar qui no es scient aquo que li avem dit de anotomia, no es evacuat que no caia en error per la qual siran mortz les homes, ayssi cum yeu he vist trops de aquels, quar alscus son formatz en esta sciencia e gettan se de aquela ses sciencia e ses experiment.	More however we have already spoken of that in the introduction to this treatise; for who does not know what we have said about anatomy, will not be cleared that he does not fall into error through which many men will die, as I have seen too many of those, for some are formed in this science and venture from that other science and its experience.
Quar yeu vi un metge folh e enperit aver incidit un apostema escrophilos en le colh de una femna, e incidic alcunas arterias del colh per que fluic gran sanc entro que la femna cazec morta entre las mas de lu.	For you saw a doctor who, having fallen ill, incurred an apostema scrophulous in the neck of a woman, and injured some arteries so that great blood flowed until the woman died among her distresses.
E vi un autre metge que pres que el traguera una peyra d’un home le qual avia procesit en sa etat, e la peyra era gran, e venguet a lu e trayssec aquela peyra am un tros de la vesiqua, per que aquel home al tertz dia es mort.	And there was another doctor who, when the patient passed a stone from his bladder, and the stone was large, came to him and removed that stone with a piece of the bladder, so that man died on the third day.
E yeu ja apelat fuy a estrayre aquela, e vi que per la grandesa de la peyra e per la disposicio del malaute conogui subre lu que morira.	And I have already called for it to be extracted, and I saw that due to the size of the stone and the position of the patient, he would die.
E vi un autre metge le qual prenia stipendic de un duc de nostra terra per cyrurgia, e endeven a un crastrat negre le qual era deves lu fractura en la coyssa de lu; e perparec le metge am la sua ignorancia, estrayssec la fractura, sobre la plagua, am pulvinas e astelas am forta strectura, e no layssec a la plagua espiracio.	And there was another doctor who took payment from a duke of our land for surgery, and he came upon a black servant who had suffered a fracture in the thigh; and because of the doctor's ignorance, he removed the fracture, over the wound, with pillows and splints of strong structure, and did not allow the wound to breathe.
E aprop le desliet segons los sieus desiriers, e aprop le relieg, e aprop le leyssec per alcus jorns e comandec que nos deslies le liament; e estec ayssi entro que la coyssa e·l pe foro apostematz, e pervenguet a perdicio.	And then the dressing according to his desires, and then the rejoining, and then the letting it rest for some days and commanding us to remove the bandage; and thus we remain until the thigh and foot recover, and then proceed to our detriment.
E yeu fuy apelat a lu, e aparelhegui a desliar le liament, e conseguida es tranquilitat e enayssi amermet de sas dolors.	And I was called to him, and prepared to remove the bandage, and peace and an attempt to alleviate his pains was achieved.
Mays empero ja corrupcio era confermada en le membre, per que no pogui refrenar aquela, e no cessec perambular la corrupcio en le membre entro que·l malaute peric.	Moreover, however, corruption was confirmed in the member, because I could not prevent that, and did not cease to allow the corruption to spread within the limb while the illness persisted.
E vi un autre metge le qual perforec un apostema cancros, e fo ulcerat aprop alscus dias, entro que foc magnificada la malicia de lu am lo senhor de lu.	And there was another doctor who perforated an oncotic abscess, and it became ulcerated for several days, during which the evil increased greatly in him and affected his lord.
La qual causa es quar le cranc caut es pur de humor melencolic, lahoras no cove que pervengua a lu am ferr de tot, sino que sia an membre le qual suffertes que de tot fos hostat.	The cause is that the pain is purely from melancholic humors, and does not affect the whole body, but rather affects a member that suffers from everything being hostile to it.
E per aquo, filhs, necessari es a vos que la operacio am ma sia devisada en dos devesios: so es en operacio a lu qual es associada salut, e en obra am la qual es perilh en las majors disposicios.	And for this reason, my son, it is necessary for you that the operation be devised in two ways: one is in an operation where health is associated, and one where danger is present in the major dispositions.
E yeu ja he exsitat aquo en tot loc de aquest libre en le qual venc opperacio en la qual es error e temor; per que necessari es a vos que guardetz aquo e layssetz aquel, per que les folhs no atrobo via a parlar e a vos desonestar.	And I have already existed here in all parts of this treatise where the operation involves error and fear; therefore, it is necessary for you to keep this and leave that, so that the leaves do not find a way to speak ill of you.
E donc prenetz las vostras armas am sollicitut e am proteccio de Dieu , e les vostres malautes am falicitat e am fermetat.	And therefore take your weapons with diligence and protection of God, and the patient with facility and firmness.
E usatz de la milhor via per la gracia de Dieu perdusent a salut e a lausabla successio, e laysatz las malautias terriblas de difficil sanacio, e ostatz las vostras armas de aquo que vos fa temer, per so que ysitatio en vostra fe e en le vostre nom no vos evasisca: quar mays es remanent a la vostra gloria, e pus aut en le mon e en derier a las vostras sanctitatz.	And use the best way by the grace of God seeking salvation and glorious success, and lay aside the terrible diseases of difficult cure, and uphold your weapons against what makes you fear, so that sitting in your faith and in your name you are not overcome: for more remains to your glory, and more in the world and beyond to your sanctity.
Gualia ja diyssec en alcunas sieuas monicios:	Gout is already dissected in some monastic texts:
“No mediquetz malautia mala, per so que mals metges no siatz nompnatz”.	Do not treat the bad disease, lest bad doctors be named.
E yeu ja he devesit aquest libre segontz tres capitols.	And I have already devoted this libretto according to three chapters.
Comensa la divisio del libre, e primier de la primieyra partida.	Begin the division of the libretto, and first with the first part.
Le primier capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, en las formas dels instrumentz e en les ferrementz dels cauteris, e de aquo que necessari es en la opperacio.	The first chapter ordered of the head into the foot, concerning the forms of the instruments and the tools of the cautery, and what is necessary in the operation.
La divisio de la segonda partida.	The division of the second part.
Le segon capitol, de siccio e perforacio, e de ventosas, e de plaguas, e de extractio de sagetas e de semblantz ad aquelas, tot capitolat e ordenat de las formas dels instrumentz.	The second chapter, on drying and piercing, and on cups, and on plagues, and on the extraction of arrows and similar, all categorized and organized by the forms of the instruments.
Divisio de la tersa partida.	The division of the third part.
Le tertz capitol, de restauracio e de dislocacio, e de curacio de torcio e de semblantz ad aquels; capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, e de las formas dels instrumentz.	The third chapter, on restoration and dislocation, and on the cure of sprains and similar conditions; a chapter organized by the head between the feet, and by the forms of the instruments.
De cauteri am foc e am medicina aguda e rememoracio de la opperacio.	On the cautery with fire and with sharp medicine, and a reminder of the operation.
Am aquel comensa le tractat de tot le libre.	With that, the treatise of the whole book begins.
Cove que yeu digua la qualitat dels juvamentz de aquel cauteri e dels noccumentz de lu, e en qual compleccio sia prohibit cauteri.	First, let me describe the quality of the metal of that cautery and its ingredients, and in which condition cautery use is prohibited.
Donc dic que·l sermo de la qualitat del juvament de cauteri e del noccument de lu es sermo lonc e prolixs, e subtil per sciensa, e secret amaguat; e ja de lu a parlat gran multitut de savis, e de lu se son desacordatz, et a mi abasta un petit dels sermons de lor, temen perlonguacio.	Therefore, I say that the discourse on the quality of the metal of the cautery and its ingredients is long and tedious, subtle through science and a hidden secret; much has already been said about it by wise men, and they are in disagreement. For me, it suffices to mention a small part of their sermons, lest I become too lengthy.
E donc dic que cauteri comfereys a tota compleccio universalment la qual es am materia o ses materia, exceptat dos compleccios, las quals son compleccios caudas ses materia .	And thus say that cautery benefits all compositions universally which are of flesh or bone material, except two compositions, which are compositions of sinew material.
En la compleccio cauda e secca am materia se desecordero; quar alcus dyssero que cauteri es juvatiu ad aquela, e les autres dyssero le contrari de aquel, que cauteri no es convenient en malautia la qual es per qualiditat e per siccitat, quar natura del foc es qualiditat e siccitat, e enconvenient es que malautia cauda e secca am aquo que es caut e sec sia sanada.	In the sinewy and dry composition, the flesh will desiccate; for some said that cautery is beneficial for that, while others said the opposite, that cautery is not appropriate in malaise which is due to quality and dryness, for the nature of fire is quality and dryness, and it is inappropriate that a malaise sinewy and dry be cured by what is cautery and dry.
E diysec aquel que ditz le contrari de aquel, que per cauteri es fayt juvament en tota malautia cauda e secca que ve en les cors dels homes, quar quan tu comparas le cors de home e las humiditatz de lu a la compleccio del foc, atrobas le cors de home freg.	And say that those who say the opposite, that by cautery one is cured in all sinewy and dry malaise that comes in men's bodies, for when you compare the body to its humors to the composition of fire, you find the body to be dry.
E yeu dic per le sermo de aquel, que esperiment aquo ja a mi alscunas vetz a descubert.	And I say according to his speech, for I have already experienced this several times myself.
Mays empero no cove que vengua sobre aquo aquel que ja es exproat e excersitat en le capitol de cauteri per derier exercici, e a conogut la diversitat de la compleccio dels homes e la disposicio de las malautias en lor meteyssas, e las causas de aquelas, e·ls accidentz de lor, e l’espasi del temps de aquelas.	But I do not consider that it comes to me who has already been experienced and exercised in the capital of cautery through recent exercises, and who knows the diversity of human composition and the disposition of maladies in their various forms, and the causes of those, and the accidents related to them, as well as the space of time for those.
Mays en las autras compleccios, no es sobre vos temor, e majorment en las malautias fregas e humidas, quar ja totz les metges se son acordatz sobre aquels, e no so desecordatz en le juvament am cauteri en aquelas.	In other complications, there is no need to fear, especially in wet and inflammatory diseases, for all doctors agree on these and are not divided in youth regarding the use of cautery in such cases.
E sapiatz, filhs, que del secret de curacio per cauteri am foc e de la bontat de lu, so sobre cauteri am medicina comburent, es quar le foc es simple, la accio del qual no perven sino al membre le qual es cauterizat e no notz al autre membre am lu ajustat sino am petit nocument.	And understand, sons, that the secret of curing by cautery with fire and its goodness, concerning the burning cautery in medicine, is that the fire is simple, its action reaching only the member being cauterized and not affecting other members touched only minimally.
Mays la accio de medicina comburent perven ad aquel en les membres le qual de lu alunhat, e fort leu fa venir en le membre malautia de dificil sanacio e fort leu ausit.	Yet the action of the burning cautery reaches that part in the members where it touches, and strongly brings to the member illness of difficult healing and strongly expels it.
Mays le foc, per la sua sublimitat e de la sua substancia bontat, no fa aquo sino que superfluisca E ja es a nos conogut per experiment e per longitut de servitut de studi am l’art sobre le veritat de las causas; e per aquo yeu so excusat de la longitut del sermo E si no fos que no es legut al mieu libre en aquest pausero a vos secret amaguat am le foc, e la qualitat de la operacio de lu en les cors e de la sieua expulcio per la qual expellis las malautias, am sermo philosophic demostratiu, le qual siria acuit en las vostras pessas.	Yet the fire, by its subtlety and the goodness of its substance, does not cause anything but to dissipate superfluous matter. We are already familiar with this through experience and long service in studying the art regarding the causes; and for this reason, I am excused for the length of my discourse. If it were not that this is not written freely in this pause, and that you do not know the secret of the fire, concerning the quality of its operation on bodies and the way it expels illnesses, I would have a philosophical demonstration, which would be beneficial to your minds.
E sapiatz, filhs, que els se desacordan del temps en le qual es convenient far cauteri e pausan le milhor temps de primaveyra.	And know, sons, that they differ in the time when it is convenient to make a cautery and the best time is during spring.
E yeu dic que cauteri es convenient en tot temps, per so que le nocument per le temps accident es submergit en le juvament de aquo que am le cauteri es atirat, e majorment si le cauteri es per dolors o de dolors necessaries, fortz e fistinas, las quals no suffertan tarditat per so que es temut de aquelas que vengua malicia, que es major que petit nocument entrant per lo temps.	And I say that a cautery is convenient at all times, because the damage due to accidental weather changes is submerged in the youth of what is burned by the cautery, and especially if the cautery is for pains or necessary pains, strong sores, which do not suffer delay, for fear of those that come from evil intentions, which are greater than small damage entering through time.
E aysso no catz en vostras pessas, o, filhs, aquo no estiman sino le poble vulguar e les fols metges, so es que ad aquela malautia que es sanada per cauteri no es redicio tot temps, e pausan aquel consequen.	And this is not done on your feet, sons, for they do not esteem it except by the common people and the foolish doctors, since that illness which is cured by cautery does not occur at all times, and they delay that treatment.
E la causa no es ges ayssi quo els cuydan per aquo, quar cauteri no es sino en loc de medicina la qual altera la compleccio e esicca las humiditatz las quals son causa per que veno las dolors.	And the reason is not thus because they care for this, for a cautery is not but in place of a medicine which alters the composition and dries up the humors which are the cause of the wind and pains.
Mays empero cauteri superflueys sobre la medicina per volicitat de la sua valitut e vertut de la sua operacio e grandesa del sieu senhor.	But nevertheless, an excessive cautery over medicine for the swiftness of its virtue and the efficacy of its operation and greatness of its lord.
E es possible que la sua malautia retorne en alcuna hora del temps, segon la compleccio del malaute e la locacio de la sua malautia, e la vertut de lu, e aquo que es preparat en le cors de lu de la agreguacio de las superfluitatz en lu, e aquo que es pervengut a lu en la sua acquisicio en viandas e semblantz de aquelas causas; sino que la malautia en la qual sia aministrat cauteri sia malautia subtil en membre de paucas superfluitatz e humiditatz, ayssi cum cauteri de dent per dolor e semblantz ad aquel, possible es que en lu no retorne aquela dolor, mays aquo se fa en petitz.	It is possible that the patient's illness may return at some point in time, depending on the complexity of the ailment, its location, the virtue of the person, and what is prepared within the body due to the accumulation of superfluities, and what is acquired through food and similitudes of those causes; but if the illness where a cautery is administered is a subtle illness in a member with few superfluities and humidity, such as a tooth cautery for pain and similar to that, it is possible that that pain will not return, more so when this is done in small amounts.
E mays sermo vulgar es que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, e es sermo dreyturier, no ad aquo que els entendo en lu, quar els crezo que no es curacio que aprofieyta am medicina ni am autra causa aprop cauteri.	It is more commonly said that cautery is the last remedy of medicine, and it is the saying of surgeons, not what we understand by it, for I believe that it is not a cure that helps either medicine or any other cause near cautery.
E la causa es en contrari de aquo; e la entencio que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina no es sino quan administram las manieyras de curacio en alcunas malautias, e aquelas medicinas no conferieysso, e aprop en la fi de la causa aministra hom cauteri, e aprofieyta ad aquela.	The cause is the opposite of this; and the understanding that cautery is the last remedy of medicine is so only when one administers the methods of cure in some ailments, and those medicines do not help, and near the end of the illness, one administers cautery, which then helps.
E lahoras de aqui cat16 que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, no segon la entencio la qual entendo les vulgars e trops dels fols metges.	And then from here, let the cautery be the last remedy of medicine, not according to the understanding which I understand vulgarly and too often by the foolish doctors.
E diyssero les antics que cauteri am aur es milhor que cauteri am ferr, e no diyssero aquo sino per la equalitat del aur e sublimitat de la sua sustancia.	And the ancients said that a gold cautery is better than an iron one, and they did not say this only because of the equality of gold and the subtlety of its substance.
E diyssero que le loc de cauteri no fa brac, cum aquo no sia absolutament vertat, quar yeu ja he aquo proat e he atrobat que aquel no fa aquo sino en alcus cors ses les autres, e cauteri am aquel es bo e milhor que am ferr ayssi quo els diyssero; mays empero quan tu fas cauteri am foc am de aur, no es a tu declarat, quar es egnit segon la quantitat que tu vols per la rugor de l’aur, e quar prepara a recebre freg; e si ajustas sobre lu ignicio se fon l’aur per le foc, e caso en le foc alcunas laminas per que le artifex catz per la occupacio de aquel.	And they said that the place for cautery does not blister, since it is not absolutely burned, for I have already tried this and found that it does not burn in all bodies as much as others. A gold cautery is good and better than iron, as they say; but when you make a cautery with fire of gold, it is not up to you, for it ignites according to the quantity you want due to the corrosion of the gold, and prepares to receive heat; and if you adjust over this ignition, the gold melts by the fire, and remains in the fire some sheets so that the craftsman can cut through its occupation.
E per aquo es fayt cauteri am ferr deves nos pus leugerament e pus propdanament a rectitut de operacio.	And for this, when you make a cautery with iron, you should touch it more lightly and more precisely to the right position.
E yeu ja he ordenat aquest capitol en le cauteri segon capitols, et he ordenat aquels del cap entro les pes, per so que aleugo le demandant aquo que vol de lu.	And I have already ordered this chapter concerning the cautery according to other chapters, and I have ordered those of the foot within it, so as to delay the patient what he wants from him.
De cauteri de dolor de cap per frigiditat e humiditat.	Of the cautery for headaches due to cold and humidity.
Le capitol primier.	The first chapter.
Aquesta cauterizacio confereys a la humiditat e frigiditat sobre le servel accident de la qual so doas causas, so es causa de soda e multitut de flux raumatic, apelat corissa, del cap a las partidas dels huelhs e de las aurelhas fluent, e multitut de dormir, e de dolor de dentz e del guolayro, e universalment de tota malautia que ve per fregiditat, ayssi cum paraliticament, sodo e apoplexio, e semblantz en aquelas malautias.	This cautery addresses the cold and humidity over the servant condition of which there are two causes, which cause soda (likely a typo or mistranslation, possibly meant to be "soda" meaning wind or gas) and much traumatic flux, called corissa, from the head to the parts of the hollows and ears that flow, and much drowsiness, and tooth pain, and colic, and universally all illness that comes from coldness, thus as paralytically, windy, apoplexy, and resemblances in those illnesses.
La forma de aquesta cauterizacio es aquesta, que primieyrament comandes al malaute que sia evacuat am medicina lacsativa le cap mondificant, per tres o per quatre nueytz, segon que exhigeys la vertut del malaute e la edat de lu e la sua costuma.	The form of this cautery is as follows: Primarily, you command the patient to be evacuated with a mild medicine for three or four nights, according to the nature of the patient, their age, and their habit.
E aprop comanda li que raza le sieu cap am razor, e aprop fay aquel sezer entre las tuas mas sobre una banca cayrada e que pause las suas mas sobre le pietz sieu.	And then command those who shave his head to do so with a razor, and place that razor between your hands on a sloping bench and have them rest their hands on their feet.
E aprop pausa la razit de la tua palma aprop le pous sobre la razit del nas entre les huels sieus.	And then place the razor from the palm of your hand near the toe between his heels.
Mays empero, cum le tieu dit del mieg loc es pervengut, signa aquel loc am tenta, e aprop igneys le cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma:	Moreover, since the proper location has been determined, mark that location with a tent, and then heat the olive cautery, the form of which is as follows:
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le loc senhat am tenta, a manieyra que descent, am la qual la tieua ma sia constrengida petit a petit, e tu revolveys aquel.	And then place that cautery over the marked location with a tent, in such a way that it descends gradually, and you rotate it.
E aprop leva la tua ma leugerament e reguarda le loc, e si veses ja del os esser descubert alcuna quantitat del cap, ayssi cum la quantitat de gra de errs, lahoras eleva la tua ma, e si no torno la tua ma am aquel ferr, am autre de aquel, si es enfrigidat, entro que sia vist del os aquo que yeu he dit a tu.	And then lift your hand slightly and look at the location. If you see any part of the bone uncovered by even a grain of sand, do as if it were a drop of oil, then lift your hand. If not, return your hand to that cautery or another, if it is cooled, so that what I have said may be visible on the bone.
E aprop pren un petit de sal e disolveys aquel sobre le loc e leyssa aquel per tres jorns.	And then take a bit of salt and dissolve it over the area and leave it for three days.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto enbegut en boder e leyssa aquel sobre lu entro que sia destrusida la scara del foc.	And then place your hand over the wound where the pus is exuding and leave it there until the scar of the fire is destroyed.
E aprop cura le loc am anguent tetrafarmacon entro que sia sanat.	And then cure the area with ointment containing tetrafarmakon until it is healed.
E ja diyssero que quant la plagua roman uberta, tant mielhs geta le brac, per que es milhor e mays juvatiu.	And we have already said that when the wound is opened wide, it heals better, because it is better and more beneficial.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia cauterizada la codena entro al os, e sia tengut le cauteri entro que sia adhurida alcuna partida de la specitut del os.	And some of them say that the condyle should be cauterized inside the bone, and that the cautery should remain until a part of the specified bone is adhered.
E aprop sia ras aquo que es adhust del os, e aprop sia curat.	And then scrape what is adhered to the bone, and then cure it.
E diyssero autres que am lo cauteri pervengua al derier, entro que enprema en le os forta enprecio entro que le os caga, e aquesta es la forma de alphecati petit:	And others say that the cautery should reach the marrow, pressing strongly on the bone until the bone cracks, and this is the method of Alphectus.
E estiman de aquel loc expiran la vapors del cap.	And they assess from that place the exhaling of the vapors from the head.
E sia tenguda la plagua uberta per lonc temps, e aprop sia curada entro que sia consolidada.	And the wound should be kept open for a long time, and then cured once it is consolidated.
Mays a mi no so vistas aquestas doas specias de cauteri de tot, sino en alcus homes segon via de temor; e layssa aquel, deves mi, milhor es am salut, quan es; quar le cap es develitat per solucio de continuitat de lu ayssi cum havem testificat en les autres membres, e majorment quan le cap del malaute es de freul natura.	But I have not seen these two types of cautery for all cases, only in some men according to fear; and leave that one, I advise you, it is better for health when it is necessary; for the head is developed by solution of continuity of the sun as we have testified in other members, and especially when the head of the patient is of cold nature.
E la specia de cauteri primieyra es mays salva e milhor deves mi; e de aquela husi e am aquela obra am salut.	And the first type of cautery is safer and better, I advise you; use that one and do that for health.
Capitol segon.	Capitulate second.
Del cauteri del cap.	On the cautery for the head.
Quan en tot le cap accideys dolor cronica e longua e aquo es en le malaute prolonguat, e usa de gerras e de cochias e de capipurges e de emplaustres e de guatz e de cadels e de gualinas e de semblantz, e majorment si ja es cauterizat am un cautere le qual recontam e no aprofieyta a lu deguna de aquelas causas, lahoras considera quar si le cap del malaute es de fort creacio en la sua natura; e no es freul et atroba mot gran freg, lahoras aquel cauterisa am autra cauteri dejos aquel un pauc.	When in the whole head there occurs chronic and long-lasting pain that has been prolonged in the patient, and the patient uses bandages, pillows, head purges, plasters, poultices, candles, gauzes, and similar remedies, and especially if the head has already been cauterized with a cautery which does not improve the condition due to any of those causes; then consider whether the head of the patient is of strong constitution in its nature. If it is not cold and there is no great need for fomentation, then that cautery should be replaced by another.
E aprop cauterisa aquel sobre le corn del sieu cap am cauteri entro que la codena es partida.	And then cauterize that on the top of his head between where the vein is divided.
Incisa la codena e sia descuberta del os la quantitat la qual havem recontat e cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en la partida deriera del cap en le loc le qual es apelat vas, — e es aquel loc en le qual es pausada ventosa.	Incise the vein and the quantity of the mouth which we have counted, and cauterize that with a cautery at the back part of the head in the place which is called vesicle, — and this is the place where suction is applied.
Et alleuja la tua ma en aysso, e no descobras le os, quar le malaute per aquo atroba mot gran dolor diversa de la dolor de totz les autres cauteris del cap.	And lift your hand here, and do not expose the mouth, for the patient finds great pain from this different from the pain of all other head cauteries.
E yeu diyre aquest cauteri en son loc, quar cove que·l cauteri am le qual so cauterisatz les corns del cap e le occiput es pus subtil cauteri que aquel am le qual es cauterisat le mieg loc del cap; e aquesta es la forma de lu.	And I will say this cautery in its place, for I know that the cautery with which you cauterize the horns of the head and the occiput is finer than that with which the middle part of the head is cauterized; and this is the form of it.
Capitol ters.	Head, top.
De cauterisacio de emigranea no-antiqua.	On the cautery treatment for new migraines.
Quan endeve en la partida del cap dolor sodo, o es stenduda dolor entro al uelh, sia evacuat am medicinas le cap mondificantz, e sia aministrada l’autra curacio, la qual yeu he dita en las devesios de las malautias; e tot no aprofieyta, lahoras cauterisacio en lu es en dos manieyras: o cauterisacio am medicina acuta comburent, o am ferr.	When there is a hard pain in the part of the head or an extended pain between the temples, the head should be evacuated with medicinal fluids that purge it, and the other treatment should be administered, which I have described in the deviations of diseases; and if this does not help, then cauterization in the head is done in two ways: either with a sharp medicated cautery that burns, or with iron.
Mays cauteri am medicina comburent es que tu prenguas una dolsa de alh, e escorgas aquela e abcindas las extremitatz de lu de amdos les caps.	May a cautery of burning medicine be that you take a blade of aloes, incinerate it, and extinguish the ends of both its edges.
E aprop incideys le loc de la dolor en la templa am una lanceta lada entro que sia en lu feyt loc dejos la codena, entro que sia occultada.	Then place the point of the lancet over the location of the pain in the temple, and set aside the needle to be hidden.
E aprop strenh sobre lu am stopada per descent constreccio, e layssa aquel per le spazi de tres horas; e aprop deslia le e tratz le alh, e laysa la plagua per dos o per tres jorn, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto submergit en boder entro que le loc fassa brac.	Then apply strength to the one stopped by descent compression, and leave it for the space of three hours; then remove the aloes, and leave the wound for two or three days, and place your hand over the spot submerged between that the area swells.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Then apply ointment to it while it is healing.
E si tu voys, fe aquo am alcunas medicinas comburentz las quals yeu he scriutas en le douse tractat de medicinas comburentz.	And if you choose, do so with some burning medicines which I have written in the second treatise of burning medicines.
Mays la cauterisacio am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: igneys per cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	May the cautery be performed in this manner: heat it with fire, for which this is the form:
e es apelat claus clavilhs, quar le cap de lu es ayssi cum forma de clavel en le qual es alcuna curvitat, e·n le mieg loc de lu es eminensia petita.	and it is called a key clamp, for the head of it is thus shaped like a key, and in the middle part there is a small protrusion.
E aprop pausa sobre loc de la dolor, e rete la tua ma — per que no sia adhurida la arceria la qual es dejos — e revol le ferr petit a petit am velocitat.	And then place your hand over the location of the pain, in order that the artery which is left is not adhered, and turn the small iron little by little with speed.
E si la quantitat de lu que es adhurida per la specitut de la codena ayssi quo la maytat de lu, e elava la tua ma per so que la arteria no sia adhurida la qual es dejos, per so que no vengua flux de sanc.	And if the quantity that is adhered by the cut of the cord is as much as its size, and raise your hand so that the artery is not adhered which is left, in order that there be no flow of blood.
E aprop enbibeys coto en aygua de sal e pausa aquel sobre le loc, e layssa aquel per tres dias; e aprop pausa coto mulhat am boder, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then soak it in salt water and place it over the area, leaving it for three days; then place something warm over it, and apply ointment until it heals.
E si voys, cauterisa am la extremitat del cutellari segon cauteri, e guarda te de incisio de arteria en aquesta emigranea propriament no-antiqua.	And if you do, cautery it at the tip of the knife blade according to the cautery, and guard yourself from cutting the artery in this not-so-old migraine.
Capitol quart.	Capitol quarter.
De cauterizacio d’emigranea antiqua.	Of the cautery for old migraine.
Quan tu curas emigranea am aquo que havem dit de la curacio precedent, e aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias, e no aprofieyta la curacio, e vezes per la malautia que no abasta a lu aquo que havem dit del primier cauteri am medicina o del cauteri am foc, lahoras cove que tu igniscas le cauteri cutellar entro que sia albificat, pus que significas sobre le loc de la dolor am linha de longuesa de la qual sia la maytat del dit, o quays aquel; e depausa la tua ma per una veguada e strenh aquela entro incidiscas la arceria e pervengua entro al os.	When you cure migraine as we have said in the previous treatment, and as we have said in the divisions of diseases, and the treatment is not effective for the illness, and sometimes because the disease does not allow what we have said about the first cautery with medicine or the cautery with fire, then you must ignite the knife cautery until it turns white. Place a line over the location of the pain that corresponds to its size, or mark that place; then remove your hand for a moment and strongly apply that area to ensure you do not incise the artery and penetrate into the bone.
Empero necessari es a tu que guardes de la continuacio de la mandibula, la qual es mauguda deves la masticacio, e que le lacert no sia adhurit e le nervi le qual mau aquela, e que no s’endevengua espasme.	But you must guard against the continuity of the jaw, which is used for chewing, and ensure that the skin is not adhered and the nerves which supply it are not affected, and that no spasm occurs.
E si es sobre la custodia e cautela de flux de sanc de l’arteria que es abciza, quar en la abcizio de lu es temor, e majorment ad aquel le qual ignora aquo que fa e no es studios e esproat; e layssa la operacio en lu al comensament.	And if it concerns the care and caution of the flow of sap in the artery that is amputated, for in its amputation there is fear, especially for those who ignore what they do and are not studious and hesitative; and leaves the operation to chance.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio del regiment de flux de sanc accident de la arceria segon la sieua manieyra, en le sieu loc de aquest libre.	And I will recall the regimen of the flow of sap in cases of accidents to the artery according to its manner, in the place of this free text.
E si veses de aquesta malautia que no abaste aquest cauteri e veses le cors del malaute tollerable, cauteriza aquel en le mieg loc del cap ayssi cum havem recontat, e cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And if you see this illness has not reached this cautery and you find the patient's condition tolerable, cauterize it in the middle of the foot as we have recounted, and cure the wound until it is healed.
E si voys, aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le capitol de streccio de arceria am cauteri havent dos cotels, e es milhor cauterizacio aquesta e mays conferent.	And if you see, administer the cautery which we have said in the chapter on strengthening the artery with a cautery, using two knives. This is a better and more effective cautery.
Capitol .v.	Capitol V.
De cauterisacio de las dolors de aurelhas.	Of the cautery treatment for ear pain.
Quan en la aurelha ve dolor per freg e es curat am causas lacsativas e am l’autra curacio la qual he dita en la divisio, e no es remauguda la dolor, lahoras igneys le cauteri, e es aquest le qual ha nom puncta, del qual aquesta es la forma:	When there is pain in the ear due to cold and it is treated with lacative causes and another treatment as I have said in the division, and the pain does not subside, then apply the cautery, which is called puncta. This is its form:
E aprop puncta aprop la ignicio, e sia menat al enviro de tota la aurelha ayssi cum roda es revolguda, o en le circuit de quascuna essemps si la dolor es en quascuna.	Then place the puncta near the beginning, and let it be moved around the entire ear as if it were rotated, or in the course of any part where the pain is located.
Alonga te am le cauteri de la razit de la aurelha pauc a pauc pus que aias senhat le loc am tenta.	Gradually apply the cautery along the edge of the ear, little by little, after you have tested the location.
E si le cauteri de detz puntz en tota aurelha, e quays aquela, e aprop cura les locz entro que sian sanatz.	And if the cautery of these points on the entire ear, and quell it there, then apply the treatment to the areas between where they are healed.
Capitol .vi.	Capitol VI.
De cauterizacio de turtura.	Of the cautery treatment for tortura.
Turtura la qual es curada e am cauterizacio no es sino de las specias las quals veno per flecma, segon que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias.	The torture which is cured and treated with a cautery is nothing but by the species of those pains caused by phlegm, as we have said in the divisions of diseases.
Esquiva cauterizacio de la specia que endeve per siccacio o per spasme del nervi.	Avoid cautery of the species that occurs due to drying or spasms of the nerves.
Quan tu curas aquela specia de turtura am jerras e capipurgi e guarguarismes, e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas le malaute am tres cauteris: la i deves la razit de la aurelha, e·l segon un petit dejos le sieu templar, e le ters deves la conjunccio de doas labias.	When you cure that species of torture by making incisions, trephinations, and guarapurgms, and if you are not satisfied with your cure, then when you cauterize the disease, you should use three cauteries: the first on the root of the ear, the second a small touch to its temple, and the third at the junction of two lips.
E pausa lo tieu cauteri per le contrari de la partida malauta, quar mollificacio no ve sino en la partida que apar sana.	And place your cautery opposite the affected part of the disease, for softening occurs only in the part that appears healthy.
E la forma de cauterisacio es que cauterizas aquel am le cauteri en le dreyt de la extremitat de la aurelha pus sobirana un petit sobre le corn del cap, e en le templar autre, la longuesa del qual sia segon la longitut del dit pous, e depausa la tua ma am cauteri entro que sia comburida la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena.	And the method of cauterization is to place the cautery at the right extremity of the ear, just above a small point on the top of the head, and another on the temple, the length of which should be according to the length of the designated part, and then place your hand over the area until the quantity of the species of the scorpion is burned.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri, e es specia del cutellari, la forma del qual es denant mesa.	And this is the form of the cautery, and it is specific to the butcher, the form of which is shown below.
Mays empero pus subtil es que aquel un pauc ayssi co vesas; e cove que cotel en lu de superflua groceza un pauc.	But more subtle is that one sees only a slight mark; and it is good to use a blade to remove just a little of the superfluous flesh.
E aprop cura le loc am aquo que es denant procezit entro que sia sanat.	And then treat the area as shown until it is healed.
Capitol .vii.	Capitol. vii.
De cauterizacio de apoplextia antiqua.	On the cautery treatment for ancient apoplexy.
Quan apoplextia es antiquada e curas aquela am aquo que havem dit e no confereys la tua medicacio e le malaute no ha febre, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris: sobre totz les corn del sieu cap; e am cauteri e le mieg loc del cap, ayssi cum havem dit; e am cauteri en le coguot.	When the apoplexy is ancient and you have treated it as we said, and if the patient does not have fever, then cauterize it with four cauteries: mainly on all the horns of its head; and with a cautery in the middle of the head, as we said; and on the scrotum.
E la manieyra del cauteri es fayta segon que es desus dit.	And the method of the cautery is made according to what was said above.
E ja es cauterizat sobre la boca del estomac; e es mays derier; e aprop sia curat am aquo que procezeys.	And the stomach's mouth has already been cauterized; it is more rearward; and then it is treated as you proceed.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter VIII.
De cauterizacio de obblivio fayta per flacma.	Cauterization for oblivion performed by flame.
Cove que sian donatz al malaute en le comensament jerras grans e pilulas le servel mondificantz.	Place cushions under the patient at the beginning; give him large stones and pills for purgation.
E aprop ras le cap tot del malaute e pausa sus le coguot de lu emplaustre de cetre descrit en le tractat dels emplastres.	Then wrap the head of the patient completely and place a plaster at the center as described in the treatise on plasters.
E pausa aquel alcunas veguadas, quar aquel es manieyra de cauteri.	Then place it for several minutes; this is the method of cautery.
E fay aquo segon aquel meteys orde le qual ja he dit.	And do so according to that method and order as I have already said.
E donc si per aqueles sanat bo es; e sino, lahoras fay a lu tres cauteris en la deriera partida de sieu cap, les quals sian deysendentz de la partida pus sobirana del cap entro a la partida pus dejos del col.	And therefore if these bring good relief; and if not, then make three cautery marks on the back part of his head, which are descending from the upper part of the head to the lower part of the neck.
E pausa entre quascun cauteri la grossetut del dit, e aprop cura lo cauteri am aquo que es procedit.	And wait for the size of the finger between each cautery, then proceed with the next cautery.
Mays si tu vos addicio e le malaute es aquo tollerant, lahoras fay a lu cauteri en le mieg loc; e si voys major addicio, lahora cauteriza aquel sobre les dos corns.	And if you add more heat and the evil is lifted, then make a cautery in the middle place; and if you have greater addition, then cauterize that above the two horns.
Aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat; e sia le cauteri olivar segon la forma denant donat.	Then cure that within which is healed; and let the cautery be olive-shaped according to the form given above.
Capitol .ix.	Capitol. ix.
De cauterisacio de parazili e de mollificacio de tot le cors.	On the cautery of the parotid gland and the mollification of the entire body.
Cove que tu procesiscas en mondificacio del cap am jerras e am aquo que havem dit; e aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap, e am cauteri sobre totz les corns del cap, e am cauteri sobre la deriera partida de lu, e am tres cauteris sobre les spondils del col.	Begin by processing the mollification of the head with powders and as we have said; then place your hand near the patient's head, and then cauterize that with a cautery in the middle part of the head, and with a cautery over all the horns of the head, and with a cautery over the back part of it, and with three cauterizations over the vertebrae of the neck.
E si es necessari en la malautia de mollificacio del cors de trops aquel e les malautes tollerantz e la malautia es fort, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e dererament am cauteri entro que sia comborit de la codena mot de lu, e aleva la tieua ma.	And if it is necessary in the illness of mollification of the body to make more of that and the evils are lifted and the illness is strong, then cauterize that with four cauterizations over the vertebrae of the back, and behind it with a cautery where it is completely combined from the spine of it, and raise your hand.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat, e aquest sia cauteri olivar.	And then cure that which is within until it is healed, and let this be an olive cautery.
Capitol .x.	Capitol.
De cauterisacio de epilemcia.	Of the cautery treatment for epilepsy.
No es cauterizat le epilemtic sino aquella epilemcia es per flecma.	Not the epileptic is cauterized, but rather the epilepsy is due to phlegm.
E donc cove que mondifiques le cervel de lu al comensament de lu am yeras e am l’autra curacio la qual havem dicta en la divisio quan le malaute es gran e es tollerant la exceperacio de las medicinas.	And therefore, modify the brain of the patient at its beginning and in the other cure which we have described in the division when the illness is large and tolerates the exclusion of medicines.
E si es enfant le qual no sufferte las medicinas, lahoras aministra guarguarissmes e mastiguatoris le servel mondifican, denant aquo per motz dias, am bonifficacio de las viandas.	And if it is a child who does not tolerate the medicines, then administer guar gum and chewing substances to the servant to modify, in advance of this for several days, with improvement of the food.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en le mieg loc del cap segon la manieyra precedent, e am autre cauteri en le occiput de lu, e sobre quascun corn del cap sieu cauterisa.	And then place on the head of the patient, and proceed to cauterize that with a cautery in the middle of the head according to the previous method, and another cautery at the back of the head, and over each horn of the head, he cauterizes.
E si le malaute es fort e es tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteris les quals he ditz, en havent paraliticament e mollificacio del cors sobre les spondils del col e les spondils del dos.	And if the patient is strong and tolerant, then cauterize those areas with a cautery as mentioned, while keeping the body in a relaxed and softened position over the vertebrae of the neck and the vertebrae of the back.
E sia cauteri olivar segon qu’es precedit.	And use an olive cautery as previously described.
Mays si le malaute es enfant, lahoras pausa cauteri subtil segon aquesta manieyra.	And if the patient is a child, then use a fine cautery in this manner.
Capitol .xi.	Capitol.xit.
De cauterizacio de melencolia.	Of the cauterization for melancholy.
Quan las causas de melencolia so humiditatz corrompudas e flacma gros, lahoras cauteriza aquel am les cauteris les quals havem ditz en le havent paralisi.	When the causes of melancholy are wet and gross flame, then cauterize those areas with the cautery we have mentioned while keeping the body in a relaxed state.
E si la causa de melencolia es superfluitat declinant a melencolia, e le cors del malaute es humit, lahoras da ha beure aquo que mundifica le cervel de lu segon aquo que ha precedut en la divisio.	And if the cause of melancholy is excess moisture turning into melancholy, and the patient's body is wet, then have them drink what purifies their brain as previously described in the division.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop fay tortora decentment fayta de li sobre le cercle, e aprop depausa aquela en le mieg loc del cap.	And place the patient's head, and properly make a tortora (a type of cauterization) on them around the circle, and then pause that over the middle of the head.
E le malaute sia sesent cayrat, e sia tengut de tota partida.	And if the patient is lying down, and is held from all parts.
E aprop pausa liniment; et es pus digne de boder antic de ovelhas.	And then apply a liniment; it is more worthy to be rubbed on the backs of sheep.
E escalfa aquel sobre le foc per calefaccio temprada per mesura, le qual le dit sufferta quan es mes en lu.	And heat it over the fire for tempered warmth by measure, which the patient suffers when more is applied.
E aprop vuo’ aquel en le mieg loc del cap de lu en le cercle, e leysa lu entro que sia enfregidat.	And then place it in the middle of his head in the circle, and let him remain until it is rubbed.
E fay aquo am le malaute en tota semmana una veguada, am le autre regiment de lu bo entro que sia sanat; o si vols, cauteriza aquel fazen petitz puntz segon lo mays de lu, sino que tenguas la ma am un cauteri ayssi ordenat: aquesta es specia de cauteri la qual humecta le cervel am equalitat.	And do this for the patient every week once, and use the other regimen until he is healed; or if you wish, cauterize it by making small points according to its size. Otherwise, keep your hand on a properly arranged cautery: this is a special cautery which wets the brain in equal measure.
E aprop pausa aquel coto enbegut en boder o en grays de gualina.	And then place that poultice on the affected area using wool or strips of cloth.
Capitol .xii.	Capitol.xii.
De cauterisacio de aygua descendent en le huel.	On the cauterization with water flowing down.
Quan a tu es declarat le comensament de aygua en le huel per les senhals les quals yeu he ditz en la divisio, lahoras comensa e dona en beure al malaute aquo que mondifique le cap de lu, e guarda aquel de totas humiditatz.	When the onset of water in the wound is declared by the signs which I have said in the division, then begin and give to drink to the patient what modifies the head of it, and keep the other part free from all moisture.
E fay aquel suzar en banh en degu per alcus jorns.	And make that paste in bath with dew for several days.
E aprop comanda a lu que raza le sieu cap, e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap; e aprop cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre dos templas si es le comensament de ysement de aygua en dos huels, o de la un latz si es comensamen de l’aygua en un huel.	And then command him to shave his head, and cautery that part with a cautery in the middle of the head; and also cautery that part with two cauteries on the temples if the onset of ysemint of water in two wounds, or on one side if the onset is in one wound.
Incideys am cauteri totas las venas e arcerias las quals so dejos la codena; e sian les cauteris en aquela lonh en la latitut de las templas.	Cauterize all the veins and arteries which are left by the chain; and let the cauteries be in that length along the temples.
E guarda te de fluxs de sanc quan es cauterizat; e si veses de lu fluxs de sanc, osta le am alcuna medicina, la qual es a tu possible.	And keep away from flows of blood when it is cauteryed; and if you see flows of blood, apply some medicine which is within your reach.
E yeu vindre am savieza la qual es en extraccio de arcerias e am abscizio de aquelas e cautela de fluxs de sanc.	And I will come with wisdom which is in the extraction of arteries and in the cutting of those, as well as the caution regarding flows of blood.
E alcunas vetz es cauterizat en le cervitz dejos dos osses am dos cauteris dererament produzitz.	And sometimes the neck is cauterized leaving two bones thoroughly produced.
Capitol .xiii.	Capitol. XIII.
De cauterizacio de lacrimas antiquas.	Of the cauterization of ancient tears.
Quan lacrimas dels huels so antiquas assuduament e per las venas e arterias las quals so en le loc manifest del cap defora e es verificat que aquo es superfluitatz frejas flecmatiquas, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri le qual havem recontat en le capitol de comensament de aygua cazent en les huels, e am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos templas, e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos osses.	When tears from the feet are ancient and through the veins and arteries, which are in the obvious place on the head above, it is verified that these are superfluous phlegmatic humors, then cauterize that with a cautery as we have recounted in the Capitol of beginning to discharge water from the feet, and with a cautery in the middle of the head and with two cauteries in the neck leaving two temples, and with two cauteries in the neck leaving two bones.
E si indigeyses de addicio, lahoras cauteriza aquel en tot latz de la coa del huel sobre la extremitat del sobrecilh am petit cauteri.	And if you need to add, then cauterize that at the entire length of the socket of the foot on the tip of the supraorbital ridge with a small cautery.
Capitol .xiiii.	Capitol. XIV.
De cauterizacio de fetor de nas.	Of the cauterization of nasal odor.
Quan tu medicas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no aprofieyta la tua medicacio, lahoras tu aparelha e dona en beure al malaute las cochias per tres noytz; e aprop ras le cap de lu, e cauteriza le am cauteri migier am cauteri olivar.	When you treat that patient as we have said in the division and your treatment is not effective, then you prepare and give to drink the chickpeas to the patient for three nights; and apply a cautery on his head, and cauterize him with a cautery made of half willow and half olive.
E aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri clavelh am dos cauteris sobre les dos sobrecilhs dejos les cabels un petit.	And apply that cautery with two cauteries on the two supraorbital regions, leaving the hair slightly singed.
E guarda te de la arceria que no incindas aquela.	And be careful not to burn that area.
E del cauteri clavilh aquesta es la forma.	And the willow cautery is applied in this manner.
Capitol .xv.	Capitol. XV.
De cauteri de mollificacio de palpebras dels huels.	Of the cautery for the softening of the eyelids of the heels.
Quan la palpebra del huel es mollificada per malautia o per humiditat, lahoras cauteriza aquela palpebre1 am un cauteri am aquest cauteri lunar; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When the eyelid of the heel is softened due to gout or humidity, then cauterize that eyelid with a cautery made from this lunar cautery; and this is the form of it:
E si vos, cauteriza aquel sobre les dos sobrecils un petit am dos cauteris en tota partida, e sian elonguatz de las timporas.	And if you, cauterize that on the two supraorbital regions a little with two cauteries in total, making them long from the temples.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la quantitat del sobrecil.	And the length of each cautery should be according to the size of the sore.
E no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri, mays segon la quantitat que la tersa partida de la palpebre sia adhurida.	And do not press too hard with your hand on the cautery, but according to the amount that the lower part of the eyelid is burned.
Capitol .xvi.	Capitol. XVI.
De cauteri de la palpebre del huel quan les pels so convertitz a las partidas dedintz e punho le huel.	Of the cautery of the eyelid when the skin is converted to the inner parts and fistula.
Quan les pels del huel son convertitz a las partidas dedintz ayssi que pungo le huel, cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, quar cauteri o es am fer o es am medicina comburent.	When the skin of the fistula is converted to the inner parts, one must prick the fistula. The cautery in such cases should be performed according to two methods: either with a cautery or with a burning medicine.
Si am cauteri de lu am foc, comanda al malaute denant aquo que leyse les sieus pels ayssi cum aquels les quals les mundan, entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz; e si punho aquel deves le lor naysement, lahoras tu strenh les huels de lu am una benda per so que no sia maugut entro que·ls pels sian nascutz.	If the cautery is made with fire, command the patient before doing it that he expose his skin as those who are bathed, entering when they are thoroughly wet and enveloped; and if you prick him, note the place of his birth. Then strengthen the fistulas on him with a bandage so that they do not get infected until the skin is regenerated.
Donc cum siran nascutz e engualhatz, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop senha sobre la palpebre dels huels de lu am tenta, am senhal le qual sia segon la figura de fulha de merta, e sia le comensament del senhal prop dels pels.	Then, when they are born and equalized, place the head of the patient on your lap, and hold over the eyelids of the patient with a sign, which should be in the shape of a leaf of mint, and is the beginning of the sign proper to the skin.
E aprop pausa coto enbegut en album de huou o en mucillatge de ptilli sobre le huel.	Then place the head in a pillow of cloth or a moist cloth over the eye.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu.	Then heat the cautery of which this is the form.
E aprop cauteriza sobre la figura la qual as senhada, petit a petit, em motas veguadas, entro que sia comburida la superficia de la codena la qual es ayssi cum fuelha de mirta, tota aparent propriament.	Then apply the cautery in the shape of the sign, marking it little by little with small dots until the surface of the wound is burned, which is done like a leaf of mint, entirely apparent properly.
E senhal de sanetat de la tieua obra es que tu vegus la palpebre de l’huel ja esser contrayta e·ls pels de lu esser elevatz deves la punctura del huel.	The sign of the patient's recovery from this operation is that you see the eyelid of the eye begin to contract and the skin around it to elevate after the puncture of the eye.
E donc eleva la tua ma e laysa aquel per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eredicada la scara.	Then lift your hand and leave it there for three days, and place it over the head between the eyebrows until the scar is healed.
E aprop cura aquela am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then care for that which is oiled until it is healed.
Mays si retorna per les pels alcuna causa aprop lor naysement e la palpebra es mollificada, lahoras fay autra vetz le cauteri sobre aquel tot ayssi cum avias fayt primieyrament.	And if it returns through the skin for some cause near their origin and the eyelid is softened, then make another time the cautery over that area just as you had done first.
Mays si les pels so en la palpebra dejos, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que sia elevada al sieu loc natural e sia engualhat e que les pels no punhan le huelh.	And if the skin is on the eyelid, then cauterize it while it is elevated to its natural place and equalized, so that the skin does not heal wrinkled.
Mays le cauteri am medicina comburent aquest es que comandes al malaute que leyse les pels entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz, e aprop sia fayta de carta de drap la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	And the cautery should burn medicinally; this is that you command the patient to stretch and equalize the skin while it is still warm, and then make a form of it with parchment cloth like the leaf of a mulberry.
E aprop pren de sabo conogut e de caus viva ana unc. i, o quays aquo, e aprop mescle3 aquelas causas be, e fay aquo am festinacio per so que no sia enfregidat; e aprop expandeys de aquo sobre la carta la qual es fayta ayssi cum forma de fulha de mirtra, e pausa aquel sobre la un huel od amdos; e pausa dejos le huel coto enbegut en album de huou, e el cap del malaute sia en le tieu se.	And then take a known and good swab of wax and, or if not, and then mix these materials well, and do so for application so that it is not rubbed; then spread this over the parchment which is made thus like the leaf of a mulberry, and place that over one nostril or both; and place the other end carefully immersed in an egg white, and the patient's head be in this position.
E pausa le dit sobre le medicina e prem aquela un petit e no la mauguas entro que lo malaute senta la mordicacio de la medicina, quar mordicacio es en lu ayssi cum de foc.	And place the said part on the medicine and press it slightly but do not wet it inside so that the patient feels the biting of the medicine, for the biting is like that of fire.
E donc cum percevera aquo que el atrobo mordicacio, lahoras leyssa la medicina e mau aquela am le tieu dit; donc cum cessa la mordicacio, lahoras remau la medicina he lava le huel am aygua; e lahoras considera si vezes la palpebra ja es levada ayssi cum es lavada deves la costriccio am foc o am incisio, quar lahoras esta be; e si no torna sobre aquela de la medicina sobre le loc en le qual no ha empremut la medicina e no se denigra entro que sia engualhada la tua operacio e sia contrayt le huel.	And so, to verify that the atrophy is biting, when you let the medicine go and wet it as you said; then when the biting ceases, remoisten the medicine with hot water; and then consider if the eyelid has risen as if washed; if yes, apply heat or incision, for then it is good; and if not, return to the place where no pressure was applied and do not neglect until your operation is equalized and contracted completely.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eradicada la codena de la adhustio, e aprop cura aquel am enguent deafinicon o am autre entro que sia sanat.	And then place it on the scar between the areas where the adhesion is to be removed, and then treat that with a deep ointment or something else so that it heals.
E es necessari a tu, deves la tua operacio que guardes am pervigil diligencia que en le huel no caia re de la medicina, e si la palpebre aprop alscus dias es mollificada e alcuna causa dels pels punh en le huel, lahoras itera la tua medicina sobre aquel loc le qual de la palpebre es mollificat, e propriamen ayssi quo as fayt al comensament, e aprop enaviro lu entro que sia sanat.	And if necessary, you should keep your operation with careful vigilance so that the medicine does not fall off, and if the eyelid becomes softened in a few days or some cause affects the skin on the wound, then reapply your medicine to that area where the eyelid has become softened, and do it precisely as you did at the beginning, and then cover it until it heals.
E aquesta es la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	And this is the form of leaf of mirtle.
E sapias que les huels dels homes son diversificatz segon la magnitut e la parvitat, e donc segon aquo es fayta la tua contraccio.	And know that the leaves of men are diverse according to their size and smallness, and therefore according to this your contraction is made.
E no sira amaguada la via de rectetut ad aquel al qual es studi en aquesta art.	And the way of the straight path shall not be hidden to him who studies in this art.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter XVII.
De cauterizacio de fistula que es en le lacrimal de l’huel.	On the cautery treatment of a fistula in the leaf (eye).
Quan tu curas fistula am aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquela segon aquesta manieyra: comanda al malaute que pause le cap sieu en le tieu se, e tengua le cap de lu alcun ministre entre las tieuas mas en tal manieyra que no sia maugut ni agitat am le sieu cap.	When you cure a fistula as we have said in the divisions of the maladies and do not apply your treatment, then when you cauterize it according to this manner: command the patient to place his head in cold water, and have some minister hold his head between their hands in such a manner that it is neither too tight nor agitated on his head.
E aprop pausa coto enfus en album de huou o en mucellage de ptilli sobre le huel de lu.	And place the cautery on the forehead in hot oil or over the eye.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then heat the cautery of which this is the form:
le qual sia conquau, ayssi cum es forma de cana o de pena de voltor, de la una extremitat am la qual es fayta lo cauteri.	which is curved, as is the form of a cane or a vuelto (a type of hook), from one end of which the cautery is made.
E si voys, sia penetrant entro a la autra extremitat.	And if you wish, insert it into the other end.
E si vols sia sort ayssi cum tenta.	And if you wish, let it come out as it enters.
Mays empero aquel que es concau es milhor a la tieua obra.	Yet, however, that which is curved is better for your work.
E aprop prem la fistula si es uberta, e tra de lu sania et exsicca aquela.	And then press the fistula if it is open, and keep it clean and dry.
E si no es uberta, lahoras obre aquela e extratz la poyredura de lu.	And if it is not open, then open it and extract the pus from it.
E aprop pausa sobre lu le cauteri le qual sia be ignit, e te am aquel la tieua ma un petit deves le cauteri del huel a la partida del nas, per so que no erre la tua ma o le malaute sia enquietat, e lahoras pausa le cauteri en le grays del huel e corrompas aquel.	And then place the hot cautery on it, and hold your hand a little above the nose, so that your hand does not err or hit the patient, and then place the cautery on the nostrils to destroy that area.
E donc si al comensament del tieu cauteri perve entro al os, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera le cauteri una veguada o dos, si mestiers era; e layssa aquel ayssi per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre aquel coto am boder e enviro lu am enguent exsiccatiu entro que sia sanat.	And so if at the beginning of your cautery it enters into the hole, that is good; and otherwise, then iterate the cautery one or two times, as needed; and leave it thus for three days, and place your hand over that spot to keep it warm and apply an ointment drying agent until it heals.
Mays si eran passatz xi dias e no es sanat, lahoras pausa sobre lu medicina aguda corrosiva entro que l’os sia descubert e sia ras segon que conveneys en le sieu capitol.	And if it has passed seven days and it is not healed, then place the sharp corrosive medicine over it until the bone is exposed and scraped as you see fit in your chapter.
E es autra manieyra de cauteri de fistula la qual alscus primiers diysero: enten al loc de la fistula e fen aquela e aprop pausa en aquela fissura camaen subtil del qual es la forma de lu: E fon en aquela la quantitat de i unc de plom fundut; e te la tua ma am camaem am bona retencio, e no sia maugut le malaute per so que le plom fundut no pervengua al huel de aquel; e cove que pausas sobre le huel del malaute coto enfus en album de huou o en aygua, quar plom adhureys le loc de la fistula e sana aquela per sanacio meravilhora.	And another way to cauterize a fistula, which some first doctors would say: Place the cautery at the site of the fistula and immediately apply it along the thin fissure that is its form. Apply the quantity of one pennyweight of melted lead in that area; hold your hand there with good retention, so that the bad humor does not enter through that place as the melted lead does not penetrate the wound. Ensure you keep your hand over the wound until it cools down like in album or water, for the lead adheres to the site of the fistula and heals it through marvelous healing.
E si la fistula es sanada am aquo que havem dit del cauteri e de la curacio, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari aministrar trauc del nas e reduzir la fistula al cors del nas segon que vindra en son loc propri.	And if the fistula is healed as we have said concerning the cautery and cure, that is good; but if not, then it is necessary to administer drops through the nose and reduce the fistula to the nasal cavity according to its proper place.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter XVIII.
De cauterizacio de la fendedura des potz.	On the cautery of the pore wound.
Motas veguadas accideysso fissuras en las labias, e majorment en las labias dels enfantz.	Small cuts or cracks occur in the lips, especially in children's lips.
Donc cum tu curas aquelas fissuras am aquo que nos havem dit en las divisios e no aprofieyta la tua cura, lahoras igneys le cauteri petit cutellar segon aquesta forma que s’ensiec:	Then, since you cure those cracks as we have said in the divisions and your cure is not effective, then heat the small cautery blade according to this form that is shown:
E sia la conquavitat de lu segon la subtilitat de cotella.	And let its cavity be according to the thickness of the blade.
Aprop pausa aquel init cuytadament en aquelas fissuras entro que·l cauteri pervengua al preon de las fissuras.	Then place that hot cautery blade into the cracks until it reaches the base of the cracks.
E aprop cura aquel am cerotz entro que sia sanat.	Then cure it with cerote once it is healed.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XIX.
De cauterizacio de fistula en la boca.	Cauterization of a fistula in the mouth.
Quan en la razit de uvula o en le paladar o en las razitz de las dentz endeve apostema e aprop fa brac, e aprop es rompuda, e aprop es antiquada, e corr brac e es fayta fistula, e aprop tu curas aquela e no aprofieyta a curacio, lahoras cove que tu igniscas cauteri segon la quantitat que sia receubuda en la fistula, e aprop met aquel ignit en le trauc de la fistola, e te la tua ma entro que pervengua le ferr ignit al preon de lu, e al derier de lu fazen aysso una veguada o dos; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que nos havem dit de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	When an abscess forms in the uvula or on the palate or around the teeth and eventually breaks, and when it heals improperly forming a fistula, and you have already treated that condition without fully curing it, then you should ignite a cautery according to the amount received into the fistula. Place the ignited cautery at the entrance of the fistula, keeping your hand there until the hot iron reaches the bottom, and do this one or two times. Then treat that with what we have said about the cure once it is healed.
E donc si la sania es abscindita e es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari de descubrir le loc e hostar le os corrumput segon que vindra en son capitol.	And if the ulcer is healed, well and good; but if not, then it is necessary to expose the location and cauterize the corrupt bone as will be detailed in its chapter.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter XX.
De cauterisacio de las dentz e de mollificacio de las angivas.	Cauterization of the teeth and softening of the gums.
Quan las angivas son mollificadas per humiditat e las dentz son maugudas, e curas aquelas am medicinas e no confereys, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra aprop aysso, enayssi que tu pauses la quanula sobre la dent e entromet en aquela le cauteri ignit festinantment, e te la tieua ma un petit entro que·l malaute cente la calor del foc a la razit de la dent esser pervenguda.	When the gums are softened by humidity and the teeth are decayed, treat those with medicines and do not delay. Then place the head of the patient under your thigh, and nearby heat the cautery to the form which will be shown below. Try that you pause the quinula (a type of medical tool) over the tooth and insert there the heated cautery forcefully, and hold it a little so that the patient feels the heat of the fire at the root of the tooth.
E aprop leva la tua ma, e aprop itera le cauteri alcunas veguadas segon que vols.	Then lift your hand, and repeatedly apply the cautery several times according to your desire.
E aprop le malaute huompla la sua boca de aygua de sal e tengua aquela per una hora, e pueys stupa aquela, quar la dent mauguda es fermada e la gengiva mollificada es strenguda e la humiditat corrompuda es exsiccada.	Then make the patient spit out salt water and hold it for an hour, then stop, as the decayed tooth is sealed, the softened gum is tightened, and the corrupted humidity is dried up.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI.
De cauterisacio de dolor de dent.	On the cautery treatment for tooth pain.
Quan dolor de dent es per fregiditat, o en lu es freg o verm, o no comfereys la curacio am medicina, lahoras cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am boder de vacas, o cauteri am foc.	When tooth pain is due to cold or worms, or if the treatment with medicine does not alleviate it, then the cautery treatment in that area is done according to two methods: either with a cow's horn cautery, or with a fire cautery.
Cauteri am boder es que tu prenguas boder de vacas e bulhas aquel en culhe de ferr , e aprop pren coto e envolopa le sobre la extremitat de la tenta, e aprop enmergeys aquel am boder bulhit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolorosa festinantment entro que sia enfregidat.	With a pointed cautery, you should take horn from cows and boil that in the iron pot, then cut it and wrap it around the tip of the tenta, then immerse that cut part, and place it over the toothache area urgently before it is cooled down.
E aprop itera aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la vertut del foc pervengua a la razit de la dentz.	And then repeatedly apply that several times until the virtue of the fire permeates to the root of the teeth.
E si voys, submergeys lana o coto en le boder desus dit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolent, e pausa sobre aquel ferr ignit entro que·l ferr pervengua al preon de la conquavitat de la dent.	And if wool or wood is placed in the horn mentioned above, place it over the painful tooth, and hold the ignited iron over that until the iron reaches the root of the tooth.
Mays empero la cauterizacio am foc es que tu atendas a la quannula de eram o de ferr, e sia en le cor de lu alcuna grocesa e la acuitat del foc no pervengua a la boca del malaute.	But the cautery with fire is such that you wait for the ember or iron to become hot, and there should be some charred part in it, and the heat of the fire does not reach the root of the tooth.
E aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra, e pausa aquel sobre la dent e te la tua ma entro que·l cauteri sia enfregidat; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas quar la dolor sira remauguda o en aquel dia o en l’autre dia.	And then heat the cautery to the form it will take, and place it over the tooth while your hand is ready until the cautery cools down; and do this several times so that the pain may be alleviated on that day or the next.
E cove que per empressio de aquel cauteri que·l malaute umpla la sieua boca de bon boder e tengua aquel per una hora e aprop scupa le; e aquesta es la forma del cauteri.	And ensure that when the cautery, which the patient opens well with good edges, has it for an hour and then remove it; this is the form of the cautery.
E cauteriza am qual que tu voys extremittat segon que a tu es possible.	And cauterize wherever you feel necessary according to what is possible.
E aquesta es la forma de la cannula:	And this is the form of the cannula:
Capitol .xxii.	Capitol.xxii.
De cauterizacio de extrophulos.	Of the cauterization of exostoses.
Quan extrophulos so de flecma e de humors fregas e no so hobedientz a digistio per medicinas e tu voys la digistio de aquelas leugerament, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri conquau la forma del qual es aquesta seguen, havent dos extremitatz hubertas per que yesca le fum deves le cauteri per l’autra extremitat, e pausa aquel ignit sobre aquel apostema una veguada, e autre si indigeyses de aquel, entro que pervengua al preon del apostema.	When exostoses are of phlegm and humors that are not responsive to digestion by medicines, and you perform the digestion of those lightly, then you should ignite the cautery in the form of which follows: having two open extremities so that smoke exits from one end, place the cautery over the apostema for one minute, and another if you find it necessary until it reaches the root of the apostema.
E si l’apostema es pauca, lahoras pausa le cauteri segon la quantitat del apostema, e aprop leyssa le per tres jorns e pausa sobre lu coto enfus en boder entro que sia remaugut aquo que·l foc ha comburit.	And if the apostema is small, then place the cautery according to the quantity of the apostema, and let it remain for three days, placing it over the root affected by heat until what the fire has consumed is fully remedied.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent e tentas e draps entro que sia sanat.	And then take care of that ointment and dressings until it is healed.
E la forma de la cannula o deu cauteri a tal es comveyter.	And the shape of the needle or cautery should be conveyed.
Capitol .xxiii.	Chapter XXIII.
De cauterizacio de rauquiera de votz e de constriccio de ale.	On the cautery for sore throat and the construction of a ligature.
Quan las humiditatz veno sobre le quanal del pulmo, e majorment quan aquo es am fregiditat de compleccio, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia evacuat al comensament am medicinas laxativas, e aprop cauteriza aquel deves la razit del golayro en le loc depremegut.	When moisture humors affect the channel of the lung, and especially when this is due to a complex composition, it is necessary that the patient be treated with medicines that promote evacuation at the beginning, and then cauterize the vein in the swollen area.
E guarda te que no pervenguas am le cauteri al golayro ni no comburas de la codena de lu sino un pauc.	And be careful that you do not apply the cautery to the vein nor burn along its length but only a little.
E cauteriza aquel am autra cauteri deves la junctura del col en le derier espondil de lu.	And cauterize the other with a cautery at the junction of the neck and at the rear vertebra of the patient.
E·l cauteri de lu sia clavilh sego la maniera precedent.	The cautery for the neck should be applied according to the previous method.
E aprop cura aquel am aquo que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And after take care of that which was preceded until it is healed.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter XXIV.
De cauterizacio de malautia del pulmo e de tos.	On the cautery treatment for lung illness and cough.
Quan tos e malautia de pulmo so de humiditatz fregas e le malaute no ha febre ni tisic e es malautia antiqua, lahoras cauterisa aquel am dos cauteris sobre la furcula en les locz depremegutz leontz e buoytz; e am autra cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz entre dos mamillos; e sia le cauteri clavilh segon la forma precedent.	When cough and lung illness are due to humidity, and the patient does not have fever or consumption, and it is an old illness, then apply a cautery with two cauteries on the furcula in the lower regions of the lion's and bull's hearts; and another cautery in the middle region of the foot between the two mammary bones; and let the cautery be pointed according to the previously mentioned form.
E si vols, sia la tua cauterizacio punctan am le cauteri que es apelat puncta, la forma del qual precedeys en la ponctacio de dolor de aurelhas.	And if you wish, let your cautery be punctual with the cauteries that are called puncta, the form of which you precede in the punction of ear pain.
E sian puntz entro cays ad aquels; e aprop cura aquel am aquo meteys que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And make points between the cracks for those; and after take care of that which you apply until it is healed.
E ya sia le cauteri haventz tres ramps quar cauterizacio es am aquel: am una veguada podes far tres cauteris segon aquesta forma:	And let the cautery have three ridges; for this cautery, you can make three cauteries in one pass according to this form:
Capitol .xxv.	Capitol.xxv.
De cauterizacio de titillic que es le cap del ajutori.	Of the cautery for titillatio which is the head of assistance.
Quan le cap del ajutori es dislocat per causa de humiditatz lubricas e no es fermat en la hora del sieu retornament deves la sua dislocacio entro que sia a lu aquo costuma de retornar, e aprop per un petit movement es deslocat ayssi que s’endeve, ayssi cum nos havem testificat, lahoras cove que primieyrament redusiscas la dislocacio, e aprop le malaute sia reversat sobre le sieu dos o sobre le latz sa; e aprop eleva la codena la qual es en la partida dedintz del citillic a las partidas desus am les ditz de la tua ma sinistra, si la junctura es dislocada a las partidas dedintz.	When the head of assistance is dislocated due to lubricous humidity and is not fixed at the time of its return, you must reduce its dislocation while it is about to return to its usual place, and by a small movement it is re-dislocated so that it strives to return, as we have testified. First, reduce the dislocation, and then lay the patient on their back or on their side; raise the knee which is in the inner part of the titillatio above your left hand fingers, if the joint is dislocated towards the inner part.
E aprop igneys le cauteri havent dos caps; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then heat the cautery having two heads; this is its form:
E aprop cauteriza la codena entro que penetre aquela entro al autre latz; e vindra la figura de cauterizacio lahoras de iv caps cauteris.	And then cautery the knee between when one head penetrates the other side; and the figure of the cautery will come when of two heads the cautery is used.
e so aquel subtils segon la quantitat de tenta; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	and it must be those subtle ones according to the quantity of tendons; and this is its form:
E alcunas veguadas es ajustat segon aquest comte i per que son les cauteris .viii.	And sometimes the cautery is adjusted according to this count and because they are eighth.
E aprop pausa sobre le cauteri porys cuytz am sal, e aprop fay adherir le malaute a trenquilitat, e lo membre no sia maugut per alcun temps entro que sia confortat.	And then place it over the cautery for coagulation with salt, and then make the affected part adhere to coagulation, so that it is not wounded for some time until it is comfortable.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas desus e tart es fayt aquo, lahoras cauteriza sobre le muscle am cauteri clavilh o am motz cauteris puntan, quar la junctura es confermada e la humiditat es romauguda e le malaute es sanat.	And if the dislocation is above and the thumb is affected, then apply the cautery over the muscle with a cautery on the wrist or with pointed cauteries on the fingers, so that the joint is confirmed and the humidity is reduced and the patient is healed.
Capitol .xxvi.	Capitol. xxvi.
De cauterizacio del stomac.	Of cautery of the stomach.
Quan veno en l’estomac freg e motas humiditatz entro que aquel extrazo de la sua compleccio e so multiplicatz raumases a lu, e si tu continuas las manieyras de curacio e no confereyso, lahoras cove que le malaute sia sobre le sieu dos ressupinat, e extenda las suas mas e las suas coysas, e aprop cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris: an un cauteri dejos le pietz per la quantitat d’un dit am cauteri clavilh, e am dos cauteris dejos del dos costatz del cauteri, entro que vengua la figura de cauteri triangulada; e elonga entre els que no sian ajustatz que faran poyredura.	When cold and humid miasmas enter the stomach before it is extracted from its composition and multiply there, if you continue the methods of cure and do not confirm it, then know that the patient will breathe heavily, extend his hands and limbs, and soon apply cautery to that area with three cauteries: place one cautery on the foot corresponding to the width of a finger with a wrist cautery, and two more on the sides of the first cautery, so as to form a triangular figure; leave space between those not adjusted to promote healing.
E si la profunditat del cauteri la quantitat de les dos terses de la grocesa de la codena.	And if the depth of the cautery matches the quantity of the two thirds of the thickness of the sole.
E sia la figura del cauteri segon aquesta forma ses addicio, E si vols, cauteriza am gran cauteri en le mieg loc del estomac segon aquesta forma; et aquest sia un cauteri segon la forma de cercle segon aquesta forma:	And let the shape of the cautery be as in this addition. If you wish, make a large cautery in the middle of the stomach as in this form; this should be a cautery according to the circular shape as in this form:
E sia cauterizat l’estomac punctan ad aquel que de aquest cauteri es spaventat: e es que tu senhes sobre l’estomac punt segon la quantitat que voles am tenta, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en les puntz; e aprop cura aquel am la curacio qu’es precedita entro que sia sanat.	And let the stomach be cauteryed with punctures at that which is frightened by this cautery: and you hold over the stomach with a puncture according to the quantity you desire to test, and then cautery the puncture; and then cure it with the cure that precedes its healing.
Capitol .xxvii.	Capitol.xxvi.
De cauterizacio del fietge fret.	Of the cauterying of the thigh wound.
Quan endeve en le fietge dolor per fregiditat o per humiditat o per grossa ventositat entro que de la sieua normal compleccio sia getat per egressio superflua, e es curat le malaute am aquo que havem dit e no comfereys, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e senhes am tenta tres cauteris segon aquesta forma et aquesta quantitat meteyssa sobre le fietge dejos dels ipocondres, la hon perve le decubit de home.	When there is pain in the thigh due to coldness or humidity or excessive windiness before it returns to its normal structure through superfluous egress, and the patient is treated with what we have said and not improved, then you should cause the patient to lie on their back, and place three cauteries according to this form and quantity over the thigh below the hypochondria, and position them over the iliac crest.
E sia l’espazi le qual es entre quascun cauteri segon la grossetut del dit, e sia le cauteri segon la longitut del cors dreyta.	And let the space be which is between each cautery according to the size of the hand, and let the cautery be according to the length of the body straight.
E no compremas la tua am le cauteri mot.	And do not burn too much with the cautery.
E si la quantitat de aquo que es adhurit la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena, e no y sia pus ajustat; e si le malaute stant sobre les pes de lu; e si no es estant, lahoras sia jassent, le qual ja ha extendudas las suas coysas, e eleve les sieus brasses.	And if the quantity that is applied equals the size of the sore on the foot, and it is not too tight; and if the wound is standing on the feet of the patient; and if not standing, then lying down, which has already spread its parts, and raises its heels.
E es aquesta la forma del cauteri:	And this is the form of the cautery:
E a tu es possible que cauterizes aquestz cauteris am cauteri cutellar, quan es am tu subtilitat e prudencia en l’art.	And with your subtlety and prudence in the art, you may apply these cauteries using a surgical cautery.
E guarda te que trop no procesiscas en la cauterizacio, e sia adhurida la specitut de tota la codena per que sia adhurit tot le cors e pervengua entro als budels, quar la codena aqui es subtil; e sapias aquo.	And take care that you do not over-burn in the cauterization, so that the entire wound of the foot is burned to ensure the whole body is affected and does not penetrate into the intestines, for the foot here is subtle; know this.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter XXVIII.
De perforacio de apostema del fietge am cauteri.	For the perforation of an abscess on the foot, use a cautery.
Quan endeve excitura o apostema en le fietge e voles saber si aquel apostema es en le carn del fietge o en la tunica de lu, lahoras si es en la carn del fietge, le malaute atrobo gravitat e dolor ses acuitat.	When there is inflammation or an abscess on the foot and you want to know if the abscess is in the flesh of the foot or in its skin, observe that if it is in the flesh of the foot, the patient will experience a greater degree of swelling and acute pain.
E si es en la tunica del fietge, am la dolor es acuitat gran e vezes que ja afatiguatz les metges la cura de lu.	And if it is in the skin of the foot, then the pain will be acute and often so severe that it exhausts even the doctors treating it.
Donc cove que·l malaute sia enversat sobre la sieua cervit; e aprop senha le loc de l’apostema am tenta; e aprop igneys le cauteri le quel es asemblat a rag, la forma del qual a precedit en l’autra pagina.	Then ensure that the patient is lying on their side; and closely examine the location of the abscess; and heat the cautery, which resembles a strip of wood, the shape of which was shown in the previous page.
E cauteriza am aquel i cauteri entro que tota la codena sia comborida, entro que pervengua al ciphac, entro qu’en yesca sania.	And cauterize it, ensuring that the entire chain of tissue is charred, reaching the capsule, until it becomes healthy flesh.
E aprop cura aquel per curacio dels autres apostemas entro que sia sanat.	And treat it with the method for curing other abscesses until it heals.
E no cove que de aquesta forma de cauteri use sino aquel del qual le estudi en l’art de medicina es prolonguat, e en las mas del qual motas malautias an conogut; mays aquest am esperiment alcunas veguadas sia ardit sobre aquesta operacio, mays empero leyssa aquela deves nos, e es miels.	And you should use only that cautery of which the study in the art of medicine is well-extended, and in most cases they have known ill-health from it; yet this one has been experimented with a few times over this operation, yet still leave the other to us, and it suits better.
Capitol .xxix.	Capitol.xxix.
De cauterizacio de plauresi.	Of the cautery for pleurisy.
Diyssero les antics cauteri de las razitz de aristologia a plauresi frega segon aquesta manieyra esser fazedor, e es aquest que tu prenguas de las razitz de aristologia longa secca una razit pun longua que es trobada, e sia de la grossetut del dit.	They said that the ancient cautery for the ribs in pleurisy should be rubbed according to this manner to make it, and this is what you should do: take from the ribs of aristologia a long narrow piece of wood, which is found, and let its thickness be like that of a finger.
E aprop submergeys aquela en oli e eysen aquela al foc, e aprop cauteriza per un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre la continuacio de la furcula am le col; e am dos cauteris petitz dejos guidazi, un pauc declinans a la partida que es dejus la barba, e am dos cauteris en aquo que es declinant entre la quinta costa e la cizena, declinant un pauc a las partidas detras; e am autre cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz; et am autre sobre l’estomac, et am tres cauteris de las partidas detras; et am un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre las dos spallas, e am dos cauteris dels dos latz del pietz, dejos le cauteri le qual es entre doas spallas.	Then immerse that in oil and heat it over the fire. Then cauterize with a cautery in that place which is between the continuation of the furcula and the neck; use two small cauteries to guide, one slightly inclining towards the side where the beard begins, and two more cauteries in what is inclined between the fifth rib and the hip bone, inclining slightly towards the rear sides. Place another cauterization in the middle of the foot; place another on the stomach, and three cauterizations at the rear sides; place one cauterization in that place which is between the two scapulas, and two cauterizations on each side of the foot, placing the cauterization between the two scapulas.
E no cove que compremas la tua ma am le cauteri, ans sia en le manifest de la codena en obra.	And do not hold your hand on the cautery, but rather at the back of the foot to work.
E ja diyssero alscus antics que so alscus dels homes les quals uson de cauteri de ferr semblant a ray e igneysso aquel, e meto aquel en aquel loc le qual es entre las costas, entro que pervenguam am aquel ad aquel apostema e sia foragetada sania, ayssi cum havem dit en l’apostema del fietge.	And some ancient doctors said that certain men use a cautery resembling a ray and ignite it, placing it in the location between the ribs until we reach the abscess and it is healed, as we have said about the abscess of the thigh.
Mays en aquesta perforacio am cauteri no es ses temor, quar hu mor tantost ho accideys en le loc fistula a la qual no es sanacio.	In this puncture, there is no fear with the cautery; for if it happens so quickly in the location of the fistula that does not heal.
Capitol .xxx.	Capitol.xxx.
De la cauterizacio de la melsa.	Of the cautery for the ulcer.
Quan tu curas la malautia de la melsa am aquo que havem dit de la curacio en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cauteri en lu es segon tres manieras, las quals totas son dreyturieras, de las quals la una es que fassas tres cauteris o quatre linhan segon la longitut de la melsa segon la figura dels cauteris del fietge, la figura dels quals ha precedit.	When you cure the illness of the ulcer, as we have said about the treatment in division and do not alter your cure, the cautery for it is according to three methods, all of which are proper. The first method is to make three or four lines according to the length of the ulcer, following the figure of the cautery for the thigh, the figure of which has preceded.
E sia entre quascun cauteri la grossetut d’un dit o un pauc mes, e la manieyra del cauteri sia la manieyra la qual havem dita en le cauteri del fietge engualment.	And let the thickness of each cautery be that of a finger or a little more, and the manner of the cautery be the manner which we have said for the cautery of the thigh equally.
E no compremas la tua ma am le cauteri; e le malaute sia eves sobre lo sieu dos.	And do not hold your hand on the cautery; and the patient be placed on their back.
E es autra manieyra de cauterizar, so es que tu igniscas le cauteri haventz dos vertimentz, la qual causa havem dita en le capitol de dislocacio del muscle, e elava la codena la qual es en le endreyt de la melsa la hon perve le jazer del malaute sinistre.	And another manner of cauterizing, so that you ignite the cautery having two wicks, which we have said in the chapter of dislocation of the muscle, and raise the lamp which is in the line of the flame to burn the jet of the patient's left side.
E sia la tua elevacio am la qual elevas la codena segon la longuesa del cors, per que sian faytz cauteris segon la latitut del cos.	And let your elevation be such that you raise the lamp according to the length of the body, so that the cautery is made according to the breadth of the body.
E aprop entromet les dos vernimentz, ignitz mot, en aquel entro que am aquels penetres la codena de la autra part.	And then insert the two wicks together, light them, in that place where you penetrate the lamp from the other side.
E aprop extrayt le cauteri; e donc son faytz quatre cauteris.	And then remove the cautery; and so he makes four cauteries.
E si voys, cauteriza am cauteri havent tres vernimentz.	And if you burn, use a cautery having three ventilation holes.
E aprop tu cura le cauteri pus que aia laysat de getar brac per trops jorns, quar mays es comferent que las autras causas precedentz en la curacio.	And then you treat the cautery more when it has been burned for too many days, as this is more painful than other preceding causes in the treatment.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter XXXI.
De cauterizacio de ydropici.	On the cautery for dropsy.
Cauteri no catz en ydropici sino en alcinte3 propriament.	Cautery is not used for dropsy but for the ankle properly.
Quan tu curas le ydropic am las manieyras de curacio las quals havem ditas en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que aquel cauterizes am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic e am un cauteri sobre l’estomac, e am autre cauteri sobre le fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa, e am dos cauteris entre les spondils del dos, e un cauteri en lo dreyt del pietz, e am autre cauteri sobre l’estomac.	When you treat the dropsy, use the methods of treatment that we have described in the division, and do not deviate from our instructions. Then, when you need to cautery, use four cauteries around the ankle and one on the stomach, and another on the flanks, and another on the back, and two between the vertebrae of the spine, and one on the right side of the foot, and another on the stomach.
E la quantitat de la profunditat del cauteri sia propdana a la spicitut de la codena.	And the depth of the cautery be proportionate to the thickness of the skin.
E aprop layssa le cauteri ubert per so que gete brac per lonc temps.	And then leave the cautery open so that it gets cool for a long time.
E no evacuas le malaute de curacio aprop le cauteri am aquo que cove per que sian agreguadas a lu doas entencios, e sira festinada a lu am ajutori sanacio.	And you do not evacuate the ill part for the cautery to be placed in such a way that two intentions are added to it, and it will be sped up by the aid of healing.
La forma del cauteri am lo qual es cauterizat lo ventre sia clavilh segon que la forma de aquel es desus precedent, e es aquel am le qual es cauterizat le dos sia olivar segon qu’es precedent a la sua forma.	The shape of the cautery used to cauterize the abdomen should be shovel-shaped according to the form described above, and it is with this shape that the two olives are cauterized according to the form described above.
Capitol .xxxii.	Capitol..xxxii.
De cauterizacio de pes e de las coyssas.	On the cauterization of feet and thighs.
Quan les pes so apostematz en ydropitz e so repletz de aygua sitrina, cove que cauterisas les pes sobre le dos del pe in nocrati aquo que es entre le auricular e le anular, e eleva la tua ma am le cauteri e no torses aquel; e aprop eleva la tua ma, e no retornes aquela de tot, quar l’aygua satrina rezuda.	When the feet are swollen and filled with yellow water, place the cautery on the sole of the foot over the bone where it is between the heel and the toe, and lift your hand with the cautery without twisting that area; then lift your hand further, and do not return to touch everything, as the yellowish water retracts.
Es le cauteri segon aquesta forma: E aprop fay sobre las doas coyssas dos cauteris, e en quascuna coysa sia feyt cauteri am la extremitat del cauteri cutellar.	The cautery is to be done in this form: Then place two cauteries on each thigh, and on each buttock make the cautery at the extremity of the surgical blade.
E sia le cauteri segon la longitut de la coyssa: i dejos le denolh e l’autre jos le mieg loc de la coyssa; e sobre quascuna coyssa dos cauteris.	The cautery is to be done according to the length of the buttock: I leave one end high and the other low on the buttock; on each buttock, two cauteries.
E layssa la plagua uberta ses curacio per lonc temps per so que alcuna aygua resuda de lu.	Leave the wound open for a long time so that any water exudes from it.
E aprop cura le am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas.	Then treat the wounds which we have mentioned.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Capitol. xxxiii.
De cauterizacio de cos de ventre.	On the cautery of the abdominal region.
Quan cos de ventre es per freg e per humiditat entro que debelice las vertutz, so es la vertut digestiva e retentiva, las quals so en l’estomac e en les budels, e es curat aquo am las manieyras de curacio e no confereys, e vezes le malaute suffertan cauteri de vertut exhiberant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am gran cauteri sobre le sieu stomac segon que a precedit en la cauterizacio del estomac, am le cauteri del cercle e am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic subtils, am cauteri clavilh subtil; e am cauteri sobre le alcatin sobre alozis gran, o am dos cauteris.	When the abdominal region is affected by cold and humidity penetrating through the thin walls, this condition is due to the digestive and retentive virtues, which are located in the stomach and intestines. This is treated according to the methods of treatment and you do not refer to any other treatments, although sometimes the patient suffers from a cauterization of virtue exhibiting, so cautery that part above the stomach with a large cautery according to what was previously described in the cauterization of the stomach, using the ring cautery and four cauteries around the circuit of the fine veins, using a subtle clavilh cautery; or use one large cautery on alcatin alozis, or two cauteries.
E si vezes las humiditatz exhuberants e le malaute aquo tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le pentenilh e sobre les budels, e fort leu ajustant dos cauteris sobre l’estomac e prop dels inguonas, quar es curacio perficent de juvament de la qual no erras.	And if you encounter excessive moisture and the malady is tolerating it, then cauterize that on the perineum and on the intestines, and strengthen it by applying two cauteries over the stomach and near the inguinal regions, which is a perfect cure from which you will not err.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Capitol.xxxiv.
De cauterizacio de emorroydas antiquas.	On the cauterization of ancient hemorrhoids.
Quan so en la natura derier emorroydas antiquas o una de humors grossas fregas o de humiditatz corrompudas, e son curadas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no confereys la tieua curacio, lahoras cauterisa am tres cauteris sobre le pus dejos spondilh del dos petit e petit triangular, e am cauteri desus le ombelic cays per dos ditz.	When they are in the nature of ancient hemorrhoids or one due to large humors or corrupt moisture, and are cured as we have said in the division and do not apply our hot cure, then cauterize three cauteries on the base of the two small and slightly triangular parts, and with a single cauterization above the navel extending for two fingers.
E si doptas que l’estomac de lu sia enfregidat e la vianda de lu no sia degerida, e la cara de lu vezes apostemada, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre l’estomac am gran cauteri segon que es precedit; e am un cauteri sobre fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa de lu am cauteri clavilh, e leyssa le cauteri per alcun temps ubert, e aprop cura lu entro que sia sanat.	And if you suspect that the stomach of the patient is inflamed and the food they ate was not digested, and their face appears feverish, then cauterize that on the stomach with a large cauterization as previously described; and with one cauterization on the groin, and another on the armpit with a pointed cauterization. Let the cauterization remain open for some time, and cure them once they are healed.
Capitol .xxxv.	Capitol. xxxv.
De cauterizacio de atheyl aprop la abscizio de lor.	Of the cautery on the thigh near the amputation.
Quan tu abscindes atheyl, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri que es asemblat a ray.	When you amputate the thigh, then apply the cautery that is similar to a branding iron.
Aprop entremet aquel ignit en aquel atheyl abscis, e ultima la tieua ma entro que pervengua le cauteri al orifici de la vena de la qual ve la sanc.	Then insert the ignited brand into the amputated thigh, and keep your hand there until the cautery reaches the opening of the vein from which the bleeding comes.
E fay aquo una vetz o doas, quar si achieyl son trops, lahoras cauteriza quascun de lor segon que havem recontat, e aprop cura aquels am aquo que confereys a lor dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And do this one or two times. If there are more, then cautery each one as we have counted, and apply the ointments to them until they are healed.
E si cauterizas am gran cauteri sobre alquatin, es mays derier en juvament.	And if you use a large cautery on several places, it is more effective in healing.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Capitol. xxxvi.
De cauterizacio de fistolas que son faytas en la natura derie en las partidas de lu.	Of the cautery of fistulas that arise in the natural passages of the body.
Quan la natura no obeziys a la obra la qual havem recomtada en son loc, e·l pacient es espaventat per aquo, sia sanat am cauteri.	When nature does not obey the work we have recommended in its place, and the patient is frightened by this, it should be treated with a cautery.
Donc quan ad alcun ve fistola en la natura derier, e es antiquada, corro sania de lu e humiditatz corrompudas, e donc aquo que es pus digne que cove es que proes aquela am tenta subtil, e aprop conoys la quantitat de la profunditat de lu am la devant dita tenta.	Then when there is an old fistula in nature behind, and it is corrupted with bad humors, and therefore what is most worthy that covers it is that you try a fine thread under it, and then know the depth of it with the previously mentioned thread.
Aprop igneys le cauteri que es semblant a ray.	Then heat the cautery that resembles a ray.
E aprop met aquel cauteri ignit en aquesta fistula, e segon la quantitat en la qual intrec la tenta.	Then place the heated cautery in this fistula, according to the quantity in which you insert the thread.
E itera sobre aquela le cauteri entro que sian comburitz aquels cors corrumputz tost una veguada o dos o tres, segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And iterate over that with the cautery until those corrupted humors burn up completely, one time or two or three, according to the quantity of your need.
E guarda te de combustio de nervi e de vena; o si fistula va al cors de la vesica o al cors del budel, lahoras guarda te de totz aquels locz; e no fassas aquo sino quan la fistula es en loc carnos e cogitas que no es penetrant.	And guard yourself from burning the nerves and veins; or if the fistula goes to the body of the bladder or the body of the intestine, then guard yourself from all those areas; and do not do this except when the fistula is in a fleshy location and you perceive that it is not penetrating.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	And then care for the area until it is healed.
E si le loc es sigillat, e so abscindidas de lu las materias, e roman ayssi per lonc temps, lahoras sapias que ja es curat entierament.	And if the area is sealed, and the substances are separated from it, and remain this way for a long time, then you know that it is completely healed.
E si las materias no so de lu ostadas, lahoras sapias que es penetrant o en le preon de lu os corromput, o cays aquo de aquelas causas de las quals vindra rememoracio en son loc.	And if the substances are not discharged from it, then you know that they are penetrating or in the process of corrupting the flesh, or have come about due to those causes which will be remembered in their place.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Capitol. xxxvii.
De cauterizacio dels ronhos.	On the cautery of warts.
Quan en les ronhos endeve dolor per freg o per grossa ventozitat, e per aysso le coyt del malaute es amermat, lahoras cove que cauterizes aquel sobre les ronhos am cauteri sobre quascun ronho am cauteri clavilh del qual precesic la rememoracio.	When warts are painful due to friction or excessive dryness, and as a result the patient's pain is diminished, then you should cautery each wart with a cautery point. The specific method for using the cautery point will be remembered later.
E fort leu cauterizam am le segon un petit dejos, per que vindran tres cauteris liniatz, e donc siran mays deriers en juvament.	And cautery it with a slight touch the second time, for three linear cauteries will follow, and thus they will be more effective in healing.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter XXXVIII.
De cauterizacio de la vesica.	Of cautery of the bladder.
Quan accideys en la vesica debelitat e mollificacio per freg e per humiditatz ayssi que·l malaute la urina no retengua, lahoras cauteriza aquel en la partida pus dejos sobre la vesiqua, la hon comensan les pels del pentenilh, e cauteriza am un cauteri en la partida dreyta, e am autre en la senestra de lu.	When the bladder becomes weakened and softened by inflammation and humidity, such that the patient cannot retain urine, then cautery the area where the skin of the perineum begins, using a cautery on the right side and another on the left side.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la cantitat dels not del pous; e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en la partida pus bassa del dos, o am dos cauteris si es necessitat.	And the length of each cautery should be according to the size of the toe; then cauterize that with a cautery on the lower part of the big toe, or with two cauteries if necessary.
E sia cauteri clavilh segon que es procesit.	And the thigh cautery should be done according to how it is performed.
Capitol .xxxix.	Chapter XXXIX.
De cauterizacio de la mayra.	Of cautery of the groin.
Quan veno en la mayra freg e humiditatz, e per aysso es prohibida enpreignacio, e son corrompudas las mestruas de lu, e es tardada la provocacio de lor, e accideys dolor deves le haveniment de lor, lahoras cove que·l loc sia cauterizat am tres cauteris en le circuit del ombelic, ayssi cum havem dit en le cauteri de la vesica; e am cauteri sobre le loc pus dejos del dos, o am dos cauteris, e sia le cauteri clavilh.	When there is venous congestion and inflammation in the groin, pregnancy is forbidden, and her menstrual cycle is disrupted, with delayed induction of labor, and joint pain occurs due to this condition, then the area should be cauterized with three cauteries around the navel circuit, as we have said in the bladder cautery; and a cautery on the lower part of the big toe, or with two cauteries, and the thigh cautery should also be used.
Capitol .xl.	Capitol it.xl.
De cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua.	Of the cautery for the dislocation of the ankle.
Quan humiditatz moucozas so efundudas a la partida de la anqua, e so faytas causas del yssiment del sieu loc, e senhal de lu es que la coyssa es prolonguada sobre l’autre quan so comparadas entre lor.	When mucous humors infiltrate the region of the ankle, and are causes of displacement in its place, a sign of this is that the swelling extends over the other foot when compared between them.
E le loc de la dislocacio es atrobat en lu quays boyt.	And the place of the dislocation is applied to the back of the foot.
Adonc cove que cauterizas le malaute sobre la partida de la anqua de lu am cauteri a sercle semblant, pus que tu auras senhat am tenta en le cercuit de la partida ayssi cum es revolguda, e per so que la partida caia el mieg loc del cercle.	Then, cautery the ankle of the foot with a circular cautery, as you will have marked in the circuit of the region as it is turned, so that the region falls in the middle of the circle.
E sia le cauteri del qual precedit la forma en la cauterizacio del estomac.	And the form of the cautery mentioned above is used in the cautery of the stomach.
E si aquest cauteri no es a tu present, lahoras cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris am cauteri olivar gran.	And if this cautery is not present, then use three large olive wood cauteries.
E sia fayt le cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de tota la codena; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And the cautery should be applied according to the intensity of the pain in the entire leg; and then cure that which remains after it has healed.
Capitol .xli.	Capitol. xli.
De cauterizacio de la vena sciatica.	Of the cautery for the sciatic vein.
Quan dolor ve en la partida de anqua, e so causa de lu freg et humiditatz, le malaute es curat am aquo que havem dit e no confereys, e aquo es antiquat, lahoras cove que tu lacses le malaute de humors grosses am pillulas fetidas o am pillulas artificials o semblantz; e aprop cauteriza aquel.	When pain is in the sciatic nerve and its cause is cold and humidity, the patient is cured with what we have said and you do not apply, and this is ancient practice. Then, let the patient be treated of thick humors by stinking pills or artificial ones resembling them; and then cauterize it.
E la manieyra del cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am medicinas comburentz, o cauteri am foc.	And the method of cautery for it is according to two methods: either with burning medicines, or with fire.
Sira segon dos manieyras scientas, de las quals es la una que cauterizes aquel sobre la partida de l’ancha de lu am tres cauteris triangulatz segon aquesta forma; e fay am aquels bona profunditat.	Sir according to two known methods, of which one is to make three triangular cauteries on the sciatic part of the foot in this form; and do so with good depth.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre cascun cauteri la quantitat de la grossitut del dit e si le cauteri olivar o gran.	And let the space between each cautery be the width of one finger, and whether the cautery is small or large.
Mays alcunas veguadas sia le cauteri sobre le mieg loc sobre le cap de l’anquan per que son quatre cauteris.	More often, apply the cautery in the middle of each location on the heel, as there are four cauteries.
E si vols, cauteriza am le cercle del qual es precesida la forma en la cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua, la i que sia cercle continent e comburey la ispicitut de tota la codena.	And if you wish, cauterize the circle around which the form precedes in the cautery of the dislocation of the ankle, and let it be a circle that burns the entire circumference.
E aquesta es la manieyra de cauteri in ciatiqua quan dolor es adherent al anqua e no es estenduda entro a la coyssa.	And this is the way to cauterize for gout when pain is localized in the ankle and not extended into the thigh.
Mays si es estenduda entro a la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre la coyssa sobre le loc al qual envireys le malaute que es la dolor; e am un cauteri sobre la cavilha per quatre ditz un pauc deves la part cilvestra.	But if it is extended into the thigh, then cauterize there with two cauteries on the thigh over the area through which you will pass the gout, which causes the pain; and with one cautery on the heel, a little should be applied to the tendinous part.
E si le cauteri cutellar, e sia la profunditat del cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de la codena.	And if the surgical cautery is used, the depth of the cautery should be according to the extent of the circumference.
E si le malaute envireys que la dolor es estenduda entro al loc prop les ditz des pes, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui on envireys am cauteri per tres puntz o quatre o mays si indigeys de aquel.	And if the gout passes through causing pain near the base of the feet, then cauterize there where you will pass the cautery with three or four points or more if needed.
E si le malaute envireys dolor esser dejos le donolh ves la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui am un cauteri cutellar.	And if the gout passes through causing pain to be felt in the knee, then cauterize there with a surgical cautery.
E guarda te en tota cauterizacio que no ultimes am le cauteri en tant que comburas nervi o gran arceria, e que per aquo a tu es sobre le malaute mal noccument o contraccio.	And in all cautery procedures, ensure that you do not complete the cautery to such an extent that it burns nerves or major artery, for thereby you will be badly injured or cause paralysis.
E yeu ja e vist un e autre de aquels les quals cauterizero sobre la cavilha e ultimero en la cauterizacio, e la cama foc inflada entro que la tumor aconseguit lo pe, e foc perforat e corromput tot le pe.	And I have seen others who cauterize the cavity and the last part of the cautery procedure, and the bed is filled with smoke where the tumor reached the skin, and fire perforates and corrupts all the skin.
E aprop accidic fort solucio de ventre, e aprop aquo la mort.	And soon after a strong convulsion of the abdomen, and soon after death.
E si la dolor es en dos partidas ensemps cauteriza quascuna segon aquesta manieyra.	And if the pain is in two parts, cauterize each one according to this method.
E diysero les savis alcus en la cauterizacio de anqua cauteri del qual aquesta es la manieyra: fay semblant a cercle de ferr del qual le cercuit sia la maytat de un palm; e sia deves le sieu orrifici segon la grossesa de un os de datil o mens un pauc.	And the wise will say about the cautery for water: this is the method: make it resemble a circular iron ring, with its circumference being the width of one palm; and let its holes be according to the size of an index finger or at most a little more.
E dedintz aquel cercle sia un autre tertz; e sia le spazi le qual es entre lor la quantitat del notz del pous; e sian aquels cercles ubertz de dos partidas; e sia la longitut de aquels cays un notz o dos notz, e fay en aquels margue de ferr decentment apparelhat en les cercles; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And inside that circle, there is another third; and let the space between them be the quantity of a foot; and may those circles be opened in two parts; and let the length of those grooves be one foot or two feet, and make on those iron edges decently fitting into the circles; this is the form of it.
Aprop sia ignit en le foc entro que s’enrogesisca e gete scintillas, e aprop sia pausat sobre la partida del anqua, le malaute colcat sobre le latz sa.	It is heated in the fire until it turns red and gives off sparks, and then placed on the part of the ankle, with the sore foot over the leg.
E donc cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris redontz en una veguada.	And then cauterize it with three round cauteries in one go.
E aprop layssa aquel per tres jorns; aprop emplastre aquel am boder e layssa la plagua uberta per trops dias; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then leave it for three days; then apply a plaster with bread and leave the wound open for many days; and cure it by anointing it until it is healed.
Diys Albucasis : o, filhs, de aquesta specia de cauteri pauc havem usat per la terror del reguardament de lu, e per aquo que paucs havem trobatz les quals reguardan sobre lu.	Albucasis says: Oh, son, of this kind of cautery we have used little because of the fear of its appearance, and because we have found few that concern it.
Mays dels bos cauteris a lu qui les sufferta, et atroba am aquel le loc de lu.	Yet for those who suffer from good cautery, he finds the place for it.
Mays cauteri am medicinas adhurentz es que tu fassas dos cercles haventz armula perforada en la qual deyssen le guaffo de la porta de ferr; sia la longuitut de la paretz en la nauteza de lor sian dos nozes o quays aquels.	More effective for medicines that adhere is to make two circles having a perforated instrument in which the smoke from the iron door passes through; let the length of the walls where they will be two nuts or half as much.
E si le spazi le qual es entre quascu la quantitat de la grossitut del dit; e sian ubertz dejos e desus, e sian que contenguan se entre lor segon aquesta forma:	And if the space which is between each of the patient's thighs due to the size of the swelling; and have been opened and downwards, and should contain themselves among them according to this form:
E aprop pausa sobre la partida de la anqua le malaut jasent sobre le latz sa, e comprem la tua ma sobre la partida de la anqua; e aprop pren de aygua cauda e fon la entre dos cercles, e la qualiditat de aquela sia am le foc petit a petit, e te aquela per la quantitat de una hora, e sufferta le malaute la mordicacio e la adhustio de lu — quar aquel atrobo mordicacio ayssi cum de foc — entro que cesse la mordicacio.	And then place your hand over the area below the abdomen where the patient is lying, and hold your hand over the area below the water; and then take some hot water and pour it between two circles, and the quality of that water should be as hot as fire gradually, and have that for the quantity of one hour, and let the patient feel the biting and tightening effect — for that contraction is like that of fire — until the biting stops.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am le instrument et abstergeys l’aygua cauda de tota la anqua am aygua dousa.	And then lift your hand with the instrument and remove the hot water from all around the water with cold water.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres jorns e pausa sobre aquel boder entro que sia la negror de la adhustio remauguda, e leyssa aquo per alcus jorns, e correra de lu poyredura; aquest es derier en juvament.	And then let it be for three days and place your hand over that border until the blackness of the tightened contraction subsides, and let this be for some days, after which the redness will fade; this is known in youth.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then cure it by applying ointment until it is healed.
E si la dolor es extenduda entro la coyssa o la camba, fay a lu estatua en lu que contengua aygua segon que es feyt en la anqua engualment.	And if the pain is extended to the thigh or hip, apply a statue in it that contains water according to how it is done in water.
E aquesta es la manieyra de aygua cauda, e yeu ja he scrit aquela en le tractat de la rectificacio de medicinas.	And this is the way of water cauda, and I have already written that in the treatise on the rectification of medicines.
Recipe de alcali e de caus no extinta de amdos ana partida una, e trissa les e pausa en una ola nova de la qual la partida dejos sia perforada per un petit trauc, segon la quantitat que intre en lu ray.	Recipe for alkali and caustic not extinguished from both parts one, and three fold them in a new bowl of which the part left is perforated by a small tube, according to the quantity that enters it.
E pausa dejos le fons de la ola autra ola enveyriada, e gete sobre aquel alcali e caus viva de aygua doussa la qual cobra aquels per un dit, e pus que tu compremes aquels am la tieua ma per bona compressio, e leyssa la hola que deyssenda de lu aygua aguda en la partida dejos a la ola enveyriada.	And place the bottom of the bowl in another boiling water bath, and get over that live alkali and caustic water slowly until it covers them by a digit, and then with your hand apply good compression to those, and let the bowl that descends from the sharp water into the part left in the boiled water.
E aprop ajusta tota aquela aygua, e geta la sobre autra caus viva e autre alcali renovelatz, quar aquela lahoras sira de mot forta acuitat, la qual es aministrada en motas operacios de medicina e en cauterizacio dels autres membres, quar operacio fa de foc.	Then adjust all that water, and pour the live caustic and renewed alkali over it, for then it will have great acuity, which is administered in most operations of medicine and in the cautery of other members, for the operation makes use of fire.
E so de las medicinas alcunas am las quals es cauterizat ancha, ayssi cum tezizic e mel anacrat e caus am sabo enayssi que sian mesclatz.	And of some medicines which are cauterized wide, such as tincture of tin and honey mixed so that they may be applied.
E Gualia recontet de un home dels antics la operacio e la curacio am la qual es curada dolor de anqua e de vena sciatica, e magnifiquet mot be esser de aquel, e diys que no hac necessitat de autra curacio, e quar es sanat per una veguada ayssi cum recomtec, quar fort leu aquel intrec en banh e eysic ja sa d’aquel.	And Gualia recounts of an ancient man who underwent an operation and a cure for water pain and sciatica, greatly magnifying the method because it was so good. He said that no other treatment was necessary, and that he was cured in one session as recommended, for he immersed himself in hot and cold baths and we know about this from him.
Et es que sia pres de certarragi vert, e si no es atrobat vert, sia presa figua recent; e mot sia trissada am un pauc de grays e sia pausat sus la anqua en la qual es la dolor, o en la coyssa, o en la camba, e sia liat.	And it should be placed near a willow branch, and if no willow branch is available, a fig tree branch should be used; it should be tied with a few grey threads and placed on the water in which the pain is, or on the thigh, or on the chest, and should be bound.
E sia layssat per la cantitat de tres horas o per la quantitat que·l malaute centa cedacio de la adhustio.	And it should be left for the quantity of three hours or for the amount of time the patient feels the effect of the application.
E aprop met aquel en banh e donc quan le cors de lu sia enrozat, entromet aquel en le sol, quar la dolor cessa e es sanat.	And then place it in hot water. When the patient's body is warm, insert it into the soil, for the pain ceases and the patient is cured.
E sapias que no cove que alcu use de cauteri am aquestas medicinas sino aprop la evacuacio del cors.	And be aware that no cautery should be used with these medicines except near the body's evacuation.
Mays ja Escorides diysec que quan am fenda de cabra la vena stretica es cauterizada, aprofieyra a lu mo be; e sia le cauteri am lu segon aquesta manieyra: sia presa lana e sia enbeguda en oli antic, e sia pausat entre le pous del pe e entre le fossil.	May I say that when making a cut in the stretched vein, it will heal better if cauterized; and the cautery should be used in this manner: take wool and soak it in old oil, then place it between the toes of the foot and on the heel.
E aprop pren fenda de cabra secca e emflasma aquela am foc entro que sia fayta carbo; e aprop pausa lu sobre la lana e leysa la entro que sia estengida.	And then take a dry vein and incinerate it in fire until it turns into charcoal; and place it on the wool and let it expand as it cools.
E aprop itera aquo, e no cessas far aquo entro que·l scintiment de la mordicacio pervengua entro al anqua e repausa la dolor.	And then repeat this, and continue doing so until the sensation of the bite reaches the water and relieves the pain.
Et aquesta manieyra de cauteri es apelat cauteri de vaquas.	And this method of cautery is called the cow's cautery.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter XLII.
De cauterizacio de dolor de dos.	On the cautery for joint pain.
Alcunas veguadas dolor es en le dos per tropas causas, cum per cazement o per percucio o per superflua evacuacio, e per causas ad aquelas semblantz, per infusio de materia frega e humida.	Sometimes pain in the two places is caused by multiple factors, such as inflammation or percussion or excessive evacuation, and by causes similar to those, through the infiltration of wet matter.
E cauteri no catz sino en aquesta sola specia la qual es fayta per efusio de materia frega.	And the cautery is not used to cut, but only in this single species which is caused by the effusion of wet matter.
Donc cove, aprop evacuacio del malaute am pillulas fitidas e am semblant a lor, que sian faytas sobre·l dos en le qual es la dolor tres linhas segon la latitut de lu, pus que senhas am tentha en quascuna linha v cauteris o mays, segon la quantitat que ve de la tolleransa del malaute e de la vertut de lu.	Therefore, extract, and then evacuate the patient's groin with pills that resemble them, which are made over both sides where the pain is three lines according to the width of each, then prick or more with cautery in any line five times, according to the quantity that comes from the tolerance of the patient and the virtue of the cautery.
E sia fayta cauterizacio am cauteri de punt.	And perform the cautery with a pointed cautery.
E si vols, cauteriza am tres cauteris o am quatre am cauteri clavilh medial segon aquesta forma:	And if you wish, cauterize with three or four cautery pricks using a medial cautery needle in this manner:
Capitol .xliii.	Capitulum XXXIV.
De cauterizacio al comensament de gilbositat.	On Cauterization at the Beginning of Gout.
Motas veguadas endeve aquesta malautia als petitz enfantz; e senhal del comensament de lu en les enfantz es que accideys sobre lor estrectura en le ale eves la elevacio e·l movement.	Motions observed when this illness affects small children; and the sign of the beginning of it in children is that they experience discomfort in their limbs during play, elevation, and movement.
E atrobas en le derier espondil del dos e dels notz de lu que ja comensa a sobremontar sobre les autres spondils.	You find in the lower vertebra of the spine and the nearby ones that are beginning to protrude over the other vertebrae.
E donc quan tu vezes aquo e voles prohibir, lahoras cauterisa aquel am cauteri que sia cercle segon aquesta forma:	And when you see this and want to treat it, then cauterize that area with a cautery in the shape of a circle according to this form:
que prengua le cauteri sobre tota partida del spondilh engualment.	place the cautery over every part of the spinal vertebrae equally.
E si vols, cauteriza en le circuit del spondilh am le cauteri de punt dos linhas o tres.	And if you wish, cauterize around the spinal column with a pointed cautery in two or three lines.
E sian les puntz propdas entre lor.	And let the points be close to each other.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat am aquo que havem dit.	Then cover the area until it heals with what we have said.
Mays guarda que cauteri no sia administrat en gelbositat que sia fayta per spasme de nervi.	More importantly, ensure that the cautery is not applied in haste due to nerve spasms.
Capitol .xliv.	Capitol XLIV.
De cauterizacio de podagra e de dolor de juncturas.	On the cautery treatment for gout and joint pain.
Quan dolor de juncturas son faytas per humors fregas les quals so enfundutz a quascun membre del cors, lahoras quan veno dolors en los pes, de costuma dels metges es que aquo apelen podragua propriament.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E donc cum es curada podagra de causa frega am manieyra de cura e no so remaugudas las dolors, lahoras las remau cauteri.	And thus, gout caused by cold is treated with a method of treatment and not just alleviation of pain, but also with cautery.
E es que tu cauterizas aquel aprop evacuacio en le circuit de la junctura del pe am motz cauteris.	And you cautery the area around the foot's joint with a pointed cautery for evacuation.
E sia cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the olive-shaped cautery, of which this is the form:
E si es necessitat que puntz sia fayt sobre la fassia del pe, lahoras fay am cauteri de punt.	And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
E si las dolors pujan entro als denolhs o a las autras juncturas, e aquo motas vetz s’endeve, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre quascun donolh am tres cauteris o quatre de tota partida am aquest cauteri olivar.	And if the pains rise into the toes or other joints, and you see this swelling, then cautery the area around each toe with three or four cauteries of this olive-shaped type.
E si motz cauteris que aquestz cauteris sian a tu necessaris, lahoras cauteriza aquel e no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri abans, sia tant solament enviro la specitut de la codena.	And if you need to use a cautery that these cauteries are necessary for you, then cauterize it and do not press your hand too much on the cautery before, just around the size of the tip of the needle.
E si las dolors pugan entro al donolh e·l dos, lahoras aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le sieu capitol.	And if the pains penetrate to the elbow and knee, then apply the cautery which we have said in our chapter.
E si las dolors so en las mas tant solament, e es apelada suagra, lahoras puncta en le circuit dels focils ayssi cum se revolvo, puncta en aquels dos linhas.	And if the pains are only in the bladder and it is called stranguria, then puncture along the course of the nerves as they twist, puncturing in those two lines.
E si reman de las dolors en les ditz, lahoras puncta en le cercuit dels focils sobre quascun notz e sobre la pinche de la ma.	And if the pains remain in the fingers, then puncture along the course of the nerves over each knuckle and over the base of the hand.
E si las dolors pugan aprop alscus jorns als coydes o als muscles, lahoras cauteriza les quascus de tota part dels ajutoris.	And if the pains remain for several days in the knees or the muscles, then cauterize the areas around all parts of the joints.
E no evacuas le malaute de bon regiment e de recepcio de medicinas, quar si es fayt bon regiment e flacma es evacuada am aquest cauteri sira sanat, Dieus ajudan.	And if you do not evacuate the bladder properly and with the right reception of medicines, for if it is done properly and inflamed, the evacuation will be healthy, God help us.
Capitol .xlv.	Capitol XLV.
De cauterizacio de rompeduras.	Of cautery for ruptures.
Quan endeve rompedura en les angonars e diysendo les budels denant l’atela al genetiu, e aquo es comensan de aprop, lahoras cove que tu mandas al malaute layssar la sua comestio en le sieu dia e que use de causas leniens per so que la fenda deyssenda del sieu ventre.	When there is a rupture in the groin and intestines are seen in front of the腹肌膜 at the inguinal region, and this begins to close, then when you order the patient to abstain from food on that day and use mild remedies so that the opening in his abdomen decreases.
E aprop segua le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e comanda a lu que tengua le sieu ale entro que sia foro getat o aparesca l’atela o·l budels.	And then place the patient's hand between your hands over his groin, and command him to hold his hand there until it is properly stitched or the腹肌膜 or intestines appear.
E aprop retorna aquel am les tieus ditz e senha am tenta la ruptura sobre le os del pentenilh am senhal la extremitat del qual sia semblant a la maytat de cercle a las subiranas partidas del cors.	And then return those points to their places and test the rupture over the bone of the thigh, marking the extremity of which appears similar to the size of a circle in the upper parts of the body.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then heat the cautery of which this is the form:
entro que sia mot rog e gete cintilhas.	until it be hot and emit sparks.
E aprop reduzeys le budel o l’atela a la sua conquavitat, e aprop pause la sua ma sobre le loc per so que le budel no yesqua.	Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
E tu ja has ubert entre las coyssas del malaute e dejos lu as pausat un coyssi, et autre servent sia sus las cambas de lu, e autre sus le pietz de lu, le qual tengua las suas mas.	You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
E aprop pausa le cauteri sobre aquel senhal am la tua ma am cauteri stan dreyt, e te aquel entro que am lu consieguas le os del pentenilh entro al mieg del duiduni; e itera am aquel autra veguada si a tu aquel no has conseguit en la primieyra veguada entro al os.	Then place the cautery over that mark on your hand where the cautery is straight, and there where you can get to the bone of the foot between the toes; and repeat with another pass if you have not reached the bone in the first pass.
E observa saviament del ysiment del budel en la hora de la tua cauterizacio, que no comburas aquel budel per so que sobre le malaute no vengua in mort o autre gran malicia.	Observe wisely the condition of the hernia during your cautery, that you do not burn the hernia so that it does not come to the patient's harm or another great mischief.
E sapias que quan tu am le cauteri no atenhas le os, no confereys la tua operacio.	Be aware that when you use the cautery, do not touch the bone, as it would compromise your operation.
E cove que·l cauteri dels enfants sia subtil segon le gran e la mesura de lor.	Make sure that the cautery for children is subtle according to their size and measure.
E aprop cura le loc del cauteri per tres dias am boder entro que sia remauguda la scara del foc.	And for three days care for the area of the cautery by keeping it between two layers until the wound from the fire heals.
E aprop cura aquel am les autres enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And care for that as with other ointments until it is healed.
E le malaute sia jasent sobre le sieu dos per xl dias entro que sia sigillat le loc e la plagua.	And the patient lie on their back for ten days until the area and wound are sealed.
E cove que pauses le nutriment de lu segon la longitut del temps de la curacio de lu le qual le linesca le ventre de lu, e que le budel no yesca fora deves le esforsament de guerir.	And ensure that you maintain the nutrition of the patient according to the length of the healing time of the wound which closes the abdomen, and that the intestine does not come out with the effort to heal.
E aprop quan se vol levar aprop xl dias, lahoras aministra liament decentment fayt, e tengua aquel per autres xl jorns.	And when it is time to lift after ten days, then apply a proper ointment, and maintain that for another ten days.
E sia mermat de trebalh e de replecio de vianda e de beure, e de votz vehementz, quar quan usa de aquest regiment de sanacio entiera sira sanat.	And let him rest and replenish his food and drink, and avoid loud voices, for when he uses this regimen of healing entirely, he will recover.
E yeu diyre la curacio de las rupturas en las autras partidas del ventre, e so al comensament, e vols que no treguan, lahoras cauterisa la ruptura d’aquel am cauteri redon segon la quantitat de lu, e sia aquo que es exhurit de la codena ayssi cum la tersa partida de lu; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit, e no es ajustat.	And I will say the healing of ruptures in other parts of the abdomen. At the beginning, and if they do not tear, then cauterize the rupture with a round cautery according to its size; what is extracted from the codena should be done similarly to the tender part of it. Then care for that as we have said, and it is not stitched.
E ja diyssero alcus primiers que ruptura sia cauterizada am cauteri triangular segon aquesta forma, pus que es senhada am tenta:	And some first ones have said that a rupture should be cauterized with a triangular cautery according to this form, rather than with forceps.
e es pausada linha que eys per la latitut en le latz pus sobira de la ruptura, e autra linha al desus; e depausa la tua ma am un cauteri clavilh, mays le primier cauteri es pus leugier e milhor.	And pause a line that is by the latitude in the slashes and rises above the rupture, and another line on top; then place your hand with a cruciform cautery, but the first cautery is lighter and better.
Capitol .xlvi.	Capitol XLVI.
De cauterizacio de torcio.	Of the cauterization of the torchio.
Quan endeve en alscus membres per cazement o per percussio dolor e persevera aquela dolor per lonc temps e no comfereys al u curacio am medicinas, lahoras cove que cauterizes am cauteri de punt.	When pain in certain members persists due to congestion or percussion and does not respond to medical treatment over a long period, then you should cauterize with a pointed cautery.
E sia le cauteri de tot membre segon la magnitut e la parvitat de lu, e vertut e develitat de lu, e locacio de torcio e dolor de lu.	And the cautery should be of the size and shape appropriate to the member, its nature and intensity, and the location and pain of the torchio.
Donc si·s sanat per le primier cauteri, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera sobre lu le cauteri; quar de costuma de aquelas dolors es que sian punctatz de membre ad aquel membre le qual apropinque al u, per que cove que consieguas aquels am cauteri entro que·l malaute sia sanat.	Then if the member is healed by the first cautery, that is good; but if not, then repeat the cautery on it; for customarily, those pains are punctured from one member to the adjacent member, so that you may achieve healing of the pain through cauterization before the malady is cured.
Capitol .xlvii.	Capitol forty-seven.
De cauterizacio de lepra.	Cauterization for leprosy.
Les lebros alcunas veguadas am cauteri per mot gran juvament, e magerment si la specia de lepra que es fayta per putrefaccio de flacma e de melencolia.	Lepers are sometimes cauterized with a very hot cautery, especially if the species of leprosy is caused by the putrefaction of flame and melancholy.
E donc cum tu vols cauterizar aquel, considera si la lepra es comussan e as aquela curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no deysen, ni esta, e temes sobre le malaute que la corrupcio comprehenda tot le cors de lu e tota la compleccio de lu, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le cap am v cauteris: am un en le mieg loc del cap, e am le segon pus dejos de lu, eves le front a la fi dels cabels; e amdos sobre dos corns; e am un detras, sobre la nuca o servitz.	And therefore, if you want to cauterize that area, consider whether the leprosy is common and as we have treated it in the division, neither here nor there. Be wary of the malady that corruption may encompass his entire body and all its composition; then cauterize that area on the head with five cautery marks: one in the middle of the head, leave one space from it, shave the forehead to the end of the hairline; two over the horns; and one behind, on the neck or servant.
E ultima la tua ma am le cauteri un pauc entro que emprema en le os una petita empressio, e de lu sian deslocadas las scorsas, per so que la expiracio de grossas vapors sia alleujada de lu; e cauteriza sobre la melsa segon que es precesit.	And finish your hand with the cautery a little inside where it creates a small impression in the mouth, so that the expiration of thick vapors is alleviated; and cauterize over the cheek as needed.
E si la lepra es ja expanduda sobre le malaute e apar manifestament, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquel am aquels cauteris les quals havem ditz en le cap; e am cauteri sobre la extremitat del nas, e am dos cauteris sobre las doas maysselas, e am dos cauteris sobre dos spondils del col, e am vi cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e am un gran sobre les spondils prop de la coeta, e un sobre la cotea , e am dos sobre las anquas, e am un sobre quascuna anqua, e am dos sobre les donols e un sobre quascun donolh, e am dos sobre les coydes, e am dos sobre les muscles, e am dos las teneretutz del sieu pietz; e cauteriza aquel sobre totas las juncturas dels ditz de las mas e dels pes, e sobre quascun talon dels sieus pes, e sobre les foscils de las suas mas.	And if leprosy is already extended over the patient and clearly manifest, then you cauterize that area as well as those cauterizations which we have said in the head; and a cauterization on the tip of the nose, and two cauterizations on both hands, and two cauterizations on two vertebrae of the neck, and six cauterizations on the vertebrae of the back, and one large one near the coccyx, and one on the spine, and two on the hips, and one on each hip, and two on the knees, and one on each knee, and two on the elbows, and two on the muscles, and two on the tendons of their feet; cauterize that on all joints of the fingers of the hands and the feet, and on each heel of his feet, and on the bones of their hands.
E guarda te dels nervis les quals so sobre le talo que no comburas aquels.	And guard the nerves which are over the heel that you do not burn those.
E alcunas veguadas es cauterizat am un cauteri sobre le os del pentenilh e am autre sobre la boca del stomac, e autre sobre le fietge.	And sometimes cauterization is done with one cauterization on the os pelenilh and another on the mouth of the stomach, and another on the liver.
E sapias que quant mays ajustas cauteris, tant es mays juvatiu e mays conferent; e sapias que le malaute no ha en le cauteri dolor, ayssi cum han les sas, per so quar le cors de lu ja es stupefayt.	And know that the more tightly you adjust the cautery, the more beneficial and effective it is; and know that the patient does not feel pain in the cautery, as they do elsewhere, since the body of the patient is already numbed.
E cove que les cauteris sian grans o paucs segon les membres e las juncturas segon que es precedit de las specias dels ferramentz.	And know that the cautery should be large or small according to the limbs and joints, as directed by the nature of the instruments.
E aprop cura le cauteri am farina de errs coyta am mel e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then cure the cautery with a mixture of ground pepper and honey, as well as other treatments until it is healed.
Capitol .xlviii.	Capitol. xlviii.
De cauterizacio de stupor.	On the cautery for stupor.
Quan alcun membre es stabozit o adormit e es curat am medicinas, olis e emplastres, e no es sanat, lahoras tu cauteriza aquel membre stabozit am cauteris segon que merita la grandesa del membre o la parvitat de lu.	When some limb is numb or asleep and is treated with medicines, oils, and plasters, and does not heal, then you cautery that numb limb with cautery according to the size of the limb or its smallness.
E sia lo tieu cauteri intrant la ispicitut de la codena un pauc.	And let your cautery penetrate the thickness of the skin slightly.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then cure that which is ointed until it is healed.
E alscunas veguadas es cauterizada alcuna stupor le qual endeve a las mas e als pes, e als spondils del dos e ves le eysiment dels nervis les quals mavon aquel membre, e es remauguda la stupor.	And in some cases, certain spots are cauterized. This affects more areas and the feet, and the vertebrae of the back, and one sees the inflammation of the nerves which run through that member, and the swelling is reduced.
Mays no prusuma sobre aquo sino aquel que es savi en la anotomia dels membre e de la egressio dels nervis tot le cors moventz.	But do not assume this for yourself, but only for one who is skilled in the anatomy of the members and the exit of the nerves throughout the moving body.
Capitol .xlix.	Capitol. XLIX.
De cauterizacio de albaras que es morfea.	On the cauterization of ulcers that become mortified.
Quan albaras es antiqua e no comfereys a lu alcu dels enguentz de medicina, lahoras tu cauteriza sobre aquela am cauteri preon un pauc segon la quantitat de la specitut de la codena entro que sia remauguda la blancor e la color de lu, e la color de lu sia mudada.	When ulcers are old and do not respond to any of the medicinal ointments, then cauterize over that spot with a cautery, using just a little according to the quantity of the cochenil involved. Let the white and color of the ulcer change.
E aprop cura aquel am farina de errs e de lentilhas am oli rozat e am folhas de arnagrosa, e am sanc de colomba o am sanc de yronda, da cascuna sia una partida e totas sian mescladas, e aprop sia linit un drap e sus le loc sia pausat entro que sia sanat.	And then cure that which is treated with a mixture of lentil flour and err flour in rubbed oil and leaves of arnica, or pigeon excrement or turtle dove excrement, taking one part of each, all mixed together. Then cover the area with a cloth until it is healed.
Capitol .l.	Capitol I.
De cauterizacio de cranc.	Of cautery for the groin.
Quan canser es comensan e vols aquel ostar, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri de cercle en le circuit de lu ayssi cum es revolgut.	When cancer begins and you want to stop it, then cautery it with a circular cautery in the circuit of the tumor as it is revolving.
E diysero les savis que sia cauterizat am lo derier cauteri en le mieg loc; mays a mi no es vist aquo, quar temi que sia ulcerat, e yeu ja e vist aquo alcunas veguadas.	And the wise will say that it should be cauterized with the last cautery in the middle location; but to me, this is not visible, for I fear it might be ulcerated, and I have seen this several times.
E es pus dreyturier que sia cauterizat en le circuit de lu am cercle ayssi cum avem dit, o am motz cauteris.	And it is more proper to cauterize it in the circuit of the tumor with a circular cautery as we have said, or with several cauteries.
Capitol .li.	Capitol II.
De cauterizacio de adubilati.	Of cautery for adenitis.
Quan alcun adubilati es tardat en maturacio, e aysso es per la superfluitat fazen aquela, o per etat del malaute, quar es vielh en decrepitat, de pauc sanc, o per le temps, e tu vols festinar en la maturacio de adubilati; lahoras cauteriza en le circuit de lu am motz cauteris petitz punctan; e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela fastinara en maturacio.	When some adenitis is delayed in maturation, this is either due to excessive fluidity making it so, or due to the patient's condition, which might be old age in decrepitude, with little strength, or due to time itself. If you want to hasten the maturation of the adenitis; then cauterize in the circuit of the tumor with several small puncturing cauteries; and leave the one that will naturally mature.
Mays si tu vols la perforacio de lu am cauteri, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: e depausa aquel en le mieg loc de adubilati entro que penetre la codena.	If you want to make the puncture with a cautery, then heat the cautery of which this is the form: and place that in the middle of the affected area so that the probe penetrates.
E si le cauteri en aquel loc que es pus dejos, per so que le cors del brac sia alleujat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you place the cautery in that location, let it be, for the arm shall be relieved; and then cure that which shall be healed.
Capitol .lii.	Capitol. lii.
De cauterizacio de corrodent.	Of the cautery for corrosion.
Corrodent es corrupcio ambulant en le membre, la qual corrodeys aquel ayssi cum a foc comedent lenha secca.	Corrosion is a wandering decay in the member, which corrodes it as fire consumes dry wood.
Donc si vezes aquel corrodent en loc le qual sufferte cauteri am foc, lahoras tu igneys cauteris clavils motz paucs, e grans segon que es convenent en aquel loc en le qual es corrodent.	Therefore, if you find the corrosion in a location where you plan to apply a fire cautery, then heat the cautery with several small and large coals as is appropriate for that location where the corrosion exists.
E aprop cauteriza aquel de tota partida entro que erradiques tota la corrosio e no romangua alcuna causa de lu.	And then cautery the entire area until you have eradicated all the corrosion and do not leave any cause of it.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres dias, e pausa sobre les locs cauterizats solpre trissat am oli mesclat entro que las scaras sian totas eradicadas e tota la corrupcio.	And after that let it be for three days, and place a hot oil mixture over the cauterized areas until all the scabs are removed and all the corruption is gone.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz carn engendrantz.	And after that cure it with an ointment producing flesh.
Mays si aprop tres dias vezes que la carn nasca sana en la qual no es corrupcio, bo es; mays sino, lahoras itera le cauteri sobre aquo que es romas en les locs corrumputz.	But if after three days the flesh grows healthy in that which is not corruption, that is good; but if not, then re-cauterize the areas that are rotten in the corrupt places.
E corrodent es medicat alcunas vetz am medicina aguda, quar aquela es meza en loc de cauteri.	And after medicating with some sharp medicines several times, use half the amount of cautery.
Mays empero cauteri am foc es de pus leugier juvament.	But however, a mild fire cautery has more benefit.
E yeu ja e dit la curacio de lu am medicina aguda en la divisio, e donc pren aquela quan de lu auras endegencia.	And I have already said the cure with sharp medicine in the division, so use it when you need it.
Capitol .liii.	Chapter 53.
De cauterizacio de claus e dels autres semblants.	On the Cauterization of Wounds and Other Similar Conditions.
Motas veguadas endeve a las partidas dejos del pe malautia que s’apela clau, e es causa grossa, fentrada, la qual ladeys le pe; e cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, so es cauteri am foc e cauteri am aygua cauda.	Small blisters appear on the afflicted side of the foot where gout is said to occur, and this is a large cause, entering through the foot; in these, cautery is performed according to two methods, one with fire and one with water-cauterization.
Mays cauteri am foc es que igniscas le cauteri concau semblant a pena de voltor, le qual sia feyt de ferr segon la quantitat la qual contengua le clau de tota partida, e sia de subtils marguas.	The cautery with fire is when you heat the concave cautery tip resembling a turning poker, which is made of iron according to the quantity it should contain for all parts, and it has thin edges.
E aprop pausa aquel ignit sobre le clau, e aprop revolveys la tua ma am le cauteri en le circuit del clau entro que·l cauteri pervengua a la profunditat del clau.	Then place that heated cautery on the blister, and quickly move your hand with the cautery in a circle around the blister while the cautery reaches the depth of the blister.
E leyssa aquel per tres dias entro que comense getar brac.	Let it remain on it for three days until it begins to scab.
E aprop emplastre aquel am malvas salvatges trissadas am sal, e leyssa le emplastre sobre aquel per una nuoyt, quar aquel sira eradicat de las suas razitz.	Then apply a poultice to it with wild thyme boiled in salt water, and let the poultice remain on it for one night until the blister is eradicated by its roots.
E aprop cura le loc am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanat.	Then treat the area with an ointment of flesh-generating medicine until it heals.
E si so no-convertitz, e motas veguadas accideysso en la superficia del cors, majorment en las mas e les pes, lahoras cove que tu aministres en aquels cauteri am aygua, e es que prenguas una quannula de eram o de ferr o de pena de voltor, e pausa aquela sobre le clau; e aprop geta en la quanula de aygua cauda pauca cantitat, e rete la tua ma, e tu revolveys aquela am compressio de la tua ma de tot, e sia enpremut le marge de la canula en la razit del clau, e atrobara la aygua cauda via al preon de la razit del cau; e espera le malaute un pauc la mordicacio de l’aygua cauda per una hora, e aprop remau aquela, quar le clau am las suas razitz sira erredicat.	And if sores or blisters occur on the surface of the body, especially on the back and feet, then when you administer cautery with water, take a quannula of copper or iron or needle, place it over the bone; then pour a small quantity in the quannula of water and withdraw your hand, and you will revolve that with compression of your hand from all sides, and press the margin of the quannula against the root of the bone, and you will find the water flowing through the passage of the root of the cautery; and wait for the patient a little by the bite of the flowing water for an hour, then withdraw it, because the bone will have been softened.
E ayssi fe am aquels la i aprop l’autre entro que venguas sobre totz les quals de lor so en le cors.	And do the same for those and then for the other until you have treated all of them in the body.
E aprop cura aquels pus que las razitz dels claus so erradicadas am aquo dels enguentz les quals la carn ve engenran.	And do likewise cure those ulcers where the roots of the bones have been softened by the ointments which cause the flesh to rot.
Capitol .liiii.	Capitol. liiii.
De cauterizacio de tremor.	Of the cautery for trembling.
Quan endeve ad alcu tremor per freg en le nervi o per febre de causa frega, o per autra causa semblant, lahoras cove que tu cauterises aquel am quatre cauteris o am v sobre les spondils del dos, entre quascun spondilh am un cauteri; e am cauteri en le pietz de lu, e sobre l‘estomac de lu, am cauteri olivar.	When there is a tremor due to friction in the nerves or from fever of that cause, or from another similar cause, then you should cauterize it with four or five cauteries on the spine, placing one cautery between each vertebra; and one cautery on the foot, and above the stomach, place an olive-shaped cautery.
E la tremor de lu se repausa e festina la sanetat de la malautia frega.	And the tremor subsides, and the recovery of health from the illness follows.
Capitol .lv.	Capitolium.
De cauterizacio de albati accidentz al cors.	Of the cautery for diseases affecting the body.
Quan en le cors so espellitz albati, e so pustulas fendas las quals so feytas de materias grossas corruptas; donc cove al comensament cum apareyso, que sia cauterizat sobre tot cap de la fistola am cauteri subtil am fustz de mirt, la extremitat del qual es estenduda am foc; o am razitz de erestologia longua; o am cauteri lentecular.	When in the body abscesses have formed and pustules are present, which are made of large腐败的物质；因此在脓肿开始出现时，应使用细小的 cautery棒状的迷迭香枝；其末端伸入火中；或者使用长形树皮；或者使用扁圆形的 cautery。
E alscunas veguadas es cauteri ademamil al comensament de la sua expulcio segon aquesta manieyra; e no so cregudas, e es disrumpuda la superfluitat fazens aquels, et sana de aquels.	And sometimes a cautery is applied additionally at the beginning of its expulsion according to this manner; and they believe, and when the superfluity is ruptured, it heals them.
Mays empero cove que aquo sia fayt aprop evacuacio am fleubotomia.	Moreover, ensure that this is done near the expulsion through phlebotomy.
Capitol lvi.	Capitulum LVII.
De cauterizacio de fluex de sanc accident per incisio de arceria.	On the cautery treatment for flux of blood from an injury due to an arterial incision.
Tropas veguadas endeve fluex de arceria que es inciza deves la plagua la qual endeve deforo, o deves la incizio de apostemas o cauteri del membre, e alor semblantz, e es dificil remaura aquel.	Often, when there is a flux of blood from an arterial incision that has been made in the wound or from the incision for an apstema or cautery on the member, then the swelling appears, and it is difficult to reduce that.
Donc cum accideys ad alcu aquo, lahoras tu·t coyta am la tua ma a l’orrifici de la arceria, e pausa sobre aquel le tieu dit endic estrenh aquel motas veguadas entro que sia ostat le fluex del sanc dejos le tieu dit, e que non yesqua.	Then, when such a case occurs, hold your hand over the opening of the artery and place it firmly there. Keep it there until the flux of blood has stopped, then remove it without allowing any more to flow.
E aprop pausa en le foc les cauteris olivars paucs e grantz, per nombre motz, e exsuffla sobre aquels entro que sian mot ignitz.	And then place the olive cautery sticks over the fire for a few moments, and blow on them until they are well heated.
E aprop pren de aquels un petit o un gran segon le loc e la plagua en la qual es rompuda la arteria, sobre aquela vena festinantment pus que auras remaugut le tieu dit, e te le cauteri entro que sia abcindit e restreyt aquel sanc.	And then take one small or large according to the place and the wound where the artery is broken, over that vein vigorously press after you have warmed as I said, and with the cautery cut and restrain that bleeding.
E si le sanc es expellit de l’orrifici de la arteria quan tu remaues le tieu dit e extringeys le cauteri, lahoras pren la un autre cauteri coytadament dels cauteris les quals en le foc son preparatz, e donc no cesses fer aquo un aprop autre entro que le sanc sia restrengit.	And if the blood is expelled from the opening of the artery when you warm as I said and draw the cautery, then take another cautery cooked among the cauteries which are prepared in the fire, and therefore do not cease to do this one after another until the bleeding is restricted.
E guarda te que no comburas le nervi que aqui es, e que vengua sobre le malaute autra malicia.	And be careful that you do not burn the nerves here, and that no other evil comes to the patient.
E sapias que quan de l’arteria flueys sanc, lahoras no es possible en aquels restrenge la sanc, e majorment quan l’arteria es gran, si no am una de quatre manieyras: o am cauteri ayssi quo dit havem, o am extraccio quan no es extrayta, quar quan es extrayta las extremitatz de lu miels son comburidas e es restreyt le sanc, o que sia liat am fiel o am liament per fort strectura, o que sian pausadas sobre lu medicinas de las quals la vertut es restringir la sanc; e sian strengudas am pulvinar am costriccio decent.	And know that when blood flows from the artery, it is not possible to restrict the bleeding with a cautery in those cases, especially when the artery is large, unless one of four methods is used: either with the cautery as we said, or with extraction when it is not extracted, or when it is extracted, the ends of it are cauterized and the bleeding is restricted, or with ligature with pitch or with a strong bandage, or with pressure over medicines of which the virtue is to restrict the bleeding; and they should be tight with a poultice and proper compression.
Mays aquel que aministra restriccio decent de lu am liament e am strictura am draps o per posicio de causas comburentz e de semblantz, no comfereys sino tart.	But he who administers a decent restraint to it with flax and by stricture of cloths or by the position of causes burning and similar, does not conferre only tart.
Mays si aquo endeve ad alcu e no sia le metge present ni medicina, lahoras obre am pausament del dit indic sobre le orrifici de aquela vena ayssi cum havem dit, e entenda a la gran costreccio de lu entro que le sanc sia ostat de la sobirana partida de la plagua, e sobre la arceria le dit no sia remaugut; e de sobre la arceria sia aspergit am aygua frega de mot gran fregiditat entro que·l sanc sia congilat e engrossat; e mays cossire en que ha de cauteri o de medicina necessitat.	But if he needs to do this for someone and neither the doctor is present nor medicine, then open it slowly with his finger on those openings of the vein as we have said, and understand the large constriction within which the scab has been from the upper part of the wound, and over the archery let the said not be rubbed; and over the archery should be sprinkled with cold water fomentation while the scab is congealed and thickened; and more cossire on whether it needs a cautery or medical necessity.
Comensa la segonda partida.	Begin the second part.
De incisio e perforacio e ventozas e de fleubotomia e de plaguas e de lor semblants.	Of incision and perforation and venting and of bloodletting and of wounds and their appearances.
Aquestas son paraulas de Albucazis.	These are the words of Albucazis.
Ja havem dit en le primier capitol tota malautia en la qual cauteri am foc es convenient e am medicina comburent, e las occasios e las causas de lu, e les instrumentz en aquels necessaris am las formas dels cauteris; e he ordenatz les capitols de la subiranetat del cap entro als pes.	We have already said in the first chapter all illness in which cautery with fire is convenient and medicine burning, and the occasions and causes of it, and the instruments necessary for those cauteries; and I have ordered the chapters of the subirance of the head between the feet.
E yeu procesire en aquest capitol per aquela meteysa guisa, per que sia alliujat lo querent aquo, lahoras sobre aquo que aura demandat.	And I will proceed in this chapter in that manner, so that the one who seeks this may be relieved, concerning what he has requested.
E denant que yeu comense aquo, cove, fils, que aprenguatz que en aquest capitol es per terror aquo que es en le capitol primier de cauterizacio.	And before I begin this, know, sons, that in this chapter we treat of what is done in the first chapter on cautery.
E per aquo que cove que sia en lu gran cautela, quar en la operacio la qual es en aquest capitol motas veguadas catz evacuacio la qual es am sanc am le qual esta la vida deves la aspersio de la vena o incisio sobre l’apostema o apercio de exsitura o puracio de la plagua o extraccio de sageta o incizio de peyra e a lor semblantz.	And so, know that you must be in great caution, for in the operation described in this chapter, multiple evacuations are made, which if not handled correctly can lead to serious consequences. You must ensure the aspersion of the vein or incision on the abscess or ulceration, or the preparation for excision or purification of the wound, or extraction of an arrow, or incision for pus discharge, and similar procedures.
E de totz aquels so acompanhatz temor e tremor e en le mas de lor catz la mort.	And in all of these, there is fear and trembling, and in the most severe cases, death.
E yeu amonesti vos que sobre vos no caia aquo en le qual es esitacio, quar alcunas veguadas cazo deves vos manieyras de homes am manieyras motas de malautias.	And I warn you that this applies to you in the position you are in, for at times you may have to handle conditions caused by bad habits.
E de lor es alcu que s’irays am la sua malautia e es leugiera deves lu la mort, e aysso per la vehemensia de aquo que troba de sa malautia, e per longuesa de la malautia de lu, e am la malautia es paor la qual significa mort.	And from them some you will go to his illness and if it is slight you should let him die, and this because of the vehemence of what he finds of his illness, and for the length of his illness, and in the illness is fear which signifies death.
E de aquels es le qual dona a tu son aver e ditta, tu esperant am aquel sanetat, e la sieua malautia es perniciosa.	And from those who give you their advice, you waiting for that health, and his illness is pernicious.
E donc no cove que tu consentas en aquel que ve a vos del qual es aquesta manieyra; e la vostra cautela sia major que covesitat e la vostra rapacitat; e no presumatz alcuna causa sobre aquo sino aprop sciencia certa la qual virifica aquo deves vos, e al qual perve successio lausabla.	And therefore you must ensure that you agree with him who comes to you from whom this manner is; and your caution be greater than covetousness and your greediness; and do not presume any cause over it but rather certain science which verifies what you should do, and to which by succession a praiseworthy success will come.
E usatz en la curacio de totz vostres malautes de pronosticacio e indicacio de lu al qual es salut convertida, quar en aquel es a vos ajutori sobre adquisicio de fama e de memoria, de lausor e de gloria.	And use in the cure of all your patients by prognosis and indication of him to whom health is converted, for in that you have aid in the acquisition of fame and memory, praise and glory.
O, filhs, Dieus en vos spire le sieu entendement e no oste a vos direccio e proteccio, quar aquo es en la sua ma.	O, children, God imparts His own understanding to you and does not take away your direction and protection, for this is in His hand.
E yeu e ordenat aquest capitol distingent per capitols segon que precedit en le capitol de cauteris, de la cura del cap entro als pes, per que sia a vos alleujat aquo que demandatz de aquo e del qual havetz necessitat.	And I have arranged this chapter distinguishing it by chapters as preceded in the chapter of cauteries, concerning the cure from head to feet, so that what you ask about this and which you need may be alleviated to you.
Capitol primier.	First chapter.
De la curacio de aygua la qual es contenguda en le cap dels enfantz.	Of the cure of water that is contained in the head of the child.
Sapias que aquesta malautia motas veguadas endeve als enfantz deves le enfantament e quan la noyrissa estrenh le cap del enfant ses livitat.	Know that this illness often appears in children during childbirth and when the mother's body strengthens the child's head, it causes fever.
E alcunas veguadas endeve per causa amaguada la qual no es saubuda.	And sometimes appears for hidden causes which are not known.
Mays yeu no vi aquesta malautia sino en les enfantz; e a totz aquels les quals yeu vi se coytec la mort, e per ayssi es a mi vist layssada obra en aquels.	But I see this illness only in children; and for all those whom I see succumb to it, therefore it has been left to me to work on them.
E yeu e vist que un enfant le cap del qual era d’aygua omplit, e·l cap de lu era totjorn ayssi magnificat entro que ceser no podia sobre si meteys per la grandesa del sieu cap, e mays que la humiditat fe aucmentada entro que foc mort.	And I have seen that a child's head was filled with water, and its head was always swollen until it could no longer support itself due to the size of its head, and more so because the humidity increased inside leading to its death.
E aquesta humiditat o es agreguada entre la codena e l’os, o es agreguada dejos le os sobre le ciphac.	And this humidity or is added between the ligament and the bone, or is added by placing the bone on the cushion.
Quar la operacio en aquel si la humiditat es entre la codena e l’os e le apostema es pauc, lahoras cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am una fissura en la latitut, e sia la longitut de la fissura cays dos notz entro que corra la humiditat, e aquesta es la forma del spatum:	When the operation is in that case where the humidity is between the ligament and the bone, and the abscess is small, then cut in the middle of the locum with a fissure in the width, and let the length of the fissure be two fingers wide so that the humidity flows out, and this is the form of the spatium:
E donc si la humiditat es mays augmentada e l’apostema es major, lahoras son aqui dos fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	And so, if the humidity is much increased and the abscess is larger, then here make two fissures in this manner:
E si la humiditat es dejos le os, senhal de lu es que tu vezes la comissuras del cap ubertas de tota partida e l’aygua es spremuda quan tu compremes aquela am la tieua ma a las partidas dedintz e no es aquo a tu amaguat.	And if the humidity is on the bone, the sign of this is that you see the edges of the locum open from all parts, and the water flows out when you compress it with your hand on the inside parts; this is not what you want to hide.
Cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am tres fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	And cut in the middle of the locum with three fissures in this manner:
e aprop la inscizio extratz ne tota la humiditat; e aprop strenh las fissuras am draps e plumassols; e aprop enbroca aquo de sobre am vi e oli entro al quint dia, e aprop deslia le liament e cura la plagua am tentas e enguentz, e strenh le cap am equalitat; e mange le malaute am vianda secca de pauca humiditat entro que·l membre sia confortat e sanat.	And drain all the humidity with the incision; strengthen the fissures with bandages and feathers; on the fifth day, pour oil over them; remove the bandage and dress the wound with cloths and ointments, strengthening the locum with equal parts; let the patient eat dry food of little humidity until the member is comfortable and healed.
E es autra manieyra de incisio, que consideras hon apar la magnitut del apostema e la colleccio de l’aygua, quar alcunas veguadas es mays en le occipicii, o en la partida denant, o en la destra, o en la sinistra; e donc aten am la incizio on appar le apostema e la replecio de l’aygua, e fen aquo segon que a tu es miels possible.	And another way of making an incision, which consider as having regard to the size of the abscess and the collection of the water; for sometimes it is more in the occiput, or in the anterior part, or on the right side, or on the left; and therefore attend to the incision where the abscess appears and the filling with water, and do so according to what seems best to you.
Et observa que no inscindas la arteria e endevengua flueys de sanc e mora le malaute per aquel flux de sanc am evacuacio de humiditat.	And observe that you do not incise the artery and endeavor to flow of blood and let the patient die from this flow of blood as an evacuation of humidity.
Capitol .ii.	Chapter II.
De inscisio de las arterias las quals so aprop las aurelhas, apeladas hilasseysse.	Of the incision of the arteries which are near the ears, called hemorrhages.
Capitol segon.	Chapter II.
Quan endeveno ad alcu catars o raumas als huelhs o al pietz, e es antiquat aquo, e no confereys en aquo la curacio de las medicinas, lahoras la deriera curacio en aquest es incizio de aquelas dos arterias.	When an acute catarrh or wound occurs in the ears or the foot, this is an ancient method, and you do not apply the treatment of medicines to it; rather, the proper treatment for this is the incision of those two arteries.
E donc cove quan tu vols inscidir aquelas que le malaute raza lo sieu cap, e aprop fregua le loc am drap aspre per so que aparan las arcerias, e aprop sia strengut le col del malaute am alcu drap; e aprop considera on polsa la vena; e les locs de quascuna sobre les locs les quals so aprop las aurelhas depremutz, e tant se occultan sino en alcus homes.	And when you want to incise where the disease's root is, then rub the area with a coarse cloth so that the arteries appear, and tie the neck of the disease with some cloth; and consider where the pulse of the vein is; and the areas above those are approximately over the ears pressed, and they are hidden in most people.
E aprop senha sobre la arceria am tenta, e aprop inscideys quascuna am le spatum de quascuna partida agut am inscizio pervenient entro al os, e sia aquo per la latitut del cap.	And then press over the artery with your finger, and incise each part sharply with the blade of the knife entering into the mouth, and do this for the width of the head.
E si vols, entromet le spatum dejos la arteria e trenqua aquala a las inciden a las partidas desus.	And if you want, insert the blade leaving the artery and cut it at the points above the parts.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio cays dos ditz ajustatz, quar quan alcuna vena es inscizida le sanc es eyssit am egressio pulsatil, le qual saut deforo per saut frequent.	And let the length of the incision be two digits long, for when any vein is cut, the bleeding occurs at the pulsating exit, which jumps frequently through it.
Mays si la arceria no apareys al cintiment, lahoras cove que tu mesures de la aurelha la quantitat del spazi de tres ditz, e aprop senha am tenta, e fen entro al os.	But if the artery does not appear at the incision, then measure from the ear the quantity of three digits' space, and press there with your finger, and cut into the mouth.
E aquo que cove getar del sanc es quantitat de vi unc., e fort leu ne geta de lu mays o mens, e tot aquo es segon la quantitat la qual appareys de la vertut del malaute e de la replecio de la arceria de lu.	And that which escapes from the wound is a quantity of blood one uncia, and more or less of it falls, all of this according to the quantity which appears from the virtue of the malady and from the fullness of the artery of his.
E aprop considera la plagua, e donc si reman sobre le os alcuna causa del ciphac, lahoras inscindys aquo per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then consider the wound, and therefore if there remains on the bone any cause of suppuration, then incise it so that no abscess forms.
E aprop strenh la plagua am plumassols e am liamentz de drap de li, e aprop cura aquela am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then strengthen the wound with down feathers and cloth lint, and then treat it with ointments until it heals.
Capitol .iii.	Chapter III.
De extraccio de las arcerias las quals so en las templas.	On the extraction of the arteries which are in the temples.
Quan ad alcu accideys emigranea antiqua o catertz agutz, per humiditatz agrimonials e per qualiditat en les lacertz des templas, o sodo antiqua vehement e semblantz ad aquels, e es medicat am las manieyras de curacio de medicina e aquo no comfereys, lahoras nos hem sproatz en aquestas malautias extraccio de las arcerias en les templas, o cauterizacio de aquelas ayssi cum havem mostrat.	When an old or acute headache occurs due to dampness and the quality of the vessels in the temples, or if it is a strong old headache similar to those, and is treated according to the methods of medical cure, but this does not relieve us, then we have resorted to the extraction of the arteries in the temples, or cauterization of those as we have shown.
E la manieyra de la operacio e extracio de aquelas es que·l malaute raza les pels les quals son en les templas; e entenda a la arceria apparent en le templar quar ela es a tu mostrada per le sieu pols, e·s occultada sino en paucs homes per vehemencia de freg.	And the manner of the operation and extraction is that you raise the skins which are on the temples; and understand the apparent artery in the temple where it is shown to you by your own pulse, and is concealed in few men due to the strength of the cold.
E si a tu es occultada, lahoras le col del malaute sia strengut am alcun drap; e aprop fregua le loc am un drap aspre o evapora le loc am aygua cauda entro que aparesca a tu la arceria manifestament.	And if it is concealed, then lift the neck of the patient with some cloth; and then rub the area with a rough cloth or evaporate the place with hot water until the artery becomes clearly visible.
E lahoras tu pren le spatum del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then you take the spatum of which this is the form:
E aprop tu scorja la codena am aquel am facilitat entro que pervenguas a la arceria; e aprop geta en lu onti e extratz aquela a las partidas sobiranas entro que extraguas aquela de la codena e descobras aquela de las tunicas las quals so dejos aquela, de tota partida.	And then you incise the vein with it as facilitated until you reach the artery; and then anoint it with oil and extract that from the superficial parts until you remove it from the vein and uncover those of the tunics, leaving that, from all parts.
Mays si la arteria es subtil, lahoras envolveys aquela am la extremitat del oncii, e aprop inscindeys de aquela una partida segon la quantitat per la qual sian alonguadas las extremitatz de lu e sian contraytas, e no endevindra flux de sanc, quar si no so inscididas no pujara le sanc de tot.	More if the artery is fine, then encircle it with the end of the forceps, and then incise a part thereof according to the quantity for which the ends of it are elongated and contracted, and there will not be a flow of blood, for if they are not incised, the blood will not rise up.
E aprop evacua del sanc de vi unc. entro a tres.	And then evacuate from the wound three ounces of blood.
E si la arceria es gran, lahoras cove que tu lies aquela en dos locs am fiel dopble fort de ceda o am cordas a lonc, e no coyte a lu putrefaccio denant la consolidacio de la plagua e endevengua flux de sanc.	And if the artery is large, then you should divide it into two places with a ligature twice as strong of that or with long cords, and do not allow it to become putrid before the consolidation of the wound and ensure a flow of blood.
E aprop incideys la superfluitat la qual es entre dos liamentz; e fay aquo en aquela hora o aprop autra ora.	And then incise the excess fluid between two ligatures; and do so at that time or shortly after another time.
E si vols, cauteriza aquela am cauteri entro al os am cauteri cutellar entro que sian incididas las extramitatz de lu, e stara en loc de aquela meteyssa obra.	And if you wish, cauterize it with a cautery on the bone and with a surgical cautery between the points where it has been incised, and this will take the place of that operation.
E es milhor obra sino que·l malaute aia febre o es de escalfada compleccio; quar cauteri es de aquelas causas que ajudan a las humiditatz finidoras, e donc es milhor en juvament.	And it is better to do this operation unless the patient has fever or is from a chill; for the cautery helps with the final humors, and therefore it is better in recovery.
E cove aprop la extraccio de las arcerias que huomplas le loc de coto antic, e sian pausatz sobre lu polvils decentement fayt, e aprop sia curat am medicinas seccas fazen naysser la carn e am calguas entro que sia sanat.	And then you should ligate the arteries that you place at the proper site, and tie them over powder properly made, and afterwards treat it with dry medicines to promote fleshing and with hot poultices until it is healed.
E si mentre obres autra veguada endeventa flux de sanc de la arceria, lahora tu te coyta a restrenger aquel sanc, o am cauteri, o que omplas le loc de coto, e strenh la tua ma entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if during another operation you encounter a flow of blood from the artery, then you tie it to restrict that blood, or with a cautery, or what you fill the place with cloth and strengthen your hand so that the blood is restricted.
E si deguna causa de aquelas no es a tu present, lahoras pausa le tieu dit sobre le loc entro que·l sanc sia congilat, e enbroca le loc am aygua de vehement fregiditat entro que la acuitat repausa, e sia strengut segon que cove.	And if any cause of this is not at your presence, then place your hand there between the blood and congilat it, and apply the area with water of vehement friction until the acuity rests, and strengthen it as needed.
E aquo que es pus leugier en extraccio de arceria es que tu cauterizes la vena am aquest cauteri haventz dos cotels, pus que tu has senhat les dos locs am tenta, e depausa quascus, mot ignitz, entro que pervenguan al os e inscindan la vena en dos locs, per so que sia elonguat aquo que es entre las extremitatz de lu, quar no son consolidadas de tot am aquest cauteri.	And for what is lighter in the extraction of an artery, you cauterize the vein with this cautery having two knives, after you have marked the two areas with hot pincers, and place two sticks, ignited, so that they reach the bone and incise the vein in two places, so that what is between the extremities of it is lengthened, which are not fully consolidated by this cautery.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri:	And this is the form of the cautery:
E sia la acuitat dels dos cotels esemps.	And the sharpness of the two knives is essential.
Mays empero si so mendres acuitat que dos cotels es milhor, quar si so agudas cum dos cotels propera a quascuna freg, e no enscideysso la carn am velocitat.	But if the pain is acute and sharp like two knives pressing against each part of the body, and it does not subside quickly, then it is better.
Donc cum en aquels es alcuna grossitut, es tenguda la calor del foc en aquels e la carn es abscindida leugierament.	Therefore, when there is any swelling, keep the heat of the fire on those areas and the flesh is incised slightly.
E aquesta obra es milhor en tota obra e pus leugiera.	And this method is better in all works and more gentle.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre dos cotels la quantitat de la grossesa del dit.	And let the space between two knives be equal to the size of the swelling of the finger.
Capitol quart.	Capitol quart.
De la cura de cors de lagremas agudas e aciduas dels huels.	Of the cure for bodies affected by sharp and acidic tears from the eyes.
Quan so lagremas aciduas, e es le cors de aquelas venas las quals so sobre le test del cap deforo, e no comfereys en aquo alcuna causa de la curacio de medicina, e vezes la cara del malaute ja enrogesir e sent en le sieu front deambulacio ayssi cum si era deambulacio de formiguas, e·ls huels de aquel so extenuatz, humitz enayssi que ja les pels de lor son conodutz, e las parpelas so scalfadas per la acuitat de las lacrimas, les antics agro mesties en la curacio de aquelas de aquesta operacio, e nompnero aquela curacio am spassa.	When the tears are acidic, and the body is affected by those veins which are on the forehead, and you find no cause for the cure in medicine, and sometimes the face of the patient turns red and feels a crawling sensation on their forehead as if it were being infested by ants, and the eyes become weak, softened such that the skin around them seems thin, and the eyelids are scalded due to the sharpness of the tears, they use ant juice in the cure for those of this kind, and they number this cure among the difficult ones.
E es que tu comandas al malaute rayre les pels les quals son en le sieu front, e aprop inscideys en le front tres fissuras engualment distans segon la longitut del front.	And you command the patient to stretch the skin that is on his forehead, and then incise in the forehead three equal distances according to the length of the forehead.
E si’ la longitut de la fissura cays dos ditz: la una fissura sia engualment distant a la longitut del nas en le mieg loc del front, e la segonda segon la longitut un petit del movement dels lacertz les quals so en le lacrimal, e la tersa del autre part.	And if the length of the incision is two digits: one incision should be equally distant from the length of the nose in the middle of the forehead, and the second according to the length of a small movement of the tears which are in the lacrimal, and the third from the other part.
E guarda te de la incizio de las arcerias las quals so en dos latz, e elongua la tua ma de la continuacio de amdos las mandibulas.	And guard yourself from the beginning of the arteries which are in two branches, and extend your hand from the continuation of both jaws.
E si’ l’espazi de quascuna inscizio la quantitat de tres ditz ajustatz.	And if the space of each incision the quantity of three digits adjust.
E si’ a tu una pessa d’espongua apparelhada o draps seccatz motz am les quals exsiccas le sanc.	And if you have a piece of sponge equipped or dry cloth at hand, place them over which to absorb the blood.
E aprop entremet le spatum de dos agudas extremitatz, del qual aquesta es la forma de la inscisio de lu:	And then insert the tip of two sharp instruments, of which this is the form of the incision:
que es de la partida des templas entro a la segonda inscizio.	that is from the opening between the temples into the second incision.
Exxcorja am aquel tota la codena la qual es entre dos incizios am le ciphac le qual es sobre le os, e aprop fay aquo de la inscizio migera entro a la segonda inscisio.	Excise all the tissue that is between two incisions along the saphenous line which is over the bone, and then do this of the middle incision into the second incision.
E aprop stratz ne aquest spatum e entromet en la primieyra inscizio autra vetz un autre instrument le qual es apelat cutellar, agut de una part e del autre no agut.	Then stab this space and insert it into the first incision. Another time use another instrument called a cutter, sharp on one side and blunt on the other.
E pausa le latz de aquel agut deves la carn annexa deves la codena, e le latz de lu leon dintz le os, e empelley aquel entro que pervengua a la fissura migera, e abscindeys am aquel totz les vaysels que descendo del cap als huels.	Then place the sharp edge to detach the surrounding flesh, and the blunt edge into the bone. Push it in so that it reaches the middle crack, and cut away all vessels that descend from the head to the heels.
Mays que sia continuada la inscizio ad aquo appar de la codena, e aprop fay aquo en la fissura migana entro al autra fissura.	More than that, continue the incision to where the tissue appears, and then do this in the middle crack between the other crack.
E pus que corr del sanc quantitat engual, exprem les locs de las pessas del sanc congilat.	And after the bleeding has equalized, express the areas of the feet with the congilat.
E aprop pausa en quascuna fissura calgua de coto vielh, e pausa sobre aquels polvils enbegutz en vi e oli e vi agre, e vegas que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then place your hand on any gouty crack in the old skin, and place it over those powders mixed in wine and oil and vinegar, ensuring that no abscess forms.
E en le tertz dia deslia le liament e aministra gran enfusio de aygua cauda o tebeza, e aprop cura aquo am enguent bazilicon am oli rozat e autres entro que las plaguas sian sanadas.	On the seventh day remove the bandage and administer a large fomentation of whey or honey water, and then cure what was applied with basil oil and others so that the wounds may heal.
Capitol .v.	Chapter V.
De la cura de lagramas per catartz e als huels descendentz de las partidas dedintz del cap.	For the cure of tears due to catarrh and those flowing from the inner parts of the head.
Quan ad alcu veno catartz agutz e continuantz, e vezes les huels del malaute extenuatz petitz, e ja le reguardament de lor es debelitat, e las palpebras ulceradas e de lor cazo les pels, e en le preon del cap es dolor aguda ledent e extrenutacio consequent, lahoras sapias per aquestz accidentz que las materias e catartz no veno sino de motas venas de las partidas dedintz procedent.	When there is an acute and continuous catarrh, and the tears from the eyes are diminished and weakened, and their gaze shows weakness, and the eyelids are ulcerated and the skin around them affected, and in the forehead there is severe pain and subsequent swelling, then you can infer that these conditions are due to matters and catarrh originating from the inner parts of the head.
E la milhor curacio en aquels es aquesta: que comandes al malaute que raza lo sieu front, e aprop inscideys en aquel una fissura al mieg loc del front, un petit per la latitut (e comensa am la fissura del templar senestre entro al dextre templar; e sia inscisio entro al os; e eslongua la tua ma dels lacertz del templas lesquals son maugutz deves la mastigacio), entro que sia le os descubert.	And the best cure for these conditions is this: you should command the patient to rub their forehead, and then incise a small crack in the middle of the forehead, about the width of a finger (beginning between the left temple and the right temple; within the bone; extend your hand from the temples where they are broadest, ensuring good penetration), until the bone is exposed.
Exsicca tot le sanc am espongua o am drap secc e aprop repleys entre las doas labias de la fissura am coto vielh o am draps de li.	Dry all the blood with sponge or dry cloth and then insert between the two lips of the fissure a piece of lint or a cloth.
E aprop estrenh desus am polvils enbegutz en vi e oli per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	Strengthen above with powders mixed in wine and oil so that it does not become an abscess when cauterized.
E quan deslias aquo e veses que l’apostema ja es diminuit, lahoras cove que fregua le os entro que comensa en lu nayser carn, e aprop cura aquel am regiment exsiccatiu le qual fassa neysser la carn, ayssi cum si tu prenes de farina de froment dos partidas e de colofania quatre partidas e mescla o, e de lor sia fayt emplastre e sia aministrat en aquestas plaguas a de la carn nativitat.	And when you remove this and see that the abscess has already diminished, then wash the bone where it begins to grow flesh, and then cure it with an exsiccative regimen that causes the flesh to mature, as if you take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of colophony and mix them, and from them make a plaster and administer it to these wounds of the flesh's nativity.
Capitol .vi.	Capitol. vi.
De la cura de aquo que catz en las aurelhas.	Of the cure for what enters the ears.
Tota causa que catz en las aurelhas es una de quatre specias, quar o es peyra mineral o causa semblant a peyra, ayssi cum ferr e veyre, o es de planta ayssi cum ceze o fava, o es causa fluxtibla ayssi cum aygua e vi agre e a lor semblantz, o alcuna bestia.	All cause that enters the ears is of four species: either it is mineral stone or a cause similar to stone, such as iron and vein, or it is from plants such as cypress or bean, or it is a fluxible cause such as water and sour wine and their类似内容似乎被截断了。请继续提供文本，以便我能完整地翻译每一行。
E donc quan peyra catz en l’aurelha o autra causa semblant de aquelas causas que no ajustan ne creysso en l’aurelha, e pausa la aurelha al solelh, e si vezes la peyra, lahoras distilla en aquela alcuna causa de oli violat o sizami, e aprop aministra la extraccio de lu, e fay le stornudar am condizi, e oppila las nars deve le aveniment de stornutacio.	And when a wart appears in the ear or another cause resembling those causes that do not affect or enter the ear, and you expose the ear to the sun, and if you touch the wart, then it distills into some cause of olive oil or sesame, then proceed with its extraction, and make it sneeze according to condition, and plug the nostrils to prevent sneezing.
E aprop pausa en le circuit de la aurelha alscunas pessas de drap o lana, e dextendas la aurelha a las partidas desus, quar motas veguadas es foro-getada am aquestas causas.	And place some pieces of cloth or wool in the circuit of the ear, and extend the ear to the parts above, where motas (small particles) are frequently found due to these causes.
E si no n’es getada, lahoras aministra extraccio de lu am le instrument apelat gesti epicicarios subtil del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if it is not removed, then proceed with the extraction using the instrument called gesti epicicarios, of which this is the form:
E si es foro-getada am gesti, bo es; e sino, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am onci subtil de pauca duplicacio.	And if it is removed by the gesti, that is good; otherwise, then proceed with the extraction using a fine, doubly folded hook.
E donc si no es foro-getada per aquo, lahoras fay una canula de aram e entromet la extremitat de la canula en le trauc de la aurelha e claus a l’enviro de la canula am cera e am oli mollificada per so que no sia ubert sino la canula.	And if it is not removed by this, then make a cannula of wire and insert the end of the cannula into the tract of the ear and close around the cannula with wax and with oil softened so that it does not open except the cannula.
E aprop extratz am le tieu vent am fort atraccio, quar tropas veguadas cum aquo que havem recontat.	And then extract the thigh muscle with strong traction, for too many times as we have recounted.
Mays si no es foro-getada en aquesta manieyra, lahoras pren de halka alumbat o de vecz aparelhat am le qual son preses les ausels una patita quantitat, e pausa aquel en la extremitat de ray, e aprop envolopa sobre aquel coto decentment pausat.	If it is not torn in this manner, then take a hot flaxen cloth or a warm compress with which the thighs are placed in contact for a quantity of time, and place that at the extremity of the thigh, and then wrap around that part decently.
E aprop entromet aquel en le trauc de la aurelha am facilitat, e aprop excicca la aurelha de la humiditat.	And then insert that into the meatus of the ear with ease, and then dry the ear of its moisture.
E donc si no es foro-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recontadas, lahoras tu coyta a talhar aquela denant que endevengua apostema caut o espasme.	And therefore if it is not torn by all the causes which we have recounted, then you cut to drain that which tends to become an abscess or spasm.
E la manieyra de talhar aquela es que tu al comensament sancnes le malaute de la vena sephasica e extratz del sanc segon la mannieyra de la vertut de lu, e aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas e converteys l’aurelha a las partidas desus, e fen am petita fissura en la razit de la aurelha deves lo greys de lu en le loc be premegut de lu.	And the way to cut it is that at the beginning you mark the thigh of the femoral vein and extract the cord according to the manner of its virtue, and then make a incision between your hands and turn the ear towards the parts above, and make a small fissure in the bottom of the ear, and place its greys in the well-compressed area.
E sia la fissura de figura lunar entro que pervengua a la peyra, e, la peyra atrobada, osta aquela si podes am instrumentz apropriatz; e aprop cos la fissura en aquela hora am velocitat, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And let the fissure of lunar shape reach to the heel, and, if the heel is infected, obstruct it if possible with appropriate instruments; then apply velocity to the fissure in that hour, and cure it while it is healing.
E si la causa cazent en la aurelha es un dels gras que creysso e so inflatz, lahoras aministra la curacio e la extraccio de lu; mays si no obezeys a tu ad eyssiment, lahoras tu pren spatum teune subtil segon aquesta forma:	And if the cause attacks the ear is one of the boils that swell and are inflamed, then administer the cure and extraction of it; but if it does not obey to your treatment, then take pure thin pus according to this form:
e aministra am aquel la abscizio de aquel gra lo qual es cazut en l’aurelha.	And administer to that the abscess of that boil which has attacked the ear.
E no fassas aquo quan cogitas que aquel ja es humectat per la vapor del aurelha, e pausa aquel en motas pessas, e prop extratz ne aquelas am les oncis o am gesti subtil, o ab inscizio ayssi co dit havem, quar es alleujada la extraccio de lu.	And do not do this when you think that it has already been moistened by the vapor of the ear, and place it on fine wicks, and then extract it in those areas near the edges or with subtle touch, or by incision as we have said, for this makes the extraction easier.
Mays en l’aygua la qual es intrada en l’aurelha cove que·l malaute use de sternutacio am condizi al comensament, e omple la sieua aurelha am alcu coto vielh, e jagua sobre aquela aurelha en la qual es l’aygua, e si per aquo es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, lahoras pren tropas peyras teunas e leons segon la longitut del dit, e calfa aquelas en le foc un pauc, e le pacient entrometa una de aquelas en le trauc de la sua aurelha e saute sobre la un pe sieu de aquela partida e percussia am una autra peyra sobre la peyra la qual es dintz la aurelha.	But in the water which has entered into the ear cavity where the disease uses sneezing to start its condition, and fills the ear with a little old wax, and pour this wax over the ear in which is the water, and if by this it is washed out, well; but if not, then take small pieces of flax or wool according to the length of your finger, and heat these in the fire for a little while, and the patient insert one of these into the passage of his ear and shake over a part of that piece and beat with another stone on the stone which is inside the ear.
Donc no cesse aquo am peyra entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada.	Do not stop applying heat until all the water has been expelled.
E ja l’aygua sira foro-getada enayssi que tu prenguas de papier o de gonc i, e met la una extremetat de lu en l’aurelha e estendas l’autre extremitat am foc entro que sia comburit le may de lu.	And when the water has been fully expelled, take a piece of paper or cloth, and put one end in the ear and extend the other end into the fire until the paper is burned.
E prop met i autre gonc e fay aquo tantas veguadas entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada, e stratz aquel am canula ayssi co desus es dit de la peyra extrasadora.	And put another piece of cloth and do this several times until all the water has been expelled, then squeeze it with a suction device as previously described.
Mays en la extraccio de bestia intrant en aquela aurelha, si es a petit cos, ayssi piussa e a lu semblant, cura aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio; mays si es de gran cos la qual causa apar al sen del vezement, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am gesti e oncis, e la causa de lu es pus leugiera de totas las autras causas que cazo en l’aurelha.	In the extraction of a small foreign body entering that ear, do this more gently and as it appears. Treat it as we have said in the division. But if it is a larger object causing immediate pain, then perform the extraction quickly and firmly, and the cause of it is less severe than all other causes that occur in the ear.
Mays en la extraccio de verm engendrat en la aurelha, quan tu curas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e en le tractat de distillacios e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu reguardes la aurelha al solelh.	In the extraction of a worm generated in the ear, when you treat it as we have said in the division and in the tractatus de distillationibus, and if your treatment is not effective, then look into the ear in the sunlight.
E donc si apar aqui alcuna causa dels verms, lahoras extratz aquel am gesti o am onci subtils, mays si no apar deguna causa, lahoras pren una canula dejos streyta e desus ampla de la qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if there appears any cause of worms, then extract that with forceps or fine tweezers, but if no cause appears, then take a cannula and stretch it open above.
E entromet la extremitat subtil en la aurelha segon la quantitat la qual suffertar puesca le malaute; e aprop sucgeys am aquela per succio fort, e fay aquo motas veguadas, entro que totz les verms sian foro-gitatz.	I introduce the subtle extremity into the ear according to the quantity that the patient can endure; and then suck it out with a strong suction, and do this several times until all the worms are expelled.
Mays si no obezeysso a tu al ayssiment, lahoras tu opila e claus en le circuit de la canula am cera ayssi cum havem dit; lahoras aministre distillacios las quals han ja esproadas les antics en la curacio dels verms, e atrobaras aquo en le tractat de distillacios.	But if they do not obey to your assistance, then you insert and close the circuit of the cannula with wax as we have said; then administer distillations which have already been prepared for the treatment of worms, and you will find this in the treatise on distillations.
E sia la tua efusio am la qual efundas les olis medicinas en la aurelha am aquest strument del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And let your application be with that which you will pour the medicinal oils into the ear with this instrument, which is its form.
E fay aquela de argent o de eram, dejos streyt, en le qual sia un petit trauc, e am pla desus.	And make that of silver or copper, stretch it out, in which there is a small tube, and with a flat surface above.
E donc sia cum empellent a que es en la conquavitat de la canula de continent aqui on sira necessari.	And thus it must be done so that it is in the cavity of the catheter here where it will be necessary.
E si vols, pren le ray e envolveys en la extremitat de lu decentment coto, e aprop gieta oli en la concavitat del auziment, o suc de alcuna herba, o aquo que vols de aquestas medicinas en la canula — e aquela es en la aurelha —, e aprop entromet le ray am coto desus e exprem am la tua ma aquel am compressio temprada de lu entro que l’oli sia expellit en la concavitat del auziment e le malaute senta le oli dedintz.	And if you wish, take the reed and wrap it around the extremity of the catheter decently tight, then place oil in the cavity of the ear, or the juice of some herb, or any medicine you choose into the catheter — that is in the ear —, and then insert the reed tightly above and squeeze with your hand a compressive pressure on it until the oil is expelled into the cavity of the ear and the illness feels the oil inside.
E aquo que sia enfundut en la aurelha sia ja scalfat am foc un petit.	And what is infused into the ear should already be heated over fire for a little while.
E guarda te que la causa la qual distillaras en l’aurelha no sia trop frega, quar las medicinas de aurelha no suffertan aquo.	And make sure that the medicine you will distill into the ear is not too hot, for ear medicines do not tolerate that.
Capitol .vii.	Capitol. vii.
De curacio de opilacio de aurelhas.	On the cure for ear abscesses.
Alcunas veguadas alcus enfantz yeysso dels ventres de lors mayres no-perforatz, e aquo ja accideys en alcus homes, opilacio en le meat de la aurelha per plagua o per carn nada en aquela; e aquesta opilacio alcunas veguadas es fayta en le preon del trau de la aurelha la qual no consiec le vezement, e alcunas veguadas es en las partidas defora.	Sometimes children are born with abscesses in the ears of their unperforated parents, and this occurs in some adults as well, with an abscess forming in the meat of the ear due to infection or without any apparent cause; sometimes these abscesses form in the preauricular region which does not become visible immediately, and sometimes they occur in the outer parts.
E aquela que accideys en le preon de lu, la qual no comprehen le vezement, es en las majors disposicios de dificil sanacio.	And that which occurs in the abdomen of the patient, which does not easily allow for visualization, is in the major disposiciones of difficult healing.
E en aquela en qual consegueys le vezement, cove que tu pauses la aurelha del malaute al solelh e reguarda en aquela.	And in that where you can see it, have the patient turn towards the sunlight and look at it.
E donc si vezes oppulacio apparent, obre aquela am espatum subtil del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if you see an apparent accumulation, open the small incision under which this accumulation is located:
Si’ la extremitat de lu en la qual sia petita la latitut, del qual la una partida sia aguda e l’autra no; e le spatum sia de dos latz leon per so que no fassa lizio al aurelha.	If the end of it where the width is small, and one part is acute while the other is not; and the incision be two fingerbreadths wide so as not to irritate the ear.
E donc si la opilacio es per carn nascuda en la aurelha o en le meat de lu, lahoras te aquela am oncis subtils e incidiys aquela vehement facilitat entro que sia ostada tota la carn.	And if the obstruction is in hidden flesh in the ear or in the meat of the ear, then make small incisions and cut deeply enough to remove all the flesh.
E si opilacio es en le preon de la aurelha, lahoras pren ray subtil leon e escalfa aquel am foc un pauc, e aprop met aquel en le meat de l’aurelha.	And if the obstruction is in the abdomen of the ear, then take a thin pointer and heat that for a little while in fire, and then place it in the flesh of the ear.
E donc si as scentit oppulacio am aquo que le malaute atroba am facilitat, per gravetat de ausir, esforsa la oppressio de lu am facilitat; e guarda te que no plagues les nervis del aurelha.	And if you sense an abundance of fluid where the patient complains with ease due to heaviness of breathing, relieve the oppression with ease; and be careful not to injure the nerves of the ear.
E aprop pausa en l’aurelha drap de li segon la quantitat del ample del trauc lo qual tu as envolvutz en l’enguent egipciac; e fay aquo per alcus jorns entro que sias segur de la consolidacio de la plagua; o que prenguas qualgua e enfon aquela en ayguaros e pulveriza sobre lu segi trissat e usa de lu; e si vezes la aurelha ja esser apostemada, lahoras cove que tu estraguas la qualgua e permutes aquela am autra qualgua la qual tu envoloparas en cerot que sia fayt am oli rozat, entro que sia le apostema caut cedat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And place the cloth in the ear according to the amount of fluid you have wrapped in Egyptian ointment. Do this for several days until you are sure of the consolidation of the wound; or soak some and apply it to the affected area, then sprinkle with dried trisact powder and use it. If you see that the ear is already swollen, then change the dressing and substitute another one which you wrap in a cloth soaked in olive oil, before the abscess ruptures; and cure the area until it is healed.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras submergeys esponga o drap en aygua frega e pausa sobre la aurelha, e usa del autra curacio la qual restrengeys le flux del sanc, la qual es dita en le tractat de distillacio.	And if a flow of blood occurs, then submerge the sponge or cloth in cold water and apply it to the ear, and use the other treatment which restrains the flow of blood, as described in the treatise on distillation.
Capitol .viii.	Capitol. VIII.
De cura de athezil le qual endeveno a las palpebras.	Of the care of abscesses which occur on the eyelids.
Athezil les quals endeveno a las paupebras dels huels alcuna veguada so humitz, alscunas veguadas son secs.	Abscesses which occur on the eyelids sometimes are humid, and some times are dry.
Donc cove que tu tenguas aquels am tenhalhas o am onci, e inscindas aquels am espatum de las suas razitz, e aprop pausa sobre les locs segi trissat.	Then ensure that you have those lancets or spoons, and incise those with the foam of their roots, and place your hand over the areas after trisecting.
Mays si dolor am flux de sanc veno, lahoras tu cauteriza aquels am cauteri lanticular subtil.	But if there is pain with a flow of hot blood, then cauterize those with a thin cautery lance.
E la milhor cauterizacio es aprop las inscizios e tropas veguadas retornam quan reman alcuna causa de sas razitz; e quan so cauterizadas am foc, aquelas razitz son comburidas e no retornan.	And the best cauterization is near the incisions and the sores return when there remains any cause of their roots; and when they are cauterized with fire, those roots are burned and do not return.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter IX.
Cura de grandeyssa que veno a las palpebras dels huels.	Care of the swelling that hot blood causes on the eyelids.
Motas veguadas endeve en las palpebras dels huels alcuna causa la qual es asemblada a grandissa en sa fortalicia e duricia, e per so grandissia es apelada.	Swellings sometimes occur on the eyelids of the eye due to some cause which is similar in its strength and hardness, and hence is called swelling.
E es agreguacio de humiditat grossa en la palpebra dejos e desus.	And it is an addition of large humidity in the eyelid below and above.
Donc la opperacio en lor es que consideras lahoras si la grandissia es procedent en lu en aquo que apar de la palpebra e es mauguda a tota partida; e la causa de lu es leugiera.	And in their operation, you must consider whether the swelling is present in them beneath and above the eyelid; and the cause of it is slight.
Donc fen sobre aquela am fissura per la latitut, e aprop escorga aquela de tota partida am facilitat entro que evasesca, e aprop suspen aquela am onci e abscindeys aquela.	And make a slit there for the width, and then probe it thoroughly with an instrument to facilitate drainage, and suspend it and cut it.
Mays si a tu no es apparelhada la incizio de lu si no pus que penetras la palpebra am inscizio pauc a pauc, lahoras aquo no notz en deguna causa.	But if you do not have an instrument to start with, so that you must penetrate the eyelid with a few incisions, then do so without any cause.
E si la figura es gran, lahoras tu l’ajusta am sutura; e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the wound is large, then you adjust it with sutures; and care for it so that it heals.
E si es pauca, a tu no sobrevindra mal per aquela quar l’anguent de lu restaura aquela e encarna.	And if it is small, you will not suffer ill from it because the ointment restores and heals it.
E si la grandissia es declinant a las partidas dedintz de la palpebra deves la superficia dedintz, lahoras evesa la palpebra e suspen la grandissia am onci, otra que tu indigescas de incizio, e prem aquela de tota part, e si la palpebra per inscizio es alonguada, aquo no notz en deguna causa.	And if the swelling is subsiding inside the eyelid, you should reduce the inner surface, then probe and lift the eyelid with an instrument, another for incision, and press it from all sides. If the eyelid is elongated by incision, then this is not a cause for concern.
E aprop la incizio, lava le huel am aygua salada; e cura le loc am aquo que encarna entro que sia sanat.	And at the beginning, wash well with salt water; and cover the area with water until it is healed.
Capitol .x.	Capitol.
De la cura axcirnah en la palpebra desus del huel.	For the cure of excision in the upper eyelid.
Axcirnath es grays le qual es engendrat en las tunicas de la palpebra desus, e majorment endeve als enfantz, agrava les huels de aquels et accideyso a lor catartz le mayti; e no podon reguardar la claror del solelh per aquo quar lagremas se coytan ad aquels.	Excision is caused by gray substances that are generated in the tissues of the upper eyelid, especially in children, aggravates their illnesses and leads to their death; and they cannot look at the brightness of the sun for this reason, causing tears to flow continuously.
E per so tu vezes aquels jaser sobre les lors caras tot temps, e sobre les lors caras dormen; e so a las palpebras de lor dejos les sobrecils humidas, las quals ja ha cuberta imflacio, e iminencia de accernac apparent es en l’uelh; e que quant tu premes le loc am les tieus ditz, tu centes accernac entro aquels.	And for this reason, they often have tears streaming down their faces all the time, and sleep with tears on their faces; only on the eyelids of their eyes are the eyebrows moist, which are already covered by inflammation, and the impending need for excision is apparent in the eye; and when you press on the area with hot compresses, you can feel the excision between them.
E alcuna manieyra de opperacio es en aquel que le malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop pausa drap de li e de lu fay calgua, e fay de lu cercle segon la quantitat la qual contena arthernach de tota partida, e aprop pausa aquel sobre aquela e prem am les tieus ditz de tota per que sia agreguat arcernac en le mieg del cercle, e aprop fen en le mieg de aquela humiditat am spatum inscident am fissura per la latitut, e la fissura no sia major que la fissura que es fayta en flaubotomia.	And some method of operation is as follows: the patient places their head on a hot compress, then covers them with a cloth and ties it securely. A circle is made according to the quantity that contains arthronach from all parts, and this is placed over the previous one, pressing with hot compresses so that excision fluid aggregates in the center of the circle. Then, in the center of this moisture, incise along the width, ensuring the fissure is no larger than the incision made in a flap operation.
Mays en le preon cove que tu fendas la codena tota entro que pervenguas ad arcernach, quar en las mays desposicios proceseys arcernach per fissura segon la forma de grayseza blanca.	More in the preceding cavity where you open the chain entirely until you reach the artery, for in the later complications you proceed with the artery through a fissure according to the form of whiteness.
Donc extratz aquela am draps los quals tu as envolopatz entre les tieus ditz a las partidas deforo e revolv entre la ma dextra e sinistre entro que sia dispargut.	Therefore, extract those from the cloths which you have wrapped around your feet and mix them between your right and left hand until they are dispersed.
E guarda te que no ajustes en la fissura per so que am le spatum no pervenguas al huel e ladescas aquel.	And make sure you do not press at the fissure so that the spatum does not reach the vein and lest it cause damage.
Mays si no apar a tu arternach en le comensament de la fissura, mays que tu ajustes en la fissura un petit am fecilitat entro que procesisca arternach; e aprop extratz aquela ayssi quo havem dit; e aprop submargeys draps de li en aygua e vi agre e pausa les sobre le loc e estrenh aquels am polvils.	More if no artery appears at the beginning of the fissure, then press a small amount of facilitation into the fissure before proceeding with the artery; and then extract those as we have said; and further immerse cloths in water and vinegar and place them over the area to strengthen those with powder.
E so alcus que trissan sal e pausan aquel en la conquavitat de la fissura per so que aquo que es remas de aquela humiditat.	And so rub with salt and place it in the cavity of the fissure to remove what remains of that humidity.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And further cure it until it is healed.
Mays si accideys en le loc apostema caut, lahoras cura aquel am emplastres cedatils entro que sia sanat.	And if an abscess occurs in that place, then cure it by applying caustic plasters until it is healed.
Capitol .xi.	Capitol. xi.
De manieyras de tactimi del huel.	Methods of palpation of the whole body.
Quan en las palpebras dels huels so natz pels ajustatz dejos les pels naturals e so antiquatz, lahoras aquels noso al huel e fan endevenir manieras de malautias ayssi cum lacrimas assiduas e mollificacio de palpebras e tela entro que aquo sia causa de destruccio del huel que s’apela tactinir del huel, e cura se en quatre manieyras: o per cauteri am foc; o am medicina acuta segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri; o es fayt atactini per inscizio e sutura; o per cannas segon que yeu diyre.	When in the eyelids of the eye sooted dyes are applied to the natural skin and it becomes hardened, then those nothings of the eye become signs of illness such as continuous tearing, softening of the eyelids, and tissue that is a cause of destruction of the eye. This condition is called tactinir of the eye, and it is cured in four ways: by cauterization with fire; by acute medicine as previously described in the Capitol on cauterization; by incision and suturing; or by cannulas as I will explain later.
E donc cove que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se; aprop converteys la palpebra del uelh am la tua ma sinistra, e si es convertida, bo es; e sino, entromet agulha en aquela en la qual sia fiel de la partida pus dejos de la palpebra, e fay penetrar la agulha am fiel desus, e aquo sia — prop del marge de la palpebra en le qual naysso les pels — prop dels pels, e tira le fiel a las partidas desus am la palpebra, e converteys aquela am le ray.	And thus cover the head of the eye with your left hand; then turn the eyelid of the eye with your right hand. If it turns, good; otherwise, insert a needle into that where the thread is tied from the part where the eyelid ends, and make the needle penetrate with thread above, and this should be — near the margin of the eyelid where the skin begins — next to the skin, and pull the thread to the parts above the eyelid, then turn it back.
E aprop fen en la partida dedintz de la palpebra dejos les pels ajustatz am spatum inscidentz del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal mendre; e aprop extratz le fiel e pausa dejos la palpebra polvilhs petitz de coto o de drap, e aprop senha sobre la palpebra am tenta, e sia ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirt.	And then place the skin tightly against the surface of the inner eyelid, between the major lacrimal gland and the minor lacrimal gland; next remove the fat and dust the eyelid with fine powder of cork or cloth, and cover the eyelid with a tent, as illustrated by the shape of a mirt leaf.
Mays empero cove que sia la figura segon la quantitat de helevacio de la palpebra, quar aquo ja es diversificat en les homes, quar de aquels es le quals indigeys que sia inscidit de la palpebra gran quantitat segon la quantitat per la qual la palpebra es mollificada.	But I must observe that the shape should be according to the amount of eversion of the eyelid, for which varies in women, for those in whom a large amount of the eyelid is to be evaginated according to the degree to which it is relaxed.
E aprop fen am le spatum sobre las doas linhas las quals has senhadas, e comensa del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal menor.	And then place the surface on the two lines you have marked, and begin between the major lacrimal gland and the minor lacrimal gland.
E si’ la tua fissura prop dels pels naturals ayssi cum es la grossetut del rey.	And if your incision near the natural skin is as thick as the king's thumb.
E aprop met le onci en un dels dos angles de la codena, e aprop excoria aquela tota, e aprop ajusta am la scitura las doas labias am gula o fiel de lana subtil, e abstergeys le sanc, e fay adherir aquo que superflueys dels fiels sobre dos sobrecils am alcunas causas enviscans, si voles far aquo, e sino, non cures.	And then place the probe in one of the angles of the wound, and excoriate it completely, and then suture the two edges with a needle or fine woolen thread, and cleanse the wound, and apply what remains of the threads over two bone ridges for some viscous causes, if you wish to do this, otherwise, you are done.
E aprop leyssa la sutura dels fiels entro a tres dias o quatre, e aprop cura aquo.	And after that, let the stitching of the veins be left in for three or four days, and then cure this.
E si vols, layssa la plagua ses sutura, e cura aquela am aquo que exsicca e constrenh, quar la palpebra es alevada deves la sigillacio de la plagua e la agreguacio de lu; mays sutura es milor E donc aysso diysso les antics de taxanir.	And if you wish, leave the wound open without stitching, and cure it by what dries and constricts, for when the eyelid is swollen you should apply the closure of the wound and its addition; but stitching is better. Therefore say this to the ancients thus.
Mays empero en lu sia sollicitut sobre le malaute, e es de bona operacio, e no es en lu temor.	But if the patient is diligent about the illness, and it is of good operation, and not out of fear.
E es autra manieyra en taxmir, e es que senhes sobre la palpebra figura ayssi cum fuelha de mirt, e aprop eleva la palpebra am tres uncis segreguatz e congreguatz segon aquesta forma:	And another method of treating it is to figure the eyelid like the leaf of a myrtle, and then elevate the eyelid by three inches separating and joining according to this form:
Mays si no es possible aquo, tener les uncis, e aquo no es engualhat, lahoras pren una agula en la qual haia fil e met aquela en le mieg de la figura, e entromet le autre fiel prop le lacrimal major, e·l fiel segon prop le lacrimal mendre, e ajusta entre les tieus ditz les fiels am equalitat, e aprop am aquels eleva la tua ma am elevacio engual, eleva tota la codena sobre la qual es senhat ayssi cum havem recomtat.	But if this is not possible, take the pins, and as it is unequal, then take a needle with thread and put that in the middle of the figure, and insert the other thread near the major lacrimal gland, and the other near the minor lacrimal gland, and adjust between the ties said threads to equality, and then raise your hand for elevation equally, raising the entire codena over which it is marked as we have recommended.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then adjust the two edges of the wound with stitches, and cure that which is within until it is healed.
Mays si accideys apostema deves la tua inscizio o la tua fissura, seda aquel apostema am cerot e a lu semblantz, e am enguentz.	And if you make an incision or a fissure, suture that apostema with thread and in the same manner, and apply ointment to it.
E alcunas veguadas endeve a la palpebra que·ls sieus pels sian convertitz, adonc cove que tu uses en aquela de aquo que havem dit de inscizio; mays sutura en quascus es mays artificial.	And in some cases on the eyelid, let its edges be converted. Then use the incision that we have mentioned for this purpose; but suture in such a way as to be more natural.
Ataxinir am cannas es segon aquesta forma:	To treat with canes is according to this form:
e es que tu convertas la palpebra e scindas la figura qu’es dedintz segon que he recontat; e aprop per art fay doas cannas o doas astelas subtils de las quals longitut sia segon la longitut de la palpebra e la latitut de lor sia mendra de la latitut del spatum.	And you convert the eyelid and split the figure that is inside according to what I have recounted; then, with art, make two canes or two thin strips whose length be according to the length of the eyelid and their width a third of the width of the space.
E tu ja has inscidit en las extremitatz de quascunas partidas, la on tenes les fils.	And you have incised at the extremities of some parts, where you have the threads.
Aprop agregua quascuna am subtilitat subre aquo que superflueys de la palpebra del huel, e constres las cannas de quascunas partidas am fort strictura, e layssa aquela per alcus jorns, quar la codena per la strictura morira e sira denegada e se poyrira entro que per si meteyssa cayra.	Then add any subtlety over what you have excised from the lid of the eye, and compress the canals of various parts with strong constraint, and leave that for a few days, for the clot will die through the constraint and be denied, and it will fall out when it can by itself come down.
Mays si es tardat, lahoras trenca la am las toroyras, e aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanat.	If it is delayed, then cut the edges of the wound, and proceed to cure the sore until it is healed.
Donc cum es solidada, la palpebra es elevada e les pels no pungo.	Then since it is solidified, the lid is elevated and the skin does not hurt.
E aquesta es la forma de doas cannas las quals faras segon aquesta forma:	And this is the way of two canals which you will make according to this form:
e haia la quantitat de la longitut e de la latitut ni mays ni mens.	and has neither more nor less in the length and width.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter XII.
De elevacio de pels pungentz en le huel am agula quan le pel es dur.	For the elevation of painful skin on the eyelid using an awl when the skin is tough.
Quan son pels no-naturals, durs e aspres e pungentz les huels, lahoras la operacio en lu es que tu prenguas agula subtil e pauses en aquela fiel de ceda subtil e leon, e aprop que tu ajustes las extremitatz de lu e nozes quascu en manieyra mot subtil.	When they are unnatural, hard, rough, and painful eyelids, the operation for them is that you take a fine awl and place it on that fine fiber of each eyelid, and then adjust the ends of the awl in a very subtle manner.
E sia la longitut dels fiels de quantitat de una palma.	And let the length of the threads be the width of one palm.
E aprop tu compon2 autre fiel subtil dejos lu en breu, e nuza las extremitatz de aquel si tu·t vols.	And then prepare another thin thread and place it briefly under the affected area, using the ends of that one if you want.
E aprop pause le malaute le sieu cap en le tieu se, e sia prop del solelh per que la tua obra sia declarada, quar es operacio subtil e menuda.	And then place the patient's head in a warm bed, and expose it to the sun so that your work is effective, for it is a delicate and intricate operation.
E aprop intromet la agulha en la razit del pel ajustat la qual ha necessitat de engen, e fay aquela penetrar en la palpebra festinantment entro que extraguas aquela desus le pel natural.	And then insert the needle into the cleft of the tightly adjusted skin, adjusting it with your hand, and let that penetrate deeply into the eyelid between the time you withdraw it from above the natural skin.
E aprop tire le pel entro desus e intromet aquel en alixati, e sian les pels un o dos o tres e no mays.	And then pull the skin tight above and insert that into the incision, with the skins being one or two or three, but not more.
E aprop tira la tua ma am aquel entro que·l pel sia fora-gitat am alixolati en la palpebra am le pel natural.	And then pull your hand there so that the skin is tightly adjusted in the incision on the eyelid with the natural skin.
Mays si es atirat alixalati e non es gitat le pel, atiraras alixati a las partidas dejos am le fiel le qual tu has compost am aquela, entro qu’en sia gitat alixalati del trau sobira.	Otherwise, if the skin is tightened with the cauterized thread and the skin does not come out, tighten the cauterized thread at the points where you placed the thread, so that the excess from the wound will be drawn in.
E vegas aquela am la visio del huel, quar lahoras tu gitaras alixati e lo fiel, e grotan quascu e clautz le huel, e laysse le claus per dos dias o tres, entro que·l pel adheresca al sieu loc e nasque sobre aquel bona carn.	And when you tie the ligament of the heel, then you will straighten and pull it, stretch it, and close the heel, and leave it closed for two or three days until the hair adheres to its place and grows over that good flesh.
E si es mays breu le pel, lahoras tu ajusta un pel lonc dels pels naturals, e es elevat am aquel, o que·l leysses entro que sia alonguat aprop alcu spazi, e lehoras tu eleva aquel.	And if the hair is shorter, then you adjust a longer piece of skin from the natural hairs, elevate it at that place, or leave it until it stretches somewhat to fill the space, and then you elevate that.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter XIII.
De la cura de ehacratir la qual ve en la palpebra desus.	For the cure of ahceratitis which is in the upper eyelid.
Quan ve en le huel ehacratir, e es contraccio de la palpebra quan es contrayta en sus, o a dextra o a sinistra partida, per mala consolidacio de plagua o de seccio o de cauteri, e es apelada leporina, e aquesta ahercrati o es natural o accidental, e es fayta per consolidacio de plagua o de seccios o de cauteri, o per semblantz a lor malcuratz.	When there is ahceratitis in the heel, and it is a contraction of the eyelid when it contracts towards the upper or lower part, due to poor consolidation of the wound or section or cautery, it is called leporina. This ahcerati can be either natural or accidental, caused by the consolidation of the wound or sections or cauteries, or resembling them in their condition.
May la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que tu fendas aquela consolidacio e que separes las labias de lu, e pauses en lu en aquo que es entre aquelas una meca de drap de li, e ligues aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	May the manner of the operation on him be that you make that consolidation and separate the lips of him, and place in him in what is between those one cheek of cloth, and tie those together until they are healed.
E no cove que tu uses de curacio de lu de las causas las quals exsiccan, constrenho; quar si tu fas aquo retorna alixacratir pus mal que nulh temps no foc habantz.	And know that you should use the cure for those causes which dry up, as they constrain; for if you do this, it will return to aggravate worse than it was before without your attention.
Usa en aquela de causas que mollifico ayssi cum es fenugrec, e embroca am la aygua en la qual son coytz altea e semensa de li, o enguent dyaquilon, le qual sia liquefayt am alcu dels olis, e submergeys en aquel la meca, e cura am aquel.	Use for those causes that mollify thus as with fenugreek, and soak the cloth in water in which it is boiled and its seed, or a unguent of yarrow, which be liquefied by some of the oils, and submerge the cheek in that, and cure with that.
E lo tesaur de la tua curacio es que tu perforsses am tot engen que no sia consolidat segon la forma que foc al comensament.	And the treasure of your cure is that you perforate with all means that are not consolidated according to the form that was at the beginning.
E aquesta operacio la qual havem dita, no es sino alcuna rectificacio de ehalixacrati que no retorna la forma del loc segon que foc denant.	And this operation which we have said is nothing but some correction of gout that does not return the form of the place as it was before.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter XIV.
De la cura de ehacrati le qual es fayt en la palpebra dejos.	For the treatment of hemorrhoids that occur in the eyelid, proceed.
Aquesta alxacrati la qual es fayta en la palpebra dejos, la qual es nompnada vertadierament alxacrati; e es de lu alcuna natural, autra accidental.	This hemorrhoid that occurs in the eyelid, which is named vertere generally, and it can be either natural or accidental.
Mays accidental es fayta per plagua o per scissura o per cauteri o per autres semblantz.	More accidentally, it is caused by injury or切割或烙伤或其他类似原因。
E la via de la operacio de lu es que tu prenguas una agula en la qual haga fil doble, e fiques aquela en la carn, e que la fassas passar del lacrimal de senestre entro al lacrimal dextre, entro que·l fil pervengua en las doas extremitatz de la carn.	For the operation of its treatment, you should take a needle and make a double thread, placing that needle in the flesh, and make it pass from the left lacrimal to the right lacrimal, so that the thread reaches the two ends of the flesh.
E aprop exten la carn a las partidas desus am la agula e cus aquela am la agula, e inscideys am spatum ample.	Then extend the flesh at the upper parts above the needle and sew that with a thick blade.
E donc si retorne la figura de la palpebre segon que cove, bo es; e sino, pren le ray e pausa aquel en la figura fenduda, e am aquel converteys la palpebra, e fen las doas fissuras en le latz de la palpebra dejos.	And therefore, if you return the shape of the eyelid as it should be, that is good; otherwise, take a needle and place it in the divided figure, then with that convert the eyelid, and make the two fissures on the edge of the eyelid.
E sian las extremitatz de las doas fissuras de dos angles de la inscizio, la qual has fayta entro que concurren, e sia de lor fayt angle entro que quan se congreguan sia fayta figura de lor.	And if the ends of the two cracks at the corners of the incision, which you have made where they converge, are to be made into an angle such that when they come together a figure is formed.
E aquesta figura es letra greca: la landa.	And this figure is the Greek letter: lambda.
E aprop osta la carn aquela per la quantitat que es le latz de lu agut dejos de lu, aquo que siec la palpebra.	And then place the flesh there for the quantity that is the length of the sharp edge left from it, what we call the eyelid.
E aprop ajusta las partz seperadas e cos aquelas am le fil de lana; e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit de las medicinas mollificativas e de las calguas entro que sia sanat.	And then adjust the separated parts with the wool thread; and then treat those with what we have said about the moistening medicines and the plaster until it is healed.
E si alxacrati endeve per fissura o sutura o cauteri, lahoras cove que tu fendas am fissura plana sobre les pels de la palpebra segon que es precedit.	And if you incise further for a crack or suture or cautery, then cut a flat incision on the skin of the eyelid according to what has been previously described.
E aprop separa am la calgua entre doas labias segon que havem dit.	And then separate with the plaster between two lips as we have said.
En la suma del sermo de la cura de alxacrati quan es desus o dejos, que corra en lu operacio, segon que es preparat de la forma de alxacrati, e aquela es en forma de motas diversitatz.	In the end of the discourse on curing incisions when they are above or left over, let it run in the operation according to how it is prepared in the form of the incision, and that is in the form of various speckles.
E le artifexs savi totz temps prepara engen en quascuna manieyra la qual es possibla a lu entro que fassa retornar la figura a la forma natural, o prop de aquela, e aquel malaute segon que a lu conveneys de la operacio e dels strumentz en las majors disposicios.	And the skilled craftsmen always prepare tools in every manner that is possible for him to return the figure to its natural form or near it, and that malade according to what suits him from the operation and the instruments in the major arrangements.
Capitol .xv.	Capitol XV.
De la adherencia de la palpebra am la conjunctiva o am la cornea.	Of the adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea.
Quan accideys aquesta consolidacio a motz homes enayssi que sia solidada la palpebra pus desus am le album del huel, e sia prohibida de la facilitat del movement e de las suas obras naturals, donc cove que tu entrometas la extramitat del ray dejos la palpebra, e eleva en sus aquela, o exten aquela am le unci.	When this consolidation occurs in men, one attempts to solidify the eyelid above on the white of the eye, and to prohibit its ease of movement and its natural actions. Therefore, you should introduce the outer corner of the ray, leave the eyelid, and elevate it or extend it to the cheek.
E aprop tu inscideys la adherencia am spatum subtil, le qual no sia am acuitat de las inscisios, habantz obtus un petit per so que·l malaute no sia inquietat deves la operacio, e remau le spatum que no ledesca le huel am la sua acuitat.	And then you incise the adhesion with a fine blade, which should not be of sharp incisions, having a slightly obtuse edge so that the patient is not disturbed by the operation, and leave the fluid to maintain its sharpness.
E sia la tua inscizio quays excorjan aquela adherencia am facilitat entro que sia retornada la palpebra segon la sua forma natural e que sia sanada tota la adherencia.	And let your incision be such that it causes the adhesion to separate easily as the eyelid returns to its natural form, and may all the adhesion heal.
E aprop tu met en le huel aygua salada am la qual tu laves; o distilla en lu de zunia dissolvut en l’aygua.	And then you put in the full salt water with which you wash; or distill in it zuni dissolved in water.
E aprop separa entre la palpebra e l’huel am calgua de li, e pausa sobre le huel lana infuza en album de huou, e aprop le tertz jorn usa de causas consolidativas entro que sia sanat.	And then separate between the eyelid and the full salt water, and place over the eye wool infused in bile of hen, and after the third day use conservative causes until it is healed.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter XVI.
De inscizio de ungla e de eminencia de carn dels lacrimals.	On the incision of the gland and the prominence of flesh of the lacrimal area.
Sapias que ungla es segon dos manieyras, quar o es nervosa, e es semblant a ciphac dur subtil; o es no-nervosa, semblant a humiditat blanca congilada, la qual quan ferr la toca, o es forsat aquela prendre am onci, es abscindida e le onci no es ficat en lu.	Know that the gland can be of two manners: one is nervous, and it resembles a thin hard chip; the other is non-nervous, resembling white congealed moisture. When you touch it, if it is necessarily taken up, it is incised and the moisture is not inserted into it.
E amdos las specias no comensan sino del lacrimal major entro que va petit a petit que cobre la vista e prohibeys le lum e·l movement de huel.	And both species do not begin but from the major lacrimal gland, which gradually covers the eye and prevents light and full movement.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en la inscizio de lu es que·l malaute pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop obre les huels de lu, e eleva la palpebra am la tua ma, e aprop colligeys la ungla am onci de pauca duplicacio e exten aquela a las partidas desus.	More specifically, the manner of acting in the incision of the gland is that the patient places their head in the crook of your arm, then opens their eyes, and elevates their eyelid with your hand. Then, collect the gland in small pieces and extend it to the upper parts.
E aprop pren una agula e entromet en aquela un pel de cavalh o de buou o de vaqua, o de semblantz, o de fiel fort, o duplica la extremitat de la agulha petit a petit e fica aquela en le mieg de la ungla, e penetra aquela am la agulha, e lia am fiel la ungla; e exten aquela a las partidas desus, e excorja am le pel le latz de la ungla lo qual siec la pupilla.	And then take a needle and insert into it a hair of horse or ox or cow, or similar, or strong thread, or gradually double the tip of the needle little by little and place that in the middle of the nail, and penetrate that with the needle, and tie the nail with glue; and extend that to the parts above, and scrape off the skin the liquid from the nail which cures the pupil.
E ayssi tu sieguas aquela am le pel entro al derier de lu.	And then follow that into the depth of the eye with the hair.
E aprop tu inscideys le romanent en la razitz del lacrimal am spatum subtil o am petitas forfexs, e leysa la carn del lacrimal natural per so que per inscizio de aquela no endevengua fluxs de lagremas continuabla.	And then incise the duct in the corner of the eye with a fine spatum or small forceps, and leave the natural flesh of the eyelid so that by incision of that it will not cause continuous flow of tears.
E alscunas vetz la ungla am le sol onci estenduda o am fiel, ayssi co havem dit, e aprop sia excurjat am spatum leon del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And sometimes the nail in the socket when extended or with glue, as we have said, and then scrape off with a lion's tooth of which this is the form:
E guarda te que am le spatum no toques la tunica cornea e que avengua en lu ruptura, e que la pupilla sia perforada.	And be careful that with the spatum you do not touch the corneal membrane, and even if there is a rupture in it, and that the pupil is not perforated.
Aprop la inscizio geta en le huel un pauc de sal trissa o di cief fayt de siniar, e leyssa aquel entro al autre dia; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	Near the incision make a small cut on the skin with a needle or knife made of iron, and leave that there for another day; then cure that as what comes between should be healed.
E si la ungla no es nervoza e no podes metre la agulha, ni es ficada en aquela le onci, lahoras motas veguadas aquesta specia de ungla es curada am medicinas, e es sanada ayssi cum yeu e recomtat en la divisio.	And if the wound is not nervous and you cannot put the needle there, then sprinkle this kind of powder on the wound; it will be cured with medicines and healed as recommended in the division.
E si tu vols inscindir aquela, lahoras tu obre le huel del malaute e pren spatum subtil leon de freul acuitat segon aquesta forma:	And if you want to incise it, then open the wound of the patient and take fine dust of sharp iron according to this form:
am subtilitat.	with subtlety.
E si vezes que aquela es rarificada e es confugida e empren en aquela razit, lahoras distilla de la tua ora en le huel de cief fayt de siniar o am cief rog o am sal trissat, e opila le huel entro a l’autre dia.	And if you see that it is rarified and congested and pressed into the razor, then distill from your mouth into the wound of iron made of steel or of charcoal or of salted iron, and plug the wound with another piece.
E aprop itera sobre aquela la operacio entro que sia remaugut tot aquo que es de lu, sino que·l contrari apostema caut sia en le huel, quar lahoras tu leyssa aquela, e cura al comensament la apostema entro que sia sanat.	Then repeatedly perform the operation until all that is from it is removed, otherwise if a carbuncle forms in the wound, then leave that, and cure the carbuncle as it heals.
E aprop itera la tua operacio sobre aquela am razo entro que sia sanat.	And then repeat your operation as much as necessary until it is healed.
La emenencia de la carn lacrimal, si notz en le huel per gran nocument, sia suspendut am onci; e inscideys aquela de aquela una partida, e no ultimes la inscizio per so que no inscidesqua fluxs de lagremas.	The gland of the tear duct, if noted for great discomfort, should be suspended with an onion; and incise a part of it, ensuring not to cut off the flow of tears.
E aprop distilla en le lacrimal cief rog e fayt de siniar entro que sia sanat.	And then let the tear duct drip with a hot cloth and keep it moist until it is healed.
Capitol .xvii.	Capitol. XVII.
De inscizio de alguazardenic e de aquo que es nascut de carn ajustada en le huel.	On the incision of the guardardenic and what arises from flesh pressed against it.
Alcunas veguadas en les huels de alcus es nascuda carn roga, e es sobre-pausada entro que cobre la pupilla, o apropinqua o estrenh sobre las palpebras e fort leu comprem las palpebras a las partidas deforo e es assemblada a roza de balaustra.	In some cases in the eyes, new flesh presses against it, and is covered over until it covers the pupil, or strengthens near the eyelids, making them lift the parts outward and adhere to the edge of the orbital bone.
Mays la operacio en lu es que·l malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se; e aprop obre les huels de aquel e colligeys tota aquela carn am oncis convenientz ad aquo, e te aquo am una forcep o am cesti; e aprop inscindiys la carn el comensament entro que tot sia finit am le encisori, e guarda te del huel que no ledescas aquel deves la tua operacio.	First, the patient's head is placed in cold water; then open the eye, and collect all that flesh with convenient incisions using forceps or a clamp. Then incise the flesh at the beginning, ensuring it is complete with the scalpel, and keep the area covered to prevent any part from escaping during your operation.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscides aquelas o am espatum le qual nos havem recomtat en la inscizio de la ungla, o am petitas forfexs am las quals es colligit ascebel segon que vindra la forma de lu aprop aquest capitol.	And let your incision be where you cut those or through the spine which we have recommended in the finger incision, or through small pincettes with which accebels are gathered according to the form it will take near this chapter.
Donc cum es complida la tua inscizio e es remauguda tota aquela carn, lahoras omple le huel de sal trissa, o destilla en lu polvera roga e semblantz a lu de las medicinas corrossivas, e pausa sobre le huel deforo coto am album de huou entro que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	So when your incision is completed and the entire flesh is thoroughly moistened, then fill it with dry salt, or sprinkle in powder resembling that of corrosive medicines, and place something like a walnut shell around it until an abscess is formed.
E si roman alcuna causa de alguardenici e es senhoragat sanc caut, e temes apostema caut, lahoras leyssa le huel e cura aquela apostema am aquo que ceda aquela apostema, e aprop itera sobre aquel am operacio entro que sia sanat, e semblantment fay en la carn ajustada la qual accideys en le huel de aquesta especia.	And if there is any cause for retention and it is seared with cautery, and you fear an abscess, then leave the wound open and treat that abscess as one would treat that abscess, and repeatedly perform this operation until it is healed, and similarly do in the flesh adjusted which you encounter in the wound of this kind.
Mays empero tu cove que alienes tota curacio del huel freul per via natural o per via accidental, obran am ferr, e no metas la tua ma en alcuna de aquestas operacios entro que veges que aquel membre sia suffertant aquela operacio.	But you must ensure that all healing of the wound by natural means or by accident occurs through iron, and do not place your hand in any of these operations until you see that the limb is suffering from this operation.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter XVIII.
De colleccio de sabel en le huel.	From the collection of knowledge in the whole.
Sabel so venas rogas las quals son testudas sobre le huel e prohibeysso al vesement la sua operacio, e develican le huel am longitut de dias.	Knowledge of veins that are thick in the whole and prohibit their operation, and expand the whole for days.
Donc necessari es al comensament que tu consideres si le huel en le qual es sabel es fort e en lu no es autra malautia que sabel, lahoras tu colligeys aquel sabel.	Therefore, at the beginning, you must consider if the pain in which knowledge is applied is strong and if there is no other ailment than the pain, then you gather that knowledge.
E es que tu comandes al malaute que pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop suspen aquelas venas am un onci o am dos segon la tua prudencia; e sia aquel onci de subtil duplicacio segon aquesta forma:	And you command the patient to place his head in cold water, and then suspend those veins for one or two minutes according to your prudence; and let that minute be of subtle duplication according to this form:
o so dos oncis gradantment en un cos segon aquesta forma:	or two minutes gradually in one breath according to this form:
E aprop sian colligidas aquelas venas am forses subtils, am subtilitat, e abstergeys le sanc hora aprop hora, entro que vegas aquelas venas esser remaugudas del huel e sian revolgudas.	And let those veins be gathered with subtle forces, by subtlety, and cleanse the wound hour by hour, while observing that those veins are drawn from the pain and are revolved.
E guarda te que tu no ledes le huel am las extremitatz del spatum; e si’ la tua operacio en le miegjorn denant le solelh, e sias mot ferm en la tua operacio que no inscidas sino aquelas venas.	And take care that you do not cut through the full thickness of the skin; and if your operation is in the morning before the sun, and you are firm in your operation that you enter only those veins.
E quan tu auras complitz, lahoras tu distilla en le huel cief vert o rog per que am sa acuitat corrodesca aquo que es remaugut del sabel.	And when you have completed, then distill in the full green vitriol or rouge so that its acidity corrupts what is rusted on the knife.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible colligeys tot en aquela hora, e lahoras tu emplastra tot am aquo que cede la dolor de lu, e leyssa lu per alcus dias entro que sia sedada la dolor de lu e que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	But if this is not possible for you to collect in that hour, then plaster it all with what relieves its pain, and let it be for a few days until the pain subsides and an abscess is secured.
E aprop itera sobre lu segon que la mateyssa manieyra entro que sia sanat.	And repeatedly work on it according to the nature of the wound as it heals.
E aquesta es la forma de las forfexs:	And this is the method for abscesses:
Capitol .xix.	Capitulum XIX.
De reduccio de arizati al nas.	On the reduction of hernias to the nose.
Quan tu curas arisati am cauteri o am medicina aguda comburent segon que es precedida la narracio de lu e no es sanat, lahoras no es engen en lu sino que fendas sobre le apostema deves la maturitat de lu, e que extraguas tota la humiditat la qual es en lu e·l poyre entro que sia descubert le os.	When you cure hernias with a cautery or with sharp burning medicine, according to the narration of its preceding events and if it is not healed, then do not engage in it but instead incise over the abscess and allow it to mature. Remove all the humidity within it and the pus until the bone is uncovered.
E donc cum es descubert le os e vezes en lu corrupcio o negror, lahoras tu ratz lu am un sturment del qual aquesta es la forma:	And since the bone and sinews in them are corrupt with blackness when uncovered, then you rub it with a tool of which this is the form:
E es nompnat de aspre cap, e sia feyt de fer indi, e sia le cap redon ayssi cum asir le qual sia fayt punctat per punctacio de lima o aliskalfati per punctacio subtil (ayssi cum es en la forma seguent).	And it is called an aspre cap, and is made of iron, and is the round head such that when gripping it, it is made punctuated by hammering or smoothed by fine puncturing (as in the form following).
E pausa aquel sobre le loc corrumput del os, e aprop revolveys aquel entre les tieus ditz, e prem la tua ma petit a petit entro que sapias que aquela corropcio es rasa.	And place it over the corrupt part of the bone, and then rotate it between your tongs, and press your hand gradually into the area until you know that the corruption is superficial.
E aquo sia fayt alcunas veguadas, e aprop restaura le loc am causas exsiccativas e stipticas.	And do this several times, and then restore the area caused by drying and constricting agents.
Donc si·l loc es consolidat e es en lu nascuda bona carn e es abscindit le cors de la sania e roman per xl dias, e no es renovat e no es apostemat e no accideys en lu accident, lahoras tu sapias que es sanat.	Then if the area is consolidated and has good hidden flesh and the body is cut from the pus and remains sound for 40 days, and does not reappear or putrefy and no accident occurs, then you know it is healed.
E sino, lahoras no es en lu engen sino reduzir la fissura a la forma del nas, e segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu descuebras de segon os am ferr o am medicina acuta, e cum sira descubert le os, lahoras tu pren tribo segon aquesta forma:	And if not, then reduce the fracture to the form of the nose, and according to this manner: and it is that you uncover the bone with iron or sharp medicine, and since the bone is uncovered, then you take a strip according to this form:
Sia la extramitat de lu ferr triangulada, e·l fust de lu sia prim extenuat entro a la extremitat ayssi cum vezes assi.	Let the extremity of the tool be triangular, and the stem thereof be thickened at the extremity as you see.
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le os, e sia aquel prop del lacrimal; e alongua la tua ma un pauc del huel, e aprop revol la tua ma am le tribo entro que penetre tot le os, e aquel sente le malaute per asso que atroba vent yssir per so quan te la sua ma.	And then place that [tool] on the bone, and let it be close to the lacrimal; extend your hand a little towards the length, and then move your hand within the groove until it penetrates the entire bone, and that which feels the pain perceives the air flowing through it when you place your hand there.
Donc lahoras restaura le loc am medicinas stipticas exsiccantz ayssi cum t’e eyssenhat.	Then restore the area with medicinal astringent substances as you have seen fit.
Donc cum nays la carn e·l loc es endurazit, lahoras la materia la qual effundia a las partidas deforo retorna al nas, donc aquo es pus leugier sobre le malaute.	Then since the flesh and the area are hardened, the material which was exuding to the surrounding parts returns to its place, therefore this is lighter for the pain.
Capitol .xx.	Capitol.xx.
De reduccio de la eminencia del huel.	For the reduction of the prominence of the hernia.
Quan le huel emineys am la sua totalitat e no accideys en le vezement nocument ni diminuacio, lahoras cove que laxas le malaute, e aprop que·l segues, e aprop que pausas ventozas en le cervitz ses scarificacio e succa per bona succaccio; e aprop pausa sobre le huel liniment le qual sia fayt de acatra e aloe e enses e sarcocolla, e aprop strenh le emplaustre sobre le huel am motz polvils.	When the hernia protrudes completely and there is no damage or diminution of the covering, then you should relax the pain, subsequently apply fomentations to the neck for scarification and drainage with good suction; then place liniment on the hernia made from acacia, aloe, ensifera, and ichthammol, and firmly apply the poultice over the hernia with pieces of cloth.
E la manieyra dels polvils es que prenguas draps de li leons motz, e quascun drap sia duplicat en quatre plecs; e fay de aquels motz.	And the method of powders is that you take linseed cloth, and each cloth be folded into four parts; and make use of those cloths.
E aprop pausa aquels la un sobre le autre segon la quantitat de la qual ha le huel necessitat.	And then place them one over the other according to the quantity that it has to be used.
E aprop strenh sobre aquels am drap dur am fort strictura; e itera las ventosas am succio ses scarificacio; e aprop osta las ventosas e leyssa le huel streyt le dia e la nueyt.	And then tightly bind the cloths around them; and repeatedly apply the suction cups with several scarifications; and then place the suction cups and leave it in place for the day and night.
Mays si entretant le liguament es mollificat, lahoras cove que sia mot streyt.	But if meantime the ligature becomes softened, then make it quite tight.
E aprop osta le liament aprop le dia e la nueyt ayssi cum havem dit.	And then keep the ligature in place day and night as we have said.
E si vezes le huel ja esser redusit, bo es, e sino, lahoras itera le emplastre am les polvils e la strictura e las ventosas entro que sia sanat.	And if the swelling has already subsided, that is good. Otherwise, then repeatedly apply the plaster with the powders and the binding and suction cups until it is healed.
Capitol .xxi.	Capitol.xxI.
De la inscizio de la eminencia de la tunica uvea.	Of the incision of the prominence of the uveal membrane.
Quan endeve disrupcio en la tunica uvea, e aprop es eminent e procezeys fora las palpebras ayssi cum un gra de rasim, e es orrazada la forma de home per aquo, e vols aquo inscidir, lahoras la operacio en lu es ayssi cum havem recomtat, que tu entrometas la agula en la razitz de la uvea de la partida dejos en la partida desus, e aprop met la agula autra en la qual sia fil doble de la part del lacrimal, e fay aquela penetrar e leyssa la primieyra agula segon la sua disposicio; e aprop inscideys le loc del fiel doble e leva am aquel la partida de la uvea en le circuit de la agula, e strenh aquela mot.	When there is a disruption in the sclera, it protrudes and you can see the form of a man through this, and if you want to incise it, then the operation on it is as we have described, that you insert the needle into the slit of the sclera from one side and over from the other side with a doubled thread from the lacrimal part, and make the latter penetrate while leaving the first needle in its position; then incise the place where the doubled thread passes and lift the portion of the sclera around the needle's circuit, and strengthen that movement.
E aprop extratz la agula e pausa sobre le huel lana infusa en album de huou e leyssa entro que cayha le fil am la uva.	Then extract the needle and place it over the heated woolen cloth infused with honey, leaving time for the thread to cool in the eye.
E aprop cura le huel am aquo que conforte aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	Then apply a warm cloth to this, so that it comforts the area while the wound heals.
E alcunas veguadas aduna de tota partida am cercle de drap entro le huel ajuste eminencia gran, e aprop sia perforat am le spatum subtil que vengua al preon del huel, e corra la humiditat albuginea, e descen le huel e intra tantost.	And sometimes gather all parts in a circle of cloth around the heated surface, and then perforate with a fine needle that comes from the center of the heat, allowing the humidity to flow and descend, and cool the area quickly.
E aprop strenh entro que sia sanat.	And then strengthen as it is healed.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXII.
De curacio de alconati.	On the cure of alopecia.
Aquesta malautia que es apelada alconati no es sino sania la qual es ajustada en le huel semblant a aygua dessendent e no es aquela.	This disease called alopecia is nothing but leprosy, which affects the skin and resembles water descending, and it is not that [kind].
Mays la manieyra del obrar en ela es que fasses le malaute sezer sobre la sela aparelada e dreyta, e aprop pren le cap sieu en las tuas mas de doas partz e mau aquel entro que veias la sania pervenir a las partidas dejos, e aprop sia siccada e no descenda, e sia ostat le lum, e·l malaute veia las causas ayssi cum vezia.	The method of treating it is to place the patient on a prepared seat and straighten them. Then, take their head in your hands at two parts and hold it there until you see the leprosy reach the extremities, ensuring it dries up and does not descend further, and keep the light nearby so that the patient can see the causes as if they were visible.
E si no descendra en jos, sapias que es aygua.	And if it does not descend to the feet, you may know that it is water.
Mays si no es preparat le descendement a la sania am aquo que havem dit, lahoras fay le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e aprop pren spatum subtil e fen am aquel sobre le pannicol cernent un petit deves la continuacio de la conjunctiva am la tunica cornea en la corona (entro al loc vuet), entro que sia fora-getada la sania.	And if the descent of the leprosy is not prepared as we have said, then place the patient on their back and hold them firmly. Then take a fine spatum and apply it over the conjunctiva, letting some drop onto the cornea (in the area marked), so that the leprosy is driven out.
Donc cum es fora-getada, lahoras tu distilla en le huel aygua cauda en la qual has mesclat mel o aygua en la qual ja has bulit fenugrec e mel.	Then, as it is forgotten, when you distill the amount of water in which you have mixed honey or water in which you have already steeped fenugreek and honey.
E aprop sia curat am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And then cure the other causes once it is healed.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter 22.
De la curacio de la aygua descendent del huel.	Of the cure for water descending into the bowel.
Ja havem dit las specias de la aygua en la divisio e qual conveneys a perforar am sermo declarant, lahoras aquel segon la sanetat.	We have already mentioned the types of water in the division and which ones require piercing as we declared, and then proceed according to health.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre un cayrat e lia le sieu huel sa, lu mot stringent.	Then you must tie the patient's legs together on a stake and hang his body there, applying a strong ligature.
E aprop pausa prop de la palpebra del sieu huel la tua ma senestra, si le huel en le qual es l’aygua es le huel senestra; o am la tua ma dreyta, si le huel es le dextre.	Then place your left hand near the eyelid of the affected side, if the side with the water is the left side; or place your right hand, if the side is the right side.
E aprop am la tua ma dextra pren almagda, si le huel es senestre; o am la tua ma senestra, si le huel es de dreyt.	Then place your right hand on the pillow, if the side is left; or place your left hand, if the side is right.
E aprop pausa la extremitat de almagda prop de la corona per la grossesa del ray en le album del huel de part del mendre lacrimal, e aprop enpelleys almagda am vertut e revol la tua ma am aquel.	And then place the extremity of the thumb near the crown for the swelling of the vein in the white of the eye from the blockage of the tear duct, and then apply the thumb with virtue and rotate your hand there.
E aprop penetre en le album del huel e sentas que almagda ja es pervenguda a causa vueda.	And then penetrate into the white of the eye and feel that the thumb has already been applied due to the swelling.
E cove que sia la masura del cami de almagda al preon la mesura del spazi le qual es de la pupilla entro a la fi de la negror, e es la corona del huel; quar tu veyras am aquel pupilla am la visio de l’huel per la clartat de la tunica cornea.	And mark the size of the path of the thumb when pressing the size of the space which is between the pupil and the edge of the black part, for this is the crown of the eye; you will see the pupil through the clarity of the corneal membrane with the vision of the eye.
E aprop pausa almagda entro al loc en le qual es l’aygua, e aprop tu la atira en jos una veguada aprop autra, e donc si la aygua descen tantost, lahoras vetz le malaute aquo sobre le qual huebre la sua vista tantost, e almagda en le sieu huel.	And then place the thumb in the location where the water is, and then draw it down a little bit, and then if the water descends quickly, you see that the patient under which its sight is located also experiences relief quickly, and the thumb in the eye.
E aprop repausa se un pauc; donc si la aygua es descenduda, lahoras tu depausa aquela autre veguada abantz que almagda ne sia getada.	And then rest for a moment; if the water has descended, then you continue with another slight movement forward before the thumb is fully inserted.
E donc quan es sicada e no descen, lahoras tu extrat almagda am facilitat, e revol am aquel la tua ma pauc a pauc, e aprop dissolveys en l’aygua un petit de sal clara de gemma e am aquela lava le huel dedintz; e aprop pausa fora le huel coto o stopa o lana infusa en oli rozat e album de huou e ligua am aquo le huel sa.	And when it is drawn out and does not descend, then you extract the matter with ease, and turn it with your hand little by little, and then dissolve a little of clear gemstone salt in water and with that wash the whole inside; then place outside the whole cloth or stop or infused wool in olive oil and egg white and tie it with that.
Mays nos e aquels que so de nostre temps pause sobre aquel comi trissat am album de huou.	May this also be done by those who in our time come to treat such cases with olive oil.
E si no obezeys a tu almagda al intrament de l’huel per la sua duricia — quar es alcu dels homes del qual le huel es dur mot —, lahoras cove que prenguas le spatum le qual es nompnat alberid del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if the matter does not yield to your extraction through the opening because of its hardness — which is common in some men whose matter is very thick —, then seek that you take the spume which is called albergid, and this is its form:
E donc perfora am aquel aquela conjunctura, e no ultimes la tua ma en le trauc, e no es si no que fassas via ad almagda loc subtil.	And then puncture that joint, and do not bring your hand to the tract, but rather make a way to the opening for the matter.
E aprop entromet almagda segon que havem dit.	And then introduce the matter as we have said.
E deves le compliment de la tua obra, sia preparat al malaute dormitori descentment fayt en le qual dorma sobre le sieu dos en mayson tenebrosa, e sia prohibit de totz movementz .	And you should complete your work, by preparing a resting place for the patient decently made in which they lie on their back in a dark house, and prohibit all movements.
E pausa en la natura de lu aquo per que sia linida la sua natura, e no maugua le sieu cap a la partida dreyta ni senestra de tot.	And pause at his nature there so that it may be lined, and do not wet its head to the right or left side of the whole.
E sia le liament segon la sua disposicio entro al tertz dia.	And let the stitch be according to its disposition on the third day.
E aprop deslia aquel en aquela maysso tenebrosa e exproha la freol vista, e fay li vezer alcunas causas, e aprop retorna le liament entro al dia .vii.	And then remove that which is in the darkest part and expose the frozen sight, and make the eyes some causes, and then return the stitch on the seventh day.
E no cove que fassas aquo en la hora de las curacios o tantost aprop la infusio.	And do not perform this at the hour of the remedies or very soon after the infusion.
Habantz cove que tu alienes aquo per so quar la aygua puega leugierament per gran e vehement de reguardament.	And you should remove this for the sake of which the water may flow slightly freely and vigorously through regard.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que deslias le huel denant le vii dia, e rectifica aquel am aquo que ceda apostema.	And if an abscess occurs, then remove the pus on the seventh day, and correct that with this to prevent an abscess.
Lahoras tu absol la vista de lu e pausa sobre la cara de lu oral per le qual sia regit le vezement de lu dejos lu per alcus dias, lu existent en la mayszo tenebrosa.	And when you close the wound, pause over the face of the patient's mouth so that it may heal, and let the patient remain in the darkest part for some days.
E aprop sia gitat de aquela mayzo gradantment e conversa8 en las suas causas.	And gradually withdraw that hand and change in its position.
E sapias que in alchatea no es excusat le discipol de visio alcunas veguadas, e lahoras tu sias ardit sobre la operacio.	And know that in surgery it is not excuseable for the apprentice to miss a few views, and then you should be vigilant about the operation.
E ja es pervengut a nos de alcu de aquels les quals so al Artach , e alcu disse que fayt foc en al Ayrac magdaam perforat am le qual es succada la aygua.	And we have been informed of some cases where the condition affects the Artichoke, and some say that fire is made in the Ayrac with a large perforated instrument through which water is poured.
Mays empero yeu non e vist degu en la nostra terra le qual haia perfeyt aquo, ni e aquo legit en alcu dels libres dels antics; e es possible que aquo sia novel.	But I have not seen anyone in our land who is perfect at this, nor is it mentioned in any of the ancient books; and it is possible that this is new.
E aquestas so las formas de las specias de magdaan per que sia sobre aquelas aquel le qual ignora aquelas:	And these are the forms of the species of perforation so that he who ignores them may know them.
E sian faytas de eram o de ferr propriament, e sian las extramitatz de lor am aquesta subtilitat triangulada, la extremitat aguda ayssi cum aquela es la forma.	And they should be made of ivory or iron properly, and their ends should have this subtlety in the form of a triangle, with one end sharp like the other.
Capitol .xxiv.	Capitol.xxiv.
De la curacio de carn nada en le nas.	Of the cure of flesh nothin in the nose.
Quan en le nas so nascudas carns diversas ajustadas de las quals es alcuna causa la qual es assemblada a scorpio de motz pes, o a polip peys; e aquesta malautia es apelada polipus quar es a semblansa de aquel peys representat.	When in the nose there arise various growths from which arises some cause that is akin to a scorpion of heavy weight or a polyp of the nose; this illness is called polypus and is in resemblance to that nose represented.
E de lu es carn cancrosa, lapadea, de fusca color; e de lu es que es carn leon no de color fusca.	And of it is flesh cancerous, dark in color; and of it is that flesh lion-like not in dark color.
Donc en aquela que es en aquestas carns leon no fraudulenta ni cancroza, cove que fassas le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e posat al solelh, e huebre las nars de lu, e picoys le tieu onci en aquelas carns.	Therefore, in that which is in these lion-like flesh not fraudulent nor cancerous, you should open the patient's nostrils and expose them to the sun, and rub the nose with a piece of onion in those flesh areas.
E aprop extrat aquela a las partidas deforo, e aprop inscindeys aquo que has comprehendut de aquelas am spatum agut subtil de la una partida entro que sapias que tota la carn ja es ostada; que si roman de lu deguna causa de la qual la abscisio es possibla, lahoras tu ratz aquo am la un dels estrumentz subtils am facilitat entro que de lu romangua denguna causa.	And then extract it to the superficial parts, and carefully divide what you have grasped with a sharp thin instrument from which you know that all the flesh has been reached; if any part remains due to some cause for which the division is possible, then quickly use one of the fine instruments to facilitate its separation.
Mays si senhoreja am sanc o accida apostema caut, lahoras tu pausa a lu aquo que cove; o es dels apostemas malignes, lahoras tu coyta e cauteriza aquel entro que sia abscindit sanc e sian ostadas las cavas totas.	If there is a pain or an accident involving a boil, then pause at that which fits; if it is from malignant boils, then incise and cauterize that within where the blood is removed and all cavities are drained.
E aprop sia getatz en le nas aprop la inscizio vi agre e aygua o vi.	And then set it on the nose near the incision and apply either wine or water.
Mays si le nas es ubert e de lu procezeys humiditat entro al palat, lahoras sapias que ja es sanat.	If the nose is already opened and the process involves humidity entering the palate, then you can see that it is healed.
Mays si la humiditat no penetra segon que cove, lahoras tu sapias que dedintz lu es carn nada en los pus sobiras osses de las nars als quals non es pervengut abscizio.	If the humidity does not penetrate as expected, then you can see that inside there is no cartilage in the pus; instead, there are bones of the nose to which incision has not been applied.
Donc lahoras cove que entromitas fiel de li al qual sia alcuna grosseza, e nuza en lu motz nuzes, e pausa entre quascun nutz la quantitat del dit o mens, e engene le malaute e entromet una extremitat del fiel en le nars am lo ray o am autra causa la qual es a lu possibla.	Then when it is necessary to introduce the gall of the animal from which there is any lump, use nuts in its place, and pause between each nut the width of a finger or less, and extract the malady and introduce an extremity of the gall into the nose either through the ray or through another cause which is possible for it.
E pus que aquo aura fayt, que atire le sieu odorament entro que pervengua a las canals de las nars, e sia eyssit sobre le sieu golayro, quar tropas veguadas le semblant ad aquesta accio fan les enfantz a las scolas, e es leugiera causa ad aquel que ho vol far.	And after he has done this, he should inhale the scent within so that it reaches the nasal channels, and sit on his cushion; for often children at schools mock such actions, and it is a light matter for anyone who wishes to do so.
E aprop pausa las dos extramitatz del fiel, una extremitat que iesca sobre le nas et l’autra que romangua en le nas, e aprop aministra serratura de carn am les nuzes que so en le fiel, e fay aquo entro que sapias que las carn ja so am les nuzes del fiel.	Then place the two ends of the cord, one end that itches near the nose and the other that swells in the nose, and then apply a flesh wound at the joints that are in the cord, doing this before you can taste that the flesh is on the joints of the cord.
E aprop extratz le fiel, e pausa en le nas aprop la abstraccio del sanc una calgua , e fay aquo per tres dias o mays entro que l’enguent corrodo tot aquo que es romas de las carns.	Then extract the cord, place it near the nose at the site of the bleeding with a cotton ball, and do this for three days or more until the ointment dissolves everything that is rotten in the flesh.
E aprop en la fi de la causa, pausa en le nas una canula de plom per alscus jorns entro que sia sanat.	Then, at the end of the treatment, place a lead tube in the nose for several days until it is healed.
Mays si endigeys de curacio que exsique, usa de aquela.	If you need a quicker cure that dries up, use that one.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument a capipurge fazedor am le qual son distillatz olis e medicinas en le nars:	And this is the form of the instrument used to pour oils and medicines into the nostrils:
E fay aquo de argent o de eram, la qual sia semblant a una petita lampesa uberta, ayssi cum petita conqua, e le meat semblantment.	And make it of silver or of copper, which should resemble a small open lamp, like a small basin, and the mouth resembling that.
E si vols, fay una canula clausa ayssi cum cana, e la cancula del estrument a capipurge fazedor e sia plana, descuberta; a la qual sia manubre en lo derier de lu, am le qual tenguas aquela quan escaufas en lu oli o aquo que tu vols dels sucs e de las causas suctiblas.	And if you wish, make a closed tube like a reed, and the opening of the instrument for pouring oils should be flat and open; to which you can attach a handle at the rear end, with which you will pour in the heated oil or whatever you want from the secretions and extractible causes.
E aquestz capipurgi es precios: recipe de enforbi de castor, de balayra blanc, de giengiebre, e piletre de safra, de pebre lonc, de escafragia, de epetum de spic ana unc. vi cumfizeys am suc de bleda e de caul, e sian faytas pillulas, e sia destemprada una pillula am aygua tebeza, e sia gitat en las nars del malaute jasent envers.	And these syringes are precious: take castor oil, white balata, cinnamon, safflower, long pepper, asafetida, and one uncia of spikenard. Mix them with wheat juice and calamus juice, make pills from this mixture, and then temper one pill with clear water, and give it to the patient to inhale through the nostrils.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter 25.
De theyls natz en las extramitatz del nas.	From the nostrils at the extremities of the nose.
Motas veguadas es nat theyl en las extramitatz del nas, e es magnificat e omentat en alscus dias entro en que mot es leg le reguardament de lu.	Blisters appear in the nostrils at the extremities of the nose, and are enlarged and poulticed over several days as the swelling is reduced by application.
E per aquo cove que tu inscidas aquel en le comensament de la apparissio de lu, e erediques tot aquel.	And for this reason, you should intervene at the beginning of its appearance, and remove all of it.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc o cauteri o medicina comburent la qual estia en loc de lu.	And place your hand over the area or on the cautery or burning medicine which was applied there.
Mays si es tardada la sua inscizio entro que sia magnificat, lahoras considera si es lapificat, dur, de fusca color e de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr quar es apostema crancos; quar motas veguadas ad aquel que inscideys aquesta apostema endeve per lu granda malicia sobre aquel le qual aquel havia.	But if its intervention is delayed until it enlarges, then consider whether it is hardened, dark in color, and has little sensation. In that case, do not touch it with iron; for blisters should be avoided when treating this abscess due to its great harm to the surrounding area.
E si le apostema es de leon tocament e no es de fosca color, e vezes que inscizio es possibla en tot aquel, lahoras evacua le malaute e inscideys aquel senes temor, e cura le loc am aquo que exsique e costrenh entro que sia sanat.	And if the abscess is due to a bite and not dark in color, and intervention is possible throughout it, then drain the poison and cut it without fear, and treat the area with something that dries and constricts until it heals.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter 26.
De sutura del nas e de las labias e de la aurelha quan la continuitat es dissolvuda per plagua o per semblantz.	For the suturing of the nose and lips when the continuity is dissolved by plague or similar diseases.
Sapias que quan accideys solucio de continuitat en una de aquestas cartillages, pauc confereys en aquela operacio sino en alcus homes.	Know that when there is dissolution of continuity in one of these cartilages, you should not rely much on that operation but rather on several people.
Donc cove, quan endeve ad alcu alcuna causa de aquelas, que consideres si es plagua fresca am le sieu sanc, e lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, when you find any cause of such conditions, consider whether it is fresh plague with its own symptoms, and then adjust the two lips of the plague with sutures, and proceed to cure that which is still sick.
E si las labias de solucio de continuitat so ja separadas, e quascuna es fayta sana, lahoras cove que tu excorjes quascuna partida de la sua codena apparent entro que n’iesca sanc.	And if the lips of dissolution of continuity are already separated, and any one of them has become healthy, then you should remove each part from its apparent ligature before it develops symptoms.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias am sutura e strenh aquelas, e sobre aquelas pulveriza sanc de drago e enses trissat, e pausa sobre la polvera una pessa de emplaustra diafinicon, o de alcu autre dels emplastres consolidatius, e leyssa aquel liat per dos jorns o per tres, e aprop deslia aquel e permuta aquel emplaustre e leyssa aquel entro que·ls fiels per si sian abscinditz, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Then adjust the two lips with sutures and strengthen them, and sprinkle dragon's blood on them, followed by three applications of trisactic ointment. Place a piece of diafinicon bandage or another consolidative ointment over the powder, and leave this mixture for two to three days. Then remove the dressing and replace it with a new ointment, allowing the wounds to heal until the granulations are resolved. Cure by applying ointment until healed.
Mays la manieyra de la sutura es que tu agregues la solucio de continuitat o am agulhas ayssi cum havem recomtat en la sutura del ventre, o agregua la solucio de continuitat am fiel ayssi cum a tu e fayt saber.	The manner of suturing is that you add the solution of continuity or use needles as we have recommended in the belly suture, or add the solution of continuity with thread as you are made to know.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter XXVII.
De extraccio de aquela causas que veno en las doas labias en las partidas dedintz.	Of the extraction of those causes that wind in the two lips in the internal parts.
Motas veguadas endeve a motz homes en las partidas dedintz de las suas labias alcus apostemas durs semblantz a gras de errs, e alscunas de lors son mendres e alcunas son majors.	Spots seen within the flesh of the internal parts of their lips, lead to the formation of hard abscesses resembling lard; some are smaller and others are larger.
Donc cove que tu convertas las labias e fendas quascuna de aquelas duricias de tota part, e aprop la abscizio umpliscas le loc de sagi trissat entro que·l sanc sia restrengut, e aprop sia lavat am vi agre e sia curat le loc am aquo que es stipticitat, entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, make sure you incise all parts of the hard swellings in both lips, and after the abscess is formed, fill the place with three layers of cloth until the wound is tightened, then wash it with vinegar and treat the area with a solution that is收敛剂，直至愈合。
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter XXVIII.
De inscizio de la carn ajustada en las gengivas.	Of the incision of flesh adhered to the gums.
Granre de veguadas nays sobre la gengiva carn ajustada la qual les antics apelero albulus, adonc cove que tu suspendas aquela am onci o que tenguas aquela am las forfecs e inscidas aquela deves la sua razit, e leyssas la sania correr o le sanc.	Great care must be taken over the gum closely fitting the tooth, which the ancients called albulus. Then draw that thread with your forceps and cut it properly, leaving the healthy tissue to heal.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc sagi trissat o autra polveras stipticas o excicativas.	Then place something hot on the area for about three minutes or another styptic or excitatory powder.
E si aquela carn retorna, lahoras inscideys aquela segundariament, e cauterisa aquela, quar aprop le cauteri no retornara.	And if that flesh returns, then cut it again, and cauterize it, for after the cauterization it will not return.
Capitol .xxix.	Capitol.xxix.
De razo de dentz am ferr.	On the reason for teeth with ferments.
Quan en la superficia de las dentz de las partidas dedintz e de las de foro e entre las gingivas so ajustadas escorsas aspras, legas, e alcunas veguadas son de nigradas e son faytas citrinas o vertz entro que a la gingiva ve per aquo corrupcio e son faytas las dentz legas.	When on the surface of the inner teeth and those from the outer side, as well as between the gums, there are sharp, rough edges, some of which are dark and appear yellowish or greenish, and through these edges corruption occurs in the gum, causing the teeth to become loose.
E donc cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas e pausar le cap de lu en le tieu se, e ratz las dents en las quals apareysso aquelas escorsas e causas semblantz arena entro que de lor no romangua deguna causa, e aquo fay de la negror e de la citrinitat e de las autras entro que sian mondificadas.	And therefore, ensure that you cut the patient's thigh between your hands and hold its head in a towel, gently moving the teeth where these edges and similar causes appear, so that no part of them breaks for any reason, and do this for the blackness and the yellowish color and other such things that have been altered.
Donc si es ostat aquo que es en aquelas del comensament de la razio, bo es; e sino, lahoras tu itera la razio sobre aquelas al autra dia e al segon e al tertz entro que vengua al derier stament en aquo que tu vols.	Therefore, if the above mentioned part is at the beginning of the reasoning, it is good; otherwise, you iterate the reasoning on those points for the next day and the second and the third until you reach the final statement of what you want.
E sapias que las dentz han necessitat de motz rezoris de diversas formas e de motas figuras segon que es preparat a la tua operacio.	And know that teeth have required roots to be removed in various ways and of diverse figures according to how your operation prepares them.
E per so quar le razori am le qual la dent es raza de la partida dedintz es autre del razori am le qual es ras entre las dentz segon autras formas, e aquestas formas de razoris sian deves tu preparadas las quals veyras tantost:	And so, for the tooth that is extracted from the inside, the dentist uses one tool, while for the tooth that is chipped between the teeth according to other forms, the dentist uses another tool. These tools you must prepare properly, which you will often see.
Capitol .xxx.	Capitol.xxx.
D’eradicacio de dentz.	For the extraction of teeth.
Cove que tu cures la dent de la sua dolor am tot engen e tardes en tota eradicacio de lu, quar no es denguna causa que suplisqua la veguada de lu quan es eradicada, quar es sustancia sublima entro que es excusacio en la eradicacio de lu.	Know that when you cure a tooth of its pain with great skill and take much time in the extraction, for no cause can replace the need to extract it completely when necessary, as the substance is sublime during the process of extraction.
Mays cove quan le malaute es forsat aquela dent eradicar, que fermament deves tu sia certificat quala es la dent dolent, quar motas veguadas la dolor descep le malaute e cuga que sia en dent sana, e tu eradicas aquela e aprop la dolor no cessa entro que la dent malauta e dolent sia eradicada, quar nos ja havem vist aquo per operacio dels barbies.	When the patient is forced to open that tooth, you must surely certify which is the painful tooth, carefully observing the pain disappear several times and confirming it is in a healthy tooth, and you extract that one, after which the pain does not cease until the diseased and painful tooth is extracted, for we have seen this through the operations of barbers.
Donc cum deves tu es sertificat qual es la dent dolent, e que o sabes be, lahoras cove que tu scarifiques en le circuit de la dent am spatum en le qual sia alcuna vertut, entro que sia dissolvut de la dent de la gingiva de tota partida, e aprop mau aquel am les tieus ditz, o am forfexs subtils al comensament petit a petit entro que aquela concucesquas.	Therefore, you must be certain which is the painful tooth, and knowing this well, when you incise along the circuit of the tooth where any virtue resides, until it dissolves from the root of the tooth in the gum, then remove it or use fine forceps gradually at the beginning, as these concussions indicate.
E aprop alogua en lu fortz tenalhas grans per bona loquacio o estuptura fort, e pausa le cap del malaute entre les tieus denolhs que be le tengues que no·s maugua, e aprop tratz la dent segon rectitut en manieyra que no trenques aquela, ni al malaute major dolor no dones.	And then irrigate it well to ensure good speech or strong fracture, and place the head of the patient between your hands so that you can hold it firmly without causing pain, and proceed to extract the tooth in a straight manner so as not to break it, nor give the patient additional pain.
E donc si no es foro-getat, lahoras pren un de aquels instrumentz, e met aquel dejos lu de tota part am facilitat e esforsa la remocio de lu ayssi que es feyt al comensament.	And if it is not forced open, then take one of those instruments, and place it on the patient from all sides with ease, and exert yourself to remove it as it is done at the beginning.
Mays si la dent es trauquada o corrosa, lahoras cove que tu comples de drap aquel trauc e estrenguas aquel am la extremitat de ray subtil per so que no sia trinquada en la hora de la tua constriccio sobre aquela am tenalas.	If the tooth is broken or corroded, then you should wrap that part with cloth and tie it tightly at the end of a thin thread so that it does not get tangled in the process of your treatment.
E cove que tu obres exquesitament am scarificacio en le circuit de tota part de la gingiva e guarda mot la tua fortaleza que no trenques aquela e romangua partida de lu, e retorne sobre le malaute per la malicia que sia majo que la primieyra dolor de lu.	And you should incise precisely in the circuit of all parts of the gum and maintain your strength so that you do not break that torn part of it, but return to the soreness due to its malignity being greater than the first pain.
E guarda te que no fassas aquo que fan alscus ignorantz barbiers en lor fistinacio e audacia sobre la eradicacio de lor, ses que no aministran aquo que nos havem recomtat; quar motas veguadas fan venir sobre les homes malautias grans las quals son pus dificils que sian trinquadas, e las razitz de lor remaugudas totas, o alcunas de aquelas, o que extrayguas aquela am alcus osses de la mandigula ayssi cum motas veguadas havem testificat.	And beware that you do not do what some ignorant barbers do in their incisions and audacity regarding the eradication of boils; for they do not administer what we have advised. For spots often bring great diseases upon men, which are harder to treat than boils, and the causes of their remedies are all, or some of those, or that you extract from certain bones of the jaw as spots we have testified.
E aprop la eradicacio de lu sia lavada la boca am vi caut o vi agre am sal.	And for the eradication of the boil, wash the mouth with warm water or water thickened with salt.
E si endeve fluxs de sanc per aysso, ayssi cum motas veguadas endeve, lahoras trissa alcuna quantitat de zegi e aspergeys sobre la plagua, e si no confereys aquel zegi, cauteriza.	And if there be fluxes of blood for this, as with motas veguadas [a type of hemorrhoids], then take some quantity of vinegar and sprinkle it over the wound, and if that vinegar does not suffice, cauterize.
La forma de las forceps e tenalas subtils am las quals es mauguda la dent al comensament sia de longua extramitat, de breu manubre e gros, per so que no sian doblatz quan am aquels deves obrar.	The shape of the forceps and delicate tweezers used to extract a tooth should be long at the beginning, short and thick, so that they do not bend when those you need to act upon.
E sian ayssi cum vezes de gros manubre entro que quan estrenhas am aquelas no sian dobladas, sian breus extramitatz.	And they should be such that when you tighten them around those [teeth], they do not bend, and are short and long.
E sian faytas de ferr de India descentment faytas de dreytas extramitatz, e en las extramitatz de aquelas sian dentz de las quals las unas intron en las autras e estrenhan per constriccio descent fort, e alscunas veguadas las extramitatz de aquelas sian la forma del bec d’un auzel le qual ha nom ciconia, so es guanta, e son de fort constriccio.	And they should be made of high-quality iron, with long handles, and at the ends of those handles, there should be teeth that interlock and tighten by strong construction. Sometimes, the ends of those handles are shaped like the bill of a heron, which is called a ciconia, and they are also strongly constructed.
Capitol .xxxi.	Capitol.xxxxi.
De erradicacio de dentz e d‘estraccio dels osses de las mandibulas trincadas.	For the removal of teeth and extraction of broken jaw bones.
Quan deves la eradicacio de dent le qual es trinquat roman alcuna causa, lahoras cove que tu pauses sobre le loc coto am boder per un jorn o per dos entro que·l loc sia mollificat; e aprop entromet algesti o tenalhas las extramitatz de las quals so asembladas al bec de un auzel apelat ciconia o guanta, la forma de las forceps:	When you need to remove a tooth that is broken for any cause, first ensure that you pause over the area carefully for one or two days until the place becomes softened; then insert forceps or tongs whose ends are assembled at the beak of an auzel called ciconia or guanta, in the shape of forceps.
Las extramitatz de lor sian faytas dedintz ayssi cum lima o alfagi.	The ends of the forceps should be made inside like a hammer or awl.
E si no obediys a tu a eyssiment am aquestas forceps o tenalas, lahoras cove que tu caves sobre la razit e descrobas tota la carn e entrometas le instrument le qual ha nom atali, so es palanca petita del qual la forma es aquesta:	And if your attempt with these forceps or tongs does not succeed, then open the wound and remove all the flesh, and insert the instrument called atali, which is a small lever whose shape is like this:
E sia de breu extremitat grossa un petit, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	And let it be brief, having a small end thick, and not bent so that it is not broken.
Donc si per aquo la razit es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, ajuda te am aquestz autres instrument dels quals aquestas son las formas: la forma del primier instrument es de triangulada extramitat en la qual sia alcuna grossesa:	So if the wound is sufficiently opened, that is good; otherwise, help yourself with these other instruments, of which these are the forms: the form of the first instrument is triangular-ended, in which there is some thickness.
La forma del segon instrument es que sia de triangulada e de pus subtil extremitat.	The form of the second instrument should be triangular and of very fine extremity.
E ja so ajudatz am aquest instrument havent dos ramps del qual aquesta es la forma aprop la seguent:	And now help with this instrument having two ramps, of which this is the form approximately as follows:
e am autres instrumentz les quals precidero en rasura de dentz; quar juvament es fayt am aquest instrument le qual es asemblat a onci gran, e aquesta es la forma:	And there are other instruments which will be shown for the scraping of teeth; so that this instrument, which is like a large spoon, has the following form:
de la triangulada extremitat torta o curta, la qual sia alcuna grossesa, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	From the triangular twisted or short extremity, which is somewhat thick, and should not be too deep so as not to penetrate.
E otra sapias que·ls instrumentz de las dentz motz so e semblantment les autres instruments.	And another spoon-like instrument for the teeth is similar to other instruments.
Mays le artifexs savi e subtil en l’art, atroba per si mateys segon aquo que a lu significa la operacio e las malautias diversas; quar son de las malautias a las quals les antics no diysero ni pausero propri instrument, per las formas de diversas specias.	More skilled craftsmen find for themselves suitable instruments according to what the operation and various ailments signify; so they have instruments for ailments to which the ancients neither described nor provided specific instruments due to the diverse forms.
Mays si es trinquat l’os de la mandibula o dels autres osses de la boca, o si poyreys, lahoras sia pes curat sobre aquel en son loc am aquo que es a lu convenient dels instrumentz e de las forceps las quals havem dit en la extraccio de las razitz de las dentz, e ajuda te am gesti del qual aquesta es la forma:	If the bone of the mandible or other bones in the mouth are penetrated, or if necessary, then apply a weight to that area in its place, using what is convenient from the instruments and forceps which we have mentioned in the extraction of the roots of the teeth, and the gesture of which has the following form:
E sia en lu alcuna grosseza petit a petit, e sia instringida o tenguda am la boca per que no evasesca o fuga entro que l’os de tot sia foro-getat; e aprop restaura le loc am medicinas convenientz ad aquo.	And let it be put in him little by little, and pressed or held at the mouth so that it does not escape or flee until all the bone is thoroughly treated; then place the area with suitable medicines for it.
Mays si en l’os es petita poyredura, lahoras ratz aquel de aquela poyredura e de la sua negror, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if there is a small sore on the bone, first lance that sore and its blackness, and cure it until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxii.	Capitol..xxxii.
De la cura de las dentz eminentz sobre las autras.	Of the treatment of prominent teeth above others.
Quan las dentz so eminentz no segon lor cors natural per aquelas la forma es laga, e majorment quan endeve a las femnas, e majorment a las piuselas venerablas; donc cove que tu consideras: si dent es nada aprop autra dent, e no es possibla sarradura ni linament de lu, lahoras radica aquela; mays que no sia annexa am autra dent, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am aquest instrument del qual aquesta es la forma; e es semblant a morr de porc, e sia feyt de ferr de India de extramitat mot aguda.	When the teeth are prominent not according to their natural position, especially when they protrude in women, and particularly in venerable old ladies; therefore consider this: if a tooth is close to another tooth and there is no possibility of extraction or separation of it, then extract that one; but if it is not connected to another tooth, then cut out that one with this instrument, which has the shape of a pig's snout, and is made of Indian steel with an extremely sharp edge.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscideyses aquela en trops dias per la duricia de la dent, e que no sia comauguda autra de las dentz.	And let your incision be where you cut there in too many days due to the hardness of the tooth, and may not another tooth become abscessed.
E si es dent eminent expausat a limadura, lahoras lima aquel am lima de ferr de India del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if the tooth is prominently protruded and needs to be filed down, then file that with a file of Indian iron, the form of which is:
E sia tot de ferr de India e·l margua eysament; e sia de motz menutz puntz ayssi cum lima am la qual son faytas agulhas, am la qual la dent sia limada pauc a pauc en motz dias am fecilitat, per so que no sia autra dent comauguda e caga.	And let the whole be of Indian iron; let the margin be filed finely; and let it have small pointed teeth as on the file with which the tooth is filed little by little over days with ease, so that no other tooth becomes abscessed or decays.
E aprop lineys aquela en la fi, e ratz aquela am alscus razoris.	Then mark that on the outside, and cut that with some razors.
E si es dent del qual una partida es trinquada e lideys la lengua, lahoras cove que tu limescas aquel entro que l’aspretat de aquela fraccio sia ostada e engualhada, e sia aplenada per so que la lengua no ledesca ni la paraula no corrumpa.	And if the tooth is such that a part of it is fractured and irritates the tongue, then cut that part so that the irritation from that fracture is stopped and equalized, and let it be filled to prevent the tongue from being injured or the speech from being impaired.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Capitol.xxxiii.
De restauracio de dentz maugudas am fiel de aur o de argent.	For the restoration of decayed teeth using gold or silver filler.
Quan accideys a las dentz devant concussio e remossio per percussio o per cazament, e le malaute no pot strenher sobre aquo que manga, e tu has curat aquel am medicinas stipticas, e no ha valgut la tua curacio, lahoras per so que no cagan es engen en aquelas que sian strengudas am fiel de aur e no de argent, quar argent se fa vert e aprop se poyreys aprop alscus dias, mays aur nul temps no es mudat.	When accidents occur to the front teeth due to concussion or removal by impact or during a fight, and the patient cannot strengthen what is missing, and you have treated it with styptic medicines, but your treatment has not been effective, then for those that are strong, insert them with gold filler and not silver, because silver turns color and may start to decay after a few days, whereas gold remains unchanged over any amount of time.
E sia le fiel en tal subtilitat e grocesa segon la quantitat que puesca entrar entre las dentz; e la forma de la reccio es que prenguas le fiel e pren lo doble de lu entre doas dentz sanas, e aprop que cresques am doas tortuositatz del fiel entre doas maugudas, o si’ una o motas, entro que pervengua la tela a la dent sana del autra partida.	And the filler should be in such subtlety and thickness according to the quantity that can enter between the teeth; and the shape of the filling is as follows: take the gold filler and place twice its amount between two healthy teeth, and when it expands it should fill the gaps between two adjacent decayed teeth, or one or several small spaces, until the fabric reaches the healthy tooth on the other side.
E aprop itera le teyssiment entro a la partida de la qual comenciest, e strenh la tua ma am facilitat e savieza entro que no sia mauguda.	And then insert the tissue into the part from which you began, and strengthen your hand with ease and skill until it is not decayed.
E sia la tua striccio am la qual strenhas le fiel deves las razitz de las dentz que no evasesca.	And let your tightness be such that it holds the root of the teeth so that they do not escape.
E aprop inscindeys las extramitatz del fiel superfluens am las forceps o tosoyras, e agregua aquelas en quascun loc am gesti, e converteys aquelas e las occulta entre la dent sana e la dent mauguda, per so que no fassa lesio a la lengua.	And then divide the extramitigations of the superfluous tooth with forceps or surgical scissors, and add them to any location with your hand, and convert those and cover them between the healthy tooth and the decayed tooth, so as not to injure the tongue.
E aprop leyssa aquela ayssi streyta cum roman.	And let it be thus held like a Roman.
Mays si es desliada o rumpuda, strenh aquela o aquelas am autra fiel en tal manieyra en tot son temps.	And if it is slipped or broken, hold it with another tooth in such a manner throughout its entire duration.
E aquesta es la forma de las dentz e la figura de la rectacio de doas dentz sanas e de doas maugudas, ayssi cum vezes aquestas liadas:	And this is the form of the teeth and the figure of the extraction of two healthy teeth and two decayed ones, as you see these ligated:
E quan se fa que retorno una dent o doas aprop le cazement de quascuna en lors locs, e sian recrescutz ayssi cum havem recomtat, e que remauguan.	And when one returns a tooth or two to their socket in their respective locations, and they are grown back as we have described, and they protrude.
E no fa aquo sino bo artifexs e savi.	And it is not done by anyone other than skilled craftsmen.
E alcunas veguadas es aptat alcuna causa dels osses de vaca, e es fayt de lor ayssi cum forma de dent, e es pausada en loc en le qual defayl la dent, e es strengit ayssi cum havem dit, e reman e serveys am aquel per lonc temps.	And sometimes it is fit for certain causes of the bones of the cow, and it is made of them thus like a tooth, and is placed in the place where the tooth fails, and is strengthened as we have said, and remains and serves you long.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Chapter XXXIV.
De inscizio del liament le qual ve en la lengua e prohibeys loquela.	Of the incision of the ligament where you speak and prohibit speech.
Aquest liguament le qual ve dejos la lengua alcunas veguadas o es natural am le qual hom nays, o accidental e accideys per plagua la qual ja es consolidada.	This ligament, where you leave the tongue sometimes either naturally, as one is born with it, or accidentally, due to a wound which has already healed.
E la operacio en lu es que huobres la boca del malaute, le sieu cap existent en le tieu se; e eleva la sieua lengua, e aprop inscideys aquel liament nervos segon la latitut entro que sia solvuda la lengua de la sua recencio.	And the operation is that one opens the patient's mouth, which is their head in this position; elevates their tongue, and then incises that ligament nerve according to the width between which the tongue can be freed from its attachments.
Mays si en aquela es alcuna duricia o denodacio, e aquo es stat per consolidacio de plagua, lahoras tu gieta unci e scindeys aquel per la latitut entro que aias inscindit le liament e sia dissolvuda la nodacio.	But if there is any hardness or nodularity in that area, and this is due to the healing of a wound, then you cut once and incise that ligament nerve according to the width at which you have already incised the ligament and dissolved the nodularity.
E guarda te que no sia fayta fissura en le preon de la carn e que scindas aqui arceria e vengua flux de sanc.	And make sure that no crack is made in the subcutaneous layer, and carefully split here to avoid a flow of blood.
E aprop sia lavat le vestigi de la inscisio am ayguaros o am vi agre o am aygua frega; e aprop pausa dejos la lengua licini; so es meca la qual tengua le malaute dejos la lengua en quascuna nuoyt per so que no sia consolidat autra veguada.	And soon wash the incision edges with wine or with vinegar and water; then place the tongue depressor under the tongue; if needed, let it stay there overnight to prevent consolidation of another attack.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, pausa sobre le loc vetriol trissat; mays si le sanc ventz, lahoras cauteriza le loc am cauteri lantiginos le qual conveneys ad aquo.	But if there is a flow of blood, place a glass tourniquet over the area; but if the bleeding continues, then cauterize the area with a long cautery that suits this purpose.
E aprop aquel cura am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And soon after, attend to the other causes until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxv.	Capitol.xxxv.
De extraccio de ranula dejos la lengua.	For the extraction of a ranula, place the tongue depressor.
Alcunas veguadas accideys dejos la lengua apostema asemblant a nomla petita prohibent la lengua de la sua operacio natural; e fort leu es magnificada entro que huempla la boca.	Sometimes, an abscess forms and the tongue becomes swollen like a small lump, prohibiting the tongue from its natural operation; and greatly enlarges as it fills the mouth.
E la operacio en lu es que huebras la boca del malaute sesent devant le solel e considera le apostema.	And the operation for this is to open the groin about a palm's breadth in front of the knee and consider the abscess.
E si tu le vezes de fusca color o de negra, dur, al qual le malaute no atroba sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel quar es cranc.	And if you see it is of a brown or black color, hard, to which the patient feels no sensation, then do not touch that part which is sore.
E si es declinat a blancor, en le qual es humiditat, lahoras tu met le onci en lu, e inscideys aquel am spatum subtil, e inscindeys le de tota partida; e si sanc te ventz en la hora de la tua operacio, lahoras tu pausa desus zegi trissat, so es vetriol, entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if it has turned white, in which there is humidity, then you insert the probe into it, and incise that area with a thin knife, and incise all parts; and if pus appears during the time of your operation, then pause above zinc chloride, so that the pus may be restrained.
E aprop retorna a la obra tua entro que lo haias trayt am compliment de lu, entro que sia lavat am vi agre e sal; e cura aquel am l’autra curacio ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And then return to your work after completing it, after it has been washed with vinegar and salt; and treat that according to the other treatment until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Capitol.xxxvi.
De extraccio de apostema de doas aurelhas e de aquel que es nada en le golayro e de las autras apostemas.	On the extraction of abscesses from both ears and those that arise in the cheek, as well as other abscesses.
Quan endeveno en le golayro godat, so son glandulas las quals son asembladas algodat, las quals accideysso deforas e son nompnadas doas aurelhas, las quals quan tu las curas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no es sanat, lahoras tu considera si le apostema es dur, de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr.	When a boil becomes painful, those glands which are gathered like cotton, which occur externally and are named two ears, when you cure them as we said in the division and it is not healed, then consider if the abscess is hard, of dusky color, of little sensation, then do not touch that with iron.
E si es de roga color e la razic es grossa, lahoras no toques aquela am ferr per le flux del sanc; abantz layssa aquel entro sia madurat, e lahoras o tu trauqueras aquel, o sira romput per si.	And if it is of red color and the root is large, then do not touch that with iron for the flow of blood; first let that mature, and then either you will puncture it or it will rupture by itself.
E si es de blanqua color, radon, e la razit de lu es subtil, lahoras aquel es que cove esser inscidit.	And if it is of white color, tender, and the root is fine, then that should be cut.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras, denant la tua operacio, si ja ha repausat le apostema de lu caut am repaus complit o si es deminuit am alcuna deminucio; e lahoras fay sezer le malaute denant le soleyl, e·l cap de lu sia en le tieu se, e huebre la boca de lu, e le servidor prenent entre las suas mas prema la lengua de lu dejos am instrument mot noble del qual aquesta es la forma:	And the operation on it is that before your operation, you consider whether the abscess has fully matured and rested from the cautery, or if it has decreased with some reduction; then you make an incision in front of the sun, with its head toward your side, and open its mouth, and the servant holding the patient's tongue between his fingers uses the most noble instrument of which this is the form:
E sia fayt de argent o de aram, e sia subtil cum cotel.	And it should be made of silver or copper, and very fine like a knife.
Donc cum tu premes am aquel la lengua e es mostrat a tu la apostema, e catz sobre aquel le tieu vezement, lahoras pren onci e fica aquel en l’amenla, e tira aquel a las partidas defora tant quant podes.	So when you press upon that place with the tongue and show the patient the abscess, and cut deeply into that area, then take anointing oil and put it on the wound, and pull that part outward as much as you can.
Otra aquo que tiras alcuna causa de las tunicas, e aprop incideys aquela am instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	Another thing you pull from the cause of the tunics, and then apply that with an instrument of which this is the form:
e es asemblat a forceps, empero las extramitatz de lu son corvadas, ayssi que l’orrifici de quascuna de aquelas es en le endreyt del autra, mot agudas, le qual sia de ferr indi enbegut.	and it is similar to forceps, except that the ends of these are curved, so that the orifice of each of those is in the opposite straight part, sharp points, which should be of iron and well tempered.
Mays si aquest instrument no es a tu present, lahoras inscideys aquel am spatum del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: E sia agut de la una part, no agut del autra part.	But if this instrument is not at hand, then incise that with a spatula of which this is the form: and it should be sharp on one side, not sharp on the other.
E pus que has inscidit una mella, inscideys l’autra segon aquesta meteyssa manieyra de inscizio, e aprop la inscizio le malaute guarguarise de aygua frega	And since you have incised one wound, incise the other according to this manner of incision, and then after the incision, let the patient heal with water.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, guarguarise aygua de decoccio de scorsa de milgrana o de fuelha de mirtra e semblantz ad aquel de las causas stiptiquas entro que·l flux del sanc sia restreyt, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Mais si there is a flow of blood, guardize agua de decocción de scorsa de milgrana o de hoja de mirtra e similar al de las causas stipticas entro que el flux del sanc sea restreído, y apret cura aquel entre que sia sanado.
E alcunas veguadas naysso en le guolayro autras apostemas otra aquelas doas aurelhas, e inscideys aquelas segon que yeu e dit en la inscizio de doas mellas engualment.	And sometimes abscesses appear in the groin or other areas of the ears, and incise those according to what is said in the incision of two meatuses equally.
E yeu ja fu medicat una femna de apostema le qual era nat en le golayro de lu, le qual apostema tendia a color fusca, de pauc sentiment, le qual ja havia claus le golayro de lu, e la femna respirava am meat streyt, e ja havia prohibit a lu comestio e beure de aygua, e ja era pervenguda a la mort si mays agues stat per un dia o per dos.	And I had already treated a woman with an abscess which was located in her groin, which abscess had a dark color, little sensation, and had closed her groin. The woman breathed easily, and her food and water intake had been prohibited, and she was near death if more days passed without water.
E l’apostema ja tant havia pugat que havia mezes dos ramps entro que eyssiro per dos traucs.	And the abscess had already been pressing so much that it had caused two inches of swelling over two days.
Donc yeu me cuytegui fisturalment e fiquegui en un de lor onci, e tiregui aquel, e atirada es de lu gran porcio, e aprop yeu incidigui aquela de on comprendegui del autre trau, e aprop yeu obrigui la boca de lu, e compremegui la sua lengua, e aprop yeu fiquegui le onci en aquela apostema.	Then I cut it surgically and clamped it with one of my forceps, then extracted it, taking out the larger portion. Next, I incised that part from which the other cut originated, then forced the mouth of it closed, held its tongue, and placed the forceps in the abscess.
E aprop yeu abscizi gran partida de lu, e no corria de lu sino un pauc de sanc.	And then you cut away a large part of it, and there was not flowing from it more than a little blood.
Donc absolut es le guolayro de aquela femna, e comensec tantost beure aygua, e aprop presec vianda, donc yeu no cessegui inscidir de aquela apostema motas vetz per lonc temps, e succesia apostema en loc de aquel, le qual inscizia entro que es prolonguat aquel.	Thus, the gout attack of that woman began, and she soon started to drink water and eat preserved food. Therefore, I could not stop cutting motas from that abscess for a long time, and an abscess formed in its place, which continued to grow as long as that condition lasted.
Donc yeu engen agui e cauterizegui le guolayro de lu, donc astec de addicio; e aprop yeu perambulegui e no saubi que fec Dieus de aquela aprop mi.	Thus, I treated the gout of her foot by incising and cauterizing it, following the method; and then I walked around, not knowing what God had done to that nearby.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Capitol.xxxvii.
De inscizio de huvela quan es apostemada.	Of incising the swelling when it is an abscess.
Quan catarr deysen a la huvula, e es apostemada e es longa, lahoras ela es nompnada perpendicular; e si es en la partida dejos grossa e redonda, e lahoras ela es apelada buba.	When catarrh affects the uvula, and it is swollen and long, then it is named perpendicular; and if it is in the part with a large and round swelling, then it is called a bubo.
Mays quan es curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio, e no comfereys la tua curacio, e eyssament ja vezes que apostema caut ja es ostat de lu e es subtil, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquela que es agreguadas redonda; e si es ad aquela longitut, e es sanguina, de fusca color o de negre, e no es a lu centiment, lahoras cove que tu temtes la inscizio de lu, quar en aquela es temor sobre le malaute.	When it is cured as we have said in the division, and you do not find your cure effective, and thus you often notice that the abscess has already been cauterized and is subtle, then you should incise the one that is aggregated round; and if it is at its length, and it bleeds, with a dusky or black color, and is not more than a centimeter, then you must fear the incision of it, for there is fear of gout in that area.
E quan tu vezes aquela segon la manieyra que yeu he dita de la sua blancor e longuesa, que tu fassas sezer le malaute e premas la lengua de lu am instrument del qual procesic la sua forma e aprop fica le onci en la nuva, e tira aquela en jos e inscideys aquela am un de dos instrumentz les quals e ditz en la inscizio de dos mellas.	And when you see that according to the manner I have said of its whiteness and length, you make the patient lie down and press on the root of his penis with the tip of an instrument by which it can be determined in what form it is, and then fix the nozzle in the new opening, and pull that downward and cut that with one of the two instruments which are called for the insertion of two bellies.
E cove que no inscidas aquela sino aquo que es ajustat sobre le terme natural ses addicio, quar si tu inscides de lu mays, lediyras le sieu parlar.	And know that you should not cut there but where it is attached to the natural term of addition, for if you cut beyond it, you will injure his speech.
E aprop la inscizio, usa de aquo le qual havem recomtat en la inscizio de dos mellas, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And in making the incision, use what we have recommended for the insertion of two bellies, and cure that until it is healed.
Mays si era le malaute espaventat per la inscizio de lu, cove que use de engen en la cauterizacio de lu ses temor, e la manieyra del cauteri en lu no es sino am aygua aguda, e es que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop prem la lengua de lu am le instrument le qual havem dit, e aprop pren de l’aygua la qual havem dita en le capitol de cauterizacio, e comfeys am aquela caus viva, e pausa aquela no spessa ni subtil, e de aquela omple la concavitat de l’estrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if the patient is frightened by the incision, know that you should use an anesthetic in the cautery to alleviate his fear. The method of the cautery on him is simply with sharp water, for you place the head of the patient's penis in your hand, and then press the root of the penis with the instrument we have mentioned. Then take from the water which we have described in the chapter on cautery, and apply it to that area alive, but do not pause much or too thinly, and fill the cavity of the instrument with which this is done:
Sia la extramitat de lu conquavitat en la qual sia pausada la medicina ayssi cum la conquavitat de culher de ray, e pausa le strument am la medicina sobre la vula, e·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu latz per so que corro saliva o musellage de la boca de aquel per la intrinscequa medicina, per so que no deyssenda de aquela deguna causa sobre le golayro de lu e que ledesca aquel.	Let the lower part of the cavity in which the medicine is placed be as wide as the width of a ray's tail, and place the instrument on top of the medicine near the vulva, while the patient lies on their side to allow saliva or mucilage from the mouth of that person to enter the internal medicine, so that it does not cease due to any such cause in the wound and heals that.
E aprop te la tua ma am la medicina, e exprem aquela sobre la uvula per l’espazi de miega hora entro que vegas aquela esser denegrada e sedada per la mordicacio de la medicina.	Place your hand on the medicine, and express it over the uvula for half an hour until you see that it becomes darkened and sedated by the bite of the medicine.
E si vols, prengues coto e envolopes aquel sobre la extremitat del ray, e submergeys le coto en la medicina, e entrometas le ray am le coto en una canula de sobre entro que·l coto adheresca en aquela canula, e fay aquo tantas vetz entro que consiegues aquo que vols de la cauterizacio de la uva, e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela se seccara e cayra aprop tres dias o quatre.	And if you want, take cotton, wrap it around the tip of the ray, and submerge the cotton in the medicine. Then insert the ray with the cotton into a tube from above so that the cotton adheres to the tube. Do this several times until you achieve what you desire for the cautery of the uvula, and then let it dry and fall off in about three or four days.
E si indigeysses que iteras la medicina, itera aquela, e aprop la cauterizacio abstergeys en le circuit de la uva am coto enbegut en boder, e mondifica am aquel aquo que es en le circuit de lu de la medicina, e sia lavat am aygua frega, e sia curat deforo am embrocacio, e dedintz am guarguarismes entro que sia sanat.	And if you need to reapply the medicine, apply it again, and for the cautery, clean around the uvula with cotton soaked in borax, and modify what is in the circuit of the uvula from the medicine, and wash it with water, and externally treat it with ointment, and internally with potions until it heals.
E aquesta especia de curacio es pus salva que inscizio e pus long de temor.	And this kind of cure is safer than incision and shorter in terms of fear.
Alcunas veguadas es curada la uvuola am aquo que es pus subtil que cauteri e inscizio, quar es curat am subfumigacio en aquesta manieyra: recipe calament, ysop, origua, ruda, scicados arabic, camamilla, broyda e semblant ad aquels de las erbas, e ajusta totas aquelas causas, o alcunas de lor, en una ola, e sian submergidas am vi agre, e bulhan; e la ola sia be lutada am lut decentment, e sia en le mieg loc de la ola un trauc, sobre le qual sia pausat un instrument conquau de aram segon aquesta manieyra; sia fayt de argent o de aram.	Some cases of uvula disease are cured with what is finer than cautery and incision, which is treated by fumigation in this manner: take calamus, hyssop, origanum, rue, scicinos arabicus, camomile, ground and mix those of the herbs, or some of them, in one vessel, and submerge all those causes or some of them; let them bubble in water enriched; and let the mixture be well stirred, and place a wick in the middle of the mixture on which an iron skewer made of brass should be placed according to this manner; let it be made of silver or brass.
E sia entromesa la extremitat en la boca del malaute entro que la vapor poge a la uvula sobre la quanula, entro que la uvula sia mot ofuscada.	And the extremity should be inserted in the mouth of the patient where the vapor rises to the uvula over the quinia, while the uvula is obscured.
E aprop itera sobre aquela motas veguadas entro qu’es secca, e guarda te que no fassas aquesta curacio al comesament de l’aveniment de apostemas, quar trop ajustaria en le apostema, e no cove que tu fassas aquo, sino deves la declaracio de apostema de lu caut.	And then repeat over those few cases where it is dry, and guard that you do not perform this cure at the beginning of the onset of carbuncles, for it would too tightly constrict the carbuncle. You should not do this, but rather declare the presence of a carbuncle with a cautery.
Mays si no es a tu present aquest instrument, lahoras pren una cana e compon en la extramitat de lu un clos de huou, per so que la boca del malaute sia comborida, quar le closc del huou prohibeys la vapor comburir la boca.	But if you do not have this instrument at hand, then take a cane and place at its end a hazel nut shell, so that the opening of the malaise may be widened, for the hazel nut shell prevents the vapor from burning the opening.
E aquesta curacio es bona am salut.	And this cure is good for health.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter XXXVIII.
De extraccio d’espinas e de aquo que adhereys en le golayro e de las autras causas.	On the extraction of thorns and what adheres in the wound and other causes.
Motas veguadas adhereys en le guolayro o spina de peys o alcuna autra causa.	Spots or thorns adhered in the wound or from a thorny plant or some other cause.
Adonc cove que tu extraguas aquo que de aquels es apparent, sobre le qual catz la vista, pus que tu premes la lengua am instrument denant solelh, per so que a tu sia declarat aquo que es en la guola.	Then carefully extract what is obvious from those, upon which the sight rests. But first press the tongue with an instrument in front of the light, so that you may be made aware of what is in the wound.
E aquo que no apar e es a tu occultat en le guolayro, cove que tu fassas vomir le malaute denant que la vianda sia degerida en l’estomac, quar fort leu la causa annexsa le golayro sira foro-getada per vomit; o que deglusia le malaute una pessa de nap o de razit de laytuga o un boci de pa sec; o prengua una pessa de sponga marina sequa leon, e lia aquela fortment am fiel, e aprop le malaute transglussia aquela, quar cum perve al loc en le qual so spinas e es extrahuda, lahoras so foro-getatz.	And what is not apparent and hidden in the wound, first make the patient vomit before the food is digested in the stomach, because if the cause attached to the wound is strong, it will be expelled by vomiting; or have the patient swallow a piece of onion or celery root or a piece of dry bread; or take a piece of sponge well saturated with honey, tie it tightly with thread, and make the patient swallow that, for it will reach the place where the thorns are and be expelled.
E mays pren una anguila e be am fiel liada, e sia dedintz mesa e soptament sia extrayta; o pren un porr e soptament le metas e soptament l’en tratz.	And take an eel and bind it with honey, place it inside and secretly extract it; or take a probe and secretly insert it and then withdraw it.
Mays si no so foro-getatz am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas, lahoras husa de un instrument de plom segon aquesta forma:	And if none of these methods work as we have said, then use a lead instrument in this form:
E sia pus gros que ray un petit, e en la extramitat de lu sia conquavitat la qual tu entrometas en la sua guola am facilitat.	And let it be as large as a small pea, and at the end of it, have a cavity which you insert into his throat with ease.
E el aga le sieu cap elevat en sus, e guarda te que·l tocament del sieu os de la gola, per so que endevengua a lu cos e am aquela que enpellesca le os o la spina, o que aquel le metge am la sua ma.	And apply his head upwards, and keep watch that the touch of his bone in the throat reaches him, so that it affects him and either peels the bone or the spine, or that the doctor touches it with his hand.
Mays empero que·l malaute aquel entrometa es miels, per la sua sciencia del loc de la causa annexa e enpellisca en jos, e tira la sua ma am le instrument en sus, tot aquo segon la quantitat la qual es a lu preparada entro que sia foro-getada.	And instead, let the patient himself insert a piece of honey, by his knowledge of the place of the cause and peel it downwards, and pull his hand towards the instrument, all this according to the quantity which is prepared for him before it is effective.
Capitol .xxxix.	Capitol.xxxix.
De extraccio de sancguisugua annexsa al golayro.	From the extraction of gouty fluid associated with gout.
Quan es medicada sanguisugua am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la curacio am medicinas e no comfereys, considera lahoras en le guolayro del malaute al solelh, pus que tu aias compremuda la lengua de lu am instrument le qual a tu havem recomtat.	When gouty fluid is treated according to what we have said in the division of the cure with medicines and you do not find relief, consider at the weather in the patient's gout, for you may need to adjust the dosage of the medicine with an instrument that we have recommended.
Donc si tu vezes la sancguisugua, extratz aquela am onci petit o am gesti subtils decentment.	Therefore, if you see the gouty fluid, extract it either through a small needle or with fine, subtle instruments.
E si no es a tu possible estrayre am aquel, lahoras pren una canula concava e entromet aquela en lo guolayro del malaute, e aprop pausa en la concavitat de la canula un ferr ignit, e fay aquo tantas vetz (entro que la sancguisugua sia morta e se osta del guolayro) e abstengua se le malaute tot lo jorn de aygua.	And if it is not possible to extract it through that, then take a concave cannula and insert it into the gouty joint. Then place a heated iron in the concavity of the cannula, and do this several times (until the gouty fluid is dead and exits from the joint), and let the patient abstain from water for the entire day.
E aprop prengua una veyria plena de aygua frega, e obra la boca de lu en aquela, e lava la boca am aquela; e no trasglucia de aquela alcuna causa e maugua l’aygua una hora aprop autra am la sua ma, quar la sancguisugua tantost cum sent l’aygua catz.	And then take a sponge full of water, open its mouth over the affected area, and wash the area with it; do not swallow any of it, and let the patient hold the water in their hand for about an hour more, as soon as they feel the gouty fluid responding to the water.
Mays si no es foro-getada am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras subfumigua le malaute am cimetz o am assafetida per le instrument le qual havem recomtat en la sufumiguacio de uvula.	If it is not fully fumigated with what we have recommended, then subfumigate the patient with cyme or asafetida through the instrument we have recommended in the uvula fumigation.
Fay aquo, so en quar cayra.	Do this, so that it may fall into place.
E es un’autra manieyra de operacio en sufumiguacio de aquela, es que tu prenguas una ola en la qual sian carbos ignitz e la ola sia cuberta am una cobertora en le mieg de la qual sia un trauc, e sia compausat en aquel trauc la extremitat del instrument; e aprop dega desus la subfumigacio; e pause le malaute la sua boca en la extremitat de la canula, e claugua la sua boca per que la subfumiguacio no sia foro-getada entro que sapias que la subfumigacio es pervenguda a la sancguisugua, quar la sancguisugua tantost cayra.	And another method of fumigation is this: you take a pot in which are burning coals and the pot is covered with a cloth in the middle of which is an aperture, and you place the end of the instrument at that aperture; and then proceed with the subfumigation; and place the patient's mouth at the end of the canula, and close his mouth so that the subfumigation is not forgotten until you see that the subfumigation has reached the uvula, for the uvula will soon fall.
E si no catz, lahoras tu itera la subfumiguacio motas vetz, e abstengua le malaute de beure, e mange causas saladas e alhs, e no begua aygua, e ayssi necessari es que am aquest regiment sia fora-getada.	And if it does not come down, then you repeat the subfumigation several times, and forbid the patient to drink, eat salty foods, and similar things, and do not let him take water; thus it is necessary that this regimen be forgotten.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument am le qual es trayta sancguisugua del guolayro quan es vista; e es semblant a forceps ayssi cum vezes, sino quar es en lu alcuna curvitat:	And this is the form of the instrument used to treat gout when seen; and it resembles forceps as you see, but some curvature is present in it.
le qual sia mesa al guolayro, e la extremitat de lu es semblant a bec de ciconia, que es guanta, en la qual es aspretat de lima, per so quar, quan comprem alcuna causa, aquela no leyssa.	And the instrument is placed over the gout, and the extremity of it resembles the beak of a stork, which is curved, and has been filed with a file, so that when any cause is grasped, it does not slip.
Capitol .xl.	Capitol.xl.
En le qual es la suma del sermo en apercio de apostemas e en seccio de lor.	In which the main discourse on abscesses and their treatment is presented.
Les apostemas so motas specias, de motas manieyras, segon que ve rememoracio de lor, de quascuna en aquest libre.	Abscesses are special kinds of boils, managed in various ways, as remembered, for each one in this treatise.
E so diversas en perforacio e seccio de lor per doas manieyras, de las quals la una es per la specia de apostemas en si meteys; e per aquo que comprem de las humiditatz.	And they are diverse in puncturing and treating them through two methods. Of these, one method is specifically for abscesses themselves; and this involves grasping the humors.
E la segonda manieyra es prop les locs en les quals accideys del cos, quar le apostema accident en le cap es autra de la apostema accident en le cul; e le apostema en le loc carnos accident es autra del apostema accident en junctura; e a quascun de lor es son juguament per operacio.	And the second method is applied near the locations where bodily accidents occur, for an abscess in the head is different from one in the buttocks; and an abscess in a fleshly area is different from one in a joint. For each of them has its own judgment through surgery.
E mays de apostemas so alcunas las quals cove que no sian perforadas sino aprop maturacio de la sania en aquels o compliment de lor.	And for abscesses, some of which cover that they not be perforated but rather await the maturation of the healing in those or their complement.
So autras apostemas les quals cove que sian traucatz quan son cruzes, e no son maturatz segon lor compliment, ayssi cum apostemas que son propdas a las juncturas, quar apostema quan ve prop junctura, lo esser de lu es prolonguat entro que·s poyreys aquo que es en le circuit de lu, e fort leu son corromputz les liamentz o les nervis de aquela junctura, per que es fayta causa de contraccio de aquel membre; o es apostema prop de membre principal, e si tu tardas la perforacio de lu entro sia madurat nosira al membre principal; o es prop le cul, donc perfora aque no-madurat; e no cove que·l perforas cru, de no-complida degestio, sino aquel que es prop del cul, per so que no poyresca le preon de lu e sia elonguat a las partidas dedintz del cul, e sia fayta fistula, o que sia fayt en le terme de lu que no sia sanat.	And for other abscesses which cover that they be drawn out when they are crosswise, and not matured according to their complement, thus as with abscesses that are near the joints, when an abscess is near a joint, the nature of it is prolonged into whatever is in the circuit of it, and greatly corrupts the ligaments or nerves of that joint, making it a cause of contraction of that limb; or if it is an abscess near the main member, and you delay the perforation of it until it is matured it will harm the main member; or if it is near the anus, then draw out that which is not mature; and one should not puncture it raw, due to poor digestion, but rather one that is near the anus, so that it does not cause pus to spread inward from the anus and become a fistula, or one made in the term when it has not healed.
Mays cove que tu sapias la hora de la perforacio de la apostema, e aysso es quan es maturat.	And you must know the time for puncturing the abscess, and this is when it is matured.
E sapias que es madurat quan es la cedacio de la dolor e la cessacio de la febre, e aprop la diminucio de la rogor e de la pulsacio, e la acuitat del cap del apostema, e les autres senhals.	And know that it is matured when there is the cessation of pain and the subsiding of fever, and nearly the reduction of swelling and pulse, and the alleviation of the top of the abscess, and other signs.
E quar cove que sapias la perforacio cazer en le loc pus dejos del apostema e de pus venient de curacio de la eminencia.	And know when to perceive the puncture hole in the place just below the abscess and of pus coming from the healing of the prominence.
E perforacio tostemps sia per le lonc de la carn o del cors, si las apostemas son en las partidas de las mas o dels pes, e en loc dels lacertz, de las cordas dels nervis, de las arcerias; e, al derier, en totz locs enguals en les quals no es reflecio; quar en aquels que so reflectitz, usa de perforacio segon aquel membre.	And the puncture should be made along the length of the flesh or body, if the abscesses are in the parts of the thigh or feet, and at the site of the lacertae, the cords of the nerves, the arches; and, finally, in all similar places where reflection does not occur. For those that do reflect, use puncture according to that member.
Mays quan le apostema es en loc carnos, lahoras miels es que leysses la perforacio de lu entro que sia confermada la digestio de lu segon compliment, ayssi quo havem dit; quar si tu perforas aquel denant aquo, es prolonguat le cors del poyre de lu e de mota sordicia, e fort leu las labias de lu so enduradas e la profunditat de lu.	When the abscess is in flesh, it is better to delay the puncture until the digestion of the pus is confirmed according to our previous saying; for if you puncture it prematurely, you will prolong the course of the disease and increase the hardness and depth of the abscess.
Mays alcus apostemas so perforatz segon la latitut de la carn o del cos deves la necessitat, o segon aquo del qual lo membre indigeys.	More abscesses are pierced according to the width of the flesh or body as necessity demands, or according to that from which the member suffers.
E cove que administres petita perforacio , e·n les apostemas grans gran perforacio e ampla o motas seccios segon la diversitat de la grandesa dels apostemas.	And ensure that you administer a small perforation in large abscesses, and a large perforation or multiple sections according to the diversity of the size of the abscesses.
E autras so dels apostemas en les quals cove que la codena sia conquavada e sia encidida, quan es fayta ayssi quo pan e fayta es en terme que ja stigua, ayssi cum aquel que accideys en trops de dubelec e de bubos.	And in other abscesses, ensure that the cord is reduced and tied when it is done so as with bread, and do it at a time when it has settled, just as you would in cases of tumors and buboes.
E de aquels so que so insciditz am seccio havent tres angles; e de aquels es en le qual es inscidit ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirtra, ayssi cum las apostemas dels angonars.	And of those that are incised with a section having three angles; and in which it is incised as the shape of a mulberry leaf, as in the abscesses of snakebites.
E de lor so en les quals es administrada seccio redonda e seccio lunar, e semblantz ad aquels.	And of these, those in which a round section and a lunar section are administered, resembling those.
Mays aquel al qual no es cap ayssi cum son apostemas leons superficials, cove que tu perforas aquel am perforacio superficial, o plana tant solament.	More for those in which none is done thus, as with superficial abscesses, ensure that you perforate them with a superficial perforation, or flat one only.
E cove quant le apostema es gros e ya ha colligit mota sania, que perfores aquel e no te coytes que extraguas tot le poyre en aquela hora; habantz extratz de aquel una partida, e aprop opila le apostema entro al autre dia, e aprop extratz una partida major, e aprop fa aquo motas veguadas segon graduacio entro que sia foro-getat.	And when the abscess is large and has already gathered some healthy matter, that you perforate it and do not hesitate to extract all the pus at that time; having extracted one part, then lift the abscess into another place the next day, and extract a larger part, and continue to do this until it is fully healed.
E majorment si·l malaute es de freol vertut, o femna prens, o enfant petit, o viel en decrepitut, quar l’esperit animal motas vetz es resolvut am la egressio de la sania, e fort leu mor le malaute, e tu operte les.	And more so if the patient is of verdure virtue, or a pregnant woman, or a small child, or an old person in decline, for the animal spirit resolves into the exit of the healthy matter, and greatly alleviates the pain, and you may open it.
Don guarda aquest capitol am gran cautela, e aprop la tua perforacio en la qual perforas aquestz apostemas, cove que abstergescas las plagues e consideras donc si la plagua del apostema es pauca, o es una seccio plana, lahoras tu aministra las qualguas de li o de coto antic; e si le apostema es gran, e las fissuras de la perforacio son motas, lahoras cove que tu pauses meca en quascun trauc entro que pervenguan ensemps.	Take great care with this chapter, and when you perform your perforation in which you puncture these abscesses, ensure that you clean the wounds and consider whether the wound of the abscess is small, or a flat section, then administer either hot or cold remedies; if the abscess is large, and the cracks of the perforation are severe, then place your hand in each to ensure they heal together.
E si en le apostema es abscindit una partida de la codena o has concavada aquela en le circuit, lahoras cove que tu la complescas de coto viel o de fil fayt de drap de li, ayssi cum quan has traytz pans o razizos, ses humiditat; e strenh aquel entro al tertz dia; e aprop proceseys aquel e cura le am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if in the abscess you have divided a part of the chain or concaved that area in the circuit, then you should close it with cold lint or a thread made of linen, just as when you have drawn out wounds or roots, their humidity; strengthen it on the third day; and proceed with it and cure it according to what is appropriate from ointments until it is healed.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc en la hora de la operacio tua, lahoras tu aministra aygua frega e vi agre en les quals mules un drap de li, e pausa aquel sobre le loc del fluxs del sanc motas veguadas.	But if a flow of blood occurs during the time of your operation, then you administer water mixed with wine in which you soak a cloth, and place that over the location of the blood flow for several minutes.
Mays si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras cove que tu aministres regiment e curacio e polveras las quals he recomtadas en motz locs de aquest nostre libre e de divisio.	But if the flow of blood persists, then you must administer treatment and cure with powders which I have recommended in several places of this our book and division.
Mays si es en temps de hivern, e·l loc de la apostema es loc de motz nervis, lahoras cove que tu enfundas pulvils en vi e oli caut, e pauses aquels sobre les locs.	But if it is in the time of winter, and the location of the abscess is near major nerves, then you should apply powders mixed with wine and oil using a cauterizer, and place those over the areas.
E si es en estiu, e les locs son carnoses, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils enbeguts am aygua e oli o am vi e oli, e tot aquo sia freg entro que sia le ters dia, ayssi cum havem dit, e lahoras cove que tu deslies le apostema e abstergescas aquel e aministres en la curacio de lu aquo que a lu conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if it is in the summer, and the areas are fleshy, then you should place powders soaked in water and oil or in wine and oil, all of which should be applied on the third day, as we have said, and then you should incise the abscess, cleanse it, and administer to it what is appropriate for its cure until it heals.
E aysso es aquo que es necessari de la cognicio de la curacio de apostemas universalment, mays segon la via de distinccio ja he dit de tot apostema en qual manieyra es via de la cura de lu per capitols singularment.	And this is what is necessary concerning the knowledge of the cure of abscesses generally, but according to the way of classification, I have already spoken of all abscesses and in what manner the cure of each one is by chapters specifically.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter XL.
De seccio de apostemas les quals veno en la codena del cap.	Of abscesses whose vein is in the vein of the head.
En la codena del cap petitz apostemas, e so de specias de nodes les quals conteno tunicas que so a lor factz ; e las specias de lor so motas.	In the vein of the head, small abscesses occur, and their substance consists of nodules which contain tunics that form them; the substances of these nodules are mottled.
E de lor son pingas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditat semblant a lima.	And they have textures, and those that contain humidity resembling lime.
E de aquelas so las quals conteno humiditat semblant a pols, et asemblantz a lor; e de aquelas so que son lapideas, durs.	And those that contain humidity resembling dust, similar to it; and those that are hard, like stones.
E en la seccio de totz, e en la extraccio de aquels no es temor, cum deves la exteccio de aquels no fa contrariat arceria.	And in the section of all, and in the extraction of those, there is no fear, just as you should perform the extraction without causing any resistance.
E la operacio en seccio de aquels es que tu esproes aquels am instrument la forma del qual ve aprop aysso, le qual es apelat entromes, entro que sapias que contengua.	And the operation to extract those is that you express them using an instrument in the form of which see below, which is called an entremes, until you know it contains them.
Quar si aquo que conte es humiditat, lahoras scindeys aquel am seccio segon la longitut per seccio superficial segon aquesta forma:	And if what is contained is humidity, then split it along the length in section by surface according to this form:
E comensa en la seccio de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G. Donc cum la humiditat es evacuada, lahoras tu excoria aquela pel que conte aquela humiditat, e no leysses de aquela alcuna causa de tot, quar tropas veguadas retorna, si roman de aquela alcuna causa.	And begin at the section of B line between the line of G. Once the moisture is evacuated, then scrape that skin which contains that moisture, and do not leave any cause of all, because too many times it returns if there remains any cause of all.
E aprop submergeys coto en enguent egipciach, si es present, e sino, en aygua e sal; e umpleys am aquel la plagua e layssa aquel entro ad autra dia, quar am aquo corrodeys tot so que es romas de aquela pellicula.	And then immerse it in Egyptian ointment if available, otherwise in water and salt; then fill it and leave it for another day, because with this it will dissolve all that is rotten of that skin.
E aprop itera sobre aquel coto am enguent egipciach segondament e tersament si indigeyses de lu, entro que·t comfides que no y haia romas alcuna causa de aquela pellicula; lahoras cura la plagua am enguent entro que sia sanada.	And then repeatedly treat that part with Egyptian ointment gently if you feel it necessary, until you are confident that there is no rotten cause of that skin; then cure the wound with ointment once it is healed.
E si apostema conte nodi gras, lahoras tu inscideys aquel segon aquesta forma:	And if there is an abscess containing fatty nodes, then incise that according to this form:
am seccio havent forma de crotz, e geta oncis entre doas labias de la seccio e scorsa aquel de tota partida, e esforsa la tua vertut en extraccio de la tunica la qual conte aquel.	In the section having a cross-like form, and make an incision between the two halves of the section and thoroughly scrape that part, and exert your virtue in extracting the tunic which contains that.
Mays si a tu arceria fa contrarieta, lahoras fay aquo que yeu t’e recontat primieyrament.	But if your artery resists, then do what I recounted to you first.
E semblantment fay en le apostema lapificat de seccio e de curacio segon que a tu havem dit; e seccio sobre apostema lapificat es pus leugiera, quar es de pauc sanc e de pauca humiditat.	And similarly, treat the abscessed area for sectioning and curing as we have said; the sectioning over an abscessed area should be lighter, because it has little bleeding and little humidity.
E alcunas vetz so alcus de aquestz apostemas les quals so en le cap en alcus homes am los quals de tot no es humiditat; la qual causa es quar yeu inscindigui sobre un apostema en le cap de una femna vielha e atrobegui le apostema ayssi cum peyra sorda, aspra, blanqua, la qual no podia esser trinquada, e si a alcu fos am aquela percussit, plaguera aquel.	And sometimes some of these abscesses, which are in the head, are almost dry in some people; the cause is that it cannot be incised over an abscess in a woman's head, and one should scrape the abscess like a hard, rough, white stone which could not be broken, and if any were subjected to percussion, it would be harmful.
Mays en les autres apostemas accidentz en le cap otra aquest no es aquest capitol, ayssi cum les apostemas que veno als caps dels enfantz e deves las razitz de las aurelhas, mays la seccio de aquestz totz sia seccio superficial.	But in other abscesses in the head, this is not covered in this chapter; as with abscesses that come to the heads of children, you should drain the cavities of the ears, but the sectioning of all these should be superficial.
E pausa la perforacio de aquels de la partida pus bassa de lor per so que sia alleujat le cos de la sania a las partidas pus bassas.	And place the perforation of those in the lower parts below such that it alleviates the body of the disease to the lower parts.
E aprop cura aquelas am aquo que conveneys ad aquel de curacio.	And then attend to those matters that concern the treatment.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter XLII.
De seccio de scrophulas las quals accideyso en le col.	Of the section on scrofula which occurs in the neck.
Motas veguadas endeveno aquestas apostemas en le colh e en las aysselhas e en les angonars; e alcunas veguadas accideyso en las autras partidas del cos.	Signs and symptoms of these abscesses occur in the neck, in the armpits, and in the groin; and sometimes they occur in other parts of the body.
E so aquelas que accideysso en le colh, e so motas que so engendradas entre lor, e tota scrofula de aquelas es dintz la sua tunica propria, e ayssi cum en les nodis e apostema del cap, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And those that occur in the neck, and the signs that are generated within them, and all scrofula of these is within its own membrane. Thus, as with the nodes and abscesses of the head, as we have reported.
E las specias de aquestas scrophulas son motas, quar de aquelas so alcunas lapideas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditatz, e de aquelas so malignas las quals no obeseysso a curacio.	And the species of these scrofula are signs. Some of them are hard lumps, and some contain moisture, and some are malignant, which do not respond to treatment.
Donc en aquela la qual tu vezes de bona disposicio en le Tocament, de la qual la color de aquo que es manifest es propda a la color de la codena, e es mauguda a tota partida, e no es annexsa am le nervi del colh, ni am las venas, ni am la arceria, e no es preonda, cove que tu inscidiscas aquela am siccio superficial de la partida desus a la partida dejos del cos de la linha de .G. entro la linha de .B., e scorja aquela de tota partida, e exten dos labias de la codena am onci, o am motz oncis si has necessitat de aquels, ayssi cum havem dit en las apostemas del cap, e extratz aquela petit a petit.	Therefore, in that one which you perceive to be of good condition in the Touchement, where the color that is manifested is similar to the color of the skin, and is palpable throughout the body, and is not attached to the nerves of the neck, nor to the veins, nor to the arteries, and is not firm, so you should incise it with a superficial cut from above the part to below the opposite side of the body along the line of G. to the line of B., and scrape it thoroughly until it is removed, and extend the lips of the skin around the wound with one or several thin strips if needed, as we have said in the case of abscesses of the head, and extract it little by little.
E es mays cautela que no sia inscidida la vena o nervi.	And it is better caution that the vein or nerve not be severed.
E sia le spatum no mot agut, que no ajuste a tu la tua ma am inscizio, o que enquiete le malaute, e que inscidas aquo que no es necessari inscidir; quar si inscideysses vena o arceria e prohibeys tu de la tua operacio, lahoras pausa en la plagua vetriol trissat o autras polveras las quals ostan fluxs de sanc, e estrenh la plagua, e layssa aquel entro que·s repausa la acuitat de la apostema e sia mollificada la plagua e comense esser poyrida.	Let the incision not be too deep, so that you do not damage the vein or nerve with your hand during the operation, or relieve the patient, and do not sever what is not necessary to sever; for if you cut a vein or artery and stop your operation, then apply a plaster of vitriol trioxide or other powders which contain fluxes of salt, strengthen the wound, and leave that within which is where the acute pain of the abscess subsides and the swelling is softened and begins to suppurate.
Quan le sanc es abscindit.	When the blood is cut off.
Donc retorna a la tua operacio entro que l’aias complida.	Then return to your operation until it is completed.
E aprop inquireys am le tieu dit indic si es romas alcuna causa de las autras petitas scrophulas, donc inscideys aquelas e munda aquelas.	And then inquire if there is any other cause for the small scrofulous swellings, and if so, cut those and cleanse them.
E si es en la razit de la scrophula gran vena, cove lahoras que no inscidas aquela scrophula de la sua razitz.	And if the large vein is near the scrofulous swelling, cover it so that you do not cut that part of the scrofulous swelling.
Abantz cove que lies aquela am fiel doblat fort e que leysses aquela entro que caia per si ses nocument.	Before you cut there where the vein is folded strongly, let that remain so it falls by itself.
E aprop omple la plagua de coto vielh le qual tu has ja submirgit en enguent egipciac, e aprop cura aquel.	And then fill the wound with old cloth which you have already soaked in Egyptian ointment, and then dress it.
E si inscides aquela scrophula tota, lahoras cove que tu ajustes las doas labias de la plagua e cuzas2 tantost pus que no y ha romasa deguna superfluitat.	And if you incise the scrophula completely, then you should adjust the two edges of the wound and stitch it tightly so that no superfluous fluid has any chance to leak out.
Mays si tu vezes que haia romasa superfluitat per la grandeza de la scrofula, cove que tu entendas a inscidir la razit de aquela, e astrayra aquela e aministra sutura e aquo que es dit.	But if you see that there is an excess of fluid due to the size of the scrophula, then you should understand to incise the edge of it, remove that part, and administer stitches as described.
E aquela de las scrophulas que conteno humiditatz, perfora aquela am perforacio superficial aqui la on appar a tu le loc de maturacio de lu, e pausa perforacio de aquo que siec le pus bas del cos, ayssi cum havem dit.	And for the scrophulas containing humidity, make a superficial perforation at the place where it appears to you as the site of maturation, and stop the perforation below the dry pus beneath the body, as we have said.
E aprop aministra perforacio, calguas am enguent e semblantz ad aquels, per so que corroda aquo que es romas de la corropcio.	And then administer the perforation, apply ointment and similar substances to it, so that it heals the rotten parts from corruption.
E aprop quan tu vezes la plagua ja esser mundada, lahoras tu cura aquela am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanada.	And when you see that the wound is already clean, then apply the cream of generative flesh while it is healing.
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter 43.
De seccio del pilhot del apostema accident dintz le guolayro.	Of the section of the fistula in the glandular area.
Diyssero les antics aquesta seccio en le epilhot, e no vist alcu hom en nostra terra que aquela aia fayta.	The ancients called this section the epilhot, and no one in our land has ever seen it performed.
E aquesta es la inscriptura del sermo de aquels.	And this is the inscription of the speech of those.
Mays en les homes haventz esquinencia, cove que sia esquivada la extraccio del epilhot, cum per aquo no sia fayt juvament per so quar totas las venas e las majors del malaute so aqui.	More in men with foreskin, a cavity that should be avoided during the extraction of the epilhot, as otherwise it is not done properly and all the veins and major vessels of the groin are at risk.
Mays en aquels que han apostemas cautz en la boca o guolayro o dos aurelhas, quan la malautia no es en la cana, cove husar de la seccio de epilhot a fugir la perdicio la qual es fayta per perfocacio.	More in those who have abscesses on the mouth or glandular area or ears, when the illness is not in the throat, it is advisable to use the section of the epilhot to avoid the loss caused by perforation.
Donc cove quan volem aquo, que inscidam le epilhot dejos tres cercles dels cercles del epilhot, o quatre am petita seccio per la latitut en aquel que es entre dos cercles per quantitat, que la seccio sia en ciphac, no en la cartillage, e aquest loc es convenent a seccio, quar es privat de carn e les vayselhs de sanc de lu son luhen.	When we want to do this, cut the foreskin and leave three or four small circles of the foreskin, each in the space between two circles by quantity, so that the section is circular, not in the cartilage, and this place is appropriate for a section, which is devoid of flesh and the blood vessels of it are removed.
E si le metge es pauruc, cove lahoras que extenda la codena del golayro am onci, e aprop fenda la codena entro que pervengua a la canal, mays evite les vaysels de sanc si vetz de aquelas alcuna causa.	And if the doctor fears this, do so when he extends the needle's thread to its end, and then cut the thread as it approaches the canal, but more avoid the blood vessels if you see any cause.
E aprop inscida li ciplach segon que havem recomtat; e es significat sobre la seccio de la canal per le flacma le qual es de aquela eyssit am aquo que es de lu disromput e per la abscizio de la votz.	And then cut the cicatrix according to what we have directed; and it is meant by the section of the canal through the flame which indicates that one part is of this intact and the other of its disrupted state, and by the absence of voice.
E layssa la plagua uberta per alcun temps.	And leave the wound open for some time.
Donc cum la hora es remauguda en la qual perforacio es temuda, agregua doas labias de la codena de la plagua, e cus aquela sola ses la cartillage.	And when the time is delayed in which the perforation is feared, add two loops of the thread of the wound, and sew that one to the cartilage.
E aprop administra medicinas que fan naysser la carn entro que sia sanat.	And then administer medicines that make flesh grow where it is healed.
E diyssec Albucasis que la summa del sermo le qual havem recomtat, exposicio no es sino que veias que alcus de aquetz apostemas ja han opilat lo guolayro del malaute, e le malaute es vengut entro a mort, e le ale de lu es entresecat, e alcus van a inscidir le epiglos per so que respire le malaute sobre le loc de la plagua per alcuna respiracio, e sia salvat de mort.	And Alcubasis says that the main point of the discourse we have recounted is simply that you can see that some of those abscesses have already opened the wound in the patient, and the patient has come into death, and its life has been cut off, and some go on to incise the epiglottis so that the patient may breathe the air over the place of the wound by some respiration, and thus be saved from death.
E per aquo comandero layssar la plagua uberta entro que sia consumida la malicia de la malautia; e es la malicia de lu per tres dias; e donc lahoras comandero cosi la plagua, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And for this, I order to leave the wound open until the malice of the illness is consumed; and the malice of the illness lasts for three days; and then, at that time, I order to close the wound and treat it until it is healed.
E aquo que yeu he vist per mi meteys, es que una sirventa pres un cotel e mesec le en le sieu golayro e inscidic am aquel una partida de la cana del pulmo, e yeu fu apelat a la curacio de lu, e atrobegui la mugen ayssi cum es mugit del moridos, e descubrigui la plagua e atrobegui le sanc le qual era yssit de la plagua petit.	And what I have seen with my own eyes is that a servant took a knife and placed it in the wound and incised there a part of the canna of the lung, and I was called to treat this case, and described the mugen as it is heard from the dead, and uncovered the wound and applied leeches which were hanging from the wound small.
Donc yeu fo confessat que aquela no havia inscidit vena ni guidegi, e le vent yssia de la plagua, e curegui aquela entro que foc sanada.	Then I have confessed that she had not incised vein nor artery, and the wind from the wound, and cured her so that it healed soundly.
E no accidic a la sirventa si no rauquiera en la votz, e aprop alcus dias retornec ad miloracio de las suas dispozicios.	And she did not suffer any injury nor even in her voice, and soon returned to her usual disposition.
E ara dic yeu que en la seccio del epilhot no ha temor.	And now I say that in the section of the inguinal region there is no fear.
Capitol .xliv.	Capitol. xliv.
De seccio sobre apostema le qual accideys en le golayro defora, e es apelat hernia del golayro.	On the section about an apostema that occurs on the elbow outside, and is called an elbow hernia.
Aquest apostema nompnat hernia del golayro es apostema gran segon la color del cors, e es mot en las femnas.	This apostema, unnamed as an elbow hernia, is a large apostema according to the color of the body, and it often occurs in women.
E es segon dos manieyras, quar o es natural o accidental.	And it is according to two ways: whether it is natural or accidental.
E en le natural no es engen de curar.	And in the natural case, it is not easy to cure.
E l’accidental es segon dos manieyras del qual la un es semblant a nodes grasses, e l’autra manieyra es semblant apostema le qual es fayt per nodacio de arteria, e en aquel es temor.	And the accidental is according to two ways: one resembles fatty nodes, and the other way resembles an apostema formed by the obstruction of an artery, and in that case, there is fear.
E no cove que·s fassa presumpcio a lu cum ferr sino en aquel que es petit.	And do not let him think that this is done with iron only in the small one.
E tu proha aquel e investigua aquel am le dit, e si atrobas lu semblant a nodi gras, e no es suspendut am alcuna de las venas, lahoras tu inscideys aquel ayssi cum les nodes, e extratz aquel am aquo que conte lu de la pel e bursiclam; e sino, lahoras es perscrutat tot le sieu esser, e aprop cura le loc am aquo que cove de curacio entro que sia sanat.	And thou probe that area and investigate the one he mentions, and if thou findest a semblance of a fatty node, and it is not suspended from any of the veins, then thou incidest that area as the nodes are incised, and extract it from the skin and bursicle it; and if not, then thoroughly examine his entire being, and place care upon the area for healing until it is healed.
Capitol .xlv.	Capitol. xlv.
De seccio de las specias de nodes.	Of the section on kinds of nodes.
Dels nodes so motas specias e yeu ja he dit totas las specias de lor en la divisio.	Of the joints, these are the main kinds, and I have already described all kinds of them in the division.
E cove que yeu recomte assi la diferencia entre node e exitura cum fassa dubitacio.	And let it be known that I recount thus the difference between a node and an abscess so as to avoid doubt.
Donc yeu dic que am exitura es caliditat e febre e dolors vehementz entro que es sedada la ebullicio de la superfluitat; e es complida putrefaccio que lahora cessa la febre, la dolor e la calor.	Therefore, I say that in an abscess there is a quality of heat and fever and vehement pains until the boiling of the excess is subdued; and when the putrefaction is complete, then the fever, pain, and heat cease.
Mays am node no es caliditat ni febre ni dolor, e conte aquel ciphac leon le qual es al u sac propri.	But if there is no heat nor fever nor pain, and concerning that lion skin which is on his back.
E es segon la color del cors, e le comensament de lu es cum un ceze e es fayt ayssi cum vace, sia major o minor, e son segon dos specias, quar o so grassas e conteno humiditat, e las colors de la humiditat son motas, segon que yeu diyssi en la divisio.	And it is according to the color of the body, and its beginning is like a stain and is made thus, either larger or smaller, and they are according to two species, namely those that are fatty and contain humidity, and the colors of the humidity are spots, as I said in the division.
Donc cove, quan pervenas a la curacio de node, que exprohes aquel e inquiras aquel al comensament am sturment le qual es apelat intromes, segon que vindra la sua forma en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	Therefore, when you arrive at the treatment of the node, express it and inquire about it from its beginning in the tissue which is called intumescent, according to its form that will appear in the capitol which is nearby.
E es manieyra de inquisicio de apostemas e de totz nodes, e es que tu prenguas aquest sturment e entromet aquel en le loc pus humit le qual atrobas en le apostema, e tu revolveras les tieus ditz am aquel petit a petit entro que sapias que·l sturment ja ha penetrat la codena.	And this is the method of inquiry for abscesses and all nodes, and it is that you take this tissue and insert it into the location most humid which you find in the abscess, and you will mix the tissues little by little until you know that the tissue has penetrated the core.
E aprop ultima la tua ma segon la mesura de la grandeza del apostema, e aprop extratz le entromes e considera aquo que es yssit en le vestigi de lu.	Then place your hand according to the measure of the abscess's size, and then extract the inserted tissue and consider what is situated in the residue.
E si es fora-getada la humiditat corrent, de qualque color sia, lahoras tu le inscideys am seccio superficial segon que he dit en les autres apostemas.	And if the running moisture of any color is overlooked, then you incise according to a superficial section as I said in the other abscesses.
E si del vestigi de l’intromes no hieys humiditat, lahoras sapias que es gras.	And if there is no moisture from the intrusion, then you know it is fatty.
E secca sobre lu am seccio havent forma de crotz segon aquesta forma:	And if it is dry on the surface and has the form of a cross according to this form:
ayssi cum t’e ensenhat, e suspen aquel am oncis, e excorja la codena de tota part am facilitat, e guarda la pel o sac, si podes, sobre aquel e extraguas aquela sania am le node.	As I have instructed you, suspend that with a cord, and completely remove the cord by scraping, and preserve the skin or sack if possible above it, and extract the healthy part at the node.
Mays si es romput en la operacio, no es possible extrayre aquela sana, e motas veguadas endeve aquo, e lahoras tu la extratz a pessas entro que de lu no romangua denguna causa.	But if it breaks during the operation, it is not possible to extract that healthy part. Instead, leave the pieces as they are, and then remove them in pieces so that they do not break for any reason.
Quar si de lu roman denguna causa, pauc o trop, le node retorne segon le mays.	But if it breaks for any reason, either a little or too much, the node will return according to the most favorable outcome.
E si tu vezes que de lu roman alcuna part petita, lahoras comple la plagua de alcunas polveras corrosivas agudas e strenh la plagua, e pausa sobre aquela que sede apostema caut, e cura aquel del autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And if you see that a part has broken a little, then fill the wound with some corrosive powders and strengthen the wound. Place your hand over the area where the abscess is located, and cure the rest of the patient using another method until it heals.
E si es node gran, lahoras tu cus las doas labias de lu e cura aquel am aquo que encarna.	And if it is not great, then you close its two lips and cure that which is within.
Mays si vena pulsatil es a lu contraria, o no-pulsatil, lahoras tu coyta e huemple le loc de zegi trissat que es vetriol e leyssa aquel streyt per dos dias o per tres entro que·s poyresca la plagua e que repause la ebullicio del sanc; e aprop retorna a inscindir aquo que es romas del node.	And if the vein is pulsatile on the opposite side, or non-pulsatile, then you incise and fill the area with a third part of vitriol and let it dry for two days or three until the inflammation subsides and the boiling of the blood ceases; and then return to cutting what is damaged around the node.
Capitol .xlvi.	Capitol. XLVI.
De las formas del sturmentz necessaris en seccio e perforacio.	Of the forms of instruments necessary for section and perforation.
De aquels so las formas dels intromesas, e so de tres specias, que de aquels es alcu gran, e de lor es migier, e de lor es petit.	Of those, these are the forms of the instruments, and they are of three species: some are large, and others are medium, and others are small.
La forma de intromes gran es aquesta:	The form of the large instrument is this:
La forma de intromes migier es aquesta:	The form of the medium instrument is this:
La forma de intromes petit es aquesta:	The form of the small instrument is this:
Sian faytz de ferr, de alfulud, de extremitatz cayradas decentment, per so que festino le intrament en les apostemas.	Make them of iron, or of lead, or of fallen edges properly, so that the instrument enters into the abscess.
E aquestas so las formas dels experientz, e son nompnatz albered, e un de aquels es apelat berid.	These are the forms of the experienced doctors, and they are named Albed and Berid.
E so de tres especias, quar de lor es gran, migier e pauc.	These are of three spices, one of which is great, the other half and little.
La forma de experient gran, forma de lu:	The form of the experienced great:
La forma de experient migier, forma de lu:	The form of the experienced half, its form:
La forma de experient pauc, forma de lu:	The form of the experienced little, its form:
Conveneysso que sian per aquels apostemas e exituras e fistulas e bubos per so que entre aquelas so dels osses e de autras causas.	It is convenient that they be for those abscesses, wounds, fistulas, and buboes, so that among them are of the bones and from other causes.
E so faytz redontz, grosses, leons, ayssi cum grans agulhas am las quals son cosidas las selhas, e son faytas de eram citri, o de eram o de ferr, o de argent, E las milhors so quan so faytas de eram citri.	And they are made round, large, like lions, as well as large needles to which the threads are sewn. They are made of iron, or steel, or silver, and the best are when they are made of steel citrus.
E son faytz les experient de plum negre, les quals se acordan que per aquels sian ubertas las fistulas en la conquavitat de las quals so reflexios, que sian reflectidas am la sua levitat am aquelas refleccios.	And black feather experiments are made, which they say should be opened where the reflections are reflected by their lightness to those reflections.
E so de tres specias, quar alcus de lor so loncs, e dels autres migiers, e dels autres breus, segon la quantitat del ample de la fistula e de la strictura de lu.	And so of three species, some are long, and others are medium, and others are short, according to the quantity of the width of the fistula and its stricture.
Forma del experient gran de plom:	Form of the large black feather experiment:
Forma del experient migier de plom:	Form of the medium black feather experiment:
Forma del experient petit de plom:	Form of the small black feather experiment:
Las formas dels oncis so de motas specias, quar de aquels so alcus simples, als quals es una curvitat solament, e so de tres specias: grans, paucs e migiers.	The forms of the needles are of three species. Some are simple, having only a single curvature, and they are of three kinds: large, few, and medium.
E de lor so uncis orps, e so de tres specias.	And some are solid needles, which are also of three species.
E de aquels so uncis haventz doas curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And some of these needles have two curvatures, which are also of three species.
E de lor so haventz tres curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And from them there are three curves, and of three species.
E totz aquetz so necessaris en lor loc.	And all these are necessary in their place.
Forma de unci simple gran, forma de lu:	Shape of single great curve, shape of it:
Forma de unci simple migier:	Shape of single moderate curve:
Forma de unci simple pauc, forma de lu:	Shape of single slight curve, shape of it:
Forma de unci orp gran:	Shape of great single curve:
Forma de unci orp migier, forma de lu:	Shape of moderate great curve, shape of it:
Forma de unci orp pauc, forma de lu:	Shape of slight moderate curve, shape of it:
Forma de unci gran havent dos curvaturas:	Shape of great single curve having two curves:
Forma de unci migier havent dos curvatas:	Shape of moderate single curve having two curves:
Forma de unci pauc havent dos curvaturas:	Shape of slight single curve having two curves:
Forma de unci gran havent tres curvaturas:	Shape of great single curve having three curves:
Forma de unci migier havent tres curvaturas:	Forma of a woman having three curves:
Forma de unci pauc havent tres curvaturas:	Forma of a woman having three curves:
E aquestas so las formas dels scalpels am les quals son seccatz e scorjatz les nodes e le apostemas, e so de tres specias, quar de aquels es gran, migier, e pauc.	And these are the forms of the knives on which the joints and abscesses are cut and scraped, and they are of three species: some are large, woman-shaped, and small.
Forma de scapel gran:	Forma of the large knife:
Forma del scapel migier:	Forma of the woman-shaped knife:
Forma de scapel pauc:	Forma of the small knife:
Las extramitatz de aquels am les quals es fayta seccio so agudas e las autres extramitatz so no-agudas, e no so pausadas en tal manieyra, sino per que sia fayt juvament en la excorjacio dels nodes la temor de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e per aquels sia sanat le malaute e atrobe tranquilitat un petit per la adustio la qual atroba deves la excoriacio del apostema.	The extremities of those on which section is performed are acute, while the other extremities are non-acute. They are not held in such a manner, but rather so that during the scraping of the joints there is no fear of cutting into a vein or nerve, and for this reason, the injury is healed and there is some relief from the heat which causes the scraping of the abscess.
E aquestas son las formas de almagidas, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc, ayssi cum veyras.	And these are the forms of the curved knives, and they are of three species: large, woman-shaped, and small, as you will see.
La forma de magda gran:	The form of great maggots:
Forma de magda migier:	The form of female maggots:
Forma de magda pauc:	The form of small maggots:
Sian faytas de eram e so semblantz de ray am le qual e fayt alcofol.	If they are made of iron and resemble a ray from which alcohol is produced.
E es en la extramitat lada punctada am spatum occultada e en aquela corr a las partidas dedintz e defora, quan tu vols, ayssi cum veses.	And it is in the outer side punctured with spatum hidden there and in those parts inside and outside, as you want, as you see fit.
Las formas de spatimis, les quals so amaguatz entre los ditz deves la perforacio dels apostemas e no les percebo les malautes, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc.	The forms of spatum, which are hidden between the fingers and do not allow the patients to perceive them, and they have three species: great, female, and small.
E aquestas so las formas de aquels:	And these are the forms of those:
Las formas de ventozas am las quals es abscindit le flux del sanc, e so de tres specias; gran, migiera e pauca; las formas de lu:	The forms of ventosas, in which the flow of blood is arrested, and they have three species: great, female, and small; the forms of them:
Sian faytas de eram citri, redondas am alcuna longitut , e sian subtils.	If they are made of iron, round, and of certain length, and are subtle.
E cove que sian aquestas specias de ventosas deves tu grans, migieras e paucas, per so que per aquelas abscindas flux de sanc am velocitat en necessitat, e lahoras quan a tu primieyrament no es medicina.	And you should have these suction cups either large, medium, or few, so that through those incisions the flow of blood is rapid in necessity, and when previously there was no medicine.
Enpero no uses de aquelas ad abscidir sanc en tot loc del cors, e non uses sino en locs carnoses, ayssi cum en les lacertis de las cambas e de las coyssas, e en les lacertz dels brasses, e de las mamillas e del ventre e dels engonars, e semblantz a lor dels lacertz carnoses humitz.	But do not use those to close all the openings in the body, and use them only on fleshly areas, such as on the inner thighs and outer thighs, and on the armpits, and on the breasts, and on the belly, and on the folds of skin, and similar fleshly creases.
E alcunas veguadas son faytz de aquels strumentz autres petitz semblantz scorsas de fisacs segon aquesta forma; per les quals lo sanc es abscindit quan es fayt per fleubotomia, o deves inscizio de vena o de arceria.	And some small instruments are made of those tools, resembling curved surgical implements according to this form; through which blood is drawn when performed by venesection, or by incision of a vein or artery.
E alcunas veguadas son faytas redondas segon aquesta forma:	And some small instruments are made round according to this form:
Capitol .xlvii.	Capitulum xlviil.
De la cura de las mamillas dels homes las quals so asembladas de femnas.	On the treatment of the breasts of men which are like those of women.
Alcunas veguadas so infladas las mamillas de alcus homes deves le compliment del dormir cum comensan esser pellutz, e aprop so infladas las mamillas, e so asembladas las mamillas de las femnas, e romano apostemosas, lejas.	Sometimes the breasts of some men swell when they begin to be flabby, and at times the breasts swell, and the breasts of women gather together, like Roman women.
E ad aquel que avoreys aquo, cove que inscidisca aquelas am seccio lunar segon aquesta forma, de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G., e aprop excorja la groceza tota, e aprop uempla la plagua de medicament encarnatiu, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am cosidura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And for those who have this, cut out the affected area according to this form, from the line of B to the line of G, and then excise all the tissue, and fill the wound with red medication, and suture the two edges of the wound together, and cure it until it is healed.
Mays si la mamilla declina a las partidas dejos e es mollificada per la sua magnitut ayssi cum endeve a las femnas, lahoras sia fendut en dos latz sieus pus sobiras, am dos seccios semblantz a figura lunar, de las quals quascuna sia contenguda en l’autra deves la fi de quascuna, entro que sia que la linha major contengua la menor segon aquesta forma de la linha de .B. e la linha de .G. E aprop excorja la codena la qual es entre dos labias de la plagua, e osta la pingueza, e aministra aquo que havem dit de la sutura e de las polveras aquo que es necessari en la curacio entro que sia sanat.	More so, if the breast droops to the sides and is softened by its size, like in women, then cut it into two lobes, each section resembling a lunar shape. Each should be contained within the other, such that the larger line contains the smaller according to this form from the line of B to the line of G. Then excise the cord which is between the two edges of the wound, remove the fat, and administer what we have said about suturing and powders as necessary during the cure until it is healed.
E si tu non conpleysses la inscizio de aquo que cove inscidir per la inquietut del malaute, e per flux de sanc, lahoras cove que huemplas la plagua de coto submergit en enguent corrosiu e layssa aquel entro que aquo corroda que es romas de la grayssa, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you do not complete the incision that needs to be made due to the restlessness of the patient and the flow of blood, then you must fill the wound with cloth submerged in corrosive ointment and leave it there so that it corrodes the roots of the fat, and then cure that which becomes healed.
Capitol .xlviii.	Capitol. xlvi.
De perforacio de apostemas que veno dejos le titillic.	Of the perforation of abscesses where the vein trembles.
Aquetz apostemas que veno dejos le titillic so de las specias de scrophulas, durs, las quals conte una pel que es sac.	These abscesses where the vein trembles are of the kinds of scrofula, tumors, which contain a swelling that is extracted.
E de aquelas so alcunas que conteno humiditatz; e aquelas que conteno humiditatz cove que sian inscididas am seccio lunar segon aquesta figura: de la linha de .G. a la linha de .B. E cum es tot evacuat aquo que es en le apostema de la sania, lahoras tu le comple de coto viel e leysa le entro al autra dia.	And of those that contain humidity, they must be incised at the lunar quarter according to this figure: from the line of G to the line of B. And when all that is in the abscess of pus is evacuated, then you complete it with new material and leave it for another day.
E aprop le coto sia ostat e sia curat am enguent convenient ad aquo, entro que sia sanat.	And then the material should be left in place and treated with appropriate ointment until it heals.
E si le apostema de las specias dels nodes es, e de las scrophulas, lahoras tu scindeys sobre aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la seccio sobre las scrophulas engualment.	And if the abscess of the glands or scrofula is present, then you incise there accordingly as we have said in the section on scrofula.
May si la plagua es extenduda en aysso que yesca poyredura, lahoras administra en lu cauteri segon que en aquo havem denant dit.	And if the ulcer is extended to the point of becoming putrid, then apply a cautery to it as we have previously stated.
Capitol .xlix.	Capitol. XLIX.
De seccio de apostemas que accideysso per arceria o per vena.	Of the section on abscesses that occur through an arrow or a vein.
Quan arceria es rompuda, e la codena es consolidada la qual es sobre aquela, lahoras motas veguadas accideys apostema E les senhals per les quals es conoguda que imflamacio e apostema sian per la arteria o per vena: quar quan apostema es per arceria es lonc agreguat en le preon del cors; e que quan inpelleysses le apostema am les tieus ditz, sentes en lu quays sia stridor.	When an arrow breaks an artery and the chain (or tendon) over it is consolidated, then dark motes or spots occur as abscesses. The signs by which one can recognize that inflammation or abscess is due to the artery or vein are as follows: when an abscess is due to an artery, it is long and extends along the course of the limb; and when you press on the abscess with hot objects, you feel a stridor in it.
E aquel que es per vena es redon al manifest del cors.	And that which is due to the vein is round at the surface of the body.
E seccio sobre aquest apostema es error, e majorment en aquel que es dejos las aysselhas, e en les angonars, e en le col, e en motz locs del cors; e es mot gran, donc cove que la sua curacio am ferr sia esquivada, e aquel que es en las extramitatz, o al cap, cove que sia evitat.	And the section over this abscess is error, and especially in that which leaves the axillae, and the armpits, and the neck, and in mad spots of the body; and it is great, therefore you should make sure that its cure be avoided, and that which is in the extremities, or at the head, should be avoided.
Mays sobre aquel que es de lor per imflacio de l’orrifici de la arceria, scindeys en la codena seccio en le lonc; e aprop huebre la seccio am uncis e aprop la arceria, e deliura de las tunicas entro que sia descuberta.	More about that which is from the liver due to inflammation of the orifice of the artery, cut the longitudinal section in the chain; and place the section with stitches near the artery, and deliver the tunics where they are uncovered.
E aprop met sobre aquel agulha e fay aquela penetrar entro al autre latz, e estrenh la arceria am fiel doble en dos locs, — la qual causa yeu a tu eyssenhegui en extraccio de doas arcerias les quals so en les templars.	And place the needle nearby and make it penetrate into the other lobe, and strengthen the artery with double thread in two places — which you should demonstrate to me in the extraction of two arteries, which are found in the tempests.
E aprop punh le loc le qual es entre dos liamentz am spatum entro que yesca le sanc tot que es en lu, e sia dissolvut le apostema.	And place the point in the area between two ligaments with steam so that the wound heals and the abscess is dissolved.
E aprop administra curacio en la qual es engendrat poyre entro que caian les liamentz; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz convenientz ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And administer cure in which powder is applied before the ligaments fall; and cure that with suitable ointments until it heals.
E si es apostema per seccio de vena, lahoras cove que tu tenguas am la tua ma aquo que es a tu possible del apostema am la codena, e aprop intromet la agulha dejos le loc le qual tu has tengut dejos la tua ma, e fay aquela penetrar; e sia en aquela fil doble entro que tu extraguas aquel del autre latz, e aprop ligua le apostema am bo liament segon que yeu he dit a tu en le liament de uva4 de doas partz am doas extremitatz del fil.	And if it is an abscess due to the drying of a vein, then you should have your hand where you can reach the center of the abscess with your hand, and then insert the needle at that location where you have your hand, making it penetrate; and take out one from inside on one side and put another in on the other side, and then ligate the abscess well with good thread as I have said before about the grapevine twist between two ends of the thread.
Mays si temes que extraguam le fil, lahoras entromet le fiel am aquela agula dejos tot le apostema deves la inscizio de la agulha primieyra, e strenh les tieus fiels en quatre locs.	And if you fear that you will take out the thread, then insert the honey at the needle and completely remove the abscess by making the first incision of the needle again, and strengthen your four threads at different locations.
Aprop secca le apostema en le mieg loc de lu entro que quan es yssit aquo que es en lu, lahoras tu inscideys la superfluitat de la codena, e layssa aquo que de lu es liat.	Then dry the abscess in its middle location so that when you sit at that place, then you incise the excess of the cord, and leave what is soaked.
E aprop pausa sobre lu pulvil le qual has submergit en vi e oli, e aprop administra la curacio la qual es fayta am calguas e enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then place over the powder which you have soaked in wine and oil, and administer the cure which is made with cloths and ointments until it is healed.
Capitol l del apostema le qual accideys per torcio de nervis.	Capitalize the abscess which has occurred due to a twisted nerve.
Ayssi cum accideys apostema en arceria e en vena, e semblantment accideys apostema en les nervis quan accideys en lor percussio o accideys per trebal superfluable, e per semblantz.	Thus an abscess occurs in artery and vein, and similarly an abscess occurs in nerves when there is percussion or occurrence due to superfluous work.
E es fayt le mays de lu en les locs dels adjutoris o del talo, o en tot loc en le qual so maugudas las juncturas.	And it is most prevalent in the areas of the assistants or the thigh, or in any area where the joints are lax.
E es apostema greu, e es asemblat a la color del autre cors, e es en las majors de lu disposicios ses de lor e quan es streyt am vehementia, sent en lu le malaute semblant stupor.	And it is a severe abscess, and its color resembles that of the rest of the body, and it is in the largest parts of its location. When it is stretched due to inflammation, one feels in it the patient's stupor.
E no es apostema agreguat en le preon del cors, e per so es dejos la codena, e el es maugut a tota partida e no va a las partidas denant ni detras.	And it is not an abscess that extends to the front of the body, and therefore one leaves the chain, and he is lax in all parts and does not go to the front or back parts.
Donc aquo de aquels que es en las juncturas no cove que sia envasit am ferr, quar fort leu endevenguera contracio.	Therefore, that which is in the joints does not have to be filled with iron, for strong pain induces contraction.
Mays aquel que es en le cap o en le front fen la codena am spatum.	More severe is that which is in the head or on the forehead, as it causes convulsion with foam.
Mays si es apostema pauc, lahoras te aquel am les forfecs e abscindeys aquel de razitz.	If it is a small abscess, then apply heat and cut it open with a sharp instrument.
E si es gran, lahoras tu le suspen am unci, e excorja aquel, e aprop osta aquel; e ajusta la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If it is large, then suspend it with a thread, and lance it, and drain it; then close the wound with stitches, and continue to treat it until it heals.
Capitol .li.	Capitol. li.
De seccio de apostema le qual accideys de cheil que accideys al ventre.	Of the section on abscesses that occur in the cheek affecting the stomach.
Endeveno ad alcus homes motas veguadas en les ventres de aquels e en las autras partidas del cors de aquels theils les quals son apelatz funguals per similitut de aquels am funges, dels quals la razitz es subtil e·l cap de aquel es gros; e ja las labias de aquels so conversas, e es de aquels que es petit, e es de aquels que es mot magnificat.	Some people have swellings in their stomachs and in other parts of their body. These swellings are called funguals due to their similarity to fungi; the root of each is thin, while the head is large; and the veins around these areas are often constricted, both for those that are small and for those that are greatly enlarged.
E yeu ja e vist un, e en le ventre de lu eran dos theils les quals eran mays a funges semblantz, e no era diferencia entre aquels blancs, de menuda razitz.	And I have seen one case where in the stomach there were two swellings that resembled fungi, and there was no difference between these white areas, which had thin veins.
E ja las labias de aquels eran enversadas e se fendian, e humiditat corria de aquel tot temps.	And already those lips were inverted and split, and moisture flowed from there constantly.
Donc yeu inscidegui aquels e atrobegui en la un en pes quays xviii unc. e l’autre quays vi unc.	Then I incised those and opened one in the foot measuring eighteen inches, and the other measuring six inches.
E la operacio en la inscizio de lor es que consideres lahoras si·l malaute es humit, e la color de atheil es blanca, humit, de subtil razitz; lahoras tu le inscideys am spatum lat, e sian en la presencia tua cauteris en le foc, quar motas veguadas deves la seccio de lu es expellit mot sanc; e si te ventz le sanc, cauteriza aquel.	And in the operation of their incision, consider whether the gout is humid, and the color of the tissue is white, humid, of fine particles; then you incise with a shallow cut, and let it be in your presence cauterized in the fire, for the sections should be expelled without corruption; and if you find the corruption, cauterize that.
E si vezes le malaute pauruc e temeros, guarda te de inscizio am ferr; mays lahoras pren fiel de plom recent fayt, e strenh am aquel atheil, la manieyra del qual es aquela que havem dita; e leyssa aquel per dos dias.	And if you see the gout painful and terrifying, avoid incision with a sharp instrument; rather, when you take lead powder recently made, strengthen that tissue, the method of which is as we have said; let that remain for two days.
E aprop ajusta en la strictura del fil de plom; donc, no cesses strenher le plom granre devetz en theil, entro que sia abscindit e cayha per se ses trebalh.	Then adjust in the constriction of the lead thread; therefore, do not cease to strengthen the lead greatly within the tissue, after it is incised and has worked on its own.
Mays si theil es de grossa razitz, lahoras en la inscizio de lu es alcuna causa de temor e de paor, e majorment en aquel que es en le ventre.	But if the tumor is of large size, in its incision there is some cause for fear and alarm, especially in that which is in the abdomen.
Mays possibla es que tu inscindas la maytat de lu , e aprop cauteriza aquel per que no retorne.	But it is possible that you incise the mass and then cauterize it to prevent it from returning.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanada la plagua.	And then cure what is inside so that the wound heals.
E guarda te que tu no presumas inscidir theil le qual es de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, de leg reguardament, quar aquel es absi cancros.	And beware that you do not presume to incise a tumor which is of dark color, has little sensation, and shows no reaction, for such a tumor is cancer.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio de cranc aprop aysso.	And I will provide a reminder of the disease nearby.
Capitol .lii.	Capitol. lii.
De curacio de eminencia del umbilic.	On the cure of an umbilical hernia.
Eminencia del umbilic es fayta per motas causas; o per fissuras del ciphac le qual es sobre le ventre, e yeys de lu la tela o budel segon que endeve en las autras rupturas; o per sanc le qual flueys de vena o de arceria segon que es denant dit, o per ventositat coarctada en lu.	An umbilical hernia is caused by various reasons; either due to fissures in the diaphragm which is above the abdomen, and protrudes through it along with the membrane or intestine depending on where the other ruptures are; or due to a wound from which fluid flows from a vein or artery as previously mentioned, or due to constricted ventosity within it.
Mays si es per fissura del ciphac e per yssiment de la tela, lahoras la color del apostema es semblant a la color del cors; e es leon ses dolor, e aprop appar de divers situament.	If it is due to a rupture of the sac and herniation of the tissue, then the color of the abscess resembles the color of the body; and the pain is severe, and nearby appears in various positions.
E si es per egressio del budel, lahoras le situament de aquel am lu de aquo que havem recontat, de mays vehement diversitat, e cum tu premes aquel am les tieus ditz es occultat, e aprop retorna; e fort leu es am lu so, e es magnificat mot deves le introt de banh e vehement trebalh.	If it is due to the protrusion of the intestine, then the situation of that area differs more markedly from what we have described. When you press on that area with your thumb, it becomes hidden and soon returns; firmly hold that area, and use a strong method to introduce cold and vigorous work.
Mays si per humiditat, lahoras es leon e no es occultat quan premes am la tua ma, ni es constrengut, ni es cregut.	If it is due to humidity, then the pain is severe and does not become hidden when you press on it with your hand; it is neither relieved nor intensified.
E si es per sanc, lahoras am aquestz senhals apareys le apostema a negror declinant.	If it is due to scalding, then in this case the abscess appears blackish and gradually darkening.
Mays si es per carn nada, lahoras es apostema greu, gros e dur, e es ficat segon una quantitat.	If it is due to no injury, then the abscess is severe, large, and hard, and is situated according to a certain quantity.
Mays si es per ventositat, lahoras le tocament de lu es leon.	If it is due to windiness, then the touch of it is severe.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras lahoras si la eminencia de l’umbilic es per sanc de arceria, o de vena, o per ventositat; lahoras cove que sias prohibit de la curacio de lu, quar en aquela es temor e paor ayssi cum t’e ensenhat en le capitol en le qual he dit les apostemas per arceria e per vena.	And in the operation, you consider whether the prominence of the navel is due to arterial blockage, or venous, or from excess; then you must avoid treating it, for there is fear and dread as you were taught in the Capitol where I said about abscesses from arteries and veins.
E si la eminencia del umbilic es per le budel o per la tela, lahoras cove que comandes al malaute que tengua le ale sieu, e sia stant extendut; e aprop senha am tenta en le circuit de tot le umbilic, e aprop comanda a lu que stia envers entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e aprop circunda am spatum lat en le circuit del umbilic sobre le loc le qual has senhat am la tenta; e aprop exten la maytat del apostema a las partidas desus am unci gran; e aprop lia en le circuit am fiel fort o am ceda e la manieyra del liar decent.	And if the prominence of the navel is due to the intestine or the hernia, then you must command the patient to lie on their side and extend. Next, gently examine around the entire navel, and command them to lie on their back with your hands under their shoulders. Then, spread a damp cloth around the area you examined with the gentle touch; extend the size of the abscess upwards by about an inch; in the circuit, place a strong string or thread tightly and properly.
E aprop huebre le mieg del apostema extendut sobre le liament e intromet le dit tieu en aquel indic e quereys le budel; e si tu l’as atrobat ni guardat per le liament, lahoras tu extratz alxorati e impelleys le budel a las partidas dedintz del ventre.	And then extend the size of the abscess over the membrane and insert your finger into that indentation to feel for the intestine; if you have already palpated it or guarded it with the membrane, then you should extract it quickly and push the intestine back into the abdominal cavity.
E si has atrobada la tela, lahoras pren aquel am unci; e inscideys las superfluitatz de lu.	And if you have found the membrane, then take it with forceps; and incise the superfluous parts of it.
Mays si es contraria a tu arceria o vena, lahoras circunda aquel mot, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio; e pren dos agulhas e met en aquelas dos fiels fortz e entromet dos agulhas en le circuit le qual has feyt entorn le apostema en manieyra de crotz, las quals fassas penetrar; e aprop strenh le apostema en quatre partidas sobre las agulhas.	But if it is contrary to your artery or vein, then circumvent that knot, and soon return to your operation; and take two needles and put them into those strong threads, and interpose two needles in the circuit which you have made around the abscess in the manner of a cross, making them penetrate; and soon strengthen the abscess in four parts over the needles.
E si tu vols, osta las agulhas e leyssa le loc entro que poyresca la carn extenduda e caia per si; o inscideys aquel quan es subtiliat e se poyreys, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if you want, hold the needles and let the area between them dry and fall by itself; or incise that when it becomes subtle and can be removed, and soon cure that with ointments until it is healed.
E si la eminencia del ombilic es de carn nada en lu o per humiditat, lahoras cove que tu conquaves le apostema ayssi cum havem dit e estraguas le sanc o la humiditat, la qual atrobas en lu, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove e que consolide le loc.	And if the prominence of the navel is due to flesh nowhere else or by humidity, then drain the abscess from your cavity as we have said and remove the pus or humidity which you find there, and soon cure that with ointments that will consolidate the area.
Capitol .liii.	Capitol liiii.
De curacio de cranc.	Of the cure of pain.
Ja havem dit, en la divisio, de specia de cranc e en qual manieyra es via a la curacio de lu am medicinas, e que es squivador en lu la curacio am ferr per so que no sia ulcerat; e havem dit cranc engendrat en la mayra e cautela de la curacio de lu.	We have already said, in the division, of kinds of pain and in what manner treatment is applied to their cure. And we have said that it is necessary to ensure that the pain is not ulcerated; and we have said that pain generated by the method and caution in the cure of it.
E diyssero les antics que alcunas veguadas cranc es en loc on es possibla la eradicacio de lu, ayssi cum de cran le qual es en las mamillas o en la coyssa e a lor semblantz dels membres allocat a estrayre tot aquel, e majorment quan es comensant petit.	And the ancients said that some kinds of pain are in a place where it is possible to completely eliminate them, such as in the head, which is in the mammary glands or in areas similar to the limbs, where one should extract all of it, especially when it begins small.
Mays quan es antiquat e es gra, no cove que te propries a lu, quar yeu non pogui sanar de aquel alcu ni no he vist autre, ni que sia pervengut ad aquo.	More often than not, when it is old and hard, one cannot determine its properties, for I have neither been able to cure such cases nor have I seen another, nor can it be treated in this way.
E la operacio en lu es quan es allocat ayssi cum havem dit, es que tu precedescas e laysses le malaute e purgues de colera negra alcunas veguadas, e aprop sagna aquel, si es atrobada replecio manifesta.	And the operation in such cases is as follows: when it is located as we have said, you should first expose the ailment and purge of black bile for several days, then draw that out, if found to be clearly present.
E aprop prepara le malaute am preparacio en le qual sia locat am operacio, e aprop prohiceys en le trauc uncis les quals cove ad aquel; e aprop concava de tota part am la codena sego bona perexcrutacio entro que no romangua alcuna causa de las razitz de lu.	And then prepare the patient for operation, placing him in a position suitable for the procedure; and extend your hand towards those that lead to it; and bend all parts with the knife according to good excision so as not to damage any vital part of him.
E layssa correr le sanc, e no abscidas aquel leugierament, e exprem les locs, e abstergeys le sanc gros tot am la tua ma o am instrument am le qual es a tu possible dels instruments.	Let the blood flow, and do not arrest it lightly, and squeeze the areas, and wipe away the thick blood with your hand or with an instrument at your disposal.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat de sanc gros inscizio de vena o de arceria, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que·l flux del sanc sia cessat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	But if you find thick blood in the incision of a vein or an artery, then cauterize that area once the flow of blood has ceased, and proceed to treat it with the other remedy until it is healed.
Capitol .liv.	Capitol. liv.
De curacio de ydropici.	Of the cure for dropsy.
Nos ja havem recomtat, en la divisio, de las specias de ydropici de l’aygua, e les senhals de quascuna especia, de la curacio de lu am medicinas.	We have already discussed in the division the species of dropsy caused by water, and the signs of each species, as well as the cure for them using medicines.
E aquela la qual es curada am ferr no es sino la specia de althitas sola, e no es aproximat am ferr a la specia de timpanistres ni a la especia de yposarcha, quar aquo es mortal.	And that which is cured by iron is nothing but the specialty of colic alone, and it is not approximated to the specialty of tympanites nor to the specialty of hypochondria, for this is fatal.
E quan tu ja has medicat aquesta especia de ydropici timpanistre am medicinas e no comfereys la tua medicacio, lahoras considera, quar si al malaute ja es conseguida debelitat, o es am aquel autra malautia otra ydropici, ayssi cum si es en lu tos o cos de ventre e semblant ad aquels, lahoras guarda te que no le mediques am ferr, quar temor es sobre aquo.	And when you have treated this specialty of tympanites with medicines and your treatment does not succeed, consider that if the patient already has debility in the abdomen or another dropsy, as if it is in their lungs or abdominal organs and similar to those, then do not treat them with iron, for fear is present regarding this.
Mays si tu vezes le malaute de vertut exuberant, e am lu no es autra malautia sino ydropici tant solament, e no enfant ni vielh, lahoras la manieyra de la operacio de lu es que tu eleves le malaute entre las tuas mas, e le ministre aprop lu exprema le ventre de lu am la sua ma, enpellen la aygua a la partida dejos del pentenilh, e aprop pren spatum spinos segon aquesta forma:	But if you see the patient has abundant virtue, and in them there is no other disease but dropsy solely, neither child nor old, then the method of the operation for it is that you lift the patient between your hands, and place your hand near their abdomen to squeeze out the fluid from them, pushing the water to the lower part of the body, and then take a spinal suction cup according to this form:
sia de dos partz agudas lonc, de aguda extremitat ayssi cum spatum; mays empero sia en lu alcuna brevitat petit a petit, per so que en la operacio am aquel no passes entro al budel, e que ledas aquel.	it should be of two sharp parts long, with sharp ends like a suction cup; however, it should have some small width to prevent passing into the intestine during the operation, and to avoid damaging it.
E aprop considera si la generacio de ydropici es de part dels budels, quar lahoras cove que tu am la seccio te alonhes del ombelic per la quantitat de tres ditz a las partidas dejos, en le dreyt de lu sobre le pentenilh.	And then consider if the generation of dropsy is from the intestines, for when you palpate the section you are away from the navel by the quantity of three fingers at the lateral parts, on its right above the pubic bone.
Mays si la generacio de hydropici es per malautia del fietge, lahoras la tua seccio sia sinistra del ombilic per tres ditz.	And if the generation of dropsy is due to illness of the kidney, then your palpation should be on the left side of the navel by three fingers.
E si la generacio de lu es per la melsa, lahoras la tua seccio sia en le las dreyt.	And if the generation of it is due to the liver, then your palpation should be on the right side.
E no cove que la tua seccio sia sobre le costat sobre le qual vol jaser le malaute per que no corron las superfluitatz ad aquel loc freul.	And you should not palpate on the side where the patient feels pain, as this may cause excess fluids to flow to that area.
E aprop perfora am le instrument tota la codena, e aprop entromet en aquela seccio, e eleva la tua ma am le spatum entre la codena e·l siphac, e tu excorja aquel; e si’ la quantitat de una ungla o enviro.	And then puncture the instrument completely through the wound, and insert it into that section, elevate your hand with the pus between the wound and the abscess, and you extract it; if it is about one inch or more.
E aprop perforo le ciphac entro que pervengua le spatum al loc vuoyt, e es loc de l’aygua.	And then puncture the abscess until the pus reaches the desired location, which is the site of the water.
E aprop extratz aquel e entromet un instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then extract it and insert an instrument of which this is the form:
e es semblant a canula de argent subtil; es fayt de argent o de eram o de lato leon, al qual en la partida pus bassa de lu es un petit trauc, e en les costatz de lu so tres traucs: dos de una partida e un del autra partida; e fayta es la extremitat de lu insciza segon la manieyra de pluma, ayssi cum vezes:	And it is similar to a thin silver cannula. It is made of silver or gold or copper, on the lower part of which there is a small hole, and on its sides are three holes: two in one part and one in another part; and at the extremity, it is incised according to the plume manner, as you see.
E en la extramitat de lu pus sobirana es armilla, quar quan le instrument perve al aygua, lahoras aquela tantost deysen sobre le instrument, donc evacua de l’aygua en la ora miega quantitat, quar si tu evacuas de aquela mes que no cove en la hora, fort leu mor le malaute per resolucio del sieu spirit animal, o accideys a lu cincopi que es appropinquada la mort.	And at the extremity of the instrument above is a ring, so that when the instrument reaches the water, immediately it begins to release a quantity of water through the small opening. If you release more than what can fit in the half-hour, it will cause the patient to faint due to the resolution of his animal spirit, or bring about an approach of death that is five signs away.
Mays evacua de aquela segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu e segon que significan a tu las disposicios del malaute de la vertut del pols de lu e de la bontat de lu.	But release from there according to the quantity of the virtue of the liquid and according to how the disposition of the patient's condition signifies to you from the pulse and the quality of the liquid.
E aprop extrats le instrument, e rete l’aygua la qual causa es quar tantost es retenguda per la codena la qual rete le trauc que es sobre le ciphac del qual e recomtat a tu que perfores aquel segon aquela manieyra.	And then extract the instrument, and retain the liquid which causes it, as soon as it is retained by the cork which it passes through. You are instructed to perforate it according to this manner.
E aprop itera le instrument al autra dia si vezes le malaute tollerant aquo, e extratz de la aygua petita quantitat, e fay aquo per alcus jorns sobre temor, e guarda te de error entro que no romangua de l’aygua sino pauc.	And then repeatedly apply the instrument if the patient tolerates this, and extract a small quantity of water, and do this for several days out of fear, and be careful not to soak in the water but only slightly.
Mays si tu temes sobre le malaute, e leyssas de l’aygua gran quantitat, lahoras cura aquel am sepultura en arena cauda, e mota suzor en banh, e al solelh espere per lonc temps; e cura aquel am medicinas dessicativas entro que sia sanat.	And if you fear for the patient, and let a large quantity of water remain, then cure that with burial in sand, and washing with wetness, and in the sun wait for a long time; and cure that with drying medicines until it is healed.
E cauteriza sobre le stomac, e la melsa e·l fitge aprop la extraccio de l’aygua, segon que yeu he recontat en aquo que es precedit.	And cauterize on the stomach, and the spleen near the extraction of the water, according to what I have recounted in what precedes.
Capitol .lv.	Capitol.
De la curacio dels enfants les quals so natz les locs de la urina no-perforatz.	For the cure of children whose locations for the passage of urine are not perforated.
Alcunas veguadas alcun dels enfantz es eyssi del ventre de la sua mayre e·l cap de la sua mixtio no es perforat (o es trauc streyt o no es en son loc).	In some instances, one of the children is born with the abdomen of its mother not perforated (or it is opened straight or not in its proper place).
Donc cove coytar am perforacio de lu tantost que es nascut am spatum mot subtil segon aquesta forma:	Then cover the wound with a flap of skin as soon as it is cut according to this form:
E aprop pausa en le trauc un clavil subtil de plom e ligua aquel, e te per tres jorns o per .iiii.tre.	And then place a thin lead nail there and bind it up, and keep it for three days or four.
E quant vol urinar sia remaugut e hurine; e aprop retorne aquel.	And when he wishes to urinate he is relieved and voids urine; then return it.
E si tu no pauses le plom, ja es possible que la urina la qual va sobre le loc, no leysa aquest claure.	And if you do not place the lead, it is possible that the urine which falls on the area will not allow this to close.
Mays aquel del qual le trauc es streyt sia medicat am clavil de Plom, ayssi cum havem dit, per trops dias entro que sia amplificat.	But that which you cut should be straightened and treated with a lead nail, as we have said, for many days before it is enlarged.
Mays aquels en les quals es le trauc no en son loc, so leditz, la qual causa es quar de aquels, aquel que es nat e·l trau es deves la fi del cap de la vergua per que no pot urinar a las partidas dedintz, entro que eleva la vergua am la sua ma a las partidas desus; e no es a lu generacio, per so quar le sperma no pot pervenir a la mayre segon rectitut, e es malautia mot laga.	But those in which the cut is not in its place, are said to be caused by stones. The stone that causes it should be removed from the head of the penis so that urine can flow through the parts inside; while lifting the penis with your hand above the parts on top; and it is not a generative issue, because the sperm cannot reach the uterus according to its straight path, making this a chronic illness.
E la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que·l malaute sia envessat sobre le sieu dos, e aprop exten le cap de la vergua de lu am la tua ma sinistra am vehement extraccio, e inscideys le cap del cap de la vergua del loc del perpucii am spatum agut, ayssi cum es inscizio de pluma, o que tu ne razas alcuna partida, per so que·l mieg de lu vengua semblant al cap de la vergua e que le trauc caia en le mieg loc segon que cove.	And the manner of the operation is that the patient lies on his back, and then extend the head of the penis with your left hand with strong traction, and incise the head of the head of the penis at the site of the curvature with a sharp blade, thus like the incision of a feather, or any part you do not reason to cut, so that the middle of it comes out resembling the head of the penis and that I pull it down into the middle location as needed.
E guarda te que en la tua operacio de flux de sanc, quar motas vetz accideys aquo; e pausa te a lu am aquo que abscindeys le sanc, e cura la plagua entro que si’ sanada.	And look that in your operation for the flow of sand, if you see any spots occur; pause at it and apply something to stop the sand, and dress the wound until it is healed.
Capitol .lvi.	Capitol LXVI.
De albater le qual accideys en le prepucii en le cap de la vergua e de corropcio e negror e adherencia del prepucii del cap de la vergua.	For the abscess which occurs in the prepuce, at the head of the penis, and is accompanied by corruption, discoloration, and adhesion of the prepuce to the head of the penis.
Motas veguadas accideys aquest albater en la vergua e es eminencia de carn laga.	Spots appear in this abscess on the penis and form an elevated flesh wound.
E de aquela una es maligna e autra es no-maligna.	And of those, one is malignant and the other is non-malignant.
No-maligna, cove que suspendas am unci subtil e abscindas aquela entro que aquela mondes tota; e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto submirgit en enguent egipciac; e aprop aquel, cura le am enguent diafinicon entro que sia sanat.	And of the non-malignant, take a thin needle and cut through that in which all that is contained; then place your hand over it to submerge it in Egyptian ointment; then cover it with fine ointment until it heals.
E si albater es maligna, de lega color, lahoras cove que tu aministres cauteri aprop la inscizio de lu e la razio de lu.	And if the boil is malignant and of a white color, then you should apply a cautery near the incision and around it.
Mays si albater es en le prepuci del cap de la vergua no-circumcis, e la una partida de albater es dedintz le prepucii e l’autra partida es defora, lahoras cove que tu ostes albater le qual es dedintz al comensament entro que es consolidat; e lahora tu cura aquel deforo, quar quan tu curas aquel ensemps le prepuci, no es asegurat que no sia trinquat.	And if the boil is on the foreskin of the head of the penis in an uncircumcised man, and one part of the boil is inside the foreskin and another part is outside, then you should remove the part that is inside at the beginning before it becomes consolidated; and then cure the part outside. For when you cure the foreskin together with it, it is not assured that it will not be torn.
E ja eysamen accideys en les genetius e en le prepuci negror e corruccio, adonc cove que tu conquavas tot aquo que ja es denigrat e que ja se vol corrompre o que ja es corrumput; e aprop lineys sobre aquel aprop aquo am mel, le qual es contusit am farina de scorsa de milgrana e de errs trissatz e crivellatz.	And we have examined accidents in the genitals and in the foreskin, such as blackening and corruption. Then you should reduce all that is already darkened and that is about to腐化或已经腐烂；然后在其上划线，用蜂蜜。该蜜是由大黄粉、三种研磨和筛过的醋制成的。
E aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sana.	And then attend to that other cure while the one is healing.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, lahoras aministra cauteri lunar segon aquesta forma:	And if there is a flow of blood, then administer a lunar cautery according to this form:
quar cauteri juvatiu es a dos disposicios ensemps, so es a flux de sanc e a la plagua quan es corrumpuda.	A lunar cautery is used in two positions together, either for a flow of blood or during an infection when the wound is broken.
E si le cap de la vergua es corrodut e es destruit tot en la hora, lahoras cove que tu intrometas en lo meat del prepucii una canula de plom per so que le malaute urina per aquela.	And if the head of the abscess is corroded and destroyed entirely in an hour, then you should introduce a lead catheter into the meat of the prepuce so that the infection discharges through it.
En la adherencia del prepucii am le cap de la vergua (et aquesta adherencia no accideys sino en aquel del qual le prepucii es sa, e sobre lu no es exhigida circumcizio; e quan accideys adherencia per plagua o per apostema) cove que excorjas am spatum obtus entro que sia dissolvut le liament e sia deliurat le cap de la vergua de tota partida.	In the adhesion of the prepuce, at the head of the abscess (and this adhesion occurs only in that part from which the prepuce comes, and no circumcision is required over it; when adhesion occurs due to an infection or an abscess), you should excoriate with a blunt spatula until the adhesive substance dissolves and the head of the abscess is completely discharged.
E si es dificil desirnir aquelas exquisidament, lahoras cove que tu excorjes am spatum alcuna causa del cap de la vergua e del prepucii, e aysso es quar le prepucii, quan es subtil, fort leu es perforat per la sua subtilitat leugierament.	And if it is difficult to excoriate those thoroughly, then you should excoriate with a spatula some part of the head of the abscess and the prepuce, and this is because the prepuce, when thin, being very light, is easily perforated by its thinness.
E aprop separa entre·l prepucii e·l cap de la vergua am dra7 de li subtil, le qual ja es mulhat en l’aygua frega per que no adherescan autra veguada.	And then separate between the foreskin and the head of the penis a thin strip of skin, which is already moistened with the fomenting liquid to prevent another fold from adhering.
E aprop sia curat am vi stiptic entro que sia consolidat.	And then let it be tied with astringents when it is consolidated.
Capitol .lvii.	Capitol. lvii.
De mundificacio dels enfants e de la curacio de aquo que accideys ad aquels de circumcisio.	On the purification of infants and the treatment of what occurs to those who have been circumcised.
Circumcisio no es solucio de continuitat ayssi cum las autras plaguas: mays empero cum sia de la nostra operacio e de nostra voluntat, e lus de aquela sia propriament en les enfants, es necessari que asignem en aquela milhor operacio e via pus leugiera perdusent a salut.	Circumcision is not a solution for continuity in the same way as other infections: indeed, it is more so of our operation and our will, and those of it are properly in infants, it is necessary that we assign to it the best operation and the most gentle path leading to health.
Donc dic que les antics no diyssero circumcisio en alcu dels lors libres, quar no n’usan en las suas leys, e no es sino quar havem aquisit per speriment, la qual causa es que yeu he atrobat la major partida dels artifexs e dels barbies usar circumcisir e mundificacio am novacula e am torores; e usan de liament am fiel e de inscizio am la ungla.	Therefore, it is said that the ancients did not command circumcision in any of the laws for free men, as they do not use it in their laws. It is merely because we have acquired this practice through experience; the reason is that I have examined the majority of artists and barbers using circumcision and purification with a knife and with torches; and they use lint with wine and incision with anointing.
E yeu ja he prohadas totas aquestas manieras e no atrobegui milhor mondificacio am forfexs, am liament am fiel que en mondificacio cum la ungla, quar motas vetz efugeys la codena pus desus, quar la codena del prepucii a dos tunicas, e roman la tonica pus dejos, e fort leu es forsat ad autra inscizio e dolor sicura.	And I have already tried all these methods and cannot find a better modification with scissors, or with honey or vinegar in the modification like ointment, for you will always see the cord come back up, for it is held by two tunics, and the woody one remains down, and it is certain that another incision and painful scar are forced.
E am mundificacio le qual es fayta per alphecati, e es digital, del qual usan les sabatiers, no es segurada la inscizio de la extremitat del membre viril, quar fort leu intra en le trau de lu.	And for the modification which is done by excision, and is digital, of which shoemakers use, it is not secure regarding the incision at the extremity of the male member, for it often enters into the channel of it.
Mays en la operacio am ungla, fort leu obazeys ferr e corromp la tua operacio.	In the operation with ointment, you must use iron and corrupt your operation.
E la codena del enfant es breu per natura, e motas veguadas nays en tal manieyra que no ha necessitat de mondificacio, e yeu he vist aquel.	And the cord of the child is short by nature, and often needs not to be modified in such a manner, and I have seen it.
Mays de la mondificacio que·s fa am forfexs e liamentz am fiel, la bontat, experiment descrobic a mi, quar las forfexs so de proporcional inscizio, per aquo quar la acuitat que es desus es ayssi cum la acuitat que es dejos; e donc cum tu premes la tua ma so proporcionadas dos acuitatz, e inscideysso segon una comperacio en un temps; e es fayta compressio del fiel am figura contenent la codena de la vergua de tota partida, am le qual no catz error de tot.	More of the modification that is done with scissors and ointments with vinegar, the quality, experience describes to me, for the scissors are of proportional incision, for which the sharpness above is as the sharpness below; and therefore, when you press your hand in proportionate two sharpnesses, and cut according to a comparison at one time; and it is made compression of the vinegar in a figure containing the cord of the virgina from all parts, with which no error can arise.
E la manieyra de la operacio primeyra es que tu fassas estar le enfant majorment si es de aquels que entendo un petit, que no fassas sino que tu lies le fiel en la sua vergua tant solament, e que leysses aquel entro al autra dia.	And the manner of the first operation is that you make the child lie mainly if it is among those who understand a little, that you bind him only in his foreskin, and let that be for another day.
E aprop fay aquel alegrar en tota aquela manieyra que es a tu possibla de aquo que recep la sua intelligencia.	And then make that child comfortable in every way that is possible for what receives its intelligence.
E aprop fa aquel estar entre las tuas mas estatuir preparadament, e no sia ges cezent; e occulta las forfexs en la tua ma o dejos le tieu pe, que l’enfant no veia aquelas ni degun autre dels instruments.	And then place that child among your knees preparedly, and do not be more than a hundred; and hide the scissors in your hand or place your knee on him so he cannot see those or any other of the instruments.
E aprop entremet la tua ma a la vergua de lu e suffla en la codena, e tira aquela entro que sia eyssit le cap de la vergua, e aprop mondifica aquel de aquo que es agregat en ela de sordicia.	And then insert your hand into the child's foreskin and blow into the head of the foreskin, and then modify that which is attached to it with sordicity.
E aprop lia le loc signat am fiel dobla, e aprop ligua pus bas de aquel un petit le segon liament, e aprop te am le dit pous e endic tieu le loc del liament dejos am bona retencio, e inscideys entre dos liaments.	And then bind the marked place with foreskin doubled, and then bind a little below that with a second ligature, and then place your finger on the site of the ligature with good retention, and incise between two ligatures.
E aprop eleva la codena sus leugierament e estratz le cap de la vergua; e aprop leyssa le sanc corre petit e petit, quar es milhor ; e pausa polvera desus e sobre la polvera pausa drap en le qual es spandut mugol de huou coyt en ayguaros concosit am oli rozat recent bo; e layssa aquel sobre aquel entro al autra dia; e cura aquel am curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then lift the thigh gently and open the head of the wound; and let the bleeding proceed slowly, for that is better; place powder above and over the powder spread a cloth in which is infused mugwort cooked in water mixed with fresh rubbed oil; leave that there until the next day; treat that with healing until it is healed.
La forma de las forfexs a mondificacio, aquesta es la forma:	The shape of the forceps after modification, this is the shape:
Sian las unas extramitatz no-talhantz e las autras sian talhant, que non sia yssit le ram del clau, e sia la longitut de las doas acuitatz ayssi cum la longitut de dos manubres engualment.	If the outer edges are not sharpened and the inner edges are sharpened, let the angle of the blade be such that the length of the two acute edges is equal to the length of two handles.
Mays la error en mundificacio es quar fort leu efugeys la codena intrinseca tota, o partida de lu deves la inscizio.	More importantly, the error in modification is that if you lift the intrinsic thigh too forcefully, or partially, you must make an incision.
Donc cove que tu extendas aquela de la tua hora am la tua ungla denant la apostemacio del loc e que inscidas aquela segon equalitat.	Therefore, ensure that you extend that part of your hand with the finger in front of the incision site and make the incision according to equality.
E si no la podes tenir am la tua ungla, lahoras extratz aquela am unci e inscideys aquela.	And if you cannot hold it with your finger, then extend that part with the thumb and make the incision.
Mays si son passatz tres dias, e roman aquo que es imflat dejos la vergua apostemat, lahoras tu leyssa aquo entro que sia cedat le apostema caut, e excorja aquel am fecilitat, e inscidex aquel segon que a tu es preparat.	But if they have passed three days and remain what is swollen with the inguinal abscess, then you let this be incised with a cautery, and excise that for ease, and scrape that according to how it is prepared.
E guarda te del cap de la vergua, quar no nosera a lu aquo.	And guard the head of the abscess, for if not done properly it will not be good.
E donc cura aquel am aquo que la plagua consolida de las polveras las quals havem recomtadas en le tractat de las polveras.	And therefore treat that part where the wound consolidates with the powders we have recommended in the treatise on powders.
E si es inscidit de la codena sobre mesura, e obezeys a las partidas desus, aquo no notz a lu.	And if it is incised beyond measure, and you obey the rules above, this will not harm it.
E mays cura aquel am aquo que havem dit entro que sia sanat.	And therefore treat that part as we have said until it is healed.
Capitol .lviii.	Chapter 8.
De curacio de urina retenguda en la vesiqua.	On the treatment of retained urine in the bladder.
Retencio de urina en la vesica es fayta per oppulacio fayta per peyra o per sanc congilat, o per poyre o per carnada, e semblantz ad aquels de aquo que havem dit de las manieyras de curacio en la divisio.	Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by an obstruction due to a stone or a strangulated hernia, or pus or meaty growths, and resembles those we have said about the methods of treatment in the division.
E si no es dissolvuda la urina, e veses retencio de lu esser per peyra le qual ja es en le col de la vesica, lahoras cove que le malaute sia encorbat sobre les sieus denolhs.	And if the urine is not dissolved, and you see retention of it being caused by a stone which is at the neck of the bladder, then suspect that the patient has a hernia above his navel.
E aprop conponeys les pes de aquel sobre le sieu dos e extendas le sieu ventre de la partida pus desus del sieu dos, e le malaute estrengua le sieu ale tant quant es a lu possible.	And then place his feet on his own buttocks and extend his abdomen from the part above his back, and the patient should bend his head as far as it is possible.
Donc lahoras le col de la vesica es costreyt ha espulsio de la peyra a las partidas detras, per que la urina es absolta.	Then when the neck of the bladder is stretched there will be expulsion of the stone to the parts behind, so that the urine is relieved.
E si no es dissolvuda am aquo que havem dit he vehement es fayta la causa sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que aministres extraccio de lu am instrument le qual es apelat siringua, del qual aquesta es la forma: Sia de argent e sia subtil leon conquau, ayssi cum canula de pena de ausel am subtilitat de ray lonc en similitut d’un palm e mig, al qual sia cana subtil en le cap de lu.	And if what we have said is not dissolved, strongly apply the cause on the patient, then administer extraction of it with an instrument which is called a syringe, of which this is the form: It should be made of silver and should be very fine, like a slender quill long in the likeness of a palm and a half, to which should be attached a fine tube at its head.
E la manieyra del eyssiment de la urina per aquel es que prenguas le fiel doblat e lies en la extramitat de lu lana o coto per bona liadura; e entrometas las extramitatz del fiel en la partida dejos de la ciringua, e inscideys am las forfexs si superflueys alcuna causa de la lana, mays intromet la en la canula am vehemencia E aprop enongeys la ciringua am boder e am album de huou.	And the method of urine extraction through this is that you take a fine tube folded and tie it at the end with wool or cotton for good closure; and insert the ends of the tube into the part left by the syringe, and cut with scissors if any excess wool is needed. Then strongly introduce it into the canula and tightly close the syringe with a wax seal.
E fay cezer le malaute sobre la selha, e embroca la vesiqua de lu e la vergua am olis umitz, e oli de oliva e ayguaros.	And make incisions in the patient's side, and sprinkle the bladder and groin with a mixture of olive oil and vinegar.
E aprop entromet la ciringua am facilitat entro que pervengua a la razit de la vergua; e aprop dobla la vergua desus a la partida del embelic; e aprop empelleys la ciringua dintz aquela; e aprop empelleys aquela entro que pervengua a la vesica, e aquela centa le malaute esser pervenguda a la causa vuoda, e no es fayt asso segon aquest orde, sino le meat en le qual va a tortuositat.	And then introduce the probe easily until it reaches the root of the groin; and then fold the groin upwards at the place where the probe ends; and then push the probe inside to reach the bladder; and then push that towards the patient's side so that it reaches the cause, and if this is not done in this order, but the meat in which there is a tortuous course.
E aprop exten le fiel am la lana petit a petit, quar la urina siec la lana.	And then slowly insert the thread into the wool, for urine will soak the wool.
Aprop extratz aquela e fay per curacio urina, e usa ciringua, no cesses fer aquo e usa ciringua entro que sia evacuada la vesica e le malaute atrobe alleviacio.	And then extract that and use a probe for treatment of urine, continue doing this and use the probe until the bladder and patient are properly relieved.
Capitol .lix.	Capitol.lix.
De qualitat de clisterizacio de la vezica am clampcedra e am semblantz instrumentz les quals sian acordants ad aquo.	Of the quality of cleansing the bladder with enemas, use strong ones and have similar instruments that are suitable for this.
Quan accideys en la vesica ulceracio o apostema, o sanc congilat en aquela, o es coartat poyredura, e vols en aquela destillar ayguas e medicinas, lahoras sia fayt am instrument le qual es apelat clampcedra, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When an ulcer or abscess occurs in the bladder, or there is a burn injury there, or it is constricted by swelling, and you want to distill waters and medicines in that area, then make an instrument which is called clampcedra, and this is its form:
sino que en la extramitat de lu es sorda, so es clausa.	so that in the extremity of it is numb, so it is closed.
Et en aquela so tres traucs: dos de la una partida , ayssi quo vezes.	And in that there are three cuts: two from one side, thus many times.
En le comensament es loc concau, en le qual es aquo que es enpellit, e sia segon quantitat que oppile aquel, ses addicio, entro que quan alcuna causa es ab aquel tirada de las humiditatz, sia atirada, e quan es expellida, am aquo sia atirada, e quan es expellit lonc, segon que fa clampcedra am la qual es phicat naphta en las batalhas de mar.	At the beginning, it is concave, in which what is pushed is located, and according to the quantity that fills it, its addition occurs. Within this, when any cause, due to the humidities, draws it out, it is drawn out, and when it is expelled, it is drawn back. When expelled for a long time, according to how it acts, naphta is applied in the battles of sea with it.
Donc cum tu vols prohicir humiditatz en la vesica, entromet la extremitat de clapcedra en la humiditat, e atira am aquel aquo que es empellit a las partidas desus, quar la humiditat es atirada en la conquavitat de clapcedra.	So, if you want to expel humidities from the bladder, insert the extremity of the clampcedra into the humidity, and draw out what is pushed to the upper parts; thus, the humidity is drawn back into the cavity of the clampcedra.
E aprop entromet la extramitat de clapcedra en la vergua segon que havem recomtat en la ciringua; e aprop empelleys la humiditat am aquo que empelleys, quar aquela humiditat perve a la vesica tantost, e le malaute cent aquela.	And then insert the tip of the pessary into the vagina as we advised in the gynecology; and then push the moisture out as you push, for that moisture will quickly reach the bladder, and the malady ceases there.
Forma del cristeri subtil am le qual la vesica es cristerizada, e es aquela la forma:	The form of the subtle pessary through which the bladder is affected, and that is the form:
E sia fayta de argent o de lato, de la qual le cap pus aut sia semblant a petita pluma, e dejos lu cana dedintz liament.	And it should be made of silver or tin, with its head resembling a small feather, and insert the stalk inside cotton.
E aprop pren vesica de moto, e pausa en aquela la humiditat que vols cristirizar en la vesica, e aprop lia aquela entre dos am fort liguatura am fiel doble, e escalfa aquela humiditat sobre le foc.	And then take a bladder of mule, place the moisture you want to affect the bladder with in it, and tie it tightly between two strong ligatures with double thread, and heat that moisture over the fire.
E aprop entromet la extremitat del cristeri en la vergua.	And then insert the tip of the pessary into the vagina.
E aprop estrenh la tua ma sobre la vesica am la humiditat am strectura descent entro que·l malaute centa que aquela humiditat ja es pervenguda a la vesica.	And then strengthen your hand on the bladder with the moisture in a descending structure so that the malady ceases as that moisture reaches the bladder.
Mays si a tu no es present vesica, lahoras tu pren una pessa de parguames e fay de aquel cercle; e perfora aquel de tota la sua retonditat; e aprop entromet fiel fort en aquels traucs, ayssi quo so revolgut; e aprop agregua le cercle ayssi quo es agreguat alsofatur, pus que tu pausas en aquel aquo que tu vols de las humiditatz, e olis e ayguas.	If you do not have a bladder present, then take a piece of parchment and make from that circle; perforate it entirely round its circumference; then insert strong thread through all those stitches, as they are turned; then add the circle as it is added alsofatur, so that you pause in that which you want from the humidities, and smell and waters.
E aprop tu lia aquel en le instrument e fay am aquel ayssi cum has fayt am la vesica, e exprescio am la tua ma entro que la humiditat pervengua a la vesica.	And then you tie that with the instrument and do so with it as you have done with the bladder, and ensure that the humidity reaches the bladder through your hand.
Capitol .lx.	Capitol.lx.
De extraccio de peyra.	Of the extraction of the stone.
Nos ja havem dit en la divisio las specias de peyra e curacio de lu am medicinas, e la diferencia entre peyra engendrada en los ronhos e peyra engendrada en la vesica, e les senhals de aquela.	We have already discussed in the division the species of stone and its cure with medicines, and the difference between a stone generated in the kidneys and a stone generated in the bladder, and the signs of the former.
E havem dit la peyra en la qual catz operacio am ma, e seccio.	And we have discussed the stone for which major surgery is performed and sectioning.
E la peyra engendrada en la vesica propriament es aquela que es ficada en la vesica.	And the stone generated in the bladder properly is that which is inserted in the bladder.
E yeu so narrant aquel am exposicio manifesta e abreviacio.	And I now proceed with that explanation and abbreviation.
Donc dic que peyra engendrada en la vesica majorment ve als enfantz; e dels senhals de lu es que la urina que es eyssida de la vesica es semblant a aygua en la sua subtilitat, e apar en aquela arena; e le malaute fregua la sua vergua, e motas veguadas pen, e aprop es dressada; e am aquo yeys foro le cul en motz de aquels.	Therefore, I say that the stone generated in the bladder mostly affects children; and among its signs is that the urine discharged from the bladder resembles water in its subtlety, and appears in that sand; and the patient grinds his teeth, feels coldness in his genitals, and soon becomes feverish; and this causes the anus to hurt instead of those.
E es laugiera la sanacio dels enfants de aquela entro que han conseguitz xiiii ans; e es dificil curacio en les viels.	And this is the healing of children within which they have reached fourteen years; and it is a difficult cure in old age.
Mays en les joves es migiera per aquo quar es entre aquels.	More in young people, it heals through this fever that is between them.
E de aquel del qual la peyra es major e la curacio es pus leugiera; E si es pauca, es contraria ad aquela.	And of that in which the stone is larger and the cure is easier; and if it is small, it is contrary to that.
Donc cum pervenem a la curacio de aquela, cove al comensament de aquela que mondifiquem le malaute am cristeri le qual extragua tota la fenda la qual es en les sieus budels; quar aquela fenda alcunas veguadas prohibeys la envencio de la peyra deves la inquisicio de lu.	Therefore, when we reach the cure of that, start with the beginning of that which we modify the patient's genitals with a cristera (a type of instrument) which extracts all the opening which is in their intestines; for that opening sometimes prohibits the passage of the stone by questioning it.
E aprop sia pres le malaute am les sieus pes e sia contosit e maugut enjos per so que la peyra descenda al preon de la vesica, o que saute de loc aut alcunas veguadas.	And then place the patient on their feet and stretch and bend them slightly so that the sole of the foot descends to the neck of the bladder, or so that it turns a few times.
E aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas preparat, e las mas de lu sian dejos las coysas de lu, per so que la vesica tota sia fayta declinant a las partidas dejos.	And then place the prepared cushions under your hands, and let the other servants hold the patient's legs, so that the bladder is made to descend to the parts held.
E aprop perquier aquela e tota aquela deforo.	And then apply it to that and all that region.
Donc si sentes la peyra en l’espazi, lahoras tu te coyta tantost am seccio sobre lu.	And if you feel the sole in the space, then quickly apply heat to it.
E si no catz de tot dejos le tieu tocament, lahoras cove que tu untes am oli le tieu dit indic de la ma sinistra, si malaute es enfant, o le dit miga si es jove complit, e entrometas aquel en le sieu cul.	And if you do not feel it completely with your touch, then know that you should anoint your index finger of the left hand with oil, if the patient is a child, or your thumb if the patient is an adult, and insert that into its anus.
E perquier de la peyra entro que stia dejos le tieu dit.	And apply heat to the sole while placing your finger there.
E converteys aquela petit a petit entro al col de la vesica.	And gradually insert that into the neck of the bladder.
E aprop prem sobre aquel am lo tieu dit, e expelleys aquel a las partidas defora ves le loc del qual vos la seccio.	And then press upon that area as you have said, and expel that to the external parts. Look for the location from which it came.
E comanda al ministra que prema la vesica am la sua ma; e comanda a un autra ministra que am la sua ma dextra extenda les genetius a las partidas desus, e am la sua autra ma remaugua la codena la qual es dejos les genetius, en partida del loc en le qual se fa la seccio.	And command the minister to press the bladder with his hand; and command another minister to with his right hand extend the legs to the upper parts, and with his other hand roll back the curtain which is placed above the legs, at the location where the operation is performed.
E aprop entromet espatum be inscident del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then insert a spatula there; this is the form of it:
e scindeys en lu aquo que es entre·l cul e·ls genetius, no en le mieg loc, abantz al latz de la coyssa sinistra; e sia la seccio sobre aquela peyra e·l tieu dit sia en le cul, e sia fayta seccio transversa, per que la seccio defora sia ampla e dedintz streyta segon la quantitat que egrecio de la peyra sia a lu possibla, e no major, quar fort leu comprem le tieu dit le qual es en le cul la peyra deves la seccio, e es foro-getada ses defacultat.	And cut there where it is between the anus and the legs, not in the middle, before the left thigh; and let the incision be on that bone which you said is in the anus, and make a transverse section, so that the incision outside is wide and inside narrow according to the quantity that flowed from the bone, as much as possible, and no more. For strongly we hold the incision where you said it is in the anus, the bone should be severed and the hole closed with its faculty.
E sapias que de la peyra es alcuna a la qual so angle e margers, per que le eyssiment de lu es fayt deficil per aquo.	And observe that from the stone there is some to which it has angles and margins, because the passage of it is made difficult by this.
E de aquela aquo es leon semblant a glan, e es redonda, e es fayt de lu leugier eyssiment.	And of that which seems like a lion, and is round, and they make from it a slight passage.
Donc si es aquela al qual so angles e marger, ajusta en la fissura.	And if that which has angles and margins, adjust in the crack.
E si no es ayssi foro-getada, lahoras cove que tu engenes sobre aquel, o que strenguas sobre aquel am gesti decentment, la extremitat del qual sia ayssi cum lima am le qual strenguas sobre la peyra, e no evasesca de lu; o que entrometas dejos lu instrument subtil de curvada extremitat.	And if it is not thus open, then you must probe it with a needle or strengthen it with a gesture decently, the extremity of which be thus like a file on which you strengthen the stone, and do not extricate yourself from it; or you must insert a thin instrument under its curved extremity.
Mays si tu no podes sobre aquel, lahoras tu amplifica le trauc un petit, e si tu veus flux de sanc, abscindeys en strenh aquel am vitriol trissat.	But if you cannot do this, then you enlarge it a little, and if you see a flow of blood, incise strongly there with vitriolic acid.
Mays si la peyra es mays de una, lahoras al comensament tu impelleys la ma a la boca de la vesica, e aprop inscideys sobre lu; e aprop impelleys un petit aprop aquo; e semblantment fay si son motas mays de doas.	But if the stone is more than one, then at the beginning you push your hand to the mouth of the bladder, and then incise there; and then push a little at that place; similarly do if its spots are more than two.
E si es peyra mot gran, lahoras ignorancia es que tu inscidas aquel am gran seccio, quar accideys al malaute una de doas causas: o que mora o que endevengua a lu destillacio de urina continuabla, per aquo quar le loc no es de tot consolidat.	And if the stone is very large, then ignorance leads you to incise that great section, for which happens to the patient one of two causes: either it dies or it manages to achieve a continuous distillation of urine, by which the area is not completely consolidated.
Mays aministra expulcio de lu entro que sia fora-getada, o engenia en la fractura de lu am las forfexs entro que extragua aquela en pessas.	May administer the expulsion of the stone when it is outside, or use forceps in the fracture of the bone to extract that which remains within the flesh.
Donc cum tu auras cumplit la tua opperacio, lahoras omple la plagua de enses de aloe e de sanc de drago, e strenh aquel.	So when you have completed your operation, fill the wound with slices of aloe and dragon's blood, and strengthen it.
E pausa sobre aquel drap enfus en oli e vi, o en oli rozat e aygua frega, per so que apostema caut sia cedat.	And place over that cloth infused in oil and wine, or in fragrant oil and water, so that the abscess may yield.
E aprop resupina le malaute sobre le sieu col, e no deslias le liament entro al tertz dia.	And then raise the patient's leg on a stool, and do not remove the bandage on the third day.
E cum aquel auras desliat, embroca le loc am aygua e mot oli, e aprop cura aquel am enguent diafinicon e am enguent diabazilicon entro que sia sanat.	And when you have removed it, sponge the area with water and some oil, and then treat it with ointment containing diaphionic and ointment containing diabazic acid until it is healed.
Mays si en la plagua accideys apostema caut, adhust e corrosiu, e de aquel semblantz ayssi cum si le sanc es en la vesica congelat, e per lu es la hurina prohibida (e aquo es conogut per la egressio del sanc am urina), a donc entromet lo tieu dit en la plagua e extratz aquel sanc, quar si roman provoca la vesica a corropcio de la vesica e de lu putrefaccio.	If in the wound you encounter an abscess that is hard and corruptive, and it appears as if the blood is frozen in the bladder and through which urination is prohibited (and this is known by the discharge of blood with urine), then insert your instrument into the wound and extract that blood, for if it remains it will cause corruption of the bladder and its putrefaction.
E aprop lava la plagua am vi agre, aygua e sal, e am opposicio a tota specia, am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	Then wash the wound with vinegar, water, and salt, and oppose all sorts of herbs, using what is suitable for its cure while it is healing.
E cove en las horas de tota la curacio que tu lies amdos las coyssas e ajustes las medicinas las quals so pausadas sobre le loc.	And mark the hours for all your treatment, placing both hands on the patient's thighs and applying the medicines which are pressed onto the area.
E si la peyra es petita e es en le meat de la vergua, e es ficat en lu, e eyssement de urina es prohibit, lahoras cura aquel am aquo que yeu recomti denant que pervenguas a seccio, quar tropas veguadas per aquesta curacio yest acusat de seccio; e ja yeu e esproat aquo, e es que tu prenguas un perforador de ferr alfelut, del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if the stone is small and is in the meat of the penis, and the emission of urine is prohibited, then treat it by using what I have recommended before you reach the section; for too many applications of this treatment are accused of causing drying. And now I will describe it: you should take a metallic drill, the shape of which is as follows:
de triangulada extramitat, agut, ficat en fust.	of triangular shape, sharp, inserted in the foot.
E aprop pren fiel, e lia am aquel la vergua dejos la peyra per so que no retorne a la vesica.	And then take honey, and apply it to the wound, letting the stone rest so that it does not return to the bladder.
E aprop entromet le ferr en la vergua, perforant am fecilitat entro que·l perforador vengua ad aquela peyra.	And then insert the needle into the wound, perforating easily where the perforator will reach the stone.
E revolveys le perforador am la tua ma en aquela peyra petit a petit, e tu perforsa la perforacio de lu entro que fassas aquel del autra part penetrar; quar la urina tantost es absolta.	And rotate the perforator with your hand around the stone little by little, and complete the perforation on that side before you make it penetrate on the other side; for the urine will then be quickly relieved.
E aprop prem la tua ma sobre aquo que es romas de la peyra de la partida deforo de la vergua, quar aquela es trinquada, e es foro-getada am la urina, e le malaute es sanat.	And then press your hand on what is left of the stone from the perforation in the wound, for that is fragmented, and is washed by the urine, and the patient is cured.
Mays si aquesta curacio no es a tu aparelhada per alcuna causa la qual prohibeys de aquela, lahoras lia un fiel dejos la peyra, e autra fiel desus la peyra.	More if this cure is not achieved due to any cause that prohibits it, then apply honey to the stone, and another layer of honey above the stone.
E aprop encideys sobre la peyra en aquela vergua entre doas liaduras.	And then place a bandage over the stone in the wound between two layers.
E aprop extratz aquela.	And then extract it.
E aprop deslia le liament e mondifica le sanc congilat, le qual es fayt en la plagua.	And then loosen the ligament and modify the sclerosed vein, which is done in the lesion.
E no es necessari liament de fiel dejos la peyra, sino per que no retorne a la vesica, e l’autre liament desus sino, quar quan es desliat le fiel aprop la egrecio de la peyra, la codena retorna a son loc e cobra la plagua.	And it is not necessary to use silk thread for the ligament, but only to prevent it from returning to the bladder. The other ligament above this is because when the silk is loosened near the injury of the stone, the cord returns to its place and heals the lesion.
E per aquo es a tu necessari quan lias le fiel desus, que tu eleves la codena a las partidas desus, o que retorne deves le tieu compliment, e cobra la plagua ayssi co havem dit.	And for this reason, when you place the silk above, you must raise the cord to the parts above, or it will return in another way, and heal the lesion as we have said.
Capitol .lxi.	Capitol. lxix.
De extraccio de peyra de las femnas.	On the extraction of stones from women.
Peyra en las femnas pauc es engendrada.	Stone in women is rarely generated.
Mays si ve peyra ad alcuna de aquelas, lahoras dificil es la curacio de lu, e es prohibida per tropas manieyras.	Yet if a stone does occur in any of them, the cure is difficult, and it is prohibited by too many methods.
La una de lor es quar la femna fort leu es verges.	One of them is that the woman faints because she is weak.
E la segonda es quar tu no trobas femna be scient que descroba si meteyssa al metge quan es casta, o es de las femnas haventz maritz.	And the second is that you cannot find a woman well versed who can describe whether she mixes it with the doctor when she is married, or if it is one of the women having a husband.
La tersa es quar tu no hatrobas femna be sabent aquesta art, majorment la operacio am ma.	The third is that you cannot find a woman well versed in this art, especially in major operations.
E la quarta es que·l loc de la seccio sobre peyra en las femnas es longinc del loc de la peyra, per que indigeys de seccio preonda, e en aquela es temor.	And the fourth is that the location of the section near the bladder in women is far from the location of the bladder, so you need a longitudinal section, and there is fear in that area.
Mays si necessitat provoca a tu ad aquo, lahoras cove que tu prenguas una femna metga be scient, e pauc es atrobada.	But if necessity prompts you to do this, then you must seek out a midwife who is well versed, and such one is not easily found.
Mays si tu es privat de aquela, lahoras cerca metga quast e subtil, o presenta una femna matrona be esenhada en le feyt de las femnas, o femna que en aquesta art ennueys partida del art.	But if you are lacking in that, then seek out a midwife who is skilled and subtle, or present a well-versed older woman knowledgeable about the condition of women, or a woman who has part of this art.
Donc fay aquela present, e comanda a lu que fassa tot aquo que tu li mandaras, de la enquisicio sobre la peyra al comensament; la qual causa es que reguarde si la femna es verges, lahoras cove que meta lo sieu dit en le cul de lu e quiera la peyra.	Therefore, have her present and command her to do everything you will tell her, from the inquiry about the bladder to the beginning of the procedure; for this reason, she should check if the woman is a virgin, and then place her hand in the woman's anus and feel for the bladder.
Donc si atroba aquela, coarte aquela dejos le sieu dit, e lahoras comanda a lu que inscida sobre aquela.	Then if you find it, cut it out and leave the one you just mentioned, and then order him to incise over it.
Mays si no es verge, lahoras comanda a la matrona que entrometa lo sieu dit en le conh de la malauta e enquiera sobre la peyra, pus que pausa la sua ma sinistra sobre la vesica, e comprem aquela am bona comprecio.	But if it is not a stone, then order the midwife to insert her finger into the bladder of the patient and feel for the stone, while placing her left hand on the bladder, and grasp it with good compression.
Donc si atroba aquela, lahoras cove que gradantment maugua aquela de l’orrifici de la vesica a las partidas dejos am somman de la sua vertut entro que pervengua am aquel a la razit de la coyssa.	Then if you find it, gradually wash out the bladder through its orifice with much water, leaving some of its virtue so that it may reach the root of the thigh.
E aprop inscida sobre aquela apposicio de la maytat del conh deves la razit de la coyssa de qualque part sia a lu parada e cent la peyra en aquela partida, e·l dit de lu no sia remaugut de la peyra coartan dejos lu.	And then incise over that insertion of the catheter, place the root of the thigh in any part where it stops and center the stone in that part, and cut him if the pain is not relieved by the stone.
E la seccio sia pauca al comensament; e aprop entrometa lo ray sobre aquela seccio, e si sent la peyra, lahoras ajuste en seccio segon la quantitat la qual sap que la peyra sira getada de aquela.	And the section should be small at the beginning; then insert the probe over that section, and if you feel the stone, then adjust the section according to the quantity he knows the stone will be removed from there.
E sapias que las specias de peyra son motas: quar de aquelas es pauca e gran, e leon e aspra, e longua e redonda, e havent ramps.	And perceive that the grains of pepper are spots: some are small and large, lion and sharp, long and round, and having wings.
Donc tu sapias quantas specias so de lu per aquo que tu signifiques sobre aquo que vols.	And therefore you perceive what grains of pepper are so that you may signify about what you want.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, ajusta en le loc vetriol trissat e te aquela per una hora entro que sia abscindit le sanc, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	And if you want a flow of urine, apply vitriol trioxide to the area for one hour before cutting the urine, and then return to your operation after the pepper is removed.
E fay que prepares am tu dels instrumentz les quals e ditz en la extraccio de peyra en les homes, per so que sias ajudat per aquels en la tua operacio.	And make sure to prepare among your instruments those which you have mentioned in the extraction of pepper in men, so that you may be helped by them in your operation.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, e sabes que la expulcio del sanc es de la arceria que es insciza, lahoras tu pausa polvera sobre le loc e estrenh aquel am pulvils e strictura descent, e no iteras aquo; e layssa la peyra e no extraguas aquela, quar fort leu morira la malauta.	And if you want a flow of urine, and you know that the expulsion of urine is from the artery that is incised, then apply powder to the area and strengthen it with powders and promote descent, and do not repeat this; and leave the pepper and do not extract it, for strong pressure will kill the patient.
E aprop cura la plagua.	And then treat the wound.
Donc cum es cedada la acuitat del sanc aprop alcus jorns, e·l loc se poyreys, lahoras tu retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	When the sharpness of the pain in the leg subsides after some days, then you return to your operation while the stone is forgotten.
Capitol lxii.	Chapter LXII.
De seccio sobre ernia acoza.	On the section about inguinal hernia.
Hernia ayguoza no es sino agregacio de humiditat en le ciphac blanc lo qual es dejos la codena dels genetius contenent le huou, e es nompnat ciphac.	Hernia aquous is nothing but an accumulation of moisture in the white fiber, which is left when the cord of the genitals containing the humor is relaxed, and it is named fibrous.
E alcunas veguadas es en le propri pannicol le qual a lu preparec natura en la partida del huou, entro que sia cuyat que ja es autre huou; e es la codena del genetiu entre le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, e no es aquo sino tart.	And sometimes it is in the own linen cloth, which nature prepares in the part of the humor before it is cooked and another humor has taken its place; and this is the cord of the genitals between the white fiber, which we have said, and it is not this but a tendon.
E la generacio de aquest hernia es per debelitat la qual accideys als genetius, per que ad aquels es efundunda aquesta materia, e alcunas vetz accideys per percuscio fayta sobre les genetius.	And the generation of this hernia is due to weakness which occurs in the genitals, because this material infiltrates there, and sometimes it occurs due to percussion performed on the genitals.
E aquesta humiditat es havent motas colors, quar la color de lu o es declinant a citrina o a sanguinent, o rog, o es negra feculenta, o es ayguosa blanqua, e es aquo que es mays.	And this moisture having colored spots, its color is either declining to yellowish, or bloody, or red, or black and starchy, or watery white, and it is this that is most common.
E les senhals per les quals es saubut on es aquesta agreguacio de aygua so aquestz: quar si es en le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, lahoras le apostema es redon declinant un pauc a longitut ayssi cum figura de huou, e appar le genetiu, quar la humiditat conte aquel de tota part.	And the signs by which one knows where this addition of water is located are these: if it is in the white cell which we have said, then the abscess is round, slightly declining in length like the figure of a gourd, and appears the genus, for the humidity contains that from all parts.
E si la humiditat es en le propri pannicol, lahoras le apostema es redon am partida del huou e per aysso hom estima que es autre huou.	And if the humidity is in the proper flesh, then the abscess is round detached from the gourd and for this reason one estimates that it is another gourd.
E si la humiditat es entre la codena dels genetius e·l ciphac blanc, lahoras catz dejos le centiment.	And if the humidity is between the genus and the white cell, then cut off the centiment.
E cum tu vols la cognicio de la color de la humiditat, lahoras tu esproa la color de la humiditat en le apostema am entromes cayrat del qual la forma es precedida; e segon aquo que es eyssit en le vestigi del entromes, jutga de aquo que es dedintz lu.	And to know the color of the humidity, you draw the color of the humidity in the abscess through a medium liquid whose form precedes it; and according to what happens in the trace of the medium, judge what is inside it.
Donc quan nos vinem a la curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que comandem al malaute que sia fleubotomat si aquo es a tu possibla, e vezes le cos de lu ple.	Then when we come to the cure of it, you must command the patient to bleed if this is within your capability, and often let his body fill.
E aprop sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos sobre alcuna causa un pauc auta, e pausa dejos lu motz draps.	And then he is laid supine on his back on some cause a little forth or aft, and place the head on the pillows.
E aprop setz tu sobre la part sinistra de lu, e comanda al ministra que segua a la dextra de lu, le qual extenda la sua vergua a hun de dos latz a la codena dels genetius e a la partida del mirac del ventre.	And then set yourself on the left side of the patient, and command the minister to stand on the right side of the patient, who extends his cloth over one of the sides at the buttocks and the part of the miracle of the abdomen.
E aprop pren spatum lat e scindeys la codena dels genetius del mieg loc per la longitut entro prop le pentenilh.	And then take a spatula and split the buttocks at the midpoint along the length near the coccyx.
E sia fayta la seccio segon rectetut engualment distant de la linha que deveseys la pel dels genetius, entro que pervengua al ciphac blanc comprehendent.	And the section should be made according to rectitude, equally distant from the line where you divide the skin of the buttocks, until it reaches the white ciphac (likely referring to a fatty tissue or muscle layer).
E excorja aquel, e observa, e guarda te per aysso que tu no inscidas aquel; e la tua excoriacio am la qual aquel excorjas per partida jassia que sia suspenduda am le huou mays e subtilment escruta am la excoriacio segon la quantitat a tu possibla.	And excise that, and observe it, and keep it for this: do not enter that; your excision from the part where you excised it should be suspended on the finest hook and subtly examine the excision according to the quantity you can.
E aprop perfora le ciphac ple de aygua am perforacio ampla, e extratz tota l’aygua.	And then puncture the fatty tissue full of water with a large hole, and extract all the water.
E aprop separa entre doas labias de la seccio am uncis, e exten le ciphac a las partidas desus; e no toques la codena les genetius comprehendent, e inscideys le ciphac en aquela manieyra que es a tu possible.	And then separate between the two lips of the section with forceps, and extend the flap above; and do not touch the cord around the genitalia, and incise the flap in that manner which is possible to you.
E inscideys aquel am la sua totalitat o en pessas, e majorment le sieu latz subtil, quar si tu no perscrutas exquisidament la inscizio de lu, no es fayta segurtat que la aygua no retorne.	And incise that completely or in parts, especially its fine inner layer; for if you do not thoroughly examine the incision, it is not ensured that the water will not return.
Mays si le huou procezeys de aquela defora de la sua codena en la ora de la tua operacio, lahoras quan tu auras complida la seccio del ciphac, retorna dedintz aquel, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la codena dels genetius am sutura, e aprop cura aquel ayssi cum las autras plagua, entro que sia sanat.	But if you proceed with the exterior part of its cord during your operation, when you have completed the sectioning of the flap, return inside that, and properly suture the two lips of the genital cord, and properly care for that as with other wounds until it heals.
E si atrobas le huou corromput per autra malautia, lahoras cove que tu lies les vayssels les quals so sore le suspensori, e extrat le huou, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit.	And if you find the cord corrupted by another illness, then ligate the vessels which are above the suspensory, extract the cord, and properly care for that as we have said.
Mays si l’aygua es agreguada en doas partidas esemps, lahoras sapias que doas son las ernias; donc inscideys aquela partida segon que has feyt en l’autra engualment; e si es a tu vist que sia una opera, lahoras tu la fay.	But if the water is present in two parts, then you know that there are two hernias; therefore, incise that part according to what you have done in the other equally; and if it is evident to you that it is a simple operation, then you perform it.
E aprop tu abstergiys le sanc, e entramet en las seccios lana submersa en oli o en oli rozat; e pausa deforo autra lana la qual tu as submersa en vi e oli, e expandeys aquela sobre dos genetius e·l mirac del ventre; e pausa desobre draps doblatz e pulvils, e lia aquels desobre am liament le qual es segon aquesta forma:	And then you cleanse the blood, insert in the sections submerged wool in oil or rubbed oil; place another wool over it which you have soaked in wine and oil, and spread that over two genii et miraculum ventris; place further on cloths folded and powders, and lay those above the lint which is according to this form:
e aprop sian preses dos draps e sian humplitz de lana carmenada segon aquesta semblansa; e sian faytas las extremitatz am les quals es premut de coto o de lana humida, e sian agreguatz am strectura en le braguier de las braguas, e la una de las extremitatz prengua del cul entro al dos, e la segonda prengua a la partida del pantenilh, e dos extramitatz sobre dos coyssas dejos e dos extramitatz autras sobre dos angonars, e tota extrictura sia ajustada en le braguier de las braguas.	And then press two cloths and fill them with well-combed wool according to this likeness; and make the ends where they are pressed tightly or with wet wool, and attach them to the structure in the waistband of the trousers, one end grasping from behind into the two, and the second grasping at the crotch part, and place the two ends on two thighs, and other two ends on two girdles, and all the structure be adjusted in the waistband of the trousers.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta hernia es medicada artificialment am cauteri en loc de seccio am ferr; e es que tu prenguas cauteri cutellar subtil e que inscidas am aquel la codena dels ginitius, e es ignit segon que havem recomtat entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc contenent la aygua, e lahoras tu pren cauteri segon aquesta forma:	And sometimes this hernia is artificially treated with a cautery at the section instead of using iron; so you take a thin surgical cautery and incise there at the cord of the genii, and ignite it as we have recommended until the white cippac containing the water is discovered, and then you use the cautery in this form:
e es asemblat a letra greca.	and it resembles Greek letters.
E aprop perfora am aquel ciphac, e es ignit entro que tota la humiditat sia fora-gitada.	And then puncture that blister, and ignite within it all the moisture to be expelled.
E aprop exten le ciphac am uncis, e excorja am uncis, e excorja am cauteri subtil ignit; e inscideys aquel segon que es a tu possible entro que eradiques tot lu; e guarda te del huou que·l foc no·l toque.	And then lance the blister with needles, and incise it with needles, and cauterize it with a thin ignited cautery; and cut it open as much as possible so that you can remove all of it; and protect yourself from the smoke that the fire produces.
E sapias que aquesta operacio es pus salva e pus longinqua de flux de sanc, e milhor que operacio am seccio.	And know that this operation is safer and farther from the risk of infection, and better than an incision.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat apostema caut en la hora de seccio o en hora de cauteri, o flux de sanc, lahoras cove que tu cures qual contrarietat fa a tu per aquo, am curacio la qual conveneys a lu segon que es dit.	But if you encounter a boil during the incision or cautery, or during the risk of infection, then treat it as you would any other similar condition, applying the appropriate cure as described.
Mays si le malaute es pauruc, e no spera la segonda operacio per la sua horribilitat, lahoras administra perforacio segon que yeu recomti aquo; e es quan es certificat deves tu, per aquo que havem dit de las significacios, que aquela hernia es ayguosa.	But if the patient is fearful and does not expect the second operation due to its horror, then administer puncture as I advise you; and it is certain that you should certify, based on what we have said about the meanings, that that hernia is painful.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute sobre alcuna cezelha elevada, aprop perfora le apostema en la partida pus bassa de lu am spatum lat, e pausa la perforacio segon la longitut del cos.	When you must suture the thigh on some elevated part, then perforate the abscess at the lower side with a spatula, and pause the perforation according to the length of the body.
E sia la apercio ampla entro que corro tota l‘aygua.	And let the opening be wide enough to drain all the water.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc coto e lia aquel e layssa aquel, per so que corro le romanent de l’aygua.	And place your hand over the exact spot, close it, and leave it open, so that the water can continue to flow.
E aprop cura aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And place something over the wound to ensure it heals.
Mays si contrarietat es a la egrecio de l’aygua en aquela hora tu perforas aquela: e aquo no es fayt sino per aquo quar le pannicol blanc en le orrifici de la plagua fa contrarietat e prohibeys le eyssiment de l’aygua, lahoras cove que tu metas en la plagua pena o instrument am la qual es extrayta l’aygua dels ydropitz, la forma del qual es precedida; o ajusta en la opprecio de la plagua un petit.	But if contrary to the flow of water at that time you perforate it: and this is not done so that the white lint prevents water from entering through the wound's openings. When you need to put in the wound a pledget or instrument from which water is drawn from the dropsy, the form of which precedes; or apply a small sponge around the wound.
E sapias que l’aygua retorna, e es agueguada aprop vi meses o enaviro aquels; e cum es agreguada, lahoras sia perforat segon aquela meteyssa manieyra, quar le malaute ayssi passara les sieus dias.	And you know that the water returns, and it is agueguada (heated) for about two months or until it does; and when it is heated, then perforate it according to that method, so that the thigh passes its days thus.
Capitol .lxiii.	Capitol LXIII.
De seccio sobre hernia carnosa e la curacio de lu.	On the section about flesh hernia and its cure.
Sapias que en la seccio sobre aquesta hernia es temor perdusent a pernicia en las majors disposicios; per que a mi es vista la dimissio de lu e esser salvat per aquela milhor.	Know that in the section about this hernia, one fears great harm to the major organs; for I have seen its removal and being saved by the better method.
E yeu so rememorant la operacio en aquela e las specias dels apostemas.	And I am remembering the operation in that case and the types of abscesses.
Donc, dic que l‘apostemas natz en les cos dels quals les genetius so conponutz e es fayt aquo per motas causas: o per superfluitat aguda agra, la qual es efundida als genetius, o per percuscio.	Therefore, I say that abscesses naturally occur in the tissues where the glands are composed, and this happens for several causes: either due to acute painful congestion, which is infused into the glands, or due to a blow.
E es la color de la apostema segon la color del cos, e no es atrobat en lu dolor, e es apostema greu.	And the color of the abscess depends on the color of the tissue, and pain is not a symptom in it; it is a serious abscess.
E fort leu es apostema lapificada, del qual la color es fosca, e no es centiment a lu.	And the abscess is firm and blackened, of which the color is dark, and there is no tenderness in it.
E alcunas veguadas es fayt per nodacio de las arcerias, e per imflacio de aquelas ayssi quo ja es perceubut la rememoracio de lu, o per imflacio de venas.	And sometimes it occurs due to the dilation of the arteries, and due to inflammation of those vessels, as the memory of which is already perceived, or due to inflammation of veins.
Mays aquo que es per imflacio de arcerias es conogut per la dispercio de la apostema quan compremas aquela am les tieus ditz; e no cove que aquel toques.	More than that, which is due to the inflation of arteries, it is known as the dispersion of the apstema when you grasp that among those thighs; and do not cut there.
Mays aquel que es fayt per imflacio de vena no es dispergut de lu alcuna causa deves la compressio am les ditz.	More than that, which is caused by the inflation of veins, is not dispersed from there; you should apply compression with your hands.
E ja es possible que sobre aquesta specia sia fayta seccio e sobre les autres carns; e es que tu inscida la codena dels genetius, e aprop esten le huou a las partidas desus, e extratz aquel del ciphac blanc, e deliura le suspensori dels vaysels, e ligua les, e inscideys le suspensori pus que tu deliuras aquel de tota partida de las partidas del huou.	And it is possible that sectioning may be performed on this species as well as on other tissues; and you incise the cord of the tendons, then extend the heel above, and extract that from the white cavity, and deliver the suspensorium of the vessels, ligate them, and incise the suspensorium after you deliver that from all parts of the heel.
Donc si l’huou ja es am aquelas carnadas consolida, lahoras cove que tu extraguas le huou e inscidas aquel.	Therefore, if the heel has already consolidated in those tissues, then you should extract the heel and incise it.
E si es adherencia entro alcuna causa del ciphac, o entre aquo que es entre les bayssels, lahoras cove que tu deliures tota aquela adherencia e inscidas aquela per inscizio redonda.	And if there is an adhesion due to any cause in the cavity, or between what is between the vessels, then you should deliver all that adhesion and incise it with a round incision.
Mays si es nativitat de carn en le loc de la adherencia la qual es detras, lahoras cove que tu inscidas tot aquo que es de lu, e extraguas le huou ayssi cum havem dit.	If the flesh is native to the place of adhesion which is behind, then cut into all that belongs to it and remove the fat as we have said.
Donc cum es complida la tua operacio, lahoras omple la plagua de lana imfuza en oli rozat e vi; e aprop cura aquela am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Then since your operation is completed, fill the wound with wool soaked in olive oil and wine; and place it over the other dressing until it heals.
Capitol .lxiv.	Chapter LXIV.
De la curacio de hernia que es de vitz.	On the treatment of hernias that occur through force.
Vit es apostema envolut per alcuna envolucio semblant a broto am mollificacio dels testiculs, e es fayt dificil movement exercitiu e deambulacio sobre le malaute.	It is an abscess enveloped by some envelope resembling a clot, and it makes physical exercise, activity, and walking difficult for the patient.
E en la curacio de aquesta malautia es per temor per aquo del qual es precedida rememoracio.	And in the treatment of this illness, one is fearful of what preceded it and caused it.
Empero cove que diguam opperacio en aquela segon que fero les primiers.	However, proceed with the operation according to how I have described the first steps.
E dic que cove que fassas sezer le malaute sobre una cezelha elevada; e aprop enpelleys le suspensori dels testiculs a las partidas dejos; e aprop te la codena dels genetius am les tieus ditz am les baysels que so probdas a la vergua; e tengua aquels autre ministre que tu, e extenda aquels am extencio vehement.	And I say that you should suspend the patient's legs on an elevated frame; and place the scrotum over the thighs, leaving the parts exposed; and tie the groin area with a strap tested for tightness against the thigh; and have another attendant hold those down while you extend them vigorously.
E aprop inscideys am spatum lat agut per seccio traversa en le dreyt dels vaysels entro que sian les vayssels descubertz.	And then incise with a sharp blade by transverse section along the right of the vessels among which the vessels are uncovered.
E aprop excorja de tota partida ayssi quo a tu havem dit en extraccio de arceria las quals so en las templas.	And then excise from all parts thus as we have said in the extraction of arteries which are in the temples.
E aprop fica en aquelas un’agulha en la qual sia fiel doble, e lia aquel en le primier del locs en les quals accideys vit, e lia aquel autra veguada en le derier de lor.	And then place a needle in which there is double thread, and tie that at the beginning of the locations where you incise, and tie the other half at the end of them.
E aprop inscideys aquels en le mieg loc per seccio dreyta segon la longuesa del cos, e extratz aquo que es agreguat de las humiditatz fetulentas e corruptas.	And then incise those in the middle location by a right section according to the length of the body, and extract what is added from the foul and corrupted humors.
E aprop cura la plagua am curacio de las autras plaguas en las quals vols sania esser engendrada per so que caian les vaysels les quals noyreysso un de dos genetius, quar no es mal per aquo.	And then cure the wound by the cure of other wounds in which you wish healing to be generated so that the vessels which nourish them are those of two genius, for this is not harmful.
Mays si accideys vit a totz les bayssels, lahoras cove que·ls testicols sian extragutz o que les testicols per aquo se cequo am les vayssels, per que sia privat de tot nutriment per la inscizio dels vayssels, e que sian estaborits, o que cequo per so que no sia juvament am aquels.	But if you incise all the vessels, then ensure that the testicles are extracted or that they wither due to the incision of the vessels, so that it is deprived of all nutrition due to the incision of the vessels, and may wither, or that they wither on their own.
Capitol .lxv.	Capitol LXV.
De la cura de hernia entestinal.	Of the cure for intestinal hernia.
Le adveniment de aquesta hernia es per seccio que endeve en le ciphac extendut sobre le ventre de part dels angunars del mirac del ventre, per que deysendo les budels de aquela ruptura ad alcu dels budels.	The occurrence of this hernia is due to a separation that extends over the diaphragm onto the abdomen from the muscles of the abdominal wall, because of the rupture of the intestines and some of the intestines.
E aquesta ruptura es o del ciphac o de excencio de lu, e accideysso aquestas doas specias per motas causas: o percussio, o per sautz, o per clamor, o per elevacio de alcuna causa greu, o per semblantz.	And this rupture is either of the diaphragm or of its excision, and these two species occur due to various causes: through a blow, by jumping, from shouting, from lifting some heavy cause, or for similar reasons.
E·l senhal de aquo, quan es per extencio del ciphac, es que accideys pauc a pauc en lonc temps, e no accideys soptament, e es apostema engual entro ves le preon per so quar le ciphac comprem le budel.	And the sign of this, when it is due to extension of the diaphragm, is that it occurs gradually over a long period of time, and does not occur suddenly. It is an abscess enclosed within the liver, by which the diaphragm compresses the intestine.
E le senhal de lu es quan es per seccio del ciphac, quar al comensament fa accidir dolor vehement sobtament; e es apostema divers aparent dejos la codena propdana aparent, e aquo es per eyssiment del budel, e·l cos de lu a las partidas deforo del ciphac.	And the sign of this is when it is due to separation of the diaphragm, for at the beginning it causes sudden and intense pain; it is an abscess that appears different from the nearby visible one, and this is due to the displacement of the intestine, with its body in the parts outside the diaphragm.
E alcunas veguadas es fora-getat am le budel la tela, e es apelada aquesta hernia entestinal zirbal.	And sometimes the intestine pushes the skin out, and this hernia is called intestinal bulge.
E alcunas veguadas es fayta am ventositat, e alcunas veguadas corr en le budel fenda, e aqui es retenguda, e es am aquo gran pernitia3 del malaute, e alcunas veguadas fa endevenir dolor malvada e majorment quan es premut.	And sometimes it is caused by distension, and sometimes a hole forms in the intestine, where it gets stuck, and this causes great discomfort to the patient, and sometimes it leads to severe pain, especially when pressed.
E en la curacio de las especias de aquesta malautia am ferr es temor, per que cove que sia esquivat le cazament en aquela.	And in the treatment of the symptoms of this illness there is fear, because it is believed that the examination must be avoided in that area.
E la manieyra de la operacio de aquela es que comandes al malaute que redugua le budel am la sua ma a las partidas dedintz de la sua conquavitat si obezeys al sieu retornament, e aprop sia envessat sobre le sieu col entre las tuas mas, e eleva las cambas de lu.	And the method of the operation for this is that you command the patient to push the intestine back into its cavity with their hand at the internal parts of their cavity if they obey in their return, then quickly place them on their back between your hands, and lift their legs.
E aprop sten la codena la qual siec la codena dels testicols a las partidas desus, e inscideys la codena dels testicols tota per le lonc; e aprop fiqua en doas labias de la seccio uncis segon que indigeysses a hubrir la seccio am aquels.	And then stretch the scrotal skin from above downward, and incise the scrotal skin entirely lengthwise; then place it in two flaps of the incision according to where you need to open the section.
E si’ la seccio segon la quantitat que a tu sia possible que de aquela le huou sia foro-getat.	And if the section according to the quantity that it is possible for you to be perforated from there, let it be opened.
E aprop excorja aquela ciphaqueth les quals so dejos la codena dels testicols, entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc dur de quascuna partida.	And then strip that skin which is left with the cord of the testicles, once the white hard part of each section is uncovered.
Lahoras tu entromet le tieu dit en aquo que siec le testicol, en aquo que es entre ciphac blanc, le qual es dejos la codena del huou, e entre le ciphac segon, e absolve am aquel’adherencia que es en la partida detras del huou.	And then insert your thumb into that which is seared on the testicle, in between the white skin, which is left with the cord of the wound, and between the skin folds, and release any adhesion that is in the part behind the wound.
E aprop mau am la ma la codena dels testicols a las partidas deforo, e am aysso exten le ciphac blanc en sus am la ma sinestra, e eleva le huou am le ciphac a la partida de la seccio; e comanda al ministre que extenda le huou ensus e tu dissolveys la adherencia que es detras am solucio complida.	And then place your hand on the testicle folds externally, and with this stretch the white skin with your left hand, and elevate the wound to the part of the section; and command the minister to stretch the wound upwards while you dissolve the adhesion behind with a solution.
E cerqua am les tieus ditz que lay no sia alcuna causa del budel envelopat en le ciphac blanc dur.	And seek around with your fingers that there be no cause of the intestine enveloped in the white tough skin.
Mays si tu atrobas de lu alcuna causa, lahoras tu enpelleys aquel al ventre dejos.	But if you find any cause, then peel it off to the abdomen, leaving it there.
E aprop tu pren una agulha en la qual sia fiel gros fayt de x fiels, e entromet aquel deves le derier del ciphac, le qual es jos la codena dels testicols, la qual siec seccio; e aprop inscideys las extremitatz las quals emineysso del fiel entro que sian quatre fiels, e aprop compausa alcus de lor sobre alcuna figura en manieyra de crotz; e lia am aquel le ciphac del qual havem dit que es dejos la codena dels testicols am fort liament de dos partz.	And then you take a needle made of coarse hemp, cut it at the end of the scrotum, which is the section below the testicles, and then incise the ends that protrude inside, which are four pieces of hemp, and then press some of them in the shape of a cross. Tie this to the scrotum from which we have said the part below the testicles should be sewn tightly with two parts.
E aprop envolveys las extremitatz dels fiels e lia aquelas am liament vehement entro que alcu dels vayssels que noyrrisso aquels no puscan trametre alcuna causa per so que de aqui no accida apostema caut.	And then wrap the ends of the hemp pieces and tie those tightly with strong thread so that none of the vessels nourishing them can transmit any cause by which an abscess might occur.
E pausa autra veguada liament segon foro le primier liament, lonh de lu mens tres ditz; e aprop aquestz dos liaments layssa del ciphac le qual es dejos la codena dels testicols la quantitat de la grandeza del dit, e inscideys tot le romanent segon redondeza, e osta de lu le huou.	And tie another time with thread according to the strength of the first thread, keeping it about three fingers' breadth away; then between these two threads leave on the scrotum, which is below the testicles, the size of a finger's breadth, and incise the rest according to roundness, and cover it with skin.
E aprop inscideys en la partida dejos de la codena dels testicols per seccio de la qual corra sanc e sania ayssi cum havem recomtat en aquo que havem dit.	And then incise in the part below the testicles for the section from which the blood and health flow as we have recounted in what we have said.
E aprop aministra lana submersa en oli, e pausa en la plagua; e aministra le liament le qual havem recomtat (e alcunas veguadas le ciphac blanc es cauterizat, le qual havem dit aprop la inscizio de lu temen de flux de sanc, quar motas veguadas accideys aquels) e leyssa le liament entro que per si caia.	And then administer wool submerged in oil, and place it on the wound; apply the plaster which we have recommended (and some times the white wick is cauterized, which we mentioned near the incision of this fear of bleeding, because often such times accidents occur). Let the plaster remain until it falls by itself.
Mays si le cazement de lu es tardat, lahoras de aygua cauda sia embrocat, e pausa sobre aquel entro que caia segon que havem dit.	And if the application is delayed, then pour cold water over it, and place it there until it falls as we have said.
E aprop cura la plagua am l’autra curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And then treat the wound with another method for treating wounds until it is healed.
Capitol .lxvi.	Capitol. lxvi.
De hernia ventosa.	Of hernia ventosa.
En aquesta hernia no e vist alcu que sia estat ardit sus la curacio de lu am ferr.	In this hernia, there is nothing seen that has been burned during the treatment of it.
E les primiers diyssero que es fayta ayssi cum havem recomtat en la hernia que es am vi; la qual es que tu lies les vayssels aprop la seccio sobre aquela am fecilitat de lu; e aprop secca en le mieg loc en enviro le apostema am aquo que obro aquel, entro que caian les vayssels.	And the first surgeons would do it this way as we have recommended for the hernia in the belly: which is that you tie the vessels near the section over which there is ease; then dry and clean in the middle area where you introduce an apostema to facilitate that, until the vessels fall.
E cura la plagua segon que havem dit entro que sia sanada.	And cure the wound as we have said until it is healed.
Capitol .lxvii.	Chapter LXVII.
De la disropcio que es fayta en les anguonars.	Of the disorder that occurs in the ankles.
Alcunas veguadas endeve ruptura en les angonars ayssi cum havem dit, e emineys le loc.	In some cases, there is a rupture in the ankles as we have said, and apply a poultice to the area.
E no deyssen als genetius alcuna causa dels budels al genetius; e si deyssen, aquo es pauc; e retorna s’en en totas horas.	And the physicians do not assign any cause of the ruptures to the bladder; and if they do, it is very little; and return to the main topic at all times.
Mays si es prolonguat le temps am aquo, es ajustada fissura en le ciphac entro que deysenda le budel en le ciphac; e accideys aquo per la extencio del ciphac le qual es en le angonars ayssi cum havem dit, la qual causa es quar le ciphac es estendut, e aprop es mollificat e·l loc es apostemat e emineys.	But if the time is prolonged in this, there is an appropriate crack in the skin through which to return the intestine into the cavity; and this happens due to the extension of the skin, as we have said, which causes the skin to stretch, soften, and become suppurated, and apply a poultice.
E la cura de lu es am cauteri ayssi quo es precedida la narracio de lu.	And the treatment of it is with a cautery as described in the preceding narration.
E alcunas veguadas es curada am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: e es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos entre las tuas mas, e aprop secca le loc de la ruptura dels apostemas emineys am seccio per la latitut segon la quantitat de tres ditz.	And sometimes it is cured by iron according to this manner: and it is that the patient lies on his back between your hands, and then the place of the rupture of the abscesses dries up by drying out in a width according to the quantity of three fingers.
E aprop strenh le ciphac blanc que es jos la codena entro que sia descubert.	And then strengthen the white chalk that is at the center when it is uncovered.
E aprop pren le ray e pausa aquel sobre le loc eminent del ciphac, e prem aquel al preon del ventre.	And then take the rod and place it over the center of the chalk that is drying, and press it against the abdomen.
E aprop cus le dos locs eminentz sobre la extremitat del ray del ciphac, e ajusta am la sutura un de aquels am l’autre.	And then prick the two center spots over the end of the rod of the chalk, and adjust one to the other with the suture.
E aprop extratz la extremitat del ray, e no inscidas del ciphac de tot, ni no extenda le huou, ni autra causa ayssi cum yeu te fi saber en la curacio de hernia entestinal.	And then remove the end of the rod, and do not go beyond the center of the chalk, nor extend the hole, nor any other cause like this in the treatment of intestinal hernia.
E aprop cura aquela am la curacio de las plaguas, e cum inscideyses les fiels, mundifica aquela e restaura la plagua entro que sia consolidada; quar le ciphac es contrayt e no es ajustada la eminencia de ruptura.	And then cure that in the treatment of wounds, and after cutting the edges, clean it and restore the wound while it is consolidating; for the chalk contracts and the edge of the rupture is not adjusted.
E cauteri es milhor en aquest loc, quar es pus propda a salut.	And cautery is better in this place, for it is more proximate to health.
Capitol .lxviii.	Capitol. lxviii.
De mollificacio de la codena dels testiculs.	Of the mollification of the scrotal skin.
Motas veguadas la codena dels testiculs en alcus homes es mollificada per aysso quar las carns que so entre aquela son mollificadas, e es fedat le reguardament de lu.	Spots on the scrotal skin in some men are mollified because the flesh between there is mollified, and it is thought that this is due to local conditions.
Adonc necessari es ad aquel que es preguat en la curacio de lu que fassa jazer le malaute segon le sieu dos, e enscida tota la codena la qual es mollificada sobre la codena natural; e aprop que ajuste doas labias am la sutura.	Then it is necessary for the one who is examining in the treatment of this to cause the patient to lie according to his condition, and at once entirely remove the scrotum which is mollified over the natural scrotum; and then bring the two lips together at the suture.
E si vols, cus en le comensament la superfluitat de la codena mollificada am tres cozeduras o quatre e am ferma sutura.	And if you wish, begin the removal of the excess scrotal tissue that is mollified with three or four stitches and a firm suture.
E aprop inscideys entre las suturas; e aprop cura per curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat e caian les fiels.	And then incise between the sutures; and afterward treat with treatment for other wounds until it is healed and the stitches fall out.
Capitol .lxix.	Chapter LXIX.
De castracio.	Of castration.
Sapias que castratio en nostre ley es excomengada, mays per causa es legut a mi que·m remembre de lu en aquest libre; e no es necessaria la rememoracio de lu sino per doas manieyras, de las quals es la una per so que aquo sia en la sciensa del metge quan es enterroguat de aquela, que sapia la curacio de lu al qual accideys; e l’autra manieyra es que nos motas vetz havem necessitat de castracio de autras bestias per les juvamentz nostres per aquelas, ayssi cum de motos, e de bocs, e de porcs, e de semblantz a las bestias.	Know that castration in our law is excommunicated, but by cause it is allowed to me that I remember it in this treatise; and the remembering of it is necessary for two reasons, of which one is that when a doctor is questioned about it, he knows the cure for him upon whom it occurs; and the other reason is that we may have need of castration for our young animals, such as mules, oxen, pigs, and similar to animals.
E donc dic que castracio es fayta en dos manieyras: o per atrissio, o per fissura a seccio.	And thus it is said that castration is performed in two ways: either by incision or by fissure (or section).
Mays en aquela que es fayta per atrissio, la via de la opera es que nos fassam cezer la bestia en aygua cauda entro que·ls genetius de lu sian mollificatz e sian linhitz e que pendan.	But in that which is performed by incision, the way of the operation is to cut the animal in water shortly before the genitals become soft and relaxed.
E aprop pren aquels am la tua ma entro que sian resols e no apparescan dejos le tocament.	And then take those parts with your hand before they become resolved and do not show marks upon touch.
Mays en castracio fayta per fissura e seccio, cove que tu tenguas la bestia e premas la codena dels testicols de lu am la ma senestra.	When castration is performed due to a crack or secundo, ensure that you have the animal and press the cord of the testicles with your left hand.
E aprop lia le suspensori, e inscideys sobre quascun huou am una seccio entro que dos huous proceseysso.	Then lift the suspensory ligament, and incise over each groove between two testicles.
E aprop inscideys aquels pus que auras quascu excorjat.	Then incise those glands that you have excoriated.
E no leysses sobre aquels del ciphac alcuna causa, sino le ciphac subtil le qual es sobre les vazes.	And do not incise any of those on the scrotum for any cause, but incise the fine one which is over the veins.
E aquesta manieyra de castracio es milhor la qual es fayta per atrissio, quar atrissio fort leu layssa alcuna causa dels testicols per que la bestia desira coyt.	And this method of castration is better which is performed by traction, for traction firmly leaves no cause of the testicles since the animal desires copulation.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	Then cure the wound while it is healing.
Capitol .lxx.	Capitol LXX.
De la cura de hermafrodozia.	On the cure of hermaphroditism.
Hermafrodozia en les homes es segon dos manieyras: la una es quar o appar en aquo que siec l’espazi en la codena de testiculs, en aquel que es entre dos testiculs figura quar cunh de femna en la qual so pels.	Hermaphroditism in males occurs in two ways: one where there is a difference or appearance in the space in the cord of the testicles, where between two testicles there is a difference that resembles female characteristics in which the skin is involved.
E alcunas veguadas de aquel corr urina le qual es en la codena dels testiculs.	And sometimes there flows urine which is in the channel of the testicles.
Mays en las femnas es una specia: e es que·l conh de la femna sobre le pentenilh es ayssi cum dos testiculs de home un pauc de tot yminiheys a la partida deforo ayssi cum le perpucii de home e dos testicols.	In women, it is a special case: and the labia of the woman around the clitoris are like two testicles of man with a small amount of fatty tissue on the outer part like the scrotum of man with two testes.
E la curacio es de tres specias: de dos dels homes e de una specia de las femnas.	And the cure is of three kinds: two for men and one for women.
E es que cove que tu inscidas aquelas carns ajustadas entro que efuga la emprecio de aquela, e aprop que cures aquelas am curacio de las autras plaguas.	And you should incise those tight flesh areas where the pus escapes from that area, and then treat those with the cure for other wounds.
E en la segonda specia dels homes de la qual yeys urina la qual es en la codena dels testiculs, no es curacio ni opperacio en lu.	And in the second kind for men from which urine flows from the channel of the testicles, neither cure nor operation is needed.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter 21.
De lentinge e de carn eminent per causas de las femnas.	On the labia and flesh protruding due to conditions in women.
Lentige fort leu es ajustada sobre causas naturals entro que es etressat e es fayt leg le reguardament; e alcunas veguadas es magnificada en alcunas femnas en tant entro que es spandit ayssi cum en les homes e perve entro al coito.	Labia fort is tightly adjusted due to natural causes where it is stretched and appears noticeable; and in some cases, it becomes enlarged in some women so much that it hangs like in men and can pass during intercourse.
Adonc cove que tu tenguas la superfluitat de lentinge am la tua ma o am unci e inscidas.	Then you should have the superfluous phlegm in your hand or cup and discard it.
E no ultimes en inscizio, majorment en le preon de la razit, per so que no endevengua flux de sanc.	And do not end in cupping, especially on the back of the hand, so that no flow of pus occurs.
E aprop cura aquela am curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanada.	Then treat that with the cure for the sores while they are healing.
Mays carn nascuda es carn que nays en le horrifici de la mayre entro que umple aquel, e fort leu es eyssit a las partidas deforo segon semblansa de coa (e per aquo alscus primiers appelero aquo “malautia caudada”); donc cove que nos inscidam ayssi cum inscidem lentinge, e curem aquela entro que sia sanada.	More hidden flesh is flesh that arises in the horror of the womb while it fills that space, and a large lump is situated outside according to the likeness of a cyst (and for this some first called it "hidden disease"); therefore, we should cut it thus as we cut phlegm, and treat it while it is healing.
Capitol .lxxii.	Capitol. lxii.
De curacio de alratica.	On the cure of alratica.
Alratica es que le conh de la femna no sia perforat, o sia le trauc petit.	Alratica is when the hymen of the woman is not perforated, or is only slightly torn.
E es o natural o accidental.	And it can be either natural or accidental.
Accidental es per malautia la qual ha precedit, e aquela es fayta o per carn nada ajustada o per ciphac subtil o espes.	Accidental is due to a malady that has preceded, and that is caused either by flesh not fitting well or by a slight or thickened ciphac.
E es fayt o en le preon de la mayre, o en les costatz de lu, o en le pus sobira de lu, o en le pus bas de lu, e prohibeys de cuoyt e de enprenguacio e de enfantament, e fort leu prohibeys las mestruas.	It is caused in the region of the liver, or in its flanks, or above it, or below it, and you forbid coitus and conception and childbirth, and strongly you forbid menses.
E la cognicio de aquela es fayta per reguardament de la metrona, si la oppilacio es apparent, propdana; mays si no es apparent, lahoras tu cerqua aquela am les tieus ditz o am le ray.	The knowledge of that is made by observing the midwife, if the obstruction is apparent, probe gently; but if it is not apparent, then you approach that with your fingers or with a probe.
Mays si oppilacio es per ciphac subtil, e es propda a las doas labias, lahoras tu coyta e disromp aquela.	But if the obstruction is due to a slight ciphac (obstruction), and is close to the two lips, then you open and separate that.
E es que pauses sobre las doas labias pulvils, e aprop pausa les tieus ditz indicz de amdoas las mas encemps.	And you place powders on the two lips, and then place your fingers, indicating with both hands around them.
E la femna sia sobre le sieu dos, las sieuas coyssas extendudas, e aprop exten las doas labias am forsa entro que aquel ciphac subtil sia romput e la oppilacio sia uberta.	And the woman is on her back, her thighs extended, and then spread the two lips with force until that slight obstruction is broken and the obstruction is opened.
E aprop pren lana e enbeu le4 en oli e pausa aquela sobre·l loc, e jagua am home le dia per so que·l loc inscis no sia consolidat.	And then take wool and soak it in oil and place it over the area, and keep someone there to prevent the incised location from becoming consolidated.
Mays si le ciphac es gros e espes, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel am spatum lat o am fuelha de mirta.	If the abscess is large and thick, then incise it with a spatula or a leaf of mint.
Mays si la oppilacio es per carnada, lahoras suspen aquela am unci, e inscideys aquela.	If the abscess is in flesh, then suspend it with a pin, and incise it.
E sian am tu las medicinas que fan cessar flux de sanc ses mordicacio, ayssi cum ahacatia, e sanc de drago, e enses, ajustat am album de huou.	And use those medicines that stop the flow of venom from a bite, such as garlic, dragon's blood, and hyssop, mixed with honey.
E aprop aministra una canulha de plom ampla per so que la plagua no sia consolidada leugierament.	And then administer an ample lead cannula to prevent the infection from becoming slightly consolidated.
E tengua aquela per alcus jorns e aministra calgua de li sec.	And keep it there for several days and administer cooled wine.
E aprop sia curada am l’autra curacio de consolidacio entro que sia sanada.	And then cure it with the other consolidation remedy before it is healed.
E alcunas vetz accideys en la mayre nativitat de autres carns, e lahoras cove que inscidas segon aquesta manieyra.	And sometimes accidents occur in the natural abundance of other tissues, then you must incise according to this method.
Mays si aysso es per apostema crancos, a l’apostema crancos le qual es en la mayre no sia fayta contrarietat am ferr en deguna manieyra.	If this is due to a chronic abscess, the chronic abscess which is in the major part should not be treated by any means of incision.
Capitol .lxxiii.	Capitol LXXIII.
De la cura de emorroydas e de tayl e de botor roja que accideysso en le conh de las femnas.	For the treatment of hemorrhoids and piles and of red boils that occur in the groin of women.
Emorroydas so apprecio dels orificis de motas venas entro que de aquelas corro mot sanc continuadament; e cum so antiquadas emorroydas e son fayts theyls.	Hemorrhoids are appreciated as the result of small veins within which constantly circulate corrupting fluids; and as for ancient hemorrhoids, they are formed by cords.
E ja yeu he dit en la divisio las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e diyre ayssi aquelas que recebo curacio e aquelas que no recebo curacio.	And I have already said in the division the species of those and the signs of those, and to say likewise which receive treatment and which do not receive treatment.
Donc dic que emorroydas e theyls quan so en le preon de la mayre e no apparo al sentiment, lahoras en aquelas no sia fayta curacio am ferr.	Therefore, say that hemorrhoids and cords when in the internal part of the major area and do not appear to the sensation, then do not treat those by any means.
Mays aquelas las quals so en le orrifici de la mayre sobre las quals catz sentiment, so aquelas que so curadas.	But those that are in the external part of the major area on which sensation is present, are those that can be treated.
E cove que tu metas la femna en mayso frega e aprop exten atheyl am les forfexs, o am drap aspre, e inscideys aquelas am las razitz.	And ensure that you place the woman in a comfortable position and then widely extend the thighs, either with scissors or a rough cloth, and incise there where the roots are.
E aprop pulveriza sobre aquelas deves le fluxs del sanc de una de las polveras insciscivas ses mordicacio, ayssi cum acassia e semblant ad aquels.	And then sprinkle over those wounds the flux of the blood from one of the incisive powders six bites, thus as it appears and looks like those.
E aprop enpellesca les sieus pes per una hora, e aprop pausa aquela en aygua freja.	And then wrap their feet for an hour, and then immerse that in cold water.
E si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras fay aquela sezer en decoccio de sumat e de scorsas de milgranas e de gualas e de semblantz.	And if the bleeding persists, then apply that dress in a decoction of sumac and of seeds of millet grains and of walnuts and of similar substances.
E aprop pren farina de ordi e comfiys aquela am miel e vi agre e fay emplastre am aquo sobre le dos de lu.	And then take flour of oregano and mix it with honey and vinegar, and make an ointment with this over their back.
E si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, fay adherir am dos ventozas, e a las mamilhas ses escarificatio.	And if the bleeding is stopped, that is good; otherwise, apply two ventosas (cupping glasses) to the breasts, and perform six scarifications.
E aprop pren lana e submergeys aquela am suc de coliandre o am suc de arnagloza o am suc de guarravier am vi pentit e fay adherir al loc; e aprop cura le loc am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then take wool and immerse it in the juice of caraway or in the juice of agrimony or in the juice of greater celandine in vinegar, and apply it to the area; and then cure the area with ointments until it is healed.
Mays athyl rog le qual es de aspre reguardament, cove que tu inscidas aquo que a tu appar de aquel segon que he dit en theyl engualment.	May I ask what it is that appears to you when you look at it as I have described in the same manner.
E cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And cure that which is within and let it be healed.
Capitol .lxxiv.	Capitol. 74.
De perforacio de eyssedura accident en la mayre.	On the perforation of the eye in the vein.
Motas specias de apostemas accideysso en la mayre, ayssi cum cranc e apostema lapident e ulceracios e adhubelat e erpetromens e fistulas emorroyas e raguarrias e thyl e autres apostemas.	Various special cases of apoplexy occur in the vein, such as stroke, apoplexy with a stone, ulcers, abscesses, erysipelas, fistulas, hemorrhoids, and thrombosis, as well as other types of apoplexy.
E yeu ja he dit aquestas malautias e las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e las curacios de lor en la divisio.	And I have already described these illnesses and their special cases, as well as the symptoms of each, and their treatments in the division.
E cove que yeu digua en aquest tractat de apostema caut le qual ve en la mayre quan es dels apostemas que collegeysso sania, e si vols saber en qual manieyra se fa la opperacio de lu am ferr.	And let it be known that I will describe in this treatise on apoplexy the cautery used when it occurs in the vein among those apoplexies that involve health, and if you want to know how the operation is performed, you may ask.
Adonc cove que tu consideres si la dolor de la apostema en le sieu comensament es aguda am percussio e flecma e febre, e vezes aquel enrogezir e si catz sobre aquel le sentiment, lahoras no·t coytes am perforacio de lu, e cura aquel am aquo que ajuda sobre la maturacio entro que cesse la acuitat dels accidentz.	Then consider whether the pain in the abscess at its beginning is sharp upon percussion and flux and fever, and sometimes that reddening and if it catches over that the sensation, when no·t piercing of it, and cure it with what helps during the maturation until the acuity of the accidents ceases.
E lahoras cove que tu fassas cezer la femna sobre una cezelha que aia doas cezelhas; e recline sobre le sieu dos e ajusta les sieus pes a la partida pus dejos del ventre, e las sieus coyssas sian expandudas, e pausa les sieus brasses dejos les sieus denols, e lia quascus am liament ad aquo convenient.	Then you should make the patient lie on a bench that has two benches; recline on their side and adjust their feet to the part behind their abdomen, and spread their thighs apart, and place their arms below their armpits, and have cushions of flax for them.
E aprop la matrona segua del latz dreyt e aministre le instrument am le qual es ubert le orrifici de la mayre, la forma del qual vindra en aquelas causas que·s faran aprop.	Then the midwife should follow the rectum straight and administer the instrument through which the openings of the womb have been opened, the form of which will come in the cases that will be mentioned later.
E cove quan vols ministrar aquest instrument que tu fiques am lo ray le preon de la mayre de la femna, e aquo que del instrument es intrat en la mayre no sia mays que·l preon de la mayre e leda le malaute.	When you want to administer this instrument, place it at the opening of the womb of the patient, and what part of the instrument enters the womb should not go beyond the opening of the womb and treat the malady.
Mays si l’estrument es major que·l preon de la mayre, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils sobre la textura del preon de la mayre per sso que sia prohibit l’intrament de tot instrument en le preon de la mayre.	If the instrument is larger than the part of the vein, then cover it with powder on the part of the vein to prevent the instrument from entering the vein.
E cove que tu pauses le vertitge que corr en le strument del latz pus desus e que le ministre tengua le strument e revolva le vertitge entro que sia ubert le orrifici de la mayre.	Cover the vein that runs in the channel above with a cloth, and let the minister hold the channel and rotate the vein within until the openings of the vein are exposed.
E cum appar la excitura, e es tocada am la ma e es leon e molh, lahoras cove que tu secces aquela deves le cap de lu am spatum lat.	And when the excitation appears, and it is touched with the hand and is hot and moist, then cover that part of the head with a sponge soaked in cold water.
E cum la sania es evacuada, lahoras cove que tu pauses en la plagua una meca submersa en oli rozat o oli vert en le qual sia alcuna stiptisitat; e pausa la calca7 en la seccio en le preon de la mayre.	And when the foulness is evacuated, then cover the wound with a compress submerged in infused oil or green oil which has some strength; and place the paste in the opening of the vein.
E pause deforo la mayre e sobre le pentenilh lana munda submersa en aygua en la qual sian bulidas malvas.	And cover the vein and over the wick place a clean woolen cloth submerged in water in which nettles have been boiled.
E aprop sia curada aprop dos dias am enguent le qual conveneys ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And it is usually cured in about two days by applying an ointment that you should use until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es lavada la mayre e la plagua enayssi que es cristerisat am aygua e mel, e aprop am aygua en la qual es bulhida razit de liri o de aristologia longua, e aprop retorna al enguent.	And sometimes the liver and wound are washed in an attempt to cauterize them with water and honey, then placed in water in which barley or rush grass has been boiled, and then returned to be anointed.
E si la plagua es dedintz en la mayre ameguada, lahoras cove que tu sias prohibit de la curacio de lu am ferr, habantz cura aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio.	And if the wound is inside the liver softened, then cover it and do not attempt to treat it with a ferret, but take care that which we have said in the division.
Capitol .lxxv.	Capitol.lxxv.
A ensenhar las matronas en qual manieyre les enbrios bius sian medicatz quan yeysso segon figura no-natural.	To teach midwives how to treat false pregnancies naturally as described in the figure.
Necessaria causa es que la matrona conogua en le comensament la figura del enfantament natural per senhals de lu, e es que quan tu vezas la femna expremar a las partidas dejos e desira odorar le ayre, e sobre aquo es enleujada per aquo que sobre ela es del part, e festina le eyssiment del enbrio, lahoras sapias que aquest part es segon figura natural, e es l’eyssiment de lu sobre le sieu cap, e la segondina am aquel o suspensa o pendent del ombelic.	Necessary cause is that the midwife know at the beginning the figure of natural childbirth by signs of it. When you see the female expel from the parts and desire to smell the air, and about this she is troubled by what is over her during labor, and hastens the birth of the fetus, then you know that this part is according to a natural figure, and its birth is above her head, and the second one is either suspended or pendent from the navel.
Donc cum tu vezes aquels senhals, lahoras cove que·l ventre de lu sia compremut per so que l’embrio deysenda leugerament quar quan deyssen sobre le sieu cap, deysen a lu la segondina, e es mondada de aquelas superfluitatz am bona mondificacio.	When you see those signs, then make sure that the abdomen is compressed so that the fetus descends lightly; when it is on its head, give the second stage, and it is cleansed of those superfluities through good purification.
Mays aquel que es otra aquest part es no-natural e no-lausable, quar quan le enbrio es eyssit sobre sos pes e·l cos de lu es eyssit devant le cap de lu e·ls pes de lu, e la ma de lu una, o al pe de lu i, o es eyssit le cap de lu e la ma de lu, o al ventre de lu, e fort leu es convertit sobre le sieu col, e semblant de las figuras de lu no-lausablas.	That which is another to this part is unnatural and displeasing, for when the fetus is situated on its feet and the body of the mother is situated in front of the head of the fetus and its feet, or one of its hands, or at the side of its head, or at its abdomen, and strongly it is turned over its own spine, and resembling the figures of such things is displeasing.
Don necessaria causa es a la matrona que sia savia e subtil en totas aquelas causas, e que·s guarde de error e de decepcio.	The midwife must be knowledgeable and subtle in all those causes, and must guard against error and deception.
E yeu so mostrant tota figura de aquelas, e qual engen es en aquelas per so que sia significat per aquo e sia stat sobre aquo.	And I show all the figures of those, and what each organ is in them so that it is signified by this and is placed upon it.
Quan le feyt es eyssit sobre le sieu cap per egrecio natural, e aquel es vehement sobre la femna e es fayt a lu part dificil, e vezes la vertut de lu ja debelitada, lahoras fay aquela sezer , o que las femnas tenguan lu, e evapora le conh de lu am fenugrec coyt e am olis humitz.	When the fetus is situated on its head by natural cause, and that is vehement upon the woman and is made difficult for her, sometimes the virtue of her is weakened, then make a cesarean section, or what the women have her, and evaporate the congh of her with fenugreek and sweet olive oil.
E aprop entrometa la metrona entre les sieus ditz espatum petit e fenda am aquel la segondina, o secce aquela am la sua ungla entro que corro aquo que es en ela de humiditat.	And then insert the probe between his so-called small spine and cut open the second one, or scrape the former with its edge while letting the moisture flow out.
E preme le ventre de la femna entro que deyssenda le fet.	And press the woman's abdomen until the fetus descends.
Mays si no deyssen, lahoras cove que la femna sia cristirizada de mucellage de ptilli e mucellage de fenugrec am cizami.	But if it does not descend, then cause the woman to be lubricated with honey andpsyllium.
E aprop comanda a lu, aprop le cristeri, que sia compremuda e fay aquela stornudar am condisi; e te la boca de lu e·l nas de lu per huna hora, quar le fet sira foro-getat tantost.	And then command her, placing her in a steamy environment, and make her sneeze by putting something in her nose or mouth; keep her mouth and nose covered for about an hour until the fetus is expelled soon.
E si las doas mas del fet so foro-getadas al comensament, lahoras cove que tu redusiscas aquelas am fecilitat petit a petit.	And if both parts of the fetus are already expelled at the beginning, then cause her to pass them gradually with facilitation.
Mays si no obezeys al intrament, lahoras pausa la femna sobre una cezelha e leva les pes de lu sus, e aprop concuceys la cezelha sobre la terra; e la femna sia tenguda que no caia deves la concussio.	But if the instrument does not obey, then place the woman on a sieve and lift her feet off it, and shake the sieve over the ground; hold the woman so that she does not fall due to the shaking.
E si las mas no son dedintz tornadas e morr le fet, lahoras inscideys aquelas e extratz le romament del fet o lia le cors a la ma de lu am drap e extratz aquel am equalitat, quar aquel sira foro-getat.	And if the uterus is not turned inside out and the wound is fatal, then incise there and extract the fetus or join the body to the hand with a cloth and extract it equally, for that will be forced open.
De eyssiment del embrio sobre les sieus pes.	From the embryo above its feet.
Quan le fet yeys sobre les sieus pes, lahoras cove que tu impelliscas aquels en sus, e aprop convertas le fet petit, e aprop que engualhes aquel, e aprop que prenguas un pe de lu e extendas aquels petit a petit.	When the fetus is below its feet, then make sure you push those parts inwards, and soon reduce the fetus to a smaller size, and then equalize it, and finally take a foot and gradually extend those parts.
Mays cum son eyssit entro a las coyssas, lahoras tu comanda a lu que se exprema, e fay aquela extornudar am condizi, quar sira foro-getat si Deus lo vol.	More easily when it is situated between the thighs, then command it to be expressed, and turn it outward by this method, for that will be forced open if God wills it.
E si no es foro-getat am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras tu retorna le fet petit a petit entro que pauses aquel segon figura natural, quar aquel sira lahoras foro-getat am leugier eyssiment.	And if it is not forced open by what we have recommended, then return the fetus gradually inside as you pause that part according to its natural figure, for that will be easily forced open by slight incision.
E si es prohibit am tot aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras pren de musellage de altea e de goma dissolvuda, e percuteys tot en le mortier per bona percussio, e aprop linieys am aquo le conh de la femna, el pus bas del ventre de lu.	And if all that we have recommended is prohibited, then take a mixture of alum and dissolved gum, and pound it thoroughly in the mortar with good pounding, and line it with this the woman's pubic area, below the lower part of her abdomen.
E aprop fay aquela cezer en aygua tebeza, entro que consegua les ypocondias.	And then make that incision in clear water, once he reaches the hypochondriac regions.
E cum vezes que las partidas dejos de lu so lenificadas, lahoras fay a lu subfumiguacio de mirta e sub-pausa aquela a lu.	And when you see that the parts around him are no longer inflamed, then perform a mirtle fumigation on him and place your hand over him to prevent any inflammation.
E quan te la sub-fumiguacio per una hora, lahoras tu la fay sezer sobre una cezelha, e aprop fay aquela stornudar e extrenh la boca de lu, e levas de aquela, e prem la partida pus bassa del ventre de lu am leugiera compressio, quar le fet sira tantost foro-getat.	And when you have kept the fumigation for an hour, then make that incision over a cloth, and immediately perform a snuffing and extract the contents from his mouth, then remove that, and apply a light compress to the lower part of his abdomen, which will soon relieve him.
Eyssiment del fet sobre les sieus denols e las suas mas.	Suture the wound on his flanks and his side.
Quan le fet eyssira segon aquesta forma, lahoras tu engenies en entrometen las suas mas petit a petit; e aprop la femna stia evessada sobre le sieu col, e les pes de lu pengo en jos, e aquelas sia jasent sobre le lieyt, e complegua las suas mas.	When the wound has sutured in this manner, then you insert his small intestine little by little; and place the woman sideways on her side, with his feet hanging down, and those holding him should be over the site, and support his sides.
E aprop prem sobre le ventre de lu petit a petit, e aprop extratz aquo que es dejos les pes de lu de las aurelhas entro que sia preparada en la partida pus dejos.	And place your hand gently on his abdomen little by little, and extract what has been left in his feet into the auricles until it is prepared at the lower part.
E si le fet no es fora-getat, lahoras pren les pes de lu e mau aquels am movement vehement, e aprop prem aquo que es sobre les ypocondres petit a petit entro que le fet puege a las partidas desus.	And if the wound is not yet closed, then take the feet and move them with vigorous motion, and place what is above the hypochondria gradually close to where the wound opens above.
E aprop entrometa las suas mas e engualhe le fet petit a petit, e comanda a la femna que se exprema entro que le fet sia foro-getat.	And then insert their hands and gradually close the wound, and command the woman to express it while the wound is not yet closed.
Eyssiment del fet latutidinalment pendent una de las suas mas.	Suture the wound longitudinally with one of their hands.
Sia engeniat en reduccio de la ma de lu, mays si no podes aquela reduzir, lahoras eleva la femna e fe aquela anar.	Gently reduce the hand back into place, but if you cannot reduce it, then elevate the woman and make her pass.
E si anar no pot, lahoras fay la jazer sobre le lieyt, e concuteys las coyssas de lu am concussio vehement, e aprop aministra liamentz les quals yeu e recomtatz de mucillages.	And if passing is not possible, then make a切口，然后轻轻地将手退回原位，但如果无法退回，那么抬高病人，并通过强烈震动她的大腿帮助排出。接着，给予一些您用粘液制成的膏药。
E si es vengut le enfantament, lahoras fay aquela sezer sobre cezelha, e aprop studia sobre la reduccio de la ma, e enguala le fet segon figura natural, e fay stornudar la femna e comanda a lu que comprema a si entro que sia foro-getat.	And if labor has begun, then make a cut there, and then study the reduction of the hand, and close the wound according to its natural figure, and make the woman cough and command her to hold herself until it is closed.
Eyssiment del fet sobre·l col expandudas las suas mas e la fassia de lu es al dos de la sua mayre.	Lift the leg and spread its hands while the foot's fascia is at the side of its mother.
Cove que la matrona tengua la ma del fet e aprop revolva aquel petit a petit, e eque aquel am facilitat.	Let the midwife hold the foot and gently rotate it little by little, so that it becomes easier to manage.
E cum es e quant so es engualhat, e lahoras pausa sobre le conh de lu aquo que havem recomtat de oli e de mucellages.	And when it is equalized and settled, then place over its head what we have recommended of oil and ointments.
E aprop comandas a lu que·s maugua petit a petit, e quan auras feyt aquo, lahoras fay aquela cezer sobre una cezelha e comanda li que sia inclinada sobre le latz dreyt, e aprop comanda a lu que sia compremuda; e fay aquela stornudar am condizi.	And then command that it be cooled little by little. When you have done this, place the cucumber over a basin and command that it be inclined over the right side, and then command that it be compressed; and make it apply condiments.
Exitus foetus praeparati super latus.	The fetus's exit is prepared over the side.
Quan deyssen a horrifici de la mayre segon aquesta manieyra, considera, e lahoras tu inscideys la segondina am la tua ungla entro que sia evacuada de la humiditat.	When the pains of the mother occur in this manner, consider it, and then incise the second one with your knife so that it is evacuated of moisture.
E si le fet es suspendut sobre la cara e·l col de lu, lahoras tu inscideys aquela del embelic, per so que no sia retengut e mora.	And if the foot is suspended over the face and neck of the mother, then incise the one on the abdomen, so that it is not retained and causes death.
E aprop empelleys le fet a las partidas dedintz entro que pauses aquel segon que cove, e manda a la femna que comprema a si alcunas veguadas, e el sira fora-getat am eyssiment leugier, si Dieus o vol.	And then push the fetus into the parts inside, according to where it fits, and tell the woman to strain herself several times, and the rest will be easily expelled by light pressure, if God wills.
Exitus geminorum aut foetuum multorum.	The exit of twins or many fetuses.
Sapias que gemels motas veguadas so natz, e alcunas vetz naysso tres o quatre , mays aquo es estranh e tart s’endeve; mays v so causas foro natura, e no vivo.	Know that twins or many spots appear naturally, and sometimes even three or four are born. But this is strange and worth investigating; mostly they arise from natural causes, not from evil.
E conte aquelas, ja sia que sian montiplicatz, una segondina, e son seperatz per ciphac, distingen aquels enter le liguament en l’ombilic de cascun de aquels E alcunas veguadas so foro-getatz ayssi cum es un fet per eyssiment natural leugier, e so eysitz alcunas veguadas per eyssiment no-lausabla ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And count those, whether they are multiple, a second one, and they are separated by chives. They distinguish between the ligaments at the umbilicus of each of them. Sometimes they are expelled several times as if it were a fetus by natural straining lightly, and some remain for several times by uncontrollable straining as we have reported.
E si son dificils alcus de lor deves le enfantament e perveno ad aquo que havem dit de las figuras no-naturals, lahoras tu cura aquels ayssi cum havem recontat.	And if they are difficult to deliver, you should facilitate the birth and proceed as we have said for non-natural figures, treating them as we have recounted.
E si’ la matrona subtil e fassa aquo que fa am facilitat e subtilitat, e am tarditat, e sia ingeniat segon tota figura segon que es a lu preparat de l’engen amenant a salut.	And if the midwife is subtle and does what she does with subtlety and delay, and is ingenious according to all form as prepared by her leading to health.
Rememoratio eius quod formatur in matrice ex embrionibus et Abortiuntur.	Recollection of that which is formed in the matrix from embryos and are aborted.
Alcunas veguadas son formatz en la mayre un, e dos, e tres, e quatre, e v, e vi, e vii, e mays x, e ja es deves mi verificat que una femna abortem ne getet vi, e una autra x totz formatz, la qual causa fo fayta per mensuracio dels glorios savis.	Sometimes embryos are formed in the womb one, two, three, four, five, six, and more than ten, and you should verify that one female aborts with a single embryo, while another has all formed, the cause of which is made by the measurement of the glorious sages.
E tot aysso cove que sia en la sciencia de la matrona quar fort leu ad aquela parve semblant de aquo, e donc opause se ad aquo am so que cove.	And all this covers what is in the science of the midwife who judges by that part seeming like it, and therefore places her hand on it so that it should be.
Capitol .lxxvi.	Chapter LXXVI.
De extraccio del fet quan es mort.	On the extraction of the fetus when it is dead.
Quan tu curas le fet mort am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la medicacio e no es defora eyssit, e tu yest forsat usar de opperacio am ma, lahoras cove que consideras si la femna es de sana vertut e no es am alcu dels accidentz per les quals sobre ela es temuda perdicio.	When you treat the dead fetus as we have said in the division of medicine and it is not outside the body, then you must use surgery more. At this point, consider whether the woman has a healthy constitution and is not among those conditions for which her life is feared to be endangered.
Lahoras cove que la femna sia envessada sobre le lieyt sobre le sieu dos, e sia le cap de lu enclinat enjos e las coyssas de lu sian elevadas.	When the woman is placed on her back on the bed, and her head is inclined sideways, and her thighs are elevated.
E·l ministre tengua aquela de doas partz o sia liada en le lieyt per so que·l cos de lu no se extenda deves la extraccio del fet.	The minister should hold that [area] with two hands or tie it to the bed so that the body does not extend during the extraction of the fetus.
E aprop tu humecta la boca de la mayre de lu am olis humitz e am mucellage de altea e de fenugrec e de semensa de li.	And then moisten the mouth of the mother with olive oil and honey, and with juice from thyme and fenugreek and sesame.
E aprop unte la matrona la sua ma am aquels olis e mucellages, e aprop entrometa la sua ma am fecilitat en la mayre, e aprop cerque am la ma loc en le qual fique les uncis en le fet.	And then the midwife should anoint her hand with those oils and honey, and place her hand with facilitation in the mother, and seek with her hand the location where the fingers will be placed on the fetus.
E locs convenient en aquo: adonc tu considera si le fet es preparat que deysenda sobre le sieu cap, e lahoras tu fique les uncis en les huels de lu, o en le col, o en la boca, o en le palat, o dejos la barba, o en la furcula de lu, o en les locs propdas de las costas, o dejos les ypocondres.	Place the fingers accordingly: then consider if the fetus is positioned to be delivered through its head, and then place the fingers in the folds of the head, or the neck, or the mouth, or the palate, or leave the beard area, or the clavicle, or the proper locations of the ribs, or leave the hypochondria.
Mays si le deysendiment es sobre les pes de lu, lahoras en le pentenilh, o en le mieg de las costas.	But if the discharge is from his feet, at the ankle, or in the middle of the back.
E cove que tengua le unci am la ma dreyta, e pausa la curvitat de lu en aquel loc le qual es entre les ditz de la ma senestra, e entrometa la ma am facilitat e fique le unci en alcu de aquels locs les quals havem ditz, entro que pervengua a la causa boyda.	And let him hold the thumb with his right hand, and curve it at that location which is between the fingers of his left hand, and insert your hand easily and place the thumb in one of those locations which we have said, until he reaches the cause of the pain.
E aprop pause e fique en la apposicio de lu un autre unci, o le tertz si es necessitat, per so que sia atraccio engual, e no sia extencio segon la sua rectetut tant solament.	And place and hold another thumb, or the third if necessary, so that there is equal pressure, and not extension according to its straightness solely.
Ans sia maugut a tota partida, per so que l’eyssiment de lu sia alleujat ayssi cum es fayt en dent deves la eradicacio de lu.	And let him grip it all the way around, so that the tension of the thumb is alleviated as is done in drawing out a tooth.
E cove en lu aquo que es entre lor que la extencio sia mollificada; e si alcuna partida de lu es retenguda, lahoras cove que la matrona unte alcus sieus ditz am oli e entrometa aquels espertament e revolva am aquels aquo que es retengut.	And let it be between them so that the extension is softened; and if any part of it is retained, then let the midwife apply some of her fingers with oil and insert those experienced fingers and rotate them where the retention is.
Donc si la partida del fet es fora-getada, lahoras les uncis sian permudatz entra loc le qual sia pus aut; e fay aysso entro que tot le fet sia fora-getat.	Then if the part of the feces is forgotten, let the nails be inserted into the place which is then filled up; and do so while all the feces are forgotten.
Mays si la ma es eyssida denant l’autra, e no es possible reduzir aquela per la coartacio de lu, lahoras cove que drap sia envolopat sobre aquela; e aprop extratz aquela entro que tota sia fora-getada, e inscideys aquela o en la junctura de la ma o en le coyde.	But if the hand is placed in front of the other, and it is not possible to reduce it due to the contraction, then cover that part with a cloth; and then extract it while all is forgotten, and incise it at the joint of the hand or on its back.
E ayssi cove que fassas en l’autra ma e en les dos pes.	And do so also with the other hand and on both feet.
Mays si le cap del fet es gran, o accideys a lu coartacio en le eyssiment, o es en le cap de lu aygua ajustada, lahoras cove que entrometa entre les ditz espatum spinos e fenda le cap e extragua la aygua, o que discroba aquel am un instrument le qual es nompnat “alundat”, la forma del qual vindra am las formas dels autres instruments en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	But if the head of the feces is large, or it experiences contraction during insertion, or it is at the head where there is well-compacted water, then you must insert spiny sponge between the fingers, cut open the head, and extract the water, or you must probe that with an instrument called "alundat," the shape of which will come in the forms of other instruments in the chapter which follows this.
E semblantment fassa si·l fet es de gran cap per natura: e lahoras cove que inscida aquel am algematu, o que prengua aquel am alunda ayssi cum havem dit; e aprop extra les osses am les forceps.	And do the same if the feces has a large head by nature: then you must incise that with a looped instrument, or probe that with an alundat as we have said; and then extract the bones with forceps.
E si le cap es eyssit e es coartat deves la furcula, lahoras sia fendut entro que la humiditat la qual es en le pietz sia efunduda.	And if the head is swollen and compressed, you should open the furcula, when the humidity which is in the feet has infiltrated.
Mays si no es complicat, ni obezeys a eyssiment, lahoras tu inscideys le cap tantost segon que a tu sira possible.	And if it is not complicated, nor obstructed by swelling, then you should incise the head as soon as possible according to what will be convenient for you.
E si le dejos del ventre es apostemat o es en lu ydropici, lahoras cove que tu perfores aquel entro que corro la humiditat que es en lu.	And if the swelling in the abdomen is suppurated or is in hydrops, then you must perforate it to allow the humidity that is within it to drain out.
Mays si le fet es sobre les sieus pes, lahoras la atraccio de lu es leugiera e la direccio de lu a la boca de la mayre es leugiera.	And if the swelling is on their feet, then the pull of it is light and its direction toward the mouth of the vein is light.
Mays si es coartat deves le ventre e·l pietz, lahoras cove que tu extraguas aquel am drap le qual auras envolopat sobre la tua ma, e que fendes le ventre e·l pietz entro que corra aquo que es en aquels.	And if it is compressed, you should incise the abdomen and the foot, when you must extract that piece of cloth which you have wrapped around your hand, and cut into the abdomen and foot to allow what is within them to drain out.
Mays si les autres membres so ostatz e torna le cap, lahoras la metrona entrometa la ma senestra; mays si la boca de la mayre es huberta, lahoras intrometa la ma en le preon de layre, e cerque am aquela le cap, e atira aquel am les ditz entro a la boca de la mayre, e aprop entrometa en lu un unci, o dos uncis, e atire lu am aquels.	And if the other members are swollen and return to their normal state, then the surgeon should insert her left hand; and if the mouth of the vein is opened, then she should insert her hand into the region of the vein, and seek out the head, and push it with the fingers into the mouth of the vein, and then insert one or two ounces, and push them there.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada per apostema caut le qual accideys a l’u, lahoras cove que no sia trebelhat sobre lu; abantz cove lahoras aministrar efusio de causas humidas grassas.	And if the mouth of the vein is constricted by an apostema, and this happens to someone, then ensure it is not twisted; first, ensure that you administer an effusion of watery fatty causes.
E aministre emplastres; e segua le pacient en ayguas que mollifican e humectan.	And administer plasters; and follow the patient with waters that soften and moisten.
E si le fet es sobre le sieu costat, lahoras si possible es, sia agulat: e sia aministrat aquo que havem dit en le fet viu.	And if the wound is on the side of the body, then it should be punctured if possible: and what we have said about the live wound should be administered.
E si aquo no es possible, lahoras sia inscidit en pessas, e sia extrayt.	And if this is not possible, then incise in pieces, and extract.
E cove que non layssas alcuna causa dedintz de la segondina.	And ensure that you do not leave any foreign cause inside the wound.
E cum tu auras complida tota la tua opperacio, lahoras aministra aquo que havem dit de la curacio en les apostemas cautz les quals accideysso de la mayre.	And when you have completed your operation, then administer what we have said about the cure for apostema caused by the vein.
E si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras deyssendas en ayguas stipticas e aministra l’autra curacio.	And if there is a flow of blood, then apply cold waters and administer the other cure.
E yeu ja e vist una femna en le ventre de la qual era fet mort, e aprop sobre aquel foc autra veguada emprenhada, e aprop foc mort es le fet autre.	And I have already seen a woman in her abdomen where one child was dead, and nearby another pregnancy began, and the dead fetus is now the other.
Accidit al u aprop lonc temps apostema en le sieu embelic; e inflat es entro que foc ubert, e comensec a getar brac.	It happens that after a long time an abscess forms in the swollen area; and when opened, it inflates and begins to discharge pus.
E yeu fu appelhat a la cura de lu, e medicat a lu per lonc temps, e la plagua no es consolidada.	And I was called to treat it, and treated it for a long time, and the wound did not heal properly.
Adonc yeu pausegui sobre lu de alscunas causas emplastra de forta atraccio, e eyssic de lu un os, e aprop passero alcus jorns, e eyssic un autre os; e yeu fu trop meravilhat, cum en le ventre no sia os.	Then I placed my hand on it for several causes using a strong adhesive plaster, and inserted one splint, and after some days, inserted another splint; and I was too amazed, as in the abdomen there is no bone.
E adonc yeu cogitegui que eran dels osses del fet mort.	Then I realized that they were the bones of the dead fetus.
Donc yeu enguisigui la plagua, e extrayssi de lu motz osses , la femna existent en las sieuas milhos disposicios, e ja visquec en tal manieyra per lonc temps, correc de lu un petit de brac.	Then I dressed the wound, and extracted the bones, the woman existing in her abdomen's many dispositions, and having seen it in such a manner for a long time, I cured her of a small arm.
E yeu no afermegui asso esser stranh, sino quar en aquo es sciensa e ajutori ad aquo que le metge artifec am la ma per curacio aministra.	And I do not consider it strange, but rather that in this there is science and aid to what the physician uses his hand for in treatment.
De las formas dels instrumentz que so necessaris a extrayre le fet.	Of the forms of the instruments that are necessary to extract the stone.
Forma de vertitge am la qual es uberta la mayre:	Form of vertigo at which the liver is opened:
Aquesta es la forma de strenhedor en le qual so engualhatz les libres, al qual engualhament sian dos virtitges en doas extremitatz de dos futz.	This is the form of strengthener in which you ligature the arteries, at which ligature there are two vertigos in the two extremities of two flax.
May empero aquesta virtitge cove que sia pus subtil de strictori, e sia fayt o de eba o de fust de boys.	But let this vertigo cover be more subtle of string, and made of hemp or flax.
E sia la latitut de quascun fust quays dos ditz e le marge de quascu amdos quays un dit, e la longitut de quascu es un palm e mig; e en le mieg loc de dos fustz so dos ajustaments de aquel meteys fustz les quals ja son fermatz, dels quals la longitut es la maytat de un palm e un pauc mes, e la latitut de quascu es quay dos ditz, o un pauc mes.	And let the width of each flax be as wide as two fingers, and the margin on both sides as wide as one finger. The length of each is one palm and a half; in the middle location of two flaxes are two ligatures of that same thickness flax, which are already tight. The length of each is the width of one palm and a little more, and the width of each is as wide as two fingers, or a little more.
E aquestz dos additamentz sian entromeses en la boca de la mayre per que sia uberta am aquels quan tu revolves las doas prescriptas virtigges.	And these two additional items be inserted in the mouth of the uterus so that they be open when you revolve the two prescribed virtues.
Forma autra semblant de aquela pus subtil e pus leugiera:	Form another one like the previous one but finer and lighter:
Sia fayta de fustz de eba o de boys segon la semblansa de forceps.	Make it of silk or linen thread according to the likeness of forceps.
Mays empero en la extremitat de lu so dos additament ayssi cum vezes, e la longitut de aquels additament es quays un palm, e la latitut de quascu es dos ditz.	Moreover, at the extremity of each, there are two additional pieces as you see, and the length of those pieces is about one palm, and the width of each is two fingers.
E cum tu vols am aquels ubrir la mayre, lahoras tu fay cezer la femna sobre le lieyt les pes pendentz, ubert aquo que es entre las coyssas de lu.	And when you want to open the uterus, then place the woman on her side with her feet hanging down, and open what is between her thighs.
E aprop obre la tua ma am le instrument ayssi cum fas am forfexs engualment segon la quantitat que vols de la aprecio de la boca de la mayre entro que la metrona fassa so que vols.	And then open your hand with the instrument as you would with scissors equally according to the quantity you want of the size of the uterus before the clamp does what you want.
La forma de vertitge la qual diysero les antics:	The form of rotation which the ancients described:
Forma de impellent am le qual es empellit le fet:	Form of pressing which is applied to the fist:
Forma de amisidat2 am le qual es conterit le cap gran	Form of pressing which contains the great scalp:
E es asemblat a forceps al qual so dentz en la extremitat, ayssi cum vezes, e alcunas veguadas es fayt lonc ayssi cum forceps segon aquesta forma, ayssi cum vezes, al qual so dentz ayssi cum dentz de ressegua am le qual es inscidit e conterit.	And it is assembled to forceps which have teeth at the extremity, as you see. Sometimes it is made long like forceps according to this form, as you see, with teeth like catgut forceps which are inserted and contained.
Forma de amesidat pauc:	Form of pressing slight:
Forma de unci havent una spina:	Form of a hook having one spine:
Forma de unci havent doas spinas:	Form of a hook having two spines:
Forma de forceps a la qual so dentz de cerra am le qual le cap del fet sia conterit:	Form of forceps which has teeth to close upon the head of the fist:
Forma de spatum havent dos extremitatz am le qual le cap es abscindit:	Form of a spatula having two extremities upon which the head is incised:
Forma de dos espatums latz:	Form of two flat spatulas:
Totz aquels instrumentz so excersitatz, e quan mes so multiplicadas las specias de aquel e so preparadas deves le artifexs, quant es pus leugier a la sua opperacio e pus aut deves les homes per la sua quantitat.	All these instruments are exercised, and when more species of that kind are multiplied, the craftsman should prepare them, making their operation lighter and providing more for their quantity.
E no obres de aquels instrumentz ja sia qua sia deves tu aparalhat, quar la necessitat de aquels no es excusabla.	And do not delay in preparing those instruments, for the need is urgent.
De extraccio de la segondina.	From the extraction of the second child.
Quan la segondina es retenguda deves le enfantament, lahoras cove que tu comandes a la malautae que retengua le sieu ale, e aprop fay aquela stornudar am condizi, e strenh la tua ma sobre la boca de lu e sobre las nars de lu, e si per aysso es defora eyssit, bo es.	When the second child is retained, you should induce labor, while commanding the patient to hold her breath, and then perform that maneuver with caution, and strengthen your hand over the mouth and nose of the patient. If by this it comes forth, well done.
E sino, lahoras tu pren una ola e perfora en la cuberta un trauc e pausa en aquela erbas ubrent la boca de la mayre, ayssi cum calament e ruda e anet e camamilla e scicados arabic e cassia lignea e santaurea.	And if not, then take a rod and perforate in the cover a tube and pause there over herbs burning at the mouth of the uterus, as with calamus, rhubarb, anise, camomile, scikabad (arabic), cinnamon wood, and saintpierre.
Totas aquestas erbas o alcunas de lor sian submersas en aygua en la ola, e pausa aquela sobre le foc.	All these herbs or some of them may be submerged in water in the rod, and place that over the fire.
E aprop pausa una canula de canaviera en la boca de la mayre, e tengua aquela entro que la evapor vengua a la concavitat de la mayre.	And place a cane catheter in the mouth of the uterus, and keep that there so that the vapor comes to the cavity of the uterus.
E aprop fay aquela stornudar ayssi cum havem dit, e la segondina sira fora-getada am velocitat.	And then perform that sneezing as we have said before, and the second one shall be done with greater speed.
Mays si roman aprop aquesta curacio e no es eyssida, lahoras tu comanda a la matrona que submerge la sua ma sinistra en oli sizami o en micellage de altea, e aprop entrometa aquela en le conh e queresca am aquela la segondina, e cum aquela auras trobada, lahoras pren la e exten aquela pauc a pauc Mays si es annexsa en le preon de la mayre, lahoras entrometa la sua ma segon que havem recomtat, e quan aura trobat la segondina, extragua aquela petit a petit segon rectetut per so que la mayre no caja deves la atraccio vehement.	If the sneezing does not succeed close to this cure and you cannot do it, then command the midwife to submerge her left hand in sesame oil or in aleth cotton, and then insert that into the nose and seek with that the second one, as you have found. If it is annexed in the prepuce of the thumb, then insert her hand according to what we have recommended, and when you have found the second one, extract it little by little following rectitude so that the thumb does not fall due to the strong attraction.
Abantz cove que sia permudada als costatz dreyt e sinestre am facilitat.	Above all, make sure it is placed on the back right and left with ease.
E aprop sia ajustat en la quantitat de atraccio, quar ela obedira e evasira de adhirencia.	And then adjust the quantity of attraction so that it obeys and avoids adherence.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada, nos ja havem recomtat la curacio am sturnutacio e am medicacio de la ola am erbas.	And if the opening of the thumb is constricted, we have already recommended the cure with sneezing and treatment of the wound with herbs.
Mays si no es fora-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recomtadas, lahoras guarda te que no fetigues sobre aquela en iteracio de abstracio, mays empero cove que aquo que es eyssit de lu a la boca de la mayre lies a la coyssa de la femna, e aprop cristeriza aquela am enguent e tetrafarmacon; quar aquel fara poyrir aquela aprop alcus dias e sira dissolvuda e sira fora-getada.	If all the causes we have recounted are not overlooked, then guard that you do not fatigue it through repetition of abstraction, but rather anoint the area with ointment and tetrapharmcon; for this will cause it to heal in about a few days and be resolved and forgotten.
Mays quan se poyreys, es de lu elevada mala audor al cap, e al estomac, e aquo ledeys la malauta; e adonc cove que sian aministradas sub-fumiguacios e convenientz ad aquo.	When it heals, elevate the affected area to the head, and this leads to the illness; then it is necessary that sub-fumigations and suitable treatments be administered for this.
Mays alcus dels Antics ja so esproatz sub-fumigacio de nazitort e de figuas seccas.	Moreover, some of the Ancients recommended sub-fumigations with nard and dry figs.
Forma de instrument am le qual la femna es sub-fumiguada deves la retentio de mestruas e de la segondina:	Form of the instrument with which the woman is sub-fumigated, you should retain the menstrual discharge and the second product:
Sia fayta de veyre o de eram.	It should be made of iron or earthenware.
E sia pausada la extremitat subtil en le conh e la extremitat ampla sobre le foc, e la sub-fumiguacio sia pausada sobre las brazas del foc.	And place the thin end in the coher and the broad end over the fire, and the sub-fumigation be placed on the coals of the fire.
E tengua aquela entro que sia consumida aquela sub-fumiguacio e itera·n autra.	And hold that there while that the sub-fumigation be consumed and they iterate another.
De curacio del cul del enfant no-perforat.	For the treatment of an unperforated child's anus.
Motz enfantz naysso e les culs de lu no so perforatz, les quals ya ciphac subtil e opilat.	When the child cries and its anus is not perforated, those already incised subtly and elevated.
Adonc cove a la matrona que perfore am le sieu dit aquel ciphac; e sino, perfora aquel am spatum agut, e guarda se que no toque le lacert.	Then have the midwife perforate with her said incision; and if not, puncture it with a sharp needle, and take care that it does not touch the sinus.
E aprop pause sobre aquel lana enfusa en vi e oli; e aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia senat.	And then place it warm in wine and oil; and apply the ointment while it is fresh.
Mays si temes que sia opilat, lahoras pausa en le trauc una canula per motz dias, e osta la quan le enfant voldra degerir.	But if you fear it is obstructed, then insert a cane for several days, and wait until the child wishes to defecate.
E ja accideys oppilacio del cul per consolidacio de plagua o de apostema; adonc cove que aquela consolidacio sia inscidida, e aprop sia curada am aquo que avem dit de la curacio e del plom.	And when an obstruction of the anus occurs due to the consolidation of a boil or abscess; then have that consolidation incised, and treat it with what we have said about the treatment and the lead.
De curacio de las fistulas que endeveno dejos.	For the treatment of fistulas that leave discharges.
Las fistulas que endeveno en la partida dejos pus bassa so nodacio e grossetut las quals endeveno prop del cul defora o en l’espazi de la una partida.	The fistulas that leave discharges are often nodotic and swollen, those that leave discharges near the anus or in the space of one side.
E es una fistula o motas.	And it is either a fistula or a carbuncle.
E cum aquela nodacio es antiquada e corr de la humiditat aygosa blanca o poyridura subtil, e alcunas veguadas so de aquestas fistulas alcunas penetrantz.	And when that nodosity is old and flows with watery white or thin pus, sometimes these fistulas penetrate.
E aquelas penetrantz so conogudas per aquo que es eyssit de aquelas per la egressio e per ventosetat; e alcunas vetz use le malaute de egressio, e fort leu es eyssit de aquelas verm.	And those that penetrate are known as those caused by the exit and by windiness; sometimes the patient experiences difficulty in exiting, and strong pain is felt from those worms.
E so de aquelas fistulas alcunas veguadas en l’espazi penetrantz entro a la vesica, e entro al meat de la vergua; e so de aquelas penetrantz entro la junctura de la coyssa e entro al notz de la coeta.	And some of these fistulas occasionally penetrate into the space between the bladder and the meat of the groin; and those that penetrate into the joint of the thigh and into the knee.
E aquo en que es conoguda fistula penetrant entro al cul e no-penetrant, es que tu metas le tieu dit endic en le cul, e entrometas tenta subtil de eram o de ferr en la fistula quan no y es turtuositat.	And to determine whether a penetrating fistula goes into the anus or not, insert your thumb in the anus and gently probe with a thin wire or needle in the fistula when there is no tenderness.
Mays si en aquela es turtuositat, lahoras entromet en aquela tenta subtil de plom o de pels de caval entro que tu sentas la tenta o le pel en le tieu dit.	But if there is a tumor, then insert a probe of lead or horsehair between the layers where you feel the tumor or the hair.
E si no sentas aquela de tot ni no procezeys del trauc alcuna causa de egestio ni verm ni ventositat, ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras sapias que es no-penetrant, e lahoras coyta te a la curacio.	And if you do not feel it at all, nor proceed from any cause of evacuation, worm, or swelling, as we have said, then you know it is non-penetrant, and now you can move to the cure.
E quan la fistula es penetrant entro a la vesica o entro al meat de la vergua, lahoras la significacio de lu es eyssiment de urina de aquela e prohibicio de lu ad aysso que·l loc am medicina sia consolidat.	And when the fistula is penetrant to the bladder or to the meat of the genitals, then the significance of this is dysuria from that side and prohibition thereof, so that the area may be consolidated by medicine.
Mays si es penetrant entro la junctura de la coyssa o entro al os e envencio de dolor en le circuit, lahoras senhal de lu es que la tenta perve entro aqui si en lu no es turtuositat entro al os, e envencio de dolor en le circuit de la partida; e que de lu yeys poyredura tostemps; e que no val en aquela medicacio, ni es consolidada am enguent.	But if it is penetrant to the joint of the thigh or to the bone and causes pain in the circuit, then the sign of this is that the probe passes through here if there is no tumor in the bone, and pain in the circuit of the limb; and that pus comes out continuously from it; and that it does not respond to any medicine, nor is it consolidated by ointment.
E en totas aquelas fistulas penetrant no es curacio de tot, e la curacio de aquelas es trebalh e vanetat dels folyls metges sobre·l qual so fermatz.	And in all those penetrant fistulas, complete cure is not always achieved, and the cure of these requires the hard work and skill of the medical practitioners upon which they rely.
Mays en aquela que no es penetrant e no antiqua, sanacio am ferr es sperada segon que yeu a tu recomtare, e aquo que ja yeu e proat.	In that which is not penetrating and not ancient, heal with iron as I shall recount to you later, and what I already said and prescribed.
E es que le malaute jagua entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos e eleva las cambas de lu entro sus, las coyssas sian enclinadas al ventre de lu, e aprop entromet tenta de plom, o de eram si es en la fistula turtuositat, entro que sapias le loc on perve la tenta.	And that is why the patient lies on his back with his hips elevated between cushions, the thighs inclined towards the abdomen, and a lead or iron implement inserted into the channel if it is in a tortuous fistula where you can perceive the passage of the probe.
E si aquela sent le malaute entorn le cuol, lahora cove que tu entrometas le tieu dit endic en le cuol.	And if the patient feels pain around the throat, then you should insert the thumb upward into the throat.
E si sentas en le tieu dit la tenta ja per si meteyssa descuberta penetrar, otra aquo que sentas entre le tieu dit e aquela siphac o carn, lahoras sapias certanament que aquela es penetrant; e adonc no trebalhes en aquela, quar no es en aquela sanacio, ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you feel the probe already partially inserted and discovered by itself, or something between your thumb and the sore or flesh, then you can certainly determine that it is penetrating; and then do not work on that, for healing does not occur there, as we have said.
Mays empero diyssero alcus que es sana en alcus homes tart.	But however, some say that it is healed in some men promptly.
E de la medicacio per la qual es sperat juvament en lu es que tu ignes cauteri subtil segon le ample de la fistula, ayssi cum es precedit, e intrometas aquel ignit en la fistula entro que pervengua entorn le cuol; e aprop itera aquel doas o tres vetz entro que sapias que ja son adhustas totas aquelas carns ajustadas fistuladas que so semblantz a cana de pluma de ausel.	And for the treatment in which healing is hoped for, you should heat a fine cautery according to the width of the fistula, as is preceded, and insert that heated instrument into the fistula until it reaches around the throat; and then repeatedly insert it two or three times until you perceive that all those fused flesh wounds, which resemble goose quills, are fully healed.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder entro que en yescan totas aquelas carns que so adhustas, e aprop cura aquela am medicinas la carn engendrantz e consolidantz, e si es sanada, bo es; e sino, lahoras no es sana en degun temps per autra curacio.	And then cure that which is with blisters wrapped in bandages between which all those flesh parts that are adhered are inflamed, and then cure that which is with medicines the flesh generating and consolidating, and if it is healed, well; and if not, then it is not healed in some time by another cure.
E si la tenta intra, e no penetra entro·l tieu dit le qual es en le cul, e entre aquel e la tenta que es velament spes de carn o de ciphac, e vezes la fistula en aquo que siec la superficia de la codena, lahoras secca la codena del comensament de la fistula, e tu ve seccan am la tenta, e sia en la fistula entro que la seccio pervengua al loc en le qual perve la extremitat de la tenta, e per la tenta es liberat e catz.	And if the probe enters but does not penetrate inside, you have said which is in the anus, and between that and the probe which is a veil of flesh or tissue, wipe the fistula with what dries the surface of the wound, then dry the wound from the beginning of the fistula, and you should dry the probe, and it should be in the fistula where the drying reaches the place where the tip of the probe reaches, and through the probe it is released and cauterized.
E aprop mundifiqua aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so asembladas a canula de pena de ausel e no romangua de aquelas alcuna causa.	And then cleanse those fistulated tissues which are adjacent to the penile urethra and do not become infected from any cause.
Mays si flux de sanc vezes que vengua entre tu e la tua opperacio quan ensideysses aquelas carns, lahoras le milh que sia e del pus leugier instrument es cauterizar am foc o am medicina acuta, quar cauteri am foc ajusta bonas doas habitutz: so es adhustio de aquelas carns ajustadas, e abscizio del sanc exseccacio de las humiditatz.	But if a flux of pus comes between you and your operation when inside those tissues, then let that which is worse be cauterized with fire or with sharp medicine. For the cautery by fire makes good two habits: it adjusts those tissues and removes the pus through the excision of humidity.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder o en caus trissat entro que·l loc geta brac, e aprop lahoras cura la plagua am enguentz carn dura engendran e consolidan.	And then cure that which is with cold muscles wrapped in bandage or in cloth stitched around the area until it gets warm, and then cure the wound with ointment of hard flesh that generates and consolidates.
E so medicinas en las quals so stipticitat e exseccio; quan lahoras es restaurada ja es sanada e no temes iteracio.	And these medicines in which there is stiffness and excoriation; when the stiffness is restored, it is cured, and you fear no recurrence.
Mays si la fistula ja perve entro al preon del cul e es elonguada de lu superficia del cos, lahoras entromet le tieu dit en le cul e inquireys am aquel.	And if the fistula has pierced through to the anus and is long from the surface of the body, then insert your finger into the anus and inquire about it.
E donc si centes la tenta e entre tu e ela es velament de ciphac o de carn, e es propda a la penetracio, lahora no es operacio en lu sino segon via di fiducia e de speransa.	And if there is a tent and between you and her it is covered with cloth or flesh, and is close to the penetration, then it is not an operation in it but rather by way of trust and hope.
La qual causa es aministrar en lu una de tres manieyras: o que cauterize aquela ayssi cum havem dit; o que secces aquela entro que consieguas la conquavitat de lu per que sia a tu possible entrometre las qualcas e la curacio propdana; e no procesiscas mot am seccio per so que no inscidas le lacert contenent le cuol, e que accidisque sobre le malaute eyssiment de la egistio ses voluntat; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit quar fort leu sira sanat; o que elongues aquel velament e mondes aquel pus que seccas aquel entro prop le cul, ayssi cum havem dit, o am tenta o am autre instrument de aguda extremitat, e aprop mondifique aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so en la seccio entro la on podes am percrustacio; e aprop esforsa te a far la restauracio de tota la plagua am seccio, e si le orrifici pus desus no es consolidat, e romangua la fistula uberta en la partida del cul, e sira pus leugier per le malaute.	That cause is to administer one of three ways: either with a cautery as we have said; or by excising it until you can achieve the cavity in which it is possible to insert the necessary instruments and cure it thoroughly; and do not proceed with excision for fear of damaging the anus containing the core, but rather act according to the will of the patient; then cure that as we have said, for a strong cure will be effective; or by elongating that cloth and cleansing it near the anus as we have said, or with a tent or another sharp instrument, and then cleanse those fistulated tissues which are in the excision area where you can perform percrustation; then strive to restore the entire wound with excision, and if the opening above is not consolidated, and open the fistula near the anus, it will be easier for the patient.
E alscunas veguadas la fistula es finida segon aquesta manieyra: es quan tu entrometas la tenta en la fistula, e es en le latz del cul entorn la superficia del cos am la codena e en le marge del cul, lahoras pren tenta de perforada extremitat, que es ayssi cum agulha de preparantz les coers segon aquesta forma:	And sometimes the fistula is closed in this manner: when you insert the probe into the fistula, and place it near the buttock on the surface of the body with the needle and at the edge of the buttock, then take hold of the perforated extremity, as if piercing a needle through the vein according to this form:
e entromet en aquela fiel envolopat de v fiels o entorn aquels; e aprop entromet tenta am fiel en la fistula entro que consiegua la conquavitat de lu.	and insert it into that channel wrapped in several threads or around them; then insert the probe with thread into the fistula until you achieve its cavity.
Mays si es penetrant en le marge del cul prop dedintz, lahoras tu extratz le fiel de aquel trauc ayssi que tu intrometas le tieu dit en le cul; e extraguas la extremitat del fiel e ajustes las duas extremitatz essemps, e estrenh cascuna, e leyssa aquo per un dia o per dos, e quan mays inscideys le fiel en la carn, estrenh be aquel entro que aquelas carns sian inscididas las quals so entre doas extremitatz del fiel e que cajan.	But if it penetrates at the edge of the buttock inward, then you withdraw the thread in such a way that you insert your hand into the buttock; withdraw the end of the thread and adjust both ends equally, strengthening each one, and leave it for a day or two. When more of the thread is embedded in the flesh, strengthen well that part where these muscles are embedded between the two ends of the thread and where they are situated.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia consolidada e sanada.	And then cure the wound as it is consolidated and healed.
Mays si le orrifici de la fistula no es penetrant, lahoras fay aquel penetrar, en qualque manieyre sia a tu preparat, sino que sia mot en le preon, quar no es a tu que fassas aquo per que no inscidas le lacert; e aprop fay am aquela entro que sia sanada.	If the fistula openings are not penetrable, make them penetrable in any manner you prepare, but rather from within so that you do not injure the patient. Then place something inside to ensure it heals properly.
La forma de spatum spinos am lo qual es fenduda la fistula: la curvitat del qual es mot aguda e l’autra partida es no-aguda, per so que no inscidas aquo que no es necessari, ayssi cum vezes.	The shape of the pointed spatula used where the fistula is split: the curvature of which is acute and the other part not acute, so as not to injure what is unnecessary, as you see.
De sutura de emorroydas en las quals corra sanc en la inscizio de aquelas.	For the suturing of hemorrhoids where there is pain at the site of those hemorrhoids.
Emorroydas so segon dos manieyras, quar o so entre le cul semblantz aysi que es de carbos, o quays aquelas sian cum a gras de rasim.	Hemorrhoids can be described in two ways: one where they resemble charcoal, or where they are like the fat of a sheep.
E de aquelas so petitas e grans, e que le sanc corr de aquelas tostemps e es una, e so motas, e so fora·l cul, e en las extremitatz de lu.	And some hemorrhoids are small and large, and the pain from them comes at times and is one, and they are lumps, and outside the anus, in the extremities of it.
Mays empero aquelas que so foro le cul so segon las mes de pauca humiditat, de las quals corr aygua citrina o un petit de sanc am cos continuabla, e so segon la color del cos.	However, those that are outside the anus are according to those with less humidity, from which yellowish water or a little of continued blood flows, and are according to the color of the body.
E la curacio de aquela que es dedintz le cuol es que comandes al malaute que se assela e que se exprema entro que le cuol yesca e las emoroydas apparescan a tu.	And the treatment for that which is inside the abdomen is to command the patient to lie down and to squeeze between when the abdomen rises and the veins appear before you.
Adonc tu te coyte e suspen am uncis o que tenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, e aprop incideys aquelas deves las suas razitz.	Then you should lie down and suspend your legs over some supports that you have with you at your elbow, and then apply those to their sides to relieve their pain.
Mays si les uncis no so tengutz en aquelas per la humiditat de lor e mollificacio de aquelas, lahoras pren aquelas am drap aspre o am coto o am flassada de lana, e extratz aquelas am les tieus ditz, e aprop inscideys aquelas e polveriza sobre lor alcunas polveras caudas aprop la inscizio, per que sian ad aquelas en loc de cauteri; o cauteriza aquelas segon que es precedit en le capitol de cauterizar.	But if your hands are not available due to the moisture and softening of those hands, then take some rough cloth or burlap or a wet woolen cloth, place them on the ties mentioned, and then apply those and sprinkle some powdered cauda on them after the application, so that they serve as a cautery; or cauterize those according to what is described in the chapter on cauterization.
E aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And then treat them with the other treatment until they are healed.
E si le cul no obezeys a egressio, lahoras cristerisa le malaute am cristeri en le qual sia mordicacio petita, e sia lavat am aquel aquo que es en le cuol e que obezesca a egressio leugierament quan le malaute s’esprem.	And if the anus does not yield to evacuation, then insert a probe into the patient's anus using a small biting instrument, and wash it with the water from the abdomen that allows slight evacuation when the patient squeezes.
Mays si las emorroydas so defora le cul, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiera, e es que tu prenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, o que prenguas aquelas am unci, e inscidas aquelas, e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit entro que sian sanadas.	If the hemorrhoids are outside the anus and the cause is slight, then you grasp them with your finger or grasp them with forceps, insert them, and place them back using what we have said earlier until they are healed.
E aquel que avoreys inscizio, cove que aministres sutura de lor segon aquesta manieyra: pren fiel envolopat e entromet aquel en agulha e aprop extratz las emorroydas a las partidas dessus, e fay aquel penetrar am la agulha en la razit del autra part, e envolveys las doas extramitatz del fiel en la partida pus dejos de la agulha, e so latitudinalment; e estrenh la emorroyda am strectura fort, e aprop noza le fiel e extratz la agulha.	And if you have an incision, make sure to suture them according to this manner: take thread wrapped around a needle and carefully extract the hemorrhoids from above, then make the thread penetrate through the edge of the other part, and wrap both ends of the thread around the part below the needle, securing it longitudinally; strengthen the hemorrhoid with firm tension, and then secure the thread and remove the needle.
E fay aquo a totas, e layssa de aquelas una e no la cozes, per so que la superfluitat del sanc corra de aquela.	And do this to all of them, leaving one open and not sewing it, so that the excess blood can flow from there.
E aprop pausa sobre le cul drap enfus en oli rozat o en cerot; e pausa aquel sobre·l cuol e comanda al malaute que·s repause.	And place a warm cloth soaked in olive oil or ointment over the anus; place it there and order the patient to rest.
E aprop layssa aquela entro que caja; e quan es casuda, cura aquelas am enguentz o am autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then let that which is inside remain; when it is cured, treat those with ointment or other treatment until it is healed.
De curacio de fistulas.	Of the treatment of fistulas.
Motas veguadas accideys per exseccacio de fenda o per costriccio de natura.	Injuries caused by the expansion of a crack or by natural constriction.
E cum so antiquadas e no val en aquela medicina, lahoras cove que tu razas aquelas am la puncta de spatum o am la tua ungla entro que sian faytas humidas e sia hostada de aquelas la escorsa pus desus, la qual prohibeys aquelas de consolidacio; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian consolidadas.	And since they are old and do not respond to medicine, you should cauterize them with the point of a spatula or with your finger when they are moist, and after scraping the surface from below, which you prevent from consolidating; then treat those that have consolidated.
Lahoras tu osta aquelas am razio pus vehement que la primieyra entro que mot sancno e sian excoriadas; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	And when you cauterize them with stronger heat than the first time when they are bleeding and are excoriated; then treat those that have healed.
De curacio de almesamir, so es clau.	Of the treatment of abscesses, this is crucial.
Sapias que alamermar, so es clau, e no es si no notz redon segon la color del cors semblant a cap de claviel, e es fayt en tot le cors e majorment en las partidas dejos les pes e als ditz, e endeve per aquels dolor deves le anament.	Know that an abscess, this is crucial, and it is not something round according to the color of the body, resembling a gooseberry, and it forms throughout the body but especially in the areas around the feet and fingers, and due to these pains you should treat them.
E adonc cove que sia inscidit aquo que es en le circuit del clau, e sia tengut am les forfexs o am unci, e sia eradicat de la sua razit; e aprop cura aquel.	And then cut what is in the circle of the key and hold it with tongs or forceps, and eradicate it from its root; and place care there.
E si vols, cauteriza le segont que es precedit en le sieu capitol.	And if you wish, cauterize what follows as preceded in its chapter.
Mays de veruca es eminencia petita aspre fistulada redonda sobre la superficia del cos, e motas veguadas veno en las mas dels enfantz.	More commonly, a veruca is a small, rough, fistula-like round prominence on the surface of the body, with venous spots in most of the children.
E curacio de lu es que estendas e inscidas aquela, o que estrenhas aquela am fiel o am pel entro que caja.	And the treatment for it is to extend and incise that, or to tighten it with a needle or with thread that encloses it.
E si vols, cauteriza aquo, segon que havem dit, am foc o am medicina acuta.	And if you wish, cauterize this as we have said, with fire or with sharp medicine.
E ja so eradicadas enversas e no-enversas am le instrument le qual yeu diyre.	And already they are eradicated both ways and against each other with the instrument which you will specify.
Mays formica es eminencia petita feutrada o fistulada grossa sobre la superficia del cos anant mot en le preon, e quan le freg atroba aquela es centit en lu semblant de mordificacio de formigua, e es fayta entorn le cos.	More commonly, a formica is a small, felted or fistula-like prominent swelling on the surface of the body. When you press on it, it resembles the bite of an ant and is formed around the body.
E curacio de lu es que prenguas una canula de pena de auca o de pena de voltor, e sia fort, e pausa aquela sobre la formigua entro que la contengua le cercle de la canula de las partidas de lu; e aprop revolveys la tua ma am la canula entro que inscidas aquo que es en le circuit de la formigua, e pauses aquela en le preon de la carn, e que eradiques la formigua de la sua razit.	And the treatment is that you take a pin of awl or of tortoise shell, and it should be strong, and place that over the worm between which you contain the circle of the pin from the parts of the patient; then return your hand around the pin as you enter what is in the circuit of the worm, and place that in the prepuce of the flesh, and that you eradicate the worm from its root.
E si vols, fay aquo am canula de eram o de ferr segon aquesta forma:	And if you wish, do this with a pin of elm or iron according to this form:
Sia la partida desus de la canulha trahent a subtilitat, sorda (so es no-perforada), envolopada per so que sobre le dit la aprencio de lu sia ablaviada e la revolucio de aquela.	Let the upper part of the pin be thin, blunt (that is, unperforated), wrapped so that over the digit the learning of it may be concealed and the rotation of that may be prevented.
E si vols cauteriza la formiga segon que es denant dit en la cauterizacio de atheyl en le capitol de cauteri.	And if you wish, cauterize the worm according to what is said in the cauterization of Athylos at the tip of the cautery.
De forma dels instrumentz que so aministratz a dar cristeri.	In the manner of the instruments that you administer with the christeri (cautery).
Alcunas veguadas es fayt cristeri de argent o de lato o de eram fondut o malleat; e alcunas veguadas es fayt de aquels instrumentz petit e gran segon aquels als quals so aministratz, quar aquel que es aministrat en la curacio dels petitz enfants sia petit; e de aquel dels quals los culs son freuls o doloyrozes, les cristeris de aquels sian petitz.	Sometimes the cautery is made of silver or tin or elm that has been melted or hammered; sometimes it is made of those instruments small and large according to those you are administering, for that which is administered in the treatment of small children should be small; and of those of which the bottoms are sore or painful, the cauteries of those should be small.
La forma de cristeri gran e pauc:	The form of striking hard and little:
Le cap de la canula de lu desus en le qual es liada la borsa sia ampla segon aquesta manieyra; e sia a lu distinacio la on la borsa es liada ayssi cum vezes.	The head of the catheter above which the bag is tied should be broad according to this manner; and there should be a place where the bag is tied as you see.
E la extremitat de lu pus dejus, la qual es entromesa en le cul, sia sorda (so es no-uberta) mot leon, atrasent a subtilita; e en la un del latz de lu sian dos traucs, e en l’autre costat un trauc, e sia la amplesa del trauc segon la groseza dels rays e pus gros un petit.	And the lower end of it, which is inserted into the anus, should be closed (i.e., not open) like a lion's mouth, gradually becoming finer; and on one side of the tube there are two openings, and on the other side one opening, and the width of the opening should correspond to the size of the rays, with the larger one slightly smaller.
E sia la borsa en la qual sian pausadas las medicinas de vesica de bestia o de pel de ovelha, e la razit de lu sia un palm.	And the bag in which the medicines for the beast's bladder or sheepskin are placed should be a palm's length.
E sia perforada per motz traucs ayssi cum es revolvuda; e si l’espazi le qual es entre les traucs la grossetut del dit.	And it should be perforated with holes as it is coiled; and the space between the holes should be the thickness of a finger.
E aprop entromet en aquels traucs fiel fort de fiel cru le qual sia de detz fiels, o enviro aquels; e ajusta am aquel la borsa; e quan es pausada en lu la borsa, sia streyt en le cap del cristeri entre dos distingentz am fort costriccio, e aprop cristeriza am aquel quascun trauc: Mays la qualitat de cristerizar am aquel es que tu omples la borsa de la medicina, que sia escalfada segon la quantitat de la tolleransa del malaute; e guarda te que no sia trop cauda ni trop freja.	And then insert into these holes strong raw honey or something similar; adjust the bag to that; and when the bag is placed in it, make the head of the catheter straight between two distinct points with strong constriction, and then catheterize each hole: More specifically, the quality of catheterizing each hole is that you fill the bag with medicine, which should be warmed according to the quantity of the patient's tolerance; and be sure that it is neither too thick nor too cold.
E aprop le malaute sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos, e eleva las suas cambas en sus e pausa dejos lu un cuer sobre le qual ja so les homes o un lansol; e aprop unta la extramitat del cauteri am oli o am album de huou o am mucellage de fenugrec o de semblantz; e aprop entromet aquel en le cul am facilitat, e aprop le ministre prengua la borsa e exprema aquel am doas mas e essemps am vehemencia entro que sia evacuat en le budelh tot aquo que es en le cristeri; e aprop extra le cristeri e le malaute leva las suas cambas a la paret.	And the patient is laid on their back, elevating their legs and placing them on a cushion; then apply oil or honey or fenugreek or similar to the tip of the cautery; insert it into the anus with ease, and the minister takes the bag and presses out two more times with vigor, ensuring that all that is in the rectum is evacuated into the intestine. Then remove the rectum and the patient lifts their legs against the wall.
E si la medicina forsa aquel a eyssiment, tengua le tant quant poyra; e si dorm am aquel per tota una nueyt, es mays derier en juvament.	And if the medicine forces it to vomit, have it as much as it can bear; and if it sleeps all through the night, it is better for recovery.
Mays si tu cristerizas aquel en las malautias de solucio de ventre e l’eyssiment de lu le coyta, lahoras tu itera le cauteri entro que sia sanat.	And if you rectify the patient for bellyaches and its vomiting, then repeat the cautery until it is healed.
E si en le cul so emorroydas o apostemas ledens, lahoras sia le cristeri mot subtil e leon, dels cristeris am les quals les enfantz so criterisatz.	And if in the anus there are hemorrhoids or abscesses, then use a thin and sharp rectal probe, from among the probes that children can tolerate.
De curacio de las plaguas.	Of the cure of the plagues.
Yeu ja e dit en la divisio de la curacio de las plaguas aquo que convenia al libre, e yeu dic assi la curacio de aquelas am ma e am medicinas segon le conpliment.	And I have already said in the division of the cure of the plagues what pertains to the free treatment, and now I speak of the cure of those more severe and those involving medicines according to their needs.
Donc dic que las plaguas son diversificadas segon aquo en que son faytas las plaguas e segon le loc sobre le qual cazo las plaquas.	Therefore, it is said that plagues are diverse according to what causes the plagues and according to the place on which the plaques fall.
E las causas per que motas vetz son faytas las plaguas so ayssi cum getament de peyra, o inscisio d’espaza o de cotel, o percussio am lansa, o am fustz, o am sageta, o semblantz ad aquels de motas causas.	And the causes by which stones or wounds from a sword or knife, or blows from a mace, a stick, or an arrow are made, are thus similar to those of stone causes.
Mays las plaguas que so en les locz del cos so ayssi cum plagua la qual catz sobre le cap, o·l col, o·l pietz, o·l ventre, o·l fitge, e semblantz ad aquels dels membres.	More specifically, the plagues that occur in parts of the body are thus like a plague that falls on the head, or the neck, or the feet, or the belly, or the thigh, and similar to those affecting the limbs.
E yeu so recomtant la curacio de alcunas plaguas per que pauses aquela ratiocinacio e regla sobre las autras plaguas.	And I am recounting the cure of some plagues so that you may apply that reasoning and rule to other plagues.
E yeu comensare de las plaguas del cap simplas, quar la rememoracio de las compostas vindra al comensament del tertz capitol.	And I will begin with simple head plaques, for the recall of composed ones will come at the beginning of the third capita.
Donc dic que quan accideys en le cap plagua simpla e no es fractura, lahoras considera: si es per getament de peyra o de semblant, e ja ha trinquada la codena tant solament e es gran plagla e temes sobre aquel malaute havinement de apostema caut, lahoras tu te coyta e fleubotoma la cephalica tantost, e no tardas aquo; e extrats ad aquel del sanc segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu si no mes alcuna causa prohibent de fleubotomia, majorment si·l sanc que es eyssit de la plagua es pauc.	Therefore say that when an injury occurs in the head and it is a simple plaque and not a fracture, consider: if it is due to a stone or similar object, and has already struck the skull just by itself and is a large plaque and you fear the imminent evil of an abscess at that place, then you should incise and bloodlet from the cephalic vein as soon as possible, and do not delay this; and you extract from it as much blood as the strength of the vein allows, unless some reason prevents bloodletting, especially if the blood that results from the plaque is little.
E sia la flaubotomia del contrari de la partida plaguada; e guardase le malaute de replecio e de vi e de viandas grossas.	And the bloodletting should be from the opposite side of the injured area; and one must prevent the patient from filling up, eating, or taking heavy foods.
Mays si de la minuicio prohibeys alcuna causa, lahoras sia aminorat de la vianda e no apropinque a carn ni a vi.	But if some reason prohibits the reduction of food intake, then it should be limited in amount and not approach meat or wine.
E pausa sobre la plagua, si a lu accideys apostema caut, coto enfus en oli rozat solet o en vi en le qual es stipticat.	And place over the plaque, if an abscess has formed, a poultice of oil rubbed with salt or in wine that contains astringents.
Mays si est segur de apostema caut, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua, si es recent am le sieu sanc e le ayre no ha mudat aquela la polvera la qual yeu recomtare aprop petit.	If it is certain that an abscess has formed, then place yourself over the wound, if it is recent with its own blood and the air has not changed there sprinkle the powder which I will describe shortly.
E si le ayre ja ha mudada aquela, lahoras pausa sobre alscus enguentz entro que sia sanada.	And if the air has already changed there, then place yourself over some ointments until it is healed.
Mays si la plagua es gran o es per inscizio d’espaza e de semblantz, e no so ajustadas las labias de lu per puvils, lahoras ajusta aquelas am sutura segon que yeu recomtare de la sutura de lor.	If the wound is large or due to a lance wound and the edges do not fit properly due to swelling, then adjust those with sutures according to the method of suturing that I will describe later.
Mays si la plagua ja es discuberta del os e pen, e no es retencio de lu sino un petit suspensori, lahoras inscideys aquela e aprop cura la plagua am medicinas e restaura la carn aprop en loc de codena, e comanda al malaute que sia pescut de viandas en las quals es groceza: caps e formen coyt e semblantz a lor, entro que sia compost.	If the wound is already uncovered from the bone and flesh, and it is not a retention but only a small suspender, then incise that area and immediately treat the wound with medicines and restore the flesh in its proper place. Command the patient to eat foods in which they take pleasure: bread and vegetables that resemble them, until they are recovered.
E si atrobas en la codena putrefaccio e no adhereys al os, lahoras tu inscideys tot aquo poyrit e geta aquo, e aprop cura aquo.	And if you find putrefaction in the flesh and it does not adhere to the bone, then incise all of that area and drain it, and immediately treat it.
Mays si en aquestas plaguas es arteria o vena de la qual fluxs de sanc pot evenir, e no es abscindida per medicinas, lahoras tu inquier sobre la arteria, e si atrobas aquela no-inscidida, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am spatum, o lia aquela; e si necessitat te provoca que aquo que havem dit no comfereys, lahoras tu cauteriza entro que·l sanc sia abscidit.	If in these wounds the artery or vein from which the flux of blood can occur is present and cannot be treated with medicines, then you inquire about the artery. If you find that uncut part, cut it with a blade or ligate it; if necessity compels you to do something that we have not said, then you cauterize before the blood is abscised.
E si aquestas plaguas son simplas e petitas, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiere; enayssi que tu polverizas sobre aquelas aquesta polvera, quar consolidada aquela denant que l’ayre mude aquelas.	If these wounds are simple and small, the cause is light; sprinkle this powder over them, that which hardens before the air changes those.
E la manieyra de la polvera es aquesta: recipe oli de enses partida una, de sanc de drago partida doas, de caus no-extincta partidas tres; sia tot mot trissat e crivellat, e de lu sia la plagua omplida, e sia constrengida per bona constriccio entro que be sobre aquela aderesca, e sia coagulada am le sanc.	The manner of the powder is this: take oil of cypress divided one part, blood of dragon divided two parts, and gall three parts; mix them all together, sift them, fill the wound with it, confine it well by good packing, and let it coagulate with the blood.
E aprop strengeys aquela desus am pulvils e leyssa aquela, e no la deslias mentre esta ayssi que no es apostemada, quar no es eredicada de lu la medicina entro que sia sanada.	Then tighten it above with powder and leave it, and do not loosen it while it is not packed, for the medicine will not be effective until it is healed.
E alcuna vetz fa aquo sola cautz, quan no es a tu en present enses e sanc de drago.	And sometimes one makes this cautery alone, when it is not in your presence the sign of dragon.
E ja fa aquesta meteyssa operacio en las grans plaguas quan conveneys que sia pausada sobre aquelas e sian streytas, e so plaguas recentz am le lor sanc, las quals le ayre no ha alteradas.	And this operation is performed in large abscesses when it is necessary to pause over them and straighten them, and for recent abscesses near their surface, which the air has not yet affected.
E si le ayre las ha alteradas, e majorment quan es en temps d’estiu, lahoras no es entencio a la posicio de aquesta polvera, mays adonc cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit, enayssi que tu pauses sobre aquelas alcus enguents degistius, o que pauses sobre aquelas pols de la farina del ordi am aygua e mel entro que getan poyredura; e aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And if the air has affected them, especially when it is in the summer season, then I cannot determine their position, but then care for them as we have said, try to place yourself over those hollows that are depressed and glistening, or place a mixture of flour and water with honey where pus is forming; and soon after apply another remedy while they are healing.
Mays si accideys am la plagua fractura en os, e es petita, lahoras tu extratz aquo am gesti.	And if a fracture occurs in the bone of the abscess and it is small, then you extract it with forceps.
E yeu diyre la cura de las fracturas del cap en aquo que es envenidor.	And I will speak of the treatment of fractures of the head in what follows.
De las plaguas del col.	Of the abscesses of the neck.
Mays si la plagua accideys en le col, lahoras no es en lu differencia en medicacio, e entre la plagua del cap quan es simpla.	If the wound occurs in the neck, there is no difference in treatment, and between head wounds when they are simple.
Mays si ja le nervi del col es inscis o arteria, lahoras si es nervi, no es en lu engen sino que sia evitada curacio de lu am aquo que fa vehement stipticitat, ayssi cum ziniar e zegi que es vetriol e semblantz a lor quar nozo als nervis e contrazo aquel.	But if the nerve of the neck is incised or an artery, when it is a nerve, no artificial cure is necessary but rather to avoid any treatment that causes strong constriction, as zinc and zegi (quicksilver) are like them and poison the nerves and contract those.
E no pauses sobre la plagua alcuna causa de tot freja, quar la sustancia dels nervis es freja e la continuacio de lu es am le cervel, le qual es le pus aut de totz les membres.	And do not place any cause of cold on the wound, for the substance of the nerves is cold and their continuity is in the brain, which is the core of all members.
E si’ aquo am que es curat de medicinas leugieras, ayssi cum es caus lavada am aygua dousa, alcuna veguada enfusa en oli rozat o no-rozat, e thucia quan es lavada am aygua dousa e las autras peyras minarantz segon aquesta manieyra, e enguentz humitz.	And if it is to be treated with light medicines, such as washing with cold water twice, sometimes infused in olive oil, roasted or unroasted, and applying thuci when washed with cold water and the other pears minarantz according to this manner, and apply a moist salve.
Mays si la plagua es gran, lahoras aministra sutura, o coarta las labias de lu, e aprop cura aquela am pulvils entro que sia sanada.	But if the wound is large, then administer缝合，或收缩其边缘，然后在其愈合时用粉末治疗。
Mays si a la plagua es profunditat o accideys en lu a la pus bassa partida poyredura, lahoras perfora aquela en le loc mays depremegut.	If there is depth to the wound or accidents in the lower part near the fundament, then perforate that at the most pressed location.
Mays si en la plagua ja es inscisa arteria e es conseguit flux de sanc, lahoras separa o secca aquela, o lia aquela, o cauteriza aquela si necessitat te provoca ad aquo.	If the wound has already severed an artery and there is a flow of blood, then separate or dry that area, or tie it with a ligature if necessity demands it.
Mays si ja ha insciditz les spondils del golayro o tot, e so salvadas las venas del col, lahoras tu ajusta las labias de la codena am sutura sobre la cana del golayro e no toques aquel; abantz egala aquel e reduzeys aquel sobre la sua figura natural, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent, e leyssa aquela per alcus jorns; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz en les quals es stipticitat e excitacio entro que sia sanat.	If the vertebrae of the thigh are already severed or all, and if the veins of the leg have been saved, then you adjust the edges of the ligament and suture over the bone of the thigh without touching that; equalize that and return it to its natural shape, and strengthen that with proper structure, letting that alone for a few days; then cure that with ointments in which there is stipticity and excitement until it is healed.
Mays si la plagua ja en le os a fayta enprecio, lahoras percuireys aquela, e lahoras si en lu ha fragmentz de hos, extratz totz aquels que podes de lor; e aquo que a tu no es apparelhat, leyssa aquo entro que la plagua se poyrisca, e sia separat e la egrecio de lu sia alleujada.	If the wound has already reached the bone, then probe that area, and if it has fragments of bone, extract all those you can from there; what appears unable to be removed, leave that until the wound suppures, and is separated and the inflammation around it alleviated.
E si la plagua es recent lahoras polveriza sobre aquela polvera la qual t’e recomtada.	And if the wound is recent, then sprinkle it with the powder which has been recommended.
Mays si en la plagua es fayta fistula, lahoras cura aquela am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra aprop en le sieu capitol.	And if in the wound a fistula is formed, then cure it as described in the next section, which will be mentioned soon in its chapter.
De las plaguas del col o de semblantz quan fayta entre las spallas e es fayta am spaza o am cotel o am lansa o am semblantz.	Of the wounds of the head or similar, when made between the shoulders and affect a spasm or a cut or a lance wound or similar.
Si es percussio de lansa o de cotel, e vezes de lu la profunditat, lahoras considera mays si de la plagua yeys ventositat quan le malaute elena; lahoras sapias que la plagua es mortal.	If it is a lance or cut wound, and you determine its depth, then consider more whether the wound has distention when the patient faints; then know that the wound is mortal.
E si en lu no es profunditat e la plagua es recent am le sieu sanc, lahoras tu pauses en lu de la primieyra horo polvera, e no strenhas aquel per que no sia le sanc retengut en la profunditat de lu e que retorne al cor e que aucigua le malaute, mays pausa en lu enguent atractiu, e deslia aquela doas veguadas le dia.	And if it is not deep and the wound is recent with its own bleeding, then you apply powder in the first hour, and do not press on it to prevent the blood from being retained in the depth of the wound and returning to the heart and causing further fainting. Instead, apply an attractive ointment and remove it after two days.
E si l’enguent no es a tu present, lahoras tu pausa en le orrifici de la plagua coto viel per que sucque aquo que yeys de las humiditatz; e fay que le malaute dorma sobre la plagua per que corra aquo que es en lu ajustat.	And if the ointment is not available, then you apply something to the wound's orifices like a wick to allow the moisture to drain out; and make the patient sleep on the wound so that what is within it can drain out.
Mays si ja de la plagua son passatz tres dias o mays e no accideys al malaute spasme ni tremor de cor mal ni strictura de ale, e vezes las autras dispozicios bonas de lu, lahoras sapias que plagua es salva; e adonc cura aquela am calguas e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanada.	If however more than three days have passed since the onset of the pain and no spasms or heart palpitations nor constriction of the lungs occur, and other good dispositions persist, then you may conclude that the pain is gone; then treat with heat for this one and the other treatment until it is healed.
Mays si la sanacio de lu es excusada, e ja tot temps es uberta, lahoras sapias que ja es fayta fistula; cura donc aquela per le sieu capitol.	If the healing of the patient is impossible, and all the time has been opened, then you may conclude that a fistula has formed; treat this accordingly according to its own chapter.
E si la plagua es per inscisio de spaza o de cotel, e es simpla en la superficia del pietz o del dos, lahoras cura aquela am aquo que es precedit de sutura, si es gran, o am polvera, si es petita.	And if the pain is due to a stab wound or cut, and it is simple on the surface of the foot or hand, then treat this according to what is preceded by suturing, if it is large, or with powder, if it is small.
Mays si ja ha fayta enprecio en le os, e so ja de lu inscizas pessas, lahoras tu torqua la plagua e coyta ad extrayre aquelas pessas, si so separadas.	If it has already perforated the bone, and you have incised the wound to extract these pieces, then twist the wound and pull to extract those pieces, if they are separated.
Mays si no so separadas, lahoras leyssa las entro que se poyresca la plagua, que la extraccio de lor es alleujada.	If they are not separated, then let them be until the wound heals, as their extraction is alleviated.
E de las autras plaguas accidentz en les autres membres le juvament en curacio es le juvament de aquo que havem dit.	And for other accidents of pain in other members, the cure is the treatment that we have said.
De las plaguas del ventre.	Of the pains in the abdomen.
L’indisposicio la qual accideys en le ventre es o gran, o pauc, o migiera.	The discomfort that occurs in the abdomen is either severe, mild, or intermediate.
De la gran alcunas veguadas yeys le budel o nervi del budel, per que es fayta intromissio de lor e la sutura de lor esser pus vehement e pus subtil.	For the severe ones, sometimes the intestine or nerve of the intestine is damaged, so that there is an interruption in them and their suturing must be more vigorous and finer.
E disrupcio petita es fayta dificil per autra manieyra, e siec se que la reduccio de lor es pus dificil, si no te coytes de la intromissio de lor al sieu loc tantost, quar se ubre e es engrossat per que le intrament de lu es fayt difficil.	And the small disruption is made difficult by another method. I believe that reducing them is more difficult if you do not quickly prevent the interruption of them in their place, for it opens up and becomes swollen, making the instrument difficult to use.
E donc la milhor disrupcio es migiera, quar en aquela no es dificil la reduccio del budel, ayssi cum es dificil en las doas specias denant ditas.	And therefore, the intermediate disruption is best, for in that case, the reduction of the intestine is not difficult, unlike in the two species mentioned before.
E sapias que sutura del ventre es segon quatre manieyras, mays doas suturas son comunas que conveneysso en suturas de las autras plaguas del cors.	And know that the suturing of the abdomen is according to four methods, but two common sutures are applicable to the suturing of other body pains.
E duas autras suturas proprias comunican a las autras plaguas, mays empero so mays proprias en la sutura del ventre.	And two other specific wounds communicate to the other wounds, more so indeed in the wound of the abdomen.
E yeu recomti a tu quascuna am exposicio e declaracio.	And I advise you regarding each exposure and declaration.
Donc dic que quan la plagua es petita e es eyssit alcuna causa del budel per aquela, e es fayt dificil a reduzir aquel, lahoras aquo es en una de doas manieyras: o per parvitat de la disrupcio ayssi cum havem dit, o quan al budel es venguda inflacio per la frigiditat de l’ayre.	So say that when the wound is small and some cause of the intestine penetrates through it, making it difficult to reduce that part, then this occurs in one of two ways: either due to the smallness of the disruption, as we have said, or when the intestine becomes inflamed due to the coldness of the air.
E donc quan aquo es ayssi, lahora cove que tu scalfes aquel enayssi que tu submerges una sponga ho drap humit en aygua tebeza sola, o que coguas en aygua squinant, e cyperum, e spic, e embroques am aquela le budel entro que la imflacio sia resolvuda.	And when this is the case, then you should wet that attempt by submerging a sponge or cloth in clear water alone, or by using squinting, spic, and embroques, and place the intestine into it until the inflammation resolves.
E alcunas veguadas fa aquo vi en le qual ha stipticitat, e es milhor que la aygua sola en resolucio de la imflacio.	And sometimes in those where there is stiffness, it is better to use water alone in resolving the inflammation.
E donc cum tu vezes la imflacio esser resolvuda, lahoras tu humecta le budel am aygua en la qual es coyta altea e malvas, quar per aquo es alleujat le intrament de lu am pauca causa.	And when you see the inflammation resolved, then moisten the intestine with water in which althea and mallows are steeped, for by this means it is alleviated with little cause.
Mays si es escusat le intrament de lu aprop aquesta curacio, lahoras scindeys la disrupcio un petit am strument am le qual so inscididas emorroydas.	If it is necessary to use an instrument near this cure, then divide the disruption with a small instrument at which the veins are incised.
E la curacio primieyra es milhor, quan es propriada que no es seccio, e no sia occupacio a seccar aprop necessitat e defaliment.	The primary cure is better when it is appropriate that no sectioning be done, and not an occupation to dry out nearby and in case of deficiency.
Del instrument, sec se la forma de lu:	Of the instrument, note its shape:
La una partida de lu torta aguda, e l’autra partida no-acuta, e la extremitat subtil, e no sia am la subtilitat de spatum, abantz sia obtusa un pauc.	One part of the blade is sharp, and the other part is not blunt, with the tip fine but not too fine like a point; it should be slightly rounded.
E donc cum la plagua es amplificada e yeys fora le budel, lahoras cove que la sua reduccio sia segon la forma de lu natural, en le sieu loc propri, si es possible sobre aquo, quar milhor es.	And since the wound is enlarged and the intestine protrudes, then ensure that its reduction follows its natural form, in its proper place. If possible, do it over the area, for this is better.
Mays quan la disrupcio es ampla, e es en la partida pu bassa del ventre, lahoras cove que tu fassas jazer le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa las suas cambas pus autas que·l sieu cap; e si es en la partida pus desus del ventre, lahoras tu pause le cap de lu e·l pietz pus autz que las partidas dejos.	If the disruption is large and located in the lower part of the abdomen, then place the patient on their back and position their legs higher than their head; if it is in the upper part of the abdomen, then position the patient's head and feet higher than the sides.
E semblantment si la disrupcio es en una de las doas partz del ventre, lahoras pausa la tua entencio e la tua consideracio tostemps en aysso per que la partida en la qual es la plagua sia pus auta que l’autra.	And if the rupture is in one of the two parts of the abdomen, then pause your understanding and consideration for some time so that the part where the injury is may be higher than the other.
E ayssi cove que tu aministres aquo en las plaguas grans e en las plaguas migieras.	And thus you should apply this to large wounds and to medium-sized wounds.
E en las plaguas petitas, pausa aquo que es a tu preparat, e aprop fay que·l ministre sia entre las tuas mas pyatados, le qual tengua la disrupcio tota am la sua ma e ajusta las labias de lu, e aprop descuebre de aquela ad aquel que siec la sutura alcuna causa aprop autra.	And in small wounds, pause what you have prepared, and then ensure that the minister has your most skilled helpers with him. He should hold the rupture completely in his hand and adjust the edges of the wound, and then uncover that area to another who will suture for any cause nearby or another.
E aquesta es la manieyra de sutura comuna: una que prenguas la agula, o comte de agula segon la cantitat de la amplitut de la plagua; e aprop layssa de la extremitat de la disrupcio del dit anular, e strenh la agula una, otre que tu no metas fiel en las doas extremitatz de la codena, am doas extremitatz del ciphac que es dejos la codena de las partidas dedintz, entro que fassas aquela penetrar de aquela partida; e tu ja has agreguadas doas extremitatz de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, e so faytas quatre ordes.	And this is the common method of suturing: take a needle, or a countersink针线工具 according to the width of the wound; then leave part of the end of the ring finger rupture, and strongly fix the needle once, or another that you do not put thread at both ends of the suture, but rather at two ends of the cloth that is left from the inner parts, before you make it penetrate from one part; and you have already added two ends of the suture and two ends of the cloth, and so four orders are made.
E aprop strenh am fiel doble en le circuit de la agula, e alcunas veguadas de doas partz ensemps, e aprop agregua las doas labias e la plagua per agreguacio decent; e aprop layssa la grossitut del dit e fiqua una autra agulha en aquela, e aprop lia aquela am fiel ayssi cum fiest am la primieyra agulha; e no cesses far aquo si es necessitat am las agulhas entro que ajas complida tota la contriccio de la plagua.	And then strengthen the double thread in the circuit of the needle, and several times on both parts together, and then join the two edges and the flap by decent joining; and then leave the thickness of the digit and insert another needle there, and then apply that thread as you did with the first needle; and do not cease to do this if necessary between the needles until all the contraction of the flap is completed.
E sian las agulhas migieras entre groceza e subtilitat, quar las agulhas subtils mot leugierament insciden la carn; e las grossas so de dificil intrament en la codena, e donc per aquo cove que sian migieras en subtilitat e grosseza.	And the needles should be of medium thickness between coarseness and subtlety, for the fine needles penetrate the flesh lightly; and the coarse ones are difficult to manipulate in the wound, which is why they should be of medium thickness in both fineness and coarseness.
E no cove que la agulha sia ficada en doas extremitatz de la codena propdana mot, per so que la carn no sia inscidida leugierament e que la plagua se huebra devant la sua consolidacio.	And it should not be that the needle is placed at two nearby ends of the wound, for fear that the flesh be cut too lightly and that the flap separate before its healing.
E no sian prolonguadas de sutura per que la plagua no sia prohibida de consolidacio.	And do not make the sutures too long so that the wound is not prohibited from healing.
E aprop inscideys las extremitatz de las agulhas per so que no ledescan le malaute deves le sieu dormier; e pausaras sobre la sutura pulvils expanduts de tota partida, les quals tenguan las extremitatz de las agulhas; e layssa aquelas entro que sapias que la plagua ja es consolidada.	And then incise the ends of the needles so that they do not slip out of their proper place; and place powders expanded from all parts over the sutures, which contain the ends of the needles; and leave them until you can see that the wound is already consolidated.
E aquestas specias de sutura am agulhas en cal manieyra es pus convenient en las plaguas petitas, quar habasta en la sutura de lor una agulha o doas o entorn aquelas.	These species of suture with needles is more convenient in small wounds, for only one or two needles are needed in their suturing.
Mays la segonda sutura es cominal: e es que tu aministres am sutura las quatre extremitatz, de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, en una veguada, am agulha en la qual sia fiel envolopat engual en subtilitat e grosseza.	The second suture is made as follows: and you administer the suturing of the four extremities, from the knot and two extremities of the thread, in one go, with a needle which is wrapped equally in subtlety and thickness.
E aprop quan am la agulha auras penetrat aquestas quatre extremitatz, reduzeys la agulha de aquela meteyssa partida de la qual comensest, per so que le fiel retrayt caja de la pus subirana partida a la plagua, per so que la sutura sia segon sutura de drap am la qual les draps so strengutz.	And when you have the needle penetrate these four extremities, withdraw the needle from that thread part where it started, so that the thread retracts and comes up from the underside to the wound, so that the suture resembles a stitch in cloth where the threads are tightened.
E pausa entre quascuna sutura la quantitat del gros del dit mendre.	And pause between each suture the width of a small finger.
E aquesta sutura sabo les homes.	And this suture I know for men.
E am tal sutura yeu cozegui la plagua la qual era accidida a un home en le sieu ventre le qual era stat plaguat am un cotel, e era la disrrumpcio de la plagua major de un palm, e era eyssit dels budels entorn dos palms del budel del mieg loc e era la disrupcio en le mieg del membre; e adonc yeu reduzegui aquel depus que le budel havia stat foro la plagua per xxiiii horas.	And with this suture, I closed the wound which was inflicted upon a man in his belly where he had been stabbed with a knife, and it was the rupture of the major wound about two palms from the middle of the belly; and it was the disruption in the middle of the member. And then I returned that part after the belly had been opened for twenty-four hours.
E la plagua fo consolidada en le spazi de xv dias o entorn, e curegui aquel e es sanat; e aprop aquo visquec per motz ans, e es conversat en las suas disposicios.	The wound is consolidated in the space of fifteen days or so, and cure that and it is healed; then that which viscous moisture, and it is converted into its proper condition.
E les autres metges havian jutgat que no fora sanat; e per miracle foc, quar yeu no curegui aquel am enguent, quar era en loc en le qual enguent no era atrobat ni deguna medicina, mays pausegui sobre la plagua coto viel dos veguadas lo dia e ablucio assiduo am aygua de mel entro que foc sanat.	And other doctors had judged that it was not healed; by miracle of fire, for I did not cure that with ointment, for it was in a place where neither ointment nor any medicine could reach, but placed my hand over the wound as an old woman would two days a day and applied frequent washing with honey water until the fire healed.
Mays yeu diyre dos specias de sutura proprias segon narracio de Paraula.	And I will speak of two species of suturing properly according to the narration of Paracelsus.
E es que tu comenses am sutura de la codena, e entrometas agulha de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz.	And you should begin with the suture of the chain, and insert the needle from one side through to the inside.
E donc cum la agulha penetra en la codena e en aquel meteys lacertz segon rectetut e en longetut de tot le cos, e layssa la extremita del ciphac en le qual has entromesa la agulha; e fay penetrar en la autra extremitat la agulha de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo en l’autra extremitat del mihat.	And thus, as the needle penetrates through the chain and along the thread according to the right path and length of the entire body, you leave the end of the needle on which you have inserted the needle inside; and pass the needle from the other end inside out through the other part of the wound.
E don cum tu auras fayta aquela penetrar, lahoras tu fay aquela penetrar autra veguada en aquela meteyssa extremitat del mihat de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz; e leyssa la extramitat del ciphac que es en aquest latz, e fay penetrar la agulha en l’autra extremitat de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo.	And when you have made the penetration, then make another penetration in that limb at the external part from the internal part; leave the end of the probe that is on this side, and penetrate the needle into the other internal part from the external part.
E fay penetrar am aquela la tua penetracio am la qual fas aquela penetrar en le ciphac en la extremitat del mirat la qual es en la partida de lu entro que tot aquel penetre.	And make the penetration with your penetration which you make penetrate in the probe at the end of the needle which is in the limb until all of that penetrates.
E aprop comensa de aquest meteys costat e cus aquel am la extremitat que es del ciphac en l’autra latz, e extratz la agulha de la codena la qual penetrec, e aprop redutz aquela en aquela codena e cos la extremitat del ciphac que es en l’autra costat am aquesta extramitat del mirat; e extratz aquela de la codena la qual es de part de lu.	And then begin from this side of the limb and sew it at the end that is of the probe on this other side, and extract the needle from the hole you just made, then return it to the needle and with the end of the probe that is on this other side, place it at the end of the limb; and extract this from the hole which is on its side.
E fay aquo una veguada e autra, e fay aquo una veguada aprop autre veguada entro que tu cozes tot aquo que es deforo segon aquel eysemple.	And do this one time and again, and do this another time or two more as you sew all of this that is on the outside according to that example.
E la suma de aquesta manieyra de sutura es que tu cozes am sutura de pellicies am la qual cozo las pels, enayssi que tu cozes le ciphac una veguada de la part de la extremitat de la codena, e que leysses aquela autra veguada entro que la ajas complida.	And the sum of this method of suturing is that you sew with threads of skin on which you sew the skins, endeavoring that you sew a third part of the width of the cut from the extremity of the wound, and leave the other third until after you finish the job.
Mays la segonda specia de sutura propria la qual dieys eyssament Gualia , e aquest es de sermo de lu e per lu recomtat, es que tu cozas aquela segon semilitut am la qual alcus medicantz cozo aquela, enayssi que agreguan tota partida a la sua compar partida a lu convenient per natura; e aplican la extremitat de autre de lu e la extremitat del mirat al autra extremitat de lu, e aquo es fayt segon que yeu a tu recomti.	And the second species of suture proper which Gualia describes is that of suturing it and pressing it, in which you sew with one third of the thread on which the medicants are woven, endeavoring that each part is added to its corresponding part according to nature; and apply the extremity of another to the other extremity of it, and this is done as I have instructed you.
Cove que tu fiques la agulha en la extremitat del mirat a tu propdana de la partida deforo, e fassas aquela penetrar a la partida dedintz en aquel sol, e leysses dos extremitatz del ciphac; e aprop revolveys la agulha e fay aquela penetrar de foro a la dedintz en dos extremitatz del ciphac.	Place the needle at the extremity of the wound on your own side of the part from the outside, and make it penetrate into that side internally; leave two thirds of the thread; then turn the needle and make it penetrate from the inside to the outside with the other two thirds of the thread.
E aprop revolveys aquelas cascunas, e fay penetrar quascunas de la partida dededintz entro a la partida deforo en dos extremitatz del mirat autras que so en le latz contrari.	Then turn each of them, and make each thread penetrate from the inside into the outside part with two thirds of the thread in the other side opposite to it.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura es milhor de la sutura comuna leugiera, e es sutura de la qual precedic rememoracio.	This method of suturing is better than the common light suturing, and this is the suture about which we have previously reminded you.
Aquest es le sermo de Gualia	This is the speech of Gualia
E mays le diyssero alcus, sutura del ventre es rectificada am dos agulhas, so es que tu entrometas en aquestas a quascunas un fiel, e comensa am intromiccio de agulha de aquo que es deves tu, e fay aquela penetrar entro al autra latz segon sutura de aquels les quals cozo les cuers engualment.	And some would say that the suturing of the abdomen is corrected with two needles, so that you introduce a thread into each of these, and start with the insertion of the needle from where you should, and make that one penetrate through the other layer according to the suture in which I join the tissues equally.
E sapias que quan disrupcio es en le mieg loc del ventre, lahoras la sutura de lu es pus difficil que dels autres locs del ventre.	And be aware that when the disruption is in the middle part of the abdomen, the suturing of this area is more difficult than of other parts of the abdomen.
Mays le juguament de medicacio de plagua es jutgament de las autras plaguas.	And the judgment of plague treatment is judged by other plagues.
La qual causa es quar quan tu consieguas la plagua recent am le sieu sanc denant que l’ayre altera aquela, e reduses le budel e cozes aquela e aptas aquela decentment, lahoras pausa sobre aquela polvera encarnativa.	This cause is when you manage to obtain the recent plague from its own sweat before the air alters it, and reduce the hernia, suture it, and treat it properly, then place it over that red powder.
E si le ayre ja ha alterada la plagua, lahoras pausa sobre aquela alcus enguentz les quals so a tu presens entro que fassan peyra dura e cajan les fiels, e sian consolidatz ciphac e mirat; e aprop cura aquela ayssi cum es la curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And if the air has already affected the wound, then place over that dressing materials which are present and let them harden and gather the edges, and be consolidated with chords and inspected; and proceed to treat it as one would other wounds until it is healed.
Mays si a tu no so presens las medicinas, lahoras pausa sobre aquela tantost, pus que comensa a getar brac, coto viel, e permuta aquel dos veguadas le dia, ayssi cum a tu e ensenhat, entro que sia sanat, quar tu no indigeysses de autra medicacio en motas disposicios quan las plaguas so simplas.	And if you do not have the medicines present, then place over that dressing for some time, until it begins to drain fluid, and change it two times a day as I have shown you, until it is healed, without needing other treatments when the wounds are simple.
Mays si tu temes que la plagua comunique en lesio als membres principals, lahoras cove que tu submergas lana leon en oli de trempada qualiditat, o en oli rozat, e pausa aquela en le circuit dels locs que so entre les angonas e dejos las aysselas.	And if you fear that the wound may communicate infection to the main limbs, then soak a lion's wool in well-pressed oil or in refined oil, and place that over the area between the joints, leaving the axillae uncovered.
E si sent dolor o putrefaccio en les sieus budels, quar motas veguadas aquo s’endeve, lahoras cristeriza aquel am vi stiptic negre tebe, e majorment si la poyredura es pervenguda en le budel e es fayta exitura penetrant entro la conquavitat de lu.	And if there is pain or putrefaction in their intestines, then apply this remedy several times, then crystallize that with a vinegar stiptic black tartar, especially if the infection has reached the intestine and caused an ulcer penetrating into the cavity of the abdomen.
E sapias que aquela que es del budel gros es de pus leugiera sanacio que aquela que es en les budels subtils.	And know that which comes from the large intestine is of a lighter and more healing nature than that which comes from the fine intestines.
E es de dificil sanacio quar le budel le qual es apelat “gegunu” no recep sanacio de plagua que caja en lu de tot; e aquo es per la gran multitut de venas que so en lu e per la magnitut de lu que so en aquelas, e per subtilitat del cos de aquel, e per propinquitat de aquel a natura de nervis.	And it is of difficult healing that the intestine called "gungun" does not receive healing from plague that falls into it; this is due to the great number of veins in it and its large size, and because of the subtlety of that part and its proximity to the nature of nerves.
Mays si aquo que procezeys de la plagua es la tela, e conseguas aquela recent, redutz aquela segon la tua rectetut am la qual reduzes les budels engualment.	But if what you are dealing with from the plague is the tissue, and manage to obtain it fresh, reduce that according to your skill with which you equally restore the intestines.
Mays si es passat a lu spazi e ja es feyt vert o negre, lahoras que tu strenguas aquela am fiel sobre le loc que es denigrat de lu, per so que vengua fluxs de sanc, quar en la tela so venas e arterias.	But if it has spread to it and already turned red or black, when you strengthen that with astringent on the area that is darkened, in order that there be flux of pus, for in the tissue are veins and arteries.
E aprop inscideys aquo que es otra aquel liament, e pausa dos extremitatz del fiel pendentz de la partida dejos de la plagua foro lu, per que sobre tu sia alleujada la atraccio de lu deves le cazement de la tela e emissio del brac de la plagua.	And then incise what is another in that ligament, and place two ends of the astringent hanging from the part left by the plague, so that above you it alleviates the attraction of it, close the opening of the tissue and the emission of the arm of the plague.
Rememoracio de las plaguas quan accideysso en le budel.	Remembrance of the plagues when they occur in the intestine.
Quan accideys disrupcio en le budel e es petita, lahoras es possibla que sia resteurada en alcus homes, per aysso quar yeu vi aquel le qual era stat plaguat en le sieu ventre am percussio de lansa et era la plagua de la part dreyta del stomac, e la plagua era antiquada e fayta fistula, e eyssic de lu gestio e ventositat.	When there is a disruption in the intestine and it is small, sometimes it can be reduced in some individuals, which is why I saw that man who had been wounded in his belly by the thrust of a lance, and the wound was old, having become a fistula due to its chronicity and distention.
Adonc yeu pansegui la curacio de lu ja sia que no era confizat en la sanacio de lu, mays cessegui subtiliar aquel entro que foc sanat e le loc es consolidat.	Then I sought to heal him, even though he was not yet fully recovered from the wound. Instead, I managed to subtlety integrate that which was healthy into the area that had healed and was now consolidated.
E yeu pus que vi le loc ja consolidat, timegui sobre le malaute que endevengues sobre lu accident de mal en le sieu ventre; e no endevenc alcu per aquo mal accident e romas en las suas milhos disposicios mangant e bevent, e aprop entrec en banh e es exercitat en sos ditz.	And when I saw the area already consolidated, I treated the patient who had suffered an injury in his belly; and none fell ill from this accident, but they took care with their dietary and beverage choices, and frequently bathed and exercised their hands.
E ja diysero alcus experimentados que quan endeve plagua en le budel, e es petita, lahoras cove que sia liada segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas fromiguas de grans caps; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua e pausa una fromigua de aquelas que aja la boca uberta sobre las doas labias de la plagua; donc quan pren sobre aquelas e strenh la sua boca, abscindeys le cap de lu, quar adhereys e no es dissolvut.	And some experienced individuals have said that when there is a small wound in the intestine, it should be tied in this manner: and you take grains of large size; then adjust the two edges of the wound and place one grain of those with the mouth open over the two edges of the wound; therefore, when it takes hold of those and tightly closes its mouth, cut off the head of the grain, for it adheres and does not dissolve.
E aprop pausa autra formigua prop la primieyra, e no cesses aquo a far am formiguas una aprop autra segon la quantitat de tota la plagua.	And then place another formica near the first one, and continue to make formicas one after another according to the quantity of the whole plague.
E aprop reduzeys aquela e cos la plagua; e romanguan aquels caps annexces en le budel entro que·l budel sia sanat; e no accideys al malaute degun nocument.	And then reduce it with the plague; and crush those attached heads within the intestine until it is healed; and do not harm the patient in any way.
E ja es possible que·l budel sia liat am fiel subtil lo qual es fayt del budel de bestia annexs am lu, pus que es mes en agulha; e es que tu prenguas la extremitat de aquestz fiels de budel, e sia mot descarnat, e aprop lia la extremitat de lu am fiel de li, envolopat, e aprop entromet aquel fiel en agulhas e cos am aquel le budel, e areduzeys aquel en la disrupcio.	And it is possible that the intestine has been treated with fine bile made from the gallbladder of an attached beast; and you should take the end of these threads of the intestine, which is raw, and place the end of it in fine bile wrapped up, and then insert those bile threads into needles and apply them to the intestine, and reduce it in the disruption.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura am formiguas no es sino segon via de fiducia e d’esperansa.	And this method of suturing with formicas is simply done out of trust and hope.
Mays si la plagua es gran e ampla, majorment si es en un dels budels subtils, quar lahoras no es engen sino subtiliacio, e no es sanacio de lu de tot.	But if the plague is great and extensive, especially in one of the fine intestines, where there is no engagement but only a slight inflammation, and it does not heal from it completely.
De curacio de zuchem e fistula.	Of the cure for stone and fistula.
Sapias que tota plagua e apostema quan se envilheseys e se Antiqua, e es fayt ulcus, e no es consolidat e geta braç tot temps e no es abscindit, lahoras, en qualque membre sia, universalment es nompnada fistula e nos la apelam aquela azukem.	Know that any boil or abscess when enveloped and becomes ancient, and is made into a ulcer, and does not consolidate and gets a branch all the time and is not excised, then in whatever member it is, universally it is called fistula and we call it that abscess.
E fistula segon veritat es nodacio feutrada, dura, blanqua am la qual no es dolor e a la qual es conquavitat ayssi cum es conquavitat de pena de ausel; e per aysso nompnat aquela alcus rizatz, id est pena.	And according to truth, a fistula is a hardened, white node where there is no pain and which has a cavity like the pain of an ulcer; therefore, it is called that ulcer rizatz, that is, pain.
E es en alcus homes humida, la qual geta brac; e fort leu la humiditat es abscidida en alcunas horas.	And in an ulcer, there is a moist node which gets a branch; and when the moisture is strong, it is excised within a few hours.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta humiditat es mota, e es pauca, e es grossa, e es subtil.	And sometimes this moisture is hot, small, large, and fine.
E yeu ja he denant dit en la divisio, lahoras cum yeu diyssi las plaguas, que tot ulcus que no es sanat ni no es en lu nuda carn, no es aquo sino per una de ix causas: de las quals la una es o per pauquesa de sanc en le cos; o per malicia de lu; o quar entre lu e las labias es carn dura prohibent nativitat de carn; o quar es de mota legesa; o quar aquel ulcus en si meteys es poyrit e la materia que es a lu tramesa es de mala qualitat; o quar la medicina es enconvenient en la curacio de lu; o quan corrupcio catz en la regio, e es pestilencia; o per proprietat de regio ayssi cum endeve a Saragossa , en la qual es fayta difficil degestio de las malautias, e es tardada en aquela sanacio de apostema per natura; o quar en lu es os un, o motz osses.	And I have already previously stated in the division, when I spoke of ulcers, that any ulcer which is not healed nor has naked flesh in it, is not this one but due to one of nine causes: of which the first is either from a lack of healing in the body; or from malice within; or because between the ulcer and the skin there is hard flesh prohibiting natural growth of flesh; or because it is hot and dry; or because the ulcer itself contains pus and the material that is present is of bad quality; or because the medicine used in its cure is inappropriate; or when corruption affects the region, and there is a pestilence; or due to the nature of the region such as at Saragossa, where there is a difficult digestion of diseases, and healing of abscesses is delayed by nature; or because there is bone present or bones.
Ja e mostrat totas aquelas causas, e·ls senhals de aquelas e la curacio de lor am medicinas en la divisio.	All those causes have been shown, and the signs of them and their cure by medicines in this division.
E cove assi que yeu fassa a tu saber la curacio de fistula la qual es fayta per via de operacio am ma.	And cover thus so you know the cure for fistula which is caused by surgical operation with hand.
E sapias que fistula accideys en totz les membres del cos; quar de aquelas son fistulas que perveno a las venas grantz e arterias, o als nervis, o al ciphac, o al budel, o a la vesica, o ad alcuna de las costas, o ad alcu dels spondils del dos, o ad alcuna de las juncturas compostas per composicio ayssi quo de la ma e del pe; e de aquelas so que dan a lu propinquitat del membre principal e de semblantz.	And know that fistula occurs in all parts of the body; some of these fistulas lead to the large veins and arteries, or to the nerves, or to the pelvis, or to the intestine, or to the bladder, or to some of the ribs, or to one of the spinal bones, or to some joint composed thus like those of the foot and the hand; and these are those that are close to the main part of the body and similar.
E donc aquela de aquestas fistulas que es segon aquesta manieyra es de las malautias de dificil sanacio, e no recep curacio, e occupacio am aquela es trebalh e ignorancia.	And of these fistulas that proceed in this manner, they are among the illnesses of difficult cure, and do not receive a cure, and the occupation with them is labor and ignorance.
E si es de las fistulas alcuna la profunditat de la qual no perve ad aquestz locs que e dit, e esperas e confizas en la curacio de lu, e vols pervenir a cognicio de lu, lahoras pren tenta de eram o de ferr, e si la fistula va segon rectetut, e perquireys aquela am lu.	And if some fistula is deep and does not reach these locations as mentioned, and you expect and rely on its cure, and want to come to know it, then take a probe or a needle, and if the fistula follows a straight course, then inquire about it.
Mays si la fistula es tortuissitat, lahoras investigua aquela am tenta de plom subtil, quar plom am la levitat del sieu cors es alleujat e curvat deves la tortuositat.	If the fistula is tortuous, then investigate that with a fine lead wire, for lead has lightness due to its body and is bent to alleviate and straighten the tortuosity.
E si la fistula es havent motz horrificis, no es a tu possible que signifiques sobre lu am tenta.	If the fistula has horrific movements, it is not possible for you to signify about it with a probe.
Adonc cristeriza le orrifici per sos orrificis, quar la humiditat per la qual clisterizas aquela va deves las autras orrificis e corr de lor.	Then cristelize the orifices by their orifices, for the humidity with which you cristelize that will affect other orifices and flow from them.
E aprop inquier exquisitament, segon qual manieyra a tu es possible que conoguas si aqui has os o nervi, e es la conquavitat de la fistula longinqua o propdana, o es una fistula a la qual so motz orrificis e esta sobre aquo tot am la suma de la tua fortaleza, am la tua enterroguacio, am la qual enterroguas le malaute, e la invencio de la dolor deves la tua compressio am la ma sobre le loc, e semblantz de las significacios e de las causas accidentz al apostema.	And then inquire precisely, according to the manner by which you can know if here are bones or nerves, and whether the fistula's cavity is distant or nearby, or it is a fistula with only orifices that extends over all with your strength, through your inquiry, where you question the patient, and by your compression on the area with your hand, and the appearance of the significations and the causes of the swelling.
E cum tu auras stat sobre totas aquelas causas am stacio veraya, lahoras ve a la curacio segon confidencia: e es que tu consideras lahoras si es fistula apparent propinqua o en loc sal, longinqua de junctura, o de nervi, o de arteria, o de vena, o de un dels locs les quals yeu a tu e ditz.	And when you have stood on all those causes in true position, then proceed to the cure according to confidence: for you consider now if it is a nearby apparent fistula or in a location close to bone, distant from joint, nerve, artery, vein, or one of the locations which I and you call.
Lahoras tu secca la fistula segon que denant es dit de la naracio de lu, e osta aquo que es en aquela filtracio e de carns corrumpudas, e aquo que es nascut en le orrifici de la carn, o de theil e de semblantz, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	When you dry the fistula as previously described from its narration, stop what is in that filtration and of corrupted flesh, and what is born in the opening of the flesh, or vein and similar, and cure that within so that it may be healed.
Mays si la fistula es de longinqua profunditat, e es segon rectetut, lahoras cove que inscidas aquela en le preon atant quant a tu sira possible, e aprop mondifica aquela de totas las suas carns corrompudas; e aprop administra calguas envolopadas en medicinas acutas, e intromet aquelas entro a la conquavitat de la fistula, la qual has conprenduda am ferr.	But if the fistula is of deep length and is according to the straight line, then delve into it until it is as possible for you, and thereafter modify it with all its corrupted flesh; and afterwards apply sharp medicines wrapped in cloth, and insert those into the cavity of the fistula, which you have understood by means of iron.
E fay aquo am aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la medicina acuta corroda tot aquo que es romas en la conquavitat de la fistula de la corrupcio.	And do this with that several times until the sharp medicine dissolves all that is rotten in the cavity of the fistula due to corruption.
E aprop restaura aquela am enguentz les quals engendran carn sana entro que sia sanada.	And thereafter restore it by applying ointments that generate healthy flesh until it is healed.
Mays si no es sanada per aquo, lahoras tu cauteriza aquela segon que havem recomtat.	But if it is not healed by this, then you cauterize it as we have previously recommended.
Mays si la causa de fistula es os e es deves tu certificat aquo, lahoras tu inquireys aquela e secca aquela segon que havem recomtat, si tu no prohibeys alcuna causa de vena o de nervi o de membre principal ayssi cum havem dit.	If the cause of fistula is bone and you must certify this, then inquire about that dry and that moist one according to what we have recommended, if you do not prohibit any cause of vein or of nerve or of main member as we have said.
Mays si le os es a tu descubert e es en lu alcuna corrupcio e negror, lahoras tu ratz aquel entro que la corrupcio sia hostada tota; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que lu encarne entro que sia sanat.	If the bone is exposed and there is some corruption and blackness, then rush in where the corruption has stopped entirely; and place something over that which the flesh inside has healed.
E si no es sana e gieta brac ayssi cum fazia, lahoras sapias que tu no est pervengut a la eradicacio tota de la corrupcio; e adonc tu descuebre sobre lu segondanament e exquisitament fay la razio de lu e la mundificacio de lu am la deriera fortalasa tieua, e aprop restaura aquel.	And if it is not yet healed and you graft on as you do, then know that you have not achieved the complete eradication of the corruption; then uncover again thoroughly and make the reason and purification of it with your final fortification, and place something over that.
E donc si es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras sapias que aquela corrupcio es en la profunditat longinqua del cors, la qual no ha conseguida, e adonc a tu en aquel no es engen sino laysar aquela.	And so, if it is healed, that is good; and if not, then know that that corruption is deep within the body, which you have not reached, and then in that place do nothing but leave it as it is.
E si le os corromput es petit, o es a tu possible atirar aquel, lahora tu le atira am forceps subtils las quals conveno ad aquo.	And if the corrupted bone is small, or if it is possible to extract it with forceps, then use fine forceps suitable for this.
E si so motz osses, lahoras exquisitament fay la extraccio de totz aquels, e de aquels no laysses denguna causa am la tua fortaleza.	And if it is bone pain, then you must thoroughly extract all of them, and from none of them do you leave any cause for your strength.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat alcuna causa de las humiditatz, e en lor inscizio no ha temor ni error, lahoras inscideys aquelas liaments o carns si so aqui, e deliura les osses.	But if it is due to some cause of humidity, and in their incision there is neither fear nor error, then incise those membranes or flesh where they are, and deliver the bones.
Mays si a tu no es preparacio de ostar les osses de la tua hora, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua aquo que poyresca la plagua aquela, e layssa aquela entro que aquo es al enviro de aquels osses de carns e de liamentz, e guarda la plagua que no sia consolidada, e sia constrengida la seccio la qual tu has inscidida en la tua operacio.	But if you are not prepared to expose the bones at this time, then pause over the wound that may cause it, and leave that part within which is near those bones of flesh and membranes, and guard the wound that is not yet consolidated, and keep the section you have incised in your operation constricted.
Habantz, si temes, pausa sobre lu coto submers en sopre trissat am oli, o coto submers en anguent egipciac, o en alcu dels enguentz vertz, quar quan poyriran aquelas liaments, e les osses son de lor seperatz la ablacio, e de aquels atraccio es alleujada.	Having done so, if you fear, pause over the wound submerged in a triple sopor with oil, or a wound submerged in Egyptian ointment, or in some of the green ointments; for when these can be applied, and the bones are free from them, the swelling is alleviated.
Mays si es un gran os ayssi cum le os de camba o de coyssa o semblantz ad aquels, e aquo que de lu es corromput es la facia de lu tant solament, lahoras ratz aquela am resio tant solament derriera entro que sia ostada aquela negror e corrupcio, e aprop restaura la plagua.	But if it is a large bone such as the thigh bone or rib or resembles those, and what is corrupt in it affects only the surface, then rush that away completely behind where the blackness and corruption are exposed, and place the wound again.
Mays si aquo que de lu es corrumpyt es gran partida, e la corrupcio ja ha conseguida la medulla del os, lahoras es causa necessaria cerrar aquel e aquel tot inscidir entro al loc on es pervenguda la corrupcio, e lahoras cura aquel entro que sia consolidada.	But if what is of it is corrupted and great part, and the corruption has already reached the marrow of the bone, then it is necessary to close that and incise entirely into the place where the corruption has been reached, and then cure that until it is consolidated.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc ad un home en la sua coyssa per que pausez aquela a eyssempli e adjutori sobre la tua operacio.	And I advise you when examining a man in the thigh to place it as an example and aid for your operation.
Foc un home jove per etat entorn xxx ans, al qual accideys dolor en la sua cueyssa, e de las partidas dedintz mauguda es sobre la materia dedintz le cors entro que la materia es pervenguda a la cueyssa, e es materia de apostema am gran apostema, e no foc a lu causa extrinseca.	A young man of about 30 years old, who experiences pain in his thigh, and where the painful part inside is over the internal matter of the body into which the matter has reached the thigh, and the matter is a large abscess, and it is not due to an external cause.
E adonc foc extendut le temps am aquela per la error dels metges entro que l’apostema es hubert, e acorrero de lu materias motas, e la sua curacio foc aprop pausada entro que la camba foc fistulada, e faytz son en lu motz orrificis les quals totz getavan poyredura e las humiditatz del cos.	And then the abscess was allowed to mature for a long time due to the error of the doctors, and the matter's particles began to settle. Its cure was nearly paused when the leg became fistulized, and you made orifices in the particle where all exuded pus and the body's humidity.
E adonc le curec multitut de metges entorn dos ans, e no foc en aquels savia ma en la art, entro que yeu fu appelat.	And then the cure lasts for about two years, and not fire is used in those who are skilled in the art, among whom I was called.
E vi la camba de lu e las materias que corrian de lu aquels orrificis per gran cors; e ja le cos de aquel home era tot stabozit e la color de lu era citrina.	And there is the leg and the materials that were flowing from it through those openings; and already the condition of that man was totally stabilized, and the color of his skin was yellowish.
E adonc yeu intromesi la tenta ad un de aquels orrificis e pervenguec la tenta al os.	And then I inserted the probe into one of those openings and guided the probe to the bone.
E aprop yeu e perscrutat tostz les orrificis e trobegui aquels pervenir a lor de totas partidas de la camba.	And then I examined all the openings closely and found those that could be reached from all parts of the leg.
E adonc yeu me coytegui e inscidegui sobre un dels orrificis aquels entro que descrobegui una partida del os, e atrobegui aquel corromput, e ja era terros e corrumput e denigrat; e era ja corrumpuda una partida de la camba entro que havia penetrat entro a la mezola.	And then I laid open and incised over one of the openings, exposing a part of the bone, and found the corrupted tissue, which was already foul, corrupt, and discolored; and a part of the leg had already become corrupted where it had penetrated into the marrow.
E adon yeu serregui aquo que a mi era discubert e preparat del os descubert.	And then I clamped what was revealed to me and prepared the exposed bone.
E yeu cujegui que no fos en le os sino aquela corrupcio la qual abscidigui e serregui, e yeu ja havia derraziguada.	And I believe that it is not in the bone but that corruption which causes abscess and constriction, and I already understood the reason.
E aprop pausegui la restauracio de la plagua am medicina consolidativas per lonc temps, e no es consolidada.	And then proceed with the restoration of the wound using medicinal materials for a long time, and it is not yet consolidated.
E aprop yeu iteregui e descubregui sobre le os segondament sobre le descubriment primier, e atrobegui continua corrupcio am le os.	And then you iterate and discover over the bone according to the first discovery, and find continuous corruption in the bone.
E serregui aquo que a mi apares de aquela corrupcio, e aprop yeu fo perforsat fayre la curacio de lu e restauracio, e no es restaurat.	And constrict what appears to be that corruption, and then you proceed to make the cure and restoration, but it is not restored.
E adonc yeu descubri sobre lu autra veguada e no cessegui inscidir le os petit a petit particuladament e perforsa la restauracio de lu, e no es restaurat entro que inscidigui entorn un palm de lu, e aquel extraxi am la medula sua, e aprop restauregui aquel am medicinas, e es consolidat leugierament e sanat.	And then you discover on the other side and do not cease to incise the bone little by little particularly, and proceed with the restoration. But it is not restored until you incise around a palm of it, and he extracted its marrow, and then restore that with medicines, and it is slightly consolidated and healed.
E no es necessaria iteracio en la operacio de lu e seccio de lu sino per la disposicio de la freulesa de lu e per la paucitat de la tollerancia de lu e paor de lu de mort, quar a lu accidia en totas horas per superfluitat de evacuacio sincopi mala.	And no iteration is necessary in the operation of the section of the limb, but for the disposition of the fracture and for the lack of tolerance and fear of death, which makes him suffer continuously due to excessive evacuation and bad fainting.
E donc sanat es per sanacio entiera, e nada es en loc de os carn dura; e es fayta bona la disposicio de lu en le sieu cors e retornec la vertut de lu; e es conversat en las suas disposicios e no fec a lu contrarietat en ambulacio ni nocument en denguna causa.	And therefore health is through entire cure, and nothing is in place of sound flesh; and it is done well the disposition of him in his body and return the virtue of him; and it is conversed in his dispositions and not forced to him contrary in movement nor damage in any cause.
Mays si es os eminent en loc del cors ja trauquat, lahoras cove que tu secces aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas liament e strenh aquel en la extremitat de aquel os eminent, e comanda ad alcu que extenda aquel en sus; e pausa aquel liament de lana pus gros del primier liament; e aprop lia aquel sobre la carn que es dejos le os, e exten la extramitat de lu per que atires la carn a las partidas dejos, e tu descuebras la carn sobre le loc le qual voles serrar per que la serra no leda la carn.	And if the bone is protruding in a place already injured, then proceed as follows: You must firmly grasp and move that bone at its extremity, commanding someone else to extend it. Place a larger woolen bandage over the flesh where the bone is left, extending its end so that you can draw the flesh towards the area left behind. Then uncover the flesh in the place you wish to cut so that the saw does not damage the flesh.
E pausa fust o taula dejos le os decentment, quar quan tu fas aquo no es prohibida la serra que no secce la carn corrumpuda.	And place a stick or board properly over the bone, for when you do this, it is not forbidden to saw without damaging the broken flesh.
E cove que sia la serradura sobre le loc corrumput petit a petit, quar si es en la concavitat del os corrupcio e no appar en la sua apparicio al sentiment, e forssa a serratura de lu autra veguada.	And ensure that the sawing is over the broken area little by little, for if the corruption is inside the bone and does not appear in its appearance through sensation, you may have to make another pass with the saw.
E si le os es corrumput e no-eminent, abantz es la una partida continuada am la autra, e la corrupcio es al mieg loc o en partida de lu, lahoras tu descuebre la carn de totas partz tota; e aprop pausa fust dejos, e aprop serra aquel de la primiera partida la on es la corrupcio entro que sia continuada la serratura del autra partida.	And if the bone is corrupt and non-projectile, there is one continuous part connected to the other, and the corruption is in the middle of it or a part thereof, then you uncover the flesh from all parts; then place fustes, and closely secure that of the first part where the corruption is located so that the closure of the other part remains continuous.
E sia la serradura segon le loc de la corrupcio un petit, segon que havem dit.	And the closure should be small according to the location of the corruption, as we have said.
E si la corrupcio es en la junctura, inscideys aquela junctura corrumpuda, e serra le os la on es continuat del autra part.	And if the corruption is in the joint, incise that corrupted joint, and set the bone where it is continuous from the other part.
E si de la corrupcio es en la continuacio de doas juncturas, lahoras no es en lu razio sino engen.	And if the corruption is in the continuity of two joints, then it is not in its proper place but misplaced.
E si la corrupcio es en le pecte de la ma o del pe, es mot dificil; empero cove que tu inquieras la corrupcio en qual manieyra appareys a tu, e que abradas aquela, e mondes aquela segon quascuna disposicio la qual es a tu possibla, e am cascum engen sia rectificat a tu, quan no fa a tu contrarietat vena o nervi.	And if the corruption is in the axilla of the arm or the armpit, it is quite difficult; however, you must inquire how the corruption appears to you, and incise and drain that area according to any disposition which is within your ability, and every misplacement should be corrected by you, provided it does not contravene veins or nerves.
E sapias qual es inscididors e las serras a inscidir aquestz osses son motz segon le situament dels osses, e la preparacio de aquels, e la grosseza de aquels, e la subtilitat e la grandeza e la parvitat de aquels, e la duricia e la lor raritat; per que cove que tu prepares a tota specia de operacio estrument convenient ad aquela opperacio.	And consider which are incisors and the saws to cut these bones are made of according to the position of the bones, and the preparation of those, and their size, and their subtlety and greatness and smallness, and their hardness and their rarity; so that you may prepare for every kind of operation an instrument suitable to that operation.
E sapias que aquela operacio significa a tu sobre la specia del strument del qual indigeysses; quan am tu es gran studi e lonc e conoyssensa de las manieyras de aquesta art, e testimoni de manieyras de malautias, quar lahoras ja tu las avias per tu meteys aquo que es convenient a lu dels sturmentz a tota malautia.	And consider that operation to you concerning the kind of instrument on which you will depend; when you have great study and long knowledge of the ways of this art, and experience in the ways of diseases, so that whenever you have them you choose what is convenient for it from the instruments for all diseases.
E yeu so a tu formant en la fi de aquest capitol le nombre dels instrumentz les quals pausaras cum eyssimples am les quals proceziras a la tua prohibicio la qual experimentaras sobre las autras.	And you shall form at the end of this chapter the number of the instruments which you will use as you please, and on which you will proceed according to your desire, which you will experiment with on the others.
Forma de serra:	Form of the saw:
Forma de autra serra:	Form of another saw:
Forma de autra serra:	Form of another saw:
Forma de autra serra gran:	Forma of another shall be great:
Forma de ray:	Forma of ray:
Sia le cap de aquest ray segon la forma de cap de clau stellat, e les puntz de lu sian segon la forma dels puntz alstefegi.	Let the head of this ray be according to the form of the head of a star key, and its points be according to the form of thestellar spikes.
E no conveneys sino que am aquel sian confricadatz les caps de las juncturas quan so corrumpudas, o es la boca gran ampla.	And do not convey any other treatment but that the points come into contact with the heads of the joints when they are broken, or with the large open mouth.
Forma de razori major dels autres:	Forma of greater razor:
Forma de razori menor:	Forma of lesser razor:
Forma de razori lat:	Forma of broad razor:
Forma de serra autra decentment fayta: sia fayt arc de lu pus sobira e la acuitat de lu de ferr, e le membre de lu de boys punhal descentment fayt.	Forma of another saw decently made: let it be made with an arc above and the sharpness of its edge of iron, and the handle of its blade of well-made sticks.
Forma de lu:	Forma of it:
Forma de razori en la qual ha concavitat:	Forma of the razor which has a cavity:
Forma de razori autra subtil:	Shape of a razor, or another fine:
Forma de autra razori de curvada extremitat:	Shape of another razor with a curved end:
Forma de rasori petit semblant a tenta:	Shape of a small razor resembling a needle:
Forma de incisori am le qual so inscidit les osses:	Shape of a cutting instrument with which one cuts the bones:
Forma de inscisori autra minor:	Shape of another cutting instrument, smaller:
Forma de un autra inscissori; aquest semblant a ray, e la extremitat de lu es cum serra, e es exhibit en motz locs en la razio dels osses:	Shape of another cutting instrument; this resembles a ray, and its end is like a point, and it is used in several places in the proportion of the bones:
Forma de ray lo qual conveneys a rasio de aquel que es perforat dels osses:	Shape like a ray which is proportionate to the bone that is perforated:
E la extremitat de lu es triangulada e de aguda extremitat.	And its end is triangular and sharp.
E es fayt de ferr de India , e semblantment cove que totas las causas que havem ditas de rasoris e de inscissoris e de serras.	And it is made of iron from India, and resembles a cavity like all the causes we have said about razors, cutting instruments, and saws.
De inscizio extremitatz e de la serratura dels osses.	For the cutting end and the joint of the bones.
Las extremitatz se poyresso o per causa intrinseca o per causa extrinseca, o cum tu auras medicat aquela corrupcio per curacio de aquelas medicinas e la curacio no comfereys, o vezes la corrupcio anar deves le membre la qual no percuteys denguna causa, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel membre entro aquo la hon acossec la corrupcio, per que le malaute evasesca per aquo de mort o de malicia que es major defeliment del membre.	The extremities may be affected either by an intrinsic cause or by an extrinsic one, or as you have medicated that corruption through the treatment of those medicines and the cure does not bring relief, or sometimes the corruption goes away from the member which you do not perceive by any cause, then it is necessary for you to enter that member into this so that the corruption accedes the wound, in order to expel the evil either through death or malice, which is a greater misfortune of the member.
E le senhal de aquel al qual accideys, es que·l membre es fayt negre entro que sia cujat que foc la ja comburit, o se poyreys aprop la negror entro que la poyredura aquela ane entro aquel membre que siec lu e que prengua tot le cors; e donc coyta te am inscizio de aquel.	The sign of the one upon whom this occurs is that the member becomes black before it turns red, as if already burned by fire. You may notice the blackness within that part where the reddening enters that member which affects him and takes over his entire body; therefore, examine carefully that part.
E semblantment si es causa de la corrupcio percussio de alcunas causas venenosas ayssi cum de scorpio mari o de vupera o de rutela e de semblantz.	And similarly, if the cause of the corruption is a percussion by some venomous causes such as from a scorpion, a viper, or a rattlesnake, and similar signs.
E si la corrupcio o la percussio es en la extremitat del dit, lahoras tu inscideys le dit e no dones spazi a la corrupcio per que ane entro a la ma.	And if the corruption or the percussion is in the extremity of the finger, then you cut the finger and do not give space to the corruption so that it enters your hand.
E semblantment si accedeys a la ma, lahoras tu inscideys aquela de la razit del focil, e no dones spazi a la corrupcio entro que prengua en le focil del bras.	And when you approach the hand, then incise that of the axilla, and do not give space for corruption to enter within the arm.
E si envezeys aquel, lahoras inscideys le bras entro al coyde en la junctura.	And if you prefer that, then incise the arm between the elbow at the joint.
E si passa otra la corrupcio e la vezes enviro le coyde, lahoras en aquel es la mort del malaute; e aministrar autra causa otra aquo en curacio es quantitat de vertut.	And if corruption passes and surrounds the elbow, then at that point is the death of the patient; and another cause given other than this for cure is the quantity of virtue.
E semblantment fay del pe quan corrupcio envezeys le dit del pe, lahoras tu inscideys aquel entro ad un dels nozes.	And similarly, do for the foot when corruption prefers the inside of the foot, then incise there between one of the bones.
E si pren en la pente del pe, lahoras tu inscideys tot le pe.	And if it takes in the sole of the foot, then incise the entire foot.
Mays si pueja entro al denol, lahoras tu inscideys la camba entro a la junctura del denol.	But if it penetrates into the sole, then incise the leg between the joint of the sole.
E si la corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denol, lahoras en lu no es engen sino dimissio, e layssar le malaute a la mort.	And if corruption has already pervaded the sole, then there is nothing but dismissal, and leave the patient to die.
E la manieyra de inscidir le membre o de serrar lu es que tu strenhas le liament en la partida pus dejos la qual voles inscidir, e strenh autre liament sobre le loc; e extenda le ministre un liament a las partidas dejos, e extenda le ministra autra liament en sus; e tu separa la carn la qual es entre dos liamentz ain spatum lat entro que sia descuberta tota la carn; e aprop sia inscidit o serrat.	And the manner of incising the member or closing it is that you hold the tendon in one part and leave which you want to incise, and tie another tendon over the spot; extend the assistant's hand with a ligament to those parts left, and extend the assistant another ligament on their side; you separate the flesh which is between two ligaments until all the flesh is uncovered; then it should be incised or closed.
E cove que sia pausat drap de li de totas partidas per so que no toque le loc sa, e que vengua al malaute lesio ajustada e apostema caut.	And ensure that a cloth is placed around all parts so that it does not touch the spot, and that when the lesion comes to the patient, it be adjusted and the cautery applied properly.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc quan obras, lahoras tu cauteriza le loc coytadament, o pausa sus lu alcunas polveras restrenhentz le sanc; e aprop retorna a la tua medicacio entro que sia complida.	And if by chance there is a flow of blood while you work, then cauterize the spot frequently, or place some constricting powders on it to stop the blood; then return to your treatment until it is completed.
E aprop lia le membre plaguat am liament al u convenient, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then tie the injured member with a ligament as required, and treat it until it is healed.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc a un home en le sieu pe, aquest meteys accident le qual yeu e a tu recomtat, le qual es quar accidic a lu negror en le sieu pe am adustio que era asemblada a combustio de foc.	And I advise you that if an injury occurs on a man's foot, the doctor and you should examine this accident which we have advised, which is quite common in blackness on his foot resembling the combustion of fire.
E aquela corrupcio accidic primierament en le sieu dit entro que tendec tot le pe.	And that corruption initially occurs within the said tissue where it tends throughout the foot.
E adonc aquel home preparec per si meteys pus que vic la curacio anar al membre am la vehemencia de lu que atrobec de dolor e de adustrio de lu, e el inscidic aquel pe entro a la junctura, e foc sanat.	And then that man prepares himself to put more faith in the cure as he sees the healing proceed in the limb with the intensity of his pain and heat subsiding, and the affected foot enter into the joint, and the wound heal.
Lonc temps accidic a lu aquela meteyssa corrupcio en le dit de la ma indic.	Long ago this corruption occurred in the hand indicated.
E adonc venc a mi, e so me perforsat repercutir aquela superfluitat am aquo que pausegui sobre la ma de las medicinas, aprop la mundificacio del cos de lu; e no es repercussa la superfluitat e comensec anar al autra dit entro que comensec en la ma.	And then it comes to me, and I perform to reflect that superfluity on what is placed over the hand of the medicaments, near the transformation of the body; and the superfluity is not reflected but begins to proceed into the other part where it began in the hand.
E el apelec me a inscidir la ma de lu, e yeu no volgui far aquo sperant sobre la repercussio de aquela superfluitat, e mays que temegui deves la inscizio de la ma de lu mort, quar la vertut del malaute era sobre cazement.	And they make me incise the hand of the patient, and I do not want to do this hoping for the reflection of that superfluity, but more because I fear the incision of the hand of the patient will be fatal, as the virtue of gout was strong.
E pus que el se desperec de mi, es retornat en la sua terra e pervenguec a mi que aquel home preparec e inscidic la sua ma tota, e es sanat.	And after he awakens from my presence, he returns to his land and informs me that that man prepared and incised his entire hand, and he was cured.
E no he adhuzida aquesta narracio sino per que sia adjutori sobre aquo que catz de aquesta malautia, e que sia significacio per la qual sia significada e segon la qual sia obrat.	And I have added this narrative only as an aid regarding what is known about this illness, and as a guide by which it may be understood and acted upon.
De cura sinuum et qualitate clisterizationis cum medicinis.	On the care of colic and the quality of cleansing enemas with medicines.
Quan accideys apostema en alcus membres carnozes e·l spazi de l’apostema es prolonguat entro que fa colleccio de sania, e aprop es romput e perforat, e es eyssida de lu la sania, e roman le loc vuoyt quays cum si era vayssel, e la codena que es desobre lu ayssi cum drap subtiliat, e no es pervengut a deriera corrupcio, e no inprimeys en le os o en nervi ni en liament, es apelat sinu, e no es nompnat fistula.	When an abscess occurs in any fleshly member and the space of the abscess is prolonged to collect pus, and then it breaks and is perforated, and the pus is drained from it, and the area remains clean as if it were a vessel, and the skin above it remains thin like fine cloth, and no further corruption occurs, and it does not imprint on bone or nerve nor in muscle, it is called colic, and is not named fistula.
Mays empero si le spazi es prolonguat entro que la corrupcio enprema en alcun membre, lahoras es appelada fistula e no zukem.	Yet if the space is prolonged to a point where corruption presses into any member, then it is called a fistula and we stop.
E la cura de lu es que inscidas aquela codena tota ayssi cum es revolvut, e majorment quan es subtiliada e es fayta cum drap, e comfizas que no adhereys al loc per la sua corrupcio.	And the treatment for it is to remove that skin entirely as if it were stirred, especially when it remains thin like cloth, and you must ensure that it does not stick to the area due to its corruption.
Mays si tu speras que la codena adheresca e que aquela corrupcio no aja conseguit per deriera consecucio, e en la codena ha spassitut de cara, lahoras tu cura aquel am clisteri.	If you hope that the string adheres and that the corruption has not reached an irreparable consequence, and on the string it has passed face-on, then you cure that with a clyster.
E es que consideras al sinu, e lahoras si es gran, e·l brac que yeys es de fetent odor, lahoras clisteriza aquel am medicament egipciac le qual es de oli e vi agre e ziniar recebent partidas enguals, e sian ajustadas en un vayssel, e sian coytas sobre le foc entro que’l medicament se fassa rog e pervengua a specitut de mel.	And you consider the string, and if it is large, and the hand that holds it has an unpleasant odor, then treat that with a clyster using a medicinal Egyptian remedy which consists of oil and wine mixed in equal parts, and be sure to place them in a vessel, and keep the mixture over fire until it simmers and reaches the desired consistency.
E aprop tu pren de lu aquo que es necessari e dissolveys lu am aygua e mel; e clisteriza am aquel le sinu, e strenh le orrifici de lu, e layssa la medicina en lu per la quantitat de doas horas.	And then you take what is necessary from it and dissolve the medicine in water and honey; then treat the string with this clyster, strengthen the orifices of the area, and leave the medicine in it for about two hours.
E aprop extratz aquela am sprecio; e fay aquo per tantz dias entro que sia mundificat le sinu e sia remauguda la pudor.	And then extract that medicine; do this for several days until the string is purified and the wound is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es clisterizat am aygua de cendre, quan no es a tu prezent aquest medicament; e es que tu prenguas la cendra de vitz, e met sobre lu aygua; e aprop cola aquela e clisteriza aquel am ela entro que te confizes que·l sinu lahoras es ostat.	And sometimes it is treated with an aqueous solution of ash when this medicine is not available; then you take the ashes from vitex, put them in water; and extract that and treat the string with it until you are sure the string has been properly treated.
E si le malaute no ha tollerancia sobre le medicament egipciac ni l’aygua de la cendre, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aygua e mel e quays sia mesclat ziniar trissat, e clisteriza aquel am vi e mel mesclat, quar de proprietat de mel es que mondifique e lave, e le vi fa adherir le sinu, e majorment quan en le vi ha superfluitat de stipticitat e de siccitat.	And if the patient does not tolerate the Egyptian medicine nor the water of the ash, then prepare that mixture with water and honey mixed with seventy parts, and prepare that mixture with wine and honey mixed, for it is the property of honey to purify and wash, and wine causes adhesion in the sinew, especially when there is an excess of stringency and dryness in the wine.
E cum tu fas aquo alcunas veguadas e te comfizes que·l sinu ja es remaugut, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aquo que fa naysser la carn en lu.	And when you have passed it several times and you are sure that the sinew is already softened, then administer that mixture with water that causes flesh to grow in it.
E es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e dissolveys aquel am oli rozat e vi stiptic; o que clisterizas aquel am alcunas medicinas e enguentz autres que hajan las proprietatz les quals ja he yeu scritz en le tractat dels enguents.	And you take dyeafinicon ointment, dissolve that mixture with oil rubbed and winestringent; or you administer that mixture with several medicines and apply other ointments that have the properties which I have already written in the treatise on ointments.
E si le orrifici del sinu es streyt en le qual no es recebuda la canula del clisteri, lahoras tu le amplifique aquel am ferr petit a petit, e pausa en lu calgua envolopada en enguent egipciac o en enguent basilicon entro que sia amplificat.	And if the opening of the sinew is wide in which the clister tube cannot be inserted, then gradually enlarge that hole with a small iron instrument, and place it in the hole wrapped in Egyptian or basilicon ointment until it is enlarged.
E semblantment si le orrifici es ample, lahoras tu agregua las labias de lu am sutura e layssa de lu quantitat en la qual intre le clisteri ses addicio.	And if the opening is wide, then you should suture the lips of it and leave enough quantity in which the enema can be added.
E si le orrifici de lu del qual corr le brac es elevat a las partidas desus, lahoras secca aquel en le pus bas loc que es en lu per que le brac corra entro dejos, quar quan le brac es coartat en la preondeza de sinu la carn esser en lu engendrada.	And if the opening from which the fluid flows is elevated above the upper parts, then dry that area below it so that the fluid can flow into it. When the fluid is constrained in the depth of the sinus, flesh will be generated there.
E si no es a tu possible seccar le sinu entro al enviro del os pus bas segon que voles, lahoras te perforssa que prepares le membre am preparacio per la qual corr de lu le brac leugierament segon que es a tu apparelhat e que no sia en lu retengut alcuna causa del brac.	And if it is not possible to dry the sinus in the area below as you wish, then you should perforate the member with a preparation through which the fluid can flow slightly according to your ability and ensure that no cause of obstruction retains the fluid.
E pren medicinas consolidativas que sian pausadas sobre le sinu convenientz ad aquo que vols exxten aquelas sobre drap de li.	And take conservative medicines that are applied gently over the sinus in a manner suitable for what you want, extending them over a cloth.
E le drap sia de tan gran quantitat cum fa la comunicacio de tot le sinu; e aprop inscidey am las forfexs en le dreyt del orrifici del sinu un trauc pus ample un pauc que l’orrifici del sinu; e aprop exten sobre autre drap de li dels enguentz leons segon la quantitat del trauc, e pausa le sobre aquel per posicio longinqua del orrifici del sinu per que sia aleujat le eyssiment del brac de lu e no ostes le drap gran sino aprop alcus dyas una veguada.	And the cloth should be of such quantity as to communicate with the entire sinus; then cut the scissors straight along the right side of the sinus orifice, making a slightly wider incision than the sinus orifice; and extend the lion ointment on another piece of cloth according to the size of the incision, placing it far from the sinus orifice to allow the evacuation of the fluid and not disturb the cloth greatly but for about a few days once.
Mays aquel que es sobre le orrifici del sinu, le qual remauguas en tota hora per so que yesca aquo que es ajust en lu del brac.	May he who is over the opening of the sinus, whom you cauterize at all times so that it does not come out what is stuck in it with the arm.
E per que sapias si aquo que corr de lu del brac es mot o pauc, o es digest, o es no-digest.	And that you may know if what flows from the arm is much or little, or is digestible, or is non-digestible.
E am aysso tu considera le loc de aquel sinu, si en lu sent le pacient dolor o no, e si es en lu apostema.	And thus you consider the place of that sinus, if in it the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess.
E cum la tua medicacio es prolonguada en la tal manieyra, e vesas la matiera que es gitada sobre le orrifici del sinu ja adhereys, o se apropria adherencia, lahoras le mayti tu le deslia o le tertz dia, e quan deslias la plagua, lahoras muda le drap per autre e renova le enguent.	And as your treatment is prolonged in this manner, and you see the matter that is discharged over the opening of the sinus already adheres, or there is a growing adherence, then you may remove it or let it dry for one day. When you remove the wound dressing, then change the cloth with another and renew the ointment.
Mays si del sinu aprop lon spazi yeys virus subtil, lahoras no te desperes de la adherencia de li, quar la sanacio de lu se apropria, quar so alcus homes en les quals tarda generacio de carn en las lors plaguas, e de aquels so en les quals es fayt le contrari de lu.	May it be that the sinus has a subtle virus spreading, then do not neglect the adherence of this, for the healing of it appropriates, for some people in whom flesh generation in their wounds is slow, and among those, it is done contrary to it.
E si del sinu aprop motz dias es yssit brac indigest, lahoras sapias que·l sinu no adhereys; e si es tardada la adherencia del sinu e es la causa prolonguada, lahoras tu ajusta en exsiccacio de las medicinas, e si las medicinas so humidas en lor substancia e en la sua vertut, son seccas ayssi cum enguent dyafinicon, quan es en lu ajustada superfluitat de addicio de zegi.	And if after several days the sinew is still movable and not adhered, then you know that the adhesion of the sinew has been delayed; and if the delay in adhesion is due to a prolonged cause, then you adjust it by drying with medicines. And if the medicines are wet in their substance and in their virtue, they are dried like an ointment of yafinicon when there is an excess addition of resin.
E le mays derier am le qual es curat, es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e sia dissout en oli rozat, e sia sobre lu vojat vi antic engual en la sua substancia, e aprop comfeys aquel am lu, e usa de aquel.	And the best remedy for what is cured, is to take an ointment of yafinicon and dissolve it in sweet oil, and apply it very evenly over it, and use that.
E ja fa semblant en aquela accio, quan no y a brac, enguent dyafinicon, mel quan es coyt entro que sia engrossat, e usa de lu; o que prenguas mirra e aloen e enses, e trissa tot e polveriza sobre le mel quan es sus le foc, e aprop lineys aquo sobre drap e strenh aquel sobre le sinu; e lineys aquel am le mel le qual has cuoyt entro que es engrossat, e polveriza sobre drap e strenh aquel.	And pretend in that action when there is no bone, use yafinicon ointment, mixed with honey and made thick, and use it; or take myrrh and aloes and incense, mix them all together and powder them over the honey which is on the fire, and lay this over cloth and strengthen it over the sinew; and lay this on the honey which you have cooked and made thick, and powder it over cloth and strengthen it.
E alcunas veguadas so administratz am lu aristologia longua e razitz de lili celesti (e es lili celesti) e farina de errs e centaurea, e usa de aquels simples o ajustatz, trissa aquels e cribela e polveriza sobre le mel le qual he recomtat; e husa de lu.	And sometimes it is administered to him long aristology and reasons of celestial lily (and the celestial lily) and flour of iris and centaury, and use those simples or adjusted, squeeze them and sift over the honey which I have recommended; and use it.
E si es prolonguat le sinu, e no es sanat per aquesta curacio, lahoras sapias que la corrupcio es en le preon de lu, e ja fa enquisicio en les osses o en les autres membres durs o als liaments; lahoras tu le cura am curacio fistular, ayssi cum desus es dit.	And if the sinus is prolonged and does not heal by this cure, then you should know that the corruption is in the root of it, and you must investigate in the bones or in the other hard members or the ligaments; then you cure it by fistula treatment, as was said above.
De curacio de panarici et unguis attritae et incisione digiti additi et sectione.	For the cure of tumors, nails worn away, and incision of the digit with sectioning.
Panarici es apostema le qual nays dejos la ungla del dit pous de la ma o del pe, e fort leu nays en les autres ditz, e cum es prolonguat e la sua curacio es mens prezada, o es apostemat de apostema caut, o es corrumput, e gieta brac entro que corrodeys la razitz de la ungla, e fort leu corromp aquela tota, e fort leu perve la sua corrupcio al os entro que es a lu odor fetent, e es fayta la extremitat del dit lada, e la color de lu es fayta fusca.	Panniculus is an apostema which leaves the nail of the finger or toe, and it swells in other fingers, and as it prolongs, its cure is less desired; or it becomes a cautrated apostema, or it is corrupted, and you insert a stick that corrodes the root of the nail, and thoroughly corrupt that part entirely, and let its corruption penetrate to the bone within which it produces an offensive odor, and the extremity of the finger is cut off, and its color becomes yellowish.
E donc quan tu auras aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas am ferr tota la superfluitat que es romasa de la ungla e aprop cauteriza la plagla aprop aquo, quar cauteri mot es juvatiu en aysso.	And when you have done that as we have said in the division and do not relate your cure, then you should enter to remove all the fluid that has escaped from the joint and place a cautery near it, for a cautery is beneficial in this.
Mays si le os es sa e la ungla es sana, e las addicios de la ungla vuoydas ja compremen las carns a las partidas dedintz, e comensan lu punger e ledeysso aquela, lahoras cove que tu pauses ray subtil dejos le angle de la ungla que pungeys la carn, e impelleys aquela sus e inscideys aquela carn am facilitat, e pausa sobre aquo que roman de la carn de las medicinas comburentz corrosivas entro que sia tot remaugut; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	If the bone is sound and the joint is healthy, and the adducions of the joint have already compressed the flesh into its interior parts, and begin to pierce it, then you should pause with a fine needle at the angle of the joint that pierces the flesh, push it out, and incise the flesh with ease, placing your hand over what remains of the flesh as medicines burn and corrode inside until it is thoroughly treated; then treat that with ointment until it heals.
Mays si la corrupcio ja enprem en le os, lahoras cove que tu inscidas le os aquel e le extraguas, car nul temps no es sanat que sia en lu le os corrumput.	If the corruption has already reached the bone, then you should incise the bone there and extract it, for nothing is healed that remains in the corrupt bone.
E si vezes la corrozio e la corupcio anar en le dit, lahoras tu inscideys aquel en un dels nozes segons que es premesa la sua rememoracio, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you see the corrosion and corruption spreading to that side, then you should incise there in one of the joints according to where the lesion is located, and treat it until it heals.
Mays si a la ungla endeve percussio o atricio, e endeve en aquela dolor vehement, lahoras cove que tu al comensament fleubotomes le malaute, e aprop secca la ungla am spatum agut am seccio transversa desus en jus, e guarda te que la seccio no pervengua entro a la carn que es dejos la ungla, quar tu faras accidir al malaute dolor vehement, e sira causa a nativitat de la carn ajustada superflua en le loc; e aprop cura aquel loc am aquo que ceda dolor.	If at the joint there is percussion or friction, and in that pain there is great violence, then you must at the beginning phlebotomize the patient, and soon dry the joint with sharp spatula by transverse section above with juice, and guard yourself that the section does not penetrate into the flesh left by the joint, for you will cause the patient great pain, which will be a cause of natural excess fit in the place; and cure that place with what alleviates pain.
Mays dit ajustat, le qual es nat en las mas de alcus homes, fort leu es carnos tot, e fort leu so en lu osses, o fort leu es en lu ungla.	But said fit, which is natural in many people, the flesh is very light and loose in them, or the joint is very light.
E alcus de lu son natz en la razit de la junctura, o es la nativitat de lu en alcus nozes dels ditz.	And some of them are located in the vicinity of the joint, or the natural condition of the fingers is due to several nodules.
Mays aquel que es nat en alcus nozes del dit no se mau, e aquest que es nat en las juncturas fort leu es maugut.	But that which is natural in several nodules of the finger is not harmful, and this which is natural in the joints is very loose.
E de aquels que son natz carnoses, la seccio es leugiera, e es que tu inscidas aquel deves la sua razitz am spatum lat.	And of those that are natural fleshly, the section is light, and you should incise it gently with a sharp knife.
Mays de aquel que es nat en la razitz de la junctura, la curacio es dificil; e donc guarda te de la abscizio de lu.	More difficult for those born near the joint, the cure is hard; therefore, beware of its removal.
Mays en aquel que es nat en dit deves les nozes, cove que tu inscidas al comensament la carn de lu am inscizio redonda entro al os, e aprop serra am una de aquelas serras convenientz ad aquo, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	More difficult in those born near the knee, ensure that you incise the beginning of the flesh around into the bone, and nearby it will be one of those convenient joints for this, and soon cure what is within to become healthy.
Mays consolidacio la qual accideys als ditz entre lor motas veguadas o per nativitat del home que nays enayssi, o per consolidacio de plagua o per combustio de foc, o per semblantz, adonc cove que secces aquela consolidacio entro que les ditz retorno a la sua forma natural.	More difficult the consolidation which occurs in the fingers among their joints from disease or from birth or due to consolidation of plague or from burning, then you must cure that consolidation so that the fingers return to their natural form.
E aprop pausa entre lor draps de li enfuzes en oli rozat per que no sian consolidatz leugierament, e separa entre aquels, o pausa entre aquels una lamina de plom subtil entro que sia consolidat segon que cove.	And then place between his sheets the affected part in olive oil to prevent it from consolidating lightly, and separate between them, or place between them a thin sheet of lead so that it may consolidate as needed.
E semblantment si accideys consolidacio en alcus ditz am la palma, lahoras tu secca aquela consolidacio segon que es preparada e conveneys a la figura del membre.	And similarly, if consolidation occurs in some fingers at the palm, then you must dry that consolidation as prepared and conform it to the figure of the member.
De inscizio de vices, so son varicas.	Of the varicose veins, so they are.
Vices so son varicas, e so venas envolutas grossas plenas de superfluitatz melencolicas las quals veno en motz dels membres del cors, e le major adveniment de lor en las cambas, e majorment en las cambas dels itinerantz e dels laborantz e dels portantz.	Varicose veins are so called, and they are thickened veins full of melancholic superfluities that appear on the parts of the body, and their greatest occurrence is in the groins, especially in the groins of those who travel much, those who work much, and those who carry things.
Adonc cove que tu administres purguacio del cors de colera negra alcunas veguadas am expulcio fort, e aprop sangna le pacient de la vena basilica.	Then administer a purge of the body from black bile several times with strong expulsion, and immediately bleed the patient from the internal jugular vein.
Mays la curacio de lor am ferr es segon dos manieyras: la una es que sia inscizas e sia atirat aquel sanc negre, e l’autra manieyra es que sia elevada la vena e sia extrayta tota.	More often, the treatment of them is according to two methods: one is to incise and draw out that black blood, and the other method is to elevate the vein and extract it entirely.
La seccio de lu es segon aquesta manieyra: embroca al comensament la camba am aygua cauda mot entro que le sanc gros sia resolvut, que es feculent de la camba, e aprop strenh la camba del malaute a la partida pus sobirana de la coyssa entro a la partida dejos del denol am una benda, e aprop secca la vena en un loc, o en dos, o en tres am seccio ampla, e aprop eleva le sanc negra am la tieua ma de la partida dejos de la camba entro en sus, e desus en jus, entro que del sanc sia yssida la quantitat que voles e que vezes habastar, e la qual tollera la vertut del malaute.	The sectioning is done in this manner: soak the groin area with warm water until the thick blood has resolved, which is febrile from the groin. Then strengthen the part of the patient's thigh above the buttocks between the inner and outer thighs with a bandage. Next, secure the vein in one, two, or three places with a wide excision. Use your hand to elevate the black blood from below the groin upwards, into the abdomen and above it, until the desired quantity has drained out, which is sufficient to neutralize the malignity of the disease.
E aprop lia aquela, e comanda a lu que abstengua de las viandas colera negra engendrantz.	And then ligate her, and command her to abstain from foods generating black bile.
E itera la curacio per fleubotomia quan las venas so umplidas e aquo notz al malaute.	And continue the cure through phlebotomy when the veins are full and this is noted by the patient.
Mays la elevacio de lor es segon aquesta manieyra: tu que razas la camba del malaute, si en lu so motz pels, e aprop met le en banh e embroca la camba de lu am aygua cauda entro que s’enrogesesca e las venas sian exuberadas; o que sia exercitat per exercici fort, si banh no es a tu present, entro que·l membre sia scalfat.	Raise the limb in this manner: you raise the leg of the patient, if there are tumors on it, and then immerse it in warm water and wrap the leg with a wet cloth until it becomes red and the veins are prominent; or exercise it with strong exercise if warm water is not available, until the limb is warmed.
E aprop secsa la codena en le dreyt de la vena per seccio en le lonc o en le derier de lu deves le denol, o en le pus bas de lu deves lo talo.	And then dry the vein along its length or at the rear of it you make a incision, or at the lower part you cut it.
E aprop uobre la codena am uncis e excorja la vena de tota part entro que appara al sentiment, e es deves la appericio de lu que vezes aquela roga declinant a negror.	And then cut the vein with forceps and strip the vein from all sides until it appears to you that it is darkening. You should notice when that vein begins to darken.
E donc cum evazeys e de la codena tu vezes aquela blanca quays sia corda.	And then, as you extract the vein, you see that white thing which is the cord.
E aprop tu met dejos aquela le ray entro que sia elevada e sia gitada de la codena, e sospen aquela am onci orp leon.	And then you place that ligament elevated and curved from the knee, and suspend it on an iron hook or lion's claw.
E aprop secsa autra seccio aprop aquela seccio per tres ditz, e aprop excorja la codena de la partida desus de la vena entro que apparia.	And then sear another section near that section for three digits, and cut the knee from the upper part of the vein where it appears.
E aprop eleva aquela e inscideys aquela en deriera seccio deves le talo, e aprop extratz aquela e eleva aquela entro que sia yssida per la seccio segonda, e aprop extratz aquela de la seccio que es sobre aquela.	And then elevate that and incise the rear section of the tendon, and extract that and elevate it where it enters through the second section, and extract that from the section above it.
E fay aquo entro que extraguas aquela de la seccio que es pus sobirana o pus auta de totas las seccios, entro que tota es yssida; e lahoras inscideys aquela.	And do this where you extract that from the section that is highest above or higher than all other sections, where everything enters; and then incise that.
E si no obezeys a tu ad extrayre e elevar, lahoras intromet una agulha am fiel fort doble e ligua aquela e extratz la, o intromet dejos lu le ray e revolveys la tua ma a tota part entro qu’en sia getada.	And if you do not obey to extract and elevate, then insert a strong double-threaded needle and tie that, and extract it. Or insert that iron rod and rotate your hand in all directions where it is curved.
E guarda te que no sia inscidida; quar si es trencada, es fayt a tu dificil elevar aquela mot e es vengut sobre le malaute per aquela nocument.	And be careful that it is not incised; for if it is broken, it will be difficult to elevate that part and the injury has come about through that damage.
E cum aquela tota auras fora-gitada, lahoras pausa sobre le loc de la plagua lana submerssa en vi e oli rozat e oli no-rozat, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And when all of it has been expelled, then place over the wound lint soaked in wine and oil, whether it be well-roasted or not roasted, and care for it until it is healed.
E si la vit es contrayta havent tortuositat a la qual sia envolucio a las partidas, e no es segon rectitut segon que havem dit, lahoras cove que tu fendas sobre aquela a tota partida de tortuositat de lu e als locs de envolucio de lu, e aprop suspen aquela am uncis entro que eleves aquela tota.	And if the vessel is constricted having tortuosity in which there is an encapsulation at certain parts, and it is not according to straightness as we have said, then cut into that at all parts of its tortuosity and at the locations of its encapsulation, and place it under tension so that you elevate that entirely.
E guarda te deves la tua seccio que no inscidas la vena e que no plagues aquela, quar dificil sira a tu elevar aquela; e serva la tua prudencia en aquela.	And guard yourself in your section so that you do not cut the vein and that you do not damage it, for it will be difficult to elevate that; serve your prudence there.
Forma del inscident am le qual es seccada vit:	Form of the incident where the vessel is constricted:
Forma de unci orp:	Form of the incision wound:
No es a lu accuitat ayssi cum als uncis ni es de aguda extremitat per so que no plague la vena; e es de grossa flexibilitat leon, quar si era subtil, inscidira la vena per la sua subtilitat; habantz es en lu superflua grosseza ayssi cum havem dit.	It is not cut as with ordinary incisions nor does it have an acute extremity because it does not damage the vein; and it has a large flexibility like a lion, for if it were subtle, it would cut the vein due to its subtlety; having this in its superfluous thickness as we have said.
De extraccio venae cruris.	From the extraction of the calf vein.
Aquesta vena es engendrada en las cambas en terras caudas ayssi cum al- Ategi en terra de Arabics e en las terras de India caudas e aridas de pauca teneritat e en las quals no nays erba ni aybre.	This vein is generated in the legs in lands with cold and arid soils of little tenacity, in which neither grass nor trees grow.
E fort leu es engendrada en autres locs del cors otra las cambas.	And the vein is generated in other parts of the body besides the legs.
E la gestacio de lu es de putrefaccio que ve dejos la codena ayssi cum venen dedintz le cors serpentz e vermps e scarides e verms engendrantz entre la codena e la carn.	And its formation is through putrefaction that breaks down the connective tissue, just as venom inside the body becomes serpents, worms, and lice that generate between the connective tissue and the flesh.
E senhal de la suscepcio de l’adveniment de lu es de aquesta vena que accideys en la camba enflammacio vehement; e aprop le loc es vesicat; e aprop comensa la vena yssir del loc de aquela vesicacio quays sembla razit de planta.	And the sign of the susceptibility to the onset of this is when you encounter inflammation in the leg intensely; then, nearby, the area becomes vesicated; and nearby, the vein starts to protrude from the site of that vesication, seeming like a plant emerging.
E adonc cum appar de lu la extremitat, lahoras cove que tu envolvas sobre aquela una pessa de plom del qual sia le pes de una drac. entro a ii drac., e noza aquela e layssa le plom suspendut de la camba.	And then, as the extremity appears, when you wrap a piece of lead around it, which weighs as much as the skin of a dragon, insert two dragons' worth of lead, and mark that spot, letting the lead hang from the leg.
E tantas veguadas cum yeys de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, envolveys aquo em plom e noza aquel.	And as often as any cause affects the parts outside, wrap this in lead and apply it there.
E si mot es prolonguat, lahoras tu inscideys una partida de lu e envolopa le romanent; e no inscidas aquela de razit entro que sia fora yssida, quar si inscideys aquela es contrayta e intra en la carn e fa accidir apostema e poyredura en le loc e ulceracio mala.	And if the wound is prolonged, then you incise a part of it and wrap the remainder; and do not incise that which is inside while part is outside, for if you incise that, it will contract and enter the flesh, causing an abscess, swelling, and bad ulceration.
Per que cove que sia tractada suaument e sia extrayta petit a petit, entro que sia fora-gitada del derier de lu e no remangua de lu alcuna causa en le cors.	That which must be treated extensively and extracted little by little, until it is completely expelled from the anus, and no cause should remain in the body.
E de aquesta vena es yssit en alcus homes que es en la sua longitut de v palms e de detz e ja es pervengut a mi que yssic un de xx palms.	And from this vein, some men are situated whose length is of five palms and ten, and I have already been informed that one was cut of twenty palms.
E si es inscidida en la hora de la sua medicacio, lahoras intromet lo ray en le trauc de lu e perfora aquela am lonc trauc am le cors, entro que sia evacuat tot aquo que es en la materia, e administra putrefaccio del loc per alcus dias am medicinas; e aprop cura aquela per la curacio de apostemas.	And if it is incised at the time of its medication, then insert the probe into the tract of the patient and perforate that which is long in the body, until all that is in the matter is evacuated. Then administer putrefaction to the area for several days with medicines; and cure that by the treatment of abscesses.
E aquesta vena alcunas veguadas ha motz ramps, e majorment quan apar a la junctura del pe o en le pe, e veno a lu motz orrificis, e es yssit de quascu orrifici ram.	And this vein sometimes has protrusions, especially when it appears at the joint of the foot or in the foot, and brings to it many orifices, and is situated from each orifice.
E donc cura aquela ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio e am aquo que es desus dit.	And therefore cure it thus as we have said in the division and what has been said above.
De sectione super vermes generatos sub cute et dicitur aegritudo bovina.	Of the section on worms generated under the skin and called bovine illness.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en alcuna terra deves nos malautia bovina per so quar motas veguadas endeve als bious e es verm pauc un le qual es nat entre la codena e la carn, e va en tot le cos pujan e devalan, e es mostrat al sentiment deves le sieu anament de membre en membre entro que disromp la codena e yeys fora.	This illness is named in some lands deves nos (or "itch") and is called bovine disease. For many times it appears on cows, and there is a worm that is native between the skin and the flesh, which goes throughout the body up and down, and is shown by its own movement from member to member, tearing the skin as it goes outside.
E la generacio de lu es per putrefaccio de alcunas humors ayssi cum accideysso verms e serpentz e lombrics e ascaridas en le ventre.	And its generation is through the putrefaction of some humors, just as worms, snakes, worms, and ascarids are generated in the belly.
E es temut per la malicia de lu, quar quan el va en le cors e es elevat al cap, e es pervengut al huel, lahoras fort leu uebre en lu e intra e destruzeys le huel, e aquo endeve motas veguadas.	And it is feared because of its malice, for when it goes in the body and rises to the head, and affects the eye, then greatly hurts it and enters and destroys the eye, and many times this happens.
E donc quan tu voles curar aquel e extraire lu, lahoras no se fa si no deves la sieua ambulacio e apparacio de lu al sentiment, e adonc cove que tu strenhas aquo que es sobre lu e aquo que es dejos lu am liament e constriccio fort, e aprop secca sobre lu e extratz aquel.	And when you want to cure that and extract it, then do not perform this without considering its mobility and appearance in relation to the sensation, then check what is on it and what is left from it by adhesion and strong constriction, and dry it thoroughly before extracting it.
E si es preondat en la carn e no le atrobes, lahoras tu pausa cauteri am foc sobre le loc entro que mora, e la major causa que es temuda es corrupcio de lu am la qual corrump le loc ayssi cum havem dit.	And if it is found in the flesh and you do not find it, then place a cautery on fire over the area where it resides, and the main fear is corruption of the area, which corrupts it as we have said.
May si tu vezes aquel esser pervengut al cap prop del huel, lahoras strenh sobre le sobrecil am fort strictura, e aprop secsa sobre lu, e extratz aquel; e cove que·l malaute use de mondificacio del sieu cors am medicinas evacuantz humors putridas malas, e guarda se de viandas generantz putrefaccio.	And if you see that it has reached near the heart, then firmly bind over the supraclavicular area, and dry it thoroughly, and extract it; and check that the illness uses modification of its body through medicines that expel putrid bad humors, and avoid foods causing putrefaction.
De sectione super aegritudinem nafir.	Of the section on the illness of gout.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en nostra terra nafir, e es dolor la qual ve en alcus membres, e aprop es permudada de membre en membre.	This illness is called gout in our land, and it is a pain that occurs in some limbs, and often is passed from limb to limb.
E yeu ja e vista aquela segon que yeu te recomtare.	And I have already seen that which I will recount to you.
Yeu fu apelat a una femna malauta ad una vila, e descubric le sieu bras e vi una imflacio petita en la vena funis del bras, e pus que fu romas per una hora, vi aquela imflacio anar ayssi cum va verm pujan ad aquest, mays pus leugierament que esser por, ayssi cum si fos argent viu quan corr de loc en loc.	I was called to a sick woman at a village, and upon examining her arm, I found a small swelling in the vein of the arm. After it had risen for about an hour, I saw that this swelling went up like a worm rising from one place to another, though less urgently than feared, like silver fluid moving from place to place.
E adonc anet s’en la dolor de aquel loc e fiquet se en le muscle, e aprop aqui stec per una hora.	And then the pain spread to that area, fixing itself in the muscle, and there it stayed for about an hour.
E aprop correc en l’autre cors entro que pervenc al autre bras.	And then it spread to the other side of the body, reaching the other arm.
E aprop recomtec a mi que revolvia se per tot le cors sieu segon que yeu vi; e fo trop meravelat de la permutacio de lu e de la velocitat de membre en membre.	And then, I was told that she moved about the entire body as I observed; and it was too amazing to see the change in her and the speed at which it spread from one limb to another.
E yeu ja havia vist denant aquo en les mieus huels segon aquela manieyra, empero yeu he vistz motz les quals atroban dolor esser permutada de membra a membre.	And I had already seen this before in my own case according to that manner, but I have also seen many cases where the pain is perceived as being permuted from one limb to another.
Mays no vi aquo am les huels ayssi cum en la femna.	But not all have heels as in women.
E yeu no cogiti esser aquo sino que es per aquo quar la femna era de viela, on so de secs cors e de venas descubertas, e en aquesta apparec al sentiment aquela ventositat permutada.	And I do not consider it to be so, but rather because the woman was old, with a dry body and exposed veins, and in this appearance there is a sensation of that humidity changed.
E es necessari que no apparesca segon aquesta retro-curacio en aquels que son delicioses e am cors humitz de venas ameguadas.	And it is necessary that this backward curvature not appear in those who are delightful and have a humid corpus with enlarged veins.
E cum tu voles la curacio de lu, e le pacient sent aquela dolor, lahoras no es a tu aparent al huel ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras tu strenh sobre aquel e dejos lu leugierament e secse sobre aquel entro que sia yssida aquela ventositat coartada, e cauterize le loc.	And since you want the cure for it, and the patient feels that pain, if it does not appear as we said regarding the heel, then strengthen that area and let it rest lightly and dry over it until that constricted humidity is inserted, and cauterize the area.
Mays si tu no la vezes am los tieus huels, alhoras tu cura aquel am excussio del cors e am aquo que expelleys ventositatz, e carmina aquelas am pillulas fetidas e am pillulas de serapi e semblantz.	But if you do not see it in the heel bones, then cure that by releasing the body and by what you expel humidity, and cleanse those with foul pills and with saffron pills and similar.
De extraccio de sagetas.	From the extraction of arrows.
Sagetas son diversificadas segon las specias, e segon les locs dels cors en les quals cazo, quar la lor diversitat es que de aquellas so que han grans puntas, e petitas, e concavas, e sordas, so es solidas; e de lor so que han tres angles, e de aquelas a las quals so que han lenguas; e de aquelas a las quals so astelas.	Arrows are diverse according to the species, and according to the places of the body in which they lodge; for their diversity is that some have large points, small, concave, and silent, solid; and some have three angles, and those to which belong tongues; and those to which belong feathers.
E aquela que es segon les membres e las pessas en las quals cazo es segon dos manieyras: quar les membres o so membres principals concaus, ayssi cum le cervel, le cor, e·l fitge, e le pulmo, e les ronhos, e les budels, e la vezica, e a lor semblantz; e donc quan catz en alcu de aquestz membres e aparo a tu senhals de mort, la qual causa yeu recomtare aprop, lahoras cove que tu evites extraccio de aquela sageta en aquels quar la mort siec aquel en le qual en las majors disposicios, e quan a tu no appareysso aquestz mals senhals, e la sageta no es amaguada en la profunditat del membre, lahoras tu extratz aquela e cura la plagua.	And that which is according to the members and the feet in which they lodge is according to two manners: for the members or are the principal causes, thus such as the brain, the heart, the liver, the lungs, the intestines, the bladder, and their like; and therefore when it lodges in any of these members and appears to you signs of death, which cause I will relate closely, then know that you should avoid the extraction of that arrow in those where death is that in which in major dispositions, and when to you do not appear these evil signs, and the arrow is not hidden in the depth of the member, then you extract it and cure the wound.
E dels senhals del servel es quan catz en lu sageta, e trespassa le os, e es yssit del cyphac le qual es sobre le cervel, quar accideys per lu soda vehement, e scotomia, e vertige, e rogor en les huels, e imflamacio e rogor de la lengua, e spasme e permixtio de entendament e vomi de colera, e fort leu es abscindida la paraula e es destruida la votz, e es yssit del loc de la plagua humiditat blanca semblant a pols, e yeys de lu semblant ad aquositat de la carn.	And of the signs of apoplexy: when the arrow pierces it, passes through the bone, and is situated above the brain, for it happens by excessive heat, scotoma, vertigo, rogor in the palms, inflammation and rogor of the tongue, spasms and confusion of understanding, vomiting of bile, and greatly weakened speech, voice is destroyed, and is situated at the site of the wound a white humidity resembling dust, and from it resembling excess moisture of flesh.
E donc si appareyso a tu aquestz senhals, lahoras tu abste de la curacio e de la extraccio de la sageta, si non es fora.	And if you see these signs in this manner, then abstain from the cure and the extraction of the arrow, unless it is outside.
Mays les senhals de la sageta quan catz en le cor, so que ela es prop de la mamila senestra, e sent am aquela quays sia ficada en causa dura, e no es causa vueda; e fort leu le movement de la sageta es semblant a movement del pols, e corr de la plagua sanc negra, e siec aquel fregiditat de las extremitatz, e suzor freja, e sincopi; e donc sapias que la mort descen ses tot dopte.	And the signs of the arrow when lodged in the heart are that it is near the left nipple, and one feels a hard lump there which is not visible; and the movement of the arrow seems like the pulse, and the flow of the black bloody wound, and there is a coldness at the extremities, sweating ceases, and fainting; and then you know that death descends upon him totally.
E les senhals quan la sageta ha plaglat le pulmo so eyssiment de sanc spumos de la plagua, e les vayssels que so prop del col so apostematz, e es mudada la color del malaute, e expira sperit gran aut, e demanda atraccio de ayre freg.	And the signs when the arrow has pierced the lung are frothy blood from the wound, and the vessels near the neck are constricted, and the color of the patient has changed, and he exhales a great spirit sometimes, and seeks to draw air with difficulty.
E si catz la sageta en le velament le qual es en le pietz, e la dolor lahoras es prop de las costas petitas, e es fayt le ale gran am vehement dolor e am sospir, e no so maugutz totz les membres dels muscles.	And if the arrow is lodged in the periosteum which is in the foot, and the pain is near the small bones, then it causes a great and violent pain along with heavy breathing, and does not affect all the members of the muscles.
E si catz la sageta en le stomac, lahoras fort leu yeys de la plagua vianda alcuna indigesta.	And if you catheterize the stomach, then forcefully remove some undigested food from the wound.
E si catz la sageta en le ventre, e es ficada en lu, yeys alcuna fenda de la plagua, o la tela, o budel le qual es disromput, e no es speransa en la curacio de lu extraccio de la sageta.	And if you catheterize the stomach, and it is inserted into it, remove some opening of the wound, or the tissue, or intestine which is ruptured, and there is no hope for the cure of it by removing the catheter.
E si la sageta catz en la vesica, e es yssida defora urina, e procesesca de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, e fort leu es dolor sobre le malaute, lahoras sapias que es mortal.	And if the catheter reaches the bladder and causes urine to overflow, and the process of it from any cause at the parts outside, and great pain occurs in the patient, then know that it is fatal.
Mays les autres membres ayssi cum es la cara, le col, e·l golayro, e las spallas e le adjutori, e les spondils del dos, e la furcula, e la coysa, e la camba e a lor semblantz dels membres, son salvatz segon las majors disposicios quan la sageta no atroba vena ni arteria e no es sageta venenosa.	Moreover, the other limbs such as the face, neck, arm, shoulder, back, and flank, and the vertebrae of the spine, as well as the furcula and coxa, and their counterparts in the limbs, are saved according to the major dispositions when the catheter does not find a vein or artery and is not a poisonous catheter.
E yeu recomtare aquo a tu que he vist del esser de aquestas sagetas, per que signifiques per aquo sobre la curacio tieua.	And I will recount to you what I have seen about the nature of these catheters, so that you may understand its significance for treatment.
La qual causa es, quar en un home cazec sageta en le lacrimal del huel de lu en la razitz del nas, e yeu extrayssi aquela a lu del autra partida, dejos le grays de l’aurelha de lu, e es sanat, e no accidic en le huel de lu nocument.	The cause is that in a man an arrow struck the lacrimal of his eye in the root of his nose, and I extracted it from one side, left his ear gray, and he recovered, and was not injured in his eye.
E extrayssi autra sageta a un Juzeu la qual cazec en lu en lo grays del sieu huel, dejos la palpebra pus dejos, e la sageta ja era occultada e no so conseguit de aquela sino una petita extremitat am la qual adhereys al sieu fust, e era gran sageta de las sagetas agudas dels Turcs , am ferr leon en la qual no havia aurelhas.	And I extracted another arrow from Juzeu which struck him in the gray of his eye, leaving the eyelid but not the arrow, for it was hidden and could only be removed by a small extremity attached to its shaft, and it was a large arrow among the sharp arrows of the Turks, with iron like a lion where there were no ears.
E senat es le Juzieu , e no accidic en le sieu huel mal accident.	And Juzeu is fine, and was not injured in his eye at all.
E extrayssi una autra sageta a un home Crestia la qual era cazuta en le golayro, e era sageta arabica, e es aquela a la qual so aurelhas; e adonc yeu inscidegui sobre aquela entre doas guidegi, e ja era submersa en le golayro de lu; e adonc yeu so subtiliat am aquela, e aprop extraxi aquela, e es sanat le Crestia .	And I extracted another arrow from a Christian man which was stuck in the glabella, and it was an Arabic arrow, and that one with its ears; then I incised over it between two guides, and it was submerged in his glabella; then I touched it with something sharp, and soon extracted it, and the Christian recovered.
E extraxi autra sageta a un home la qual era cazuta en le sieu ventre, e cogitegui que moris per aquela; e donc, pus que foro passatz xxx dias e no es mudat sobre lu alcuna causa de las suas disposicios, inscidegui sobre la sageta e engenagui sobre aquela, e es sanat, e no accidic a lu accident mal.	And another arrow was extracted from a man which was lodged in his stomach, and I perceived that he died from that; and so, after thirty days had passed and no change occurred due to his condition, I incised over the arrow and evacuated it, and he recovered, and no ill accident befell him.
E vi mays un home en le qual cazec una sageta en le dos de lu, e consolidada es la plagua sobre lu, e pus que foc aprop set ans, yssic la sageta en la razitz de la coyssa.	And I found a man in whom an arrow was embedded in his back, and the wound had healed over it. After about seven years, incise the arrow in the side of the thigh.
E vi una femna a la qual cazec sageta en le sieu ventre, e la plagua es consolidada dedintz lu, e no es mudada en las suas disposicios en re, e la femna no atrobec nocument en alcunas de las suas opperacios naturals.	And I found a woman in whom an arrow was embedded in her stomach, and the wound had healed inside it, and there had been no change in her condition over time, and the woman did not experience any discomfort during her usual natural operations.
E vi un autre home al qual cazec sageta en la sua cara e consolidada es la plagua e romas la sageta, no atrobant aqui mota dolor, e motz semblantz ad aquestz.	And I found another man in whom an arrow was embedded in his face, and the wound had healed, breaking the arrow. He did not experience any more pain, and appeared similar to others.
E extrayssi la sageta del home dels princeps del rey que era cazuda en le mieg loc del nas sieu e ja havia declinat a la partida dreyta un petit, e occultada era tota la sageta.	And I extracted the arrow from the king's prince, who had an arrow embedded in the middle of his nose, and it had slightly declined to the right side, with the entire arrowhead hidden.
E yeu fu appelat a la curacio de lu aprop le cazement de la sageta entro a tres dias.	And I was called for the treatment of him around the arrow wound within three days.
E adonc yeu atrobegui la plagua de la sageta mot streyta; e adonc yeu inquirigui aquela am tenta subtil, e no sentigui aquela; mays el la sentia puncio dejos la aurelha dreyta, e adonc speregui que aquela punccio era per la extremitat de la sageta.	And then I examined the wound of the arrow closely; and then I inquired about the one that felt subtle, and did not feel it; but he felt the puncture and let me touch his right ear, and then suspected that that puncture was at the tip of the arrow.
E amplastregui le loc am emplaustre en le qual es vertut atrectiva e digestiva, confizant de mi que·l loc se apostemes per que appares a mi le loc de la sageta, per que secces sobre aquela.	And apply the place to be plastered with an attractive and digestive plaster, convincing myself that the place we apply it will show me the location of the arrow, so that it dries there.
E no accidic en le loc accident significant que la sageta hagues conseguit aquel loc; e yeu continuegui am le emplaustre sobre lu per motz dias e no accidic accident; e consolidada es la plagua entretant, e romas le malaute de la extreccio de lu per spazi de motz dias entro que un jorn sentic la sageta dintz le sieu nas e recontec aquo a mi.	And do not miss the significant location where the arrow struck; and continue applying the plaster over it for several days without missing any spot; and meanwhile, the wound consolidates, and I remove the arrow from its socket over a period of several days until one day I feel the arrow in its own nostril and tell me this.
E adonc yeu pausegui sobre la plagua medicina acuta corrosiva per motz dias entro que foc ubert, e am la tenta yeu assagegui aquel, e atrobegui la extremitat de la sageta subtil, la qual adhereys al fust.	And then place a sharp corrosive medicine on the wound for several days until it opens up. And touching it, I examine that area, and carefully examine the tip of the arrow, which adheres to the shaft.
E aprop yeu ajustegui en la apersio de la plagua per aquela medicina acuta entro que apparec a mi visiblament la extremitat de la sageta, e passec a mi temps am aquo per le spazi de temps entro quatre meses.	And then you adjust in the opening of the wound with that sharp medicine until I visibly see the tip of the arrow, and pass to my time for that over the space of four months.
E aprop pus que la plagua foc amplificada, e foc a mi possible entrometre las forfexs en lu, e remaure aquela, e no obezic ad eyssiment, lahoras yeu no cessegui subtiliar e ingeniar sobre aquela am manieyras de engen, entro que comensegui un dia sobre aquela am manieyras de engens pendre lu am forceps descentment faytas, segon que vindra la forma de aquelas en la fi del capitol, entro que extraxi aquela; e aprop restauregui aquela plagua.	And then, once the wound is enlarged, and it is possible for me to insert the forceps into it, I will manipulate that, without using any aids, so that I do not cease to refine and devise various mechanical methods until one day I successfully used a pair of forceps inserted from above, as described at the end of this chapter, to extract it; then, I restored that wound.
E alcus metges jutgavan que la cartillage del nas no es restaurada, e yeu restauregui aquela e la plagua es consolidada, e sanat es le malaute per sanetat entiera, e no noguec en lu en deguna causa.	And some doctors judged that the cartilage of the nose is not restored, but I restored that and when the wound is consolidated, the patient recovers completely, without any defect in it.
E yeu recomti a tu la qualitat de extraccio de alcunas sagetas per que pauses aquo regla e significacio sobre aquo que no he dit, quar las partidas de aquesta art e las difinicios de aquela no so conprehendudas am narracio ni no comprehen aquelas le libre.	And I recount to you the quality of extracting some arrows, so that you pause and consider this rule and significance of what I have not said, for the parts of this art and the definitions of those are not understood in the narration nor do they comprehend them freely.
E le artifexs savi compara am pauc sobre mot; e am aquo que es present sobre aquo que es absent; e atroba operacio novela e instrument novel deves le descendement de las causas extranhas del art quan accideysso.	And the wise craftsmen compare a little about motion; and with that which is present about that which is absent; and find new operations and new instruments for the descent of foreign causes when they occur.
E donc yeu dic que sagetas no son fora-gitadas dels membres en les quals son ficadas sino segon dos manieyras: o per atraccio del loc en le qual intrec; o per le contrari de la autra partida.	And therefore I say that arrows are not expelled from the members in which they are inserted but according to two manners: either by attraction of the place in which they enter; or by the contrary part.
E aquela que es gitada per le loc don es intrada, o es sageta procedent en loc carnos, e es atirada e fora-gitada.	And that which is expelled by the place where entry was made, or the arrow proceeds into a fleshly location and is then launched and expelled.
E si no obezeys a eyssiment de la hora en la qual catz, lahoras cove que tu la laysses per alcus dias entro que poyresca la carn que es al enviro de lu, e sia alleujada l‘atraccio de lu e la sua egressio.	And if it does not respond to the attempt of the hour in which it was drawn out, then you should leave it for a few days until the flesh around it can heal, and reduce the attraction to it and its exit.
E semblantment si es ficada en os e no obezeys a tu a eyssiment, lahoras layssa aquela per alcus dias e itera aquela am atraccio e mocio en quascun dia, e ja es fora-gitada.	And similarly, if it is inserted into bone and does not respond to your attempt, then leave it for a few days and repeat the operation with attraction and motion each day, and it will be expelled.
E si no obezeys a tu eyssiment aprop alcus dias, lahoras cove que tu perforas en le circuit de la sageta en aquel os de tota partida am taravel subtil entro que·l loc sia amplificat de la sageta, e aprop extratz aquela.	And if you do not obey your effort for some days, then you must puncture in the circuit of the arrow at that bone from which all parts travel subtly into the area where the arrow is enlarged.
E si la sageta es ficada en le os del cap e ja ha procezit en un dels ventres del cervel, e apparo en le malaute alcus de aquels accidentz les quals yeu e ditz, lahoras abste de la extraccio de la sageta e layssa aquela entro que·l sieu esser sia equat aprop alcus dias; quar si la sageta perve al ciphac, lahoras la mort no es a lu prolonguada.	And if the arrow is lodged in the bone of the head and has already affected one of the ventricles of the brain, and appears in the patient several days later as one of those accidents which you and others call it, then abstain from extracting the arrow and leave it where its being equates for some days; or if the arrow reaches the brain, then death is not prolonged for it.
E si la sageta no es ficada sino en le cors del os tant solament e no passa entro al ciphac, e roman le malaute per alcus dias, e no accideys a lu denguna causa de aquels accidentz, lahoras tu engenia en la atraccio de la sageta e en la atraccio de lu.	And if the arrow is not lodged in the bone of the body merely and does not pass into the brain, but remains in the patient for several days, and you do not incur any cause of those accidents, then you proceed with the extraction of the arrow and the wound.
Mays si es mot ficada e no obezeys a tu a extraccio, lahoras tu aministra taravels en le circuit de la sageta ayssi cum havem recomtat, e aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	But if it is indeed lodged and you do not obey your extraction, then you administer travels in the circuit of the arrow as we have recommended, and proceed to care for the area until it is healed.
Mays si la sageta ja es amaguada en le loc del cors, e es amaguada del sentiment, lahoras tu inquireys aquela am tenta, e si tu sentas aquela, lahoras atira aquela am alcus sturmentz les quals so convenientz a la atraccio de lu.	But if the arrow is already hidden in the place of the body and hidden from sensation, then you inquire about it by touch, and if you feel it, then extract it with some instruments which are suitable for its removal.
E si no podes sobre lu per la constriccio de la plagua e per la longitut del preon, e aqui no es os ni nervi ni vena, lahoras tu fen sobre la plagua entro que sia amplificada e que sia possible extrayre la sageta.	And if you cannot remove it through the wound due to its size and the length of the arrow, and here there are neither nerves nor veins, then you incise the wound to make it larger and possible to extract the arrow.
E si so a lu aurelhas am las quals sia tenguda, lahoras tu deliura la carn en la qual es ficada de tota partida am tot le engen que poyras far; e ingenia sobre aquo, si no podes sobre la evasio de la carn en la fractura de las aurelhas e en torssio de aquelas entro que obezesca.	And if it is in the ears where it is embedded, then you incise the flesh in which it is stuck as much as possible with all the skill you can; and use your ingenuity, if you cannot drain the flesh around the fracture of the ears and in torsion of those parts that must obey.
E quan tu administras la extraccio de la sageta en quascun loc on sia, lahoras tu usa am torcio de la tua ma am forceps a totas partidas entro que fassa aquela obezir; e subtilia am deriera subtilitat que la sageta no sia trencada e que sia fayta a tu dificil atraccio de lu e de aquela extraccio.	And when you administer the extraction of the arrow in any place where it is, then you use your hand's torque and forceps in all parts to make it obey; and with great subtlety ensure that the arrow is not broken and that it is made easy for its extraction and for this extraction.
E si no podes sobre aquela de la tua hora, lahoras tu layssa per alcus dias entro que se poyrescan las partidas que so en le circuit de lu, e aprop itera aquela quar lahoras es alleujada.	And if you cannot do this at your hour, then you leave it for some days until the parts that are in the circuit of him heal, and then proceed with that which is alleviated.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat flux de sanc, lahoras tu administra aquo que havem dit de curacio en le sieu capitol.	And if it makes contrary effects with the flow of blood, then you administer what we have said about cure in its chapter.
E guarda la tua vertut de inscizio de vena o de nervi, o de corda, e aministra engen en tota manieyra a tu possibla de la evasio de la sageta; e fay aquo am facilitat e tranquillitat e tarditat e fermetat ayssi cum yeu e a tu recomtat.	And preserve your virtue in the incision of veins or nerves, or cords, and administer means in every manner for the avoidance of the arrow; and do this with ease, tranquility, and delay and firmness as I and you have recommended.
E donc que fassas contrayre la sageta per so que·l malaute sia segon la figura segon la qual foc deves le cazement de la sageta en lu, quar es mays juvatiu.	And thus contract the arrow by itself that the patient be according to the figure according to which you should place the tip of the arrow in him, for this is more advantageous.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible, lahoras tu aministra aquo que es a tu possible per las figuras.	And if this is not possible for you, then administer what is possible for you according to the figures.
Mays las sagetas que son fora-gitadas per le contrari del autra partida, o que ja de lu procezeys alcuna partida a las partidas de fora, o fa gilbositat la extramitat de la sageta per sentiment de la partida pus desus de la codena propdana e vezes aquela eminent; adonc tu secsa sobre aquela; e sia la seccio segon la quantitat en la qual prenguan las forceps; e aprop atira aquela, quar ela es fayta leugiera a eyssiment.	And for arrows that are deflected contrary to the other part, or which you have already treated some part of them externally, or cause swelling at the tip of the arrow by the sensation of the part above the elbow; then dry over that; and let the section be according to the quantity in which the forceps take hold; and then remove it, for it is made light and everted.
Mays si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu tortz lama segon contrarietat entro que la sageta enprema en le os, e amplifique a si meteys, e aprop extratz aquela.	If it is retained in the bone, then twist the lance according to the opposite direction where the arrow presses into the bone, enlarge it by inserting, and then extract it.
E sino, layssa aquela per alcus dias, e aprop itera aquela entro qu’en yesca.	Otherwise, leave it for a few days, and then reinsert it where it is embedded.
E si le fust de la sageta es en aquela, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am lu.	If the shaft of the arrow is there, then push it into place.
Mays si le fust es cazut e voles aministrar inpulsio, lahoras tu intromet e aquela, si es sorda, sturment concau per so que intre la concavitat de lu en la coa de la sageta e aprop impelleys aquela am lu.	Otherwise, if the shaft is stuck and you want to administer an impulse, then insert it there. If it is obstinate, stir it with a curved tool so that the concavity of the tool enters into the channel of the arrow, and then push it into place.
Mays si la sageta es concava, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am sturment fort intrant en aquela, quar la sageta es alleujada per aquela.	Otherwise, if the arrow is curved, then push it with a strong stirrup entering into it, so that the arrow straightens out.
E si la sageta es entoxiguada, lahoras cove que tu concaves tota la carn en la qual es le vere, si es a tu possible aquo, e aprop cura aquela am aquo que si conveneys.	And if the arrow is poisoned, then make sure you concave all the flesh where it is located, if possible, and then treat it with what is appropriate.
E si la sageta catz en le pietz, o en le ventre, o en la vesica, o en le costat, e es propinqua per so que tu tocas aquela am la tenta, e es a tu possible secsar sobre aquela, lahoras secsa sobre aquela e guarda te de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e extratz aquela, e aprop cos la plagua si indigeys, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the arrow hits the foot, or the abdomen, or the bladder, or the side, and is close enough for you to touch it directly, and it is possible to extract it dry from that spot, then dry it and guard against cutting a vein or nerve, extract it, and afterwards treat the wound until it heals.
Forma de forceps am las quals so atiradas las sagetas:	Form of forceps with which arrows are extracted:
Sian las extremitatz de lor cum a bec de ausel que son faytas cum serra quan prendon sobre la sageta per so que no la layssen.	Let the ends be curved like the beak of a bird, so that they can grasp the arrow and not let it slip.
E de aquelas son faytas motas specias, grans, paucas e migieras, segon la quantitat de la grandeza de la sageta e de la sieua pauqueza, e de la amplitud de la plagua, e de la constriccio de lu.	And from these, special loops are made, large, few, and medium-sized, according to the size of the arrow and its smallness, and the width of the wound, and its depth.
Forma de impellent concau de aquesta extremitat conquava ayssi cum pena de ausel per so que sia alleujat le intrament de la sageta en lu, e impulcio de aquela sorda:	Form of the concave cup at this end is made like the claw of a bird so that it can facilitate the removal of the arrow from the wound, and impel the blind arrow.
Forma de impellent de sorda extremitat:	Form of pressing for deaf extremity:
ayssi cum ray per so que sia alleujat le intrament de lu en la sageta concava e es impellida am aquel.	Thus, in order to alleviate the instrument in the concave arrow and press it towards that area.
De fleubotomia de las venas.	Of femoral venous incision.
Las venas de fleubotomia de las quals corr costuma de fleubotomar so xxx, de las quals so en le cap xvi, so es doas venas pulsatils las quals so aprop las aurelhas, dic alhasisain; doas herbas que so en les dos templars apparentz; e doas venas que so en dos lacrimals de dos huels que son appeladas aspicientz; e la vena preparada en le mieg loc del front, e la vena que es en la extremitat del nas; e doas guidegi que so al col; e doas venas que so en la labia desus; e doas venas que so en la labia dejos; e — aquestas so las venas que so appeladas algelic —; e so doas venas que so dejos la lengua.	Of femoral vein incision. The veins for which custom dictates to perform femoral incision are xxx, which are in chapter XVI, and are two pulsating veins near the ears, called by Avicenna; two herbs that are clearly visible on the temples; and two veins that are in the inner corners of the eyes, called aspicients; one vein in the middle of the forehead, and one vein at the extremity of the nose; two guidegi vessels near the neck; two veins in the upper lip; and two veins in the lower lip; — these are the veins called algelic —; and two veins on the left side of the tongue.
Mays las venas que so fleubotomadas en les brasses so v; quar de aquelas es una cephalica, e es deves le latz silvestre; e le poble appela “la vena del cap”, e sorda, e es vena migiera, e es composta de un ram de la basilica, e de autre ram de la cephalica; e nomna aquela le poble “vena de tot le cors”, e basilica es vena la qual es pausada en le latz domestic, e es nomnada “citillar”, e nompnan aquela les vulguars “vena del ventre”; e funis del bras, e es pausada sobre le focil, e es aquela en la qual es fleubotomat, e es aquela que appar sobre le poutz per apparicio manifesta; e salvatella, e es la vena que es entre lo dit auricular e·l pus petit dit, e so en lu dos ramps.	Moreover, the veins that are incised in the arms are V; of which one is cephalic and is from the wild ivy; the people call it "the vein of the head," and it is a median vein, composed of a branch of the basilica and another branch of the cephalic. They call the latter the "vein of all the body," while the basilica is the vein that is from the domestic ivy and is called "cithernal," and the common people call it "the vein of the belly"; those of the forearm, which are incised over the brachial artery, and are where femoral incisions are made, as this vein becomes apparent on the surface of the arm; and savallata, which is the vein between the mentioned auricular and the smaller one, and it has two branches.
E en le pe e la camba so tres venas; la una de aquelas es que es dejos la curvatura del denolh del latz silvestre; e la segonda es sophena, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz domestic; e la vena sciatica, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz silvestre; e en la camba son autras venas semblantz ad aquelas.	And in the foot and thigh there are three veins; one of them is that which gives curvature to the bend of the wild beast's leg; and the second is sophena, and its place is given to the bend of the domestic animal; and the sciatic vein, and its place is given to the bend of the wild beast; and in the thigh are other veins similar to those.
Le juvament de las venas que so aprop las aurelhas es a cataris antics e emigranea e sahafati e ulceracios del cap malas antiquas.	The condition of the veins near the ears is catarrhs, headaches, meningitis, and old bad ulcers of the head.
E la qualitat de sagnar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: es que sia ras le cap del malaute, e sia freguat le cap del malaute en le occipiti en le loc de amdoas las venas am drap ample am bona fricacio; aprop strenha le malaute le sieu col am una benda entro que apparan las doas e les locs de lor so aprop las aurelhas en dos locs depremegutz del cap; e quereys aquela am le tieu dit, e si tu sentes le pols de aquelas am le dit tieu, aqui senha am tenta.	And the quality of sanguine in those veins is as I will recount to you: it should be rubbed on the head of the patient, and the head of the patient should be rubbed at the occipital region where both veins are located with a wide cloth for good friction; then firmly press the patient's neck with a band where the two locations of their veins are near the ears in two pressed areas of the head; and you want that on your right side, and if you feel the pulse of those on your right side, here it is tested.
Aprop tu pren la lancea cutellar, e es aquela que es inscident, e aprop tu intromet aquel dejos la vena en la codena entro que·l fleubotomi vengua al os.	And you take the surgical lancet, which is the one that will be inserted, and you insert it into the vein between where the phlebotomy will reach the jaw.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am la vena e la codena a las partidas desus e inscideys la vena am inscizio inscident.	And then raise your hand to the vein and its branches above and incise the vein with an incident incision.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio la quantitat de dos ditz ajustatz o entorn de aquo; e fay yssir del sanc atant quant voles.	And let the length of the incision be the width of two fingers adjusted or around that; and let the blood flow out as much as you want.
E aprop strenh am pulvils e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	And then strengthen with powders and leave that there until it is healed.
E ja e precedit en le comensament del libre la inscizio de aquelas e de lor la cauterizacio.	And already it was mentioned at the beginning of this book regarding the incision and their cautery.
Mays de las doas venas arterias que so als templars le juvament de la fleubotomia es a emigranea antiqua e sode malvada e obtalmia assidua e cors de superfluitatz acutas effusas als huels.	More than the two arteries, which are adjacent to the femoral vein and vital for the efficacy of phlebotomy, they are ancient and evil migraines, persistent eye diseases, and a corpus of acute effusions in the veins.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: constrengua le malaute le sieu col mot entro que apparan las doas venas al sentiment per appericio manifesta e sia demonstrat le pols de lor dejos le tieu dit; e lahoras tu senha am tenta.	And the quality of phlebotomizing those is as I will recount to you: strengthen the patient's thigh muscle such that the two veins become apparent by a clear sense, and demonstrate the pulse at their location with your hand; and then you can feel for it.
E aprop tu eleva la codena desobre la vena a las partidas desus am le tieu dit indic, e intromet le fleubotomi inscident dejos, e eleva la vena en sus; e inscidey aquela ayssi cum has fayt en las doas venas autras; e fay correr del sanc segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And then you elevate the codena above the vein at the parts superior to what you have already indicated, and insert the fleurbotomi incidentiaj dejos, and elevate the vein in them; and cut that as you have done in the other two veins; and let the blood flow according to the quantity of your necessity.
E aprop deslia la coartacio del malaute, e pausa le tieu dit sobre la vena per una hora, e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto e pulvils e strenh aquela desus am fort constriccio, e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	And then release the constriction of the patient, and place your hand on the vein for an hour, and then place the compress and powder above with a strong constriction, and leave it there until it is healed.
E ja es precedida la rememoracio de lor, e de aquelas la inscizio, e la atraccio en le comensament del libre.	And after the memory of them, and of those the incision, and the extraction at the beginning of the book.
E donc le juvament de fleubotomia de la vena del front es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a las malautias antiquas de la cara e a emigranea e rogor e ulceracios fetidas.	And thus the youth of flebotomy of the vein of the forehead is near the flebotomy of the cephalic for ancient illnesses of the face and migraines and fever and foul ulcers.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es segon que yeu recomti a tu; so es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col am una benda entro que apparesca la vena; e aprop pren le insturment le qual es nompnat fossori del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the quality of the flebotomy of the forehead is according to what I will recount to you; so, the patient strains his neck with a bandage in which the vein appears; and then take the instrument which is called a fossor, this is its form:
Pausa la puncta eminent la qual es al cap del fossori sobre aquela vena e percuteys sobre lu am penche o am autre causa en la manieyra de lu, e layssa lo sanc correr segon la quantitat la qual voles; e aprop deslia la perforacio del malaute e strenh aquela entro que sia sanada.	Pause the point突出的部位在泄殖腔膜口的顶端，在那条静脉上方，然后以倾斜或因其他原因的方式击打它，让血流根据你想要的数量流出；随后解除对患处的穿刺，并加强那里的愈合。
E alcunas veguadas es uberta am fleubotomi lat, empero no cove que·l fleubotomi sia de acuta extremitat ayssi cum les autres fleubotomis, abantz sia de lada extremitat, e fleubotoma aquela segon le tranvers, quar le os es propda e fort leu trencaria en lu le fleubotomi quan es subtil.	Sometimes the opening is made with a lancet, but I do not know if the lancet should be of acute extremity as in other lancets, or whether it should be of broad extremity, and one should lance it transversely, for the bone is close by and strong; the lancet, being thin, would break in it during the lancing.
Mays le juvament de las duas venas que so als lacrimals de dos huels per scabia del huels per rogor e sebol en les huels, e a las malautias de la cara.	More importantly, the youth of the two veins that are at the corners of the eyes through the groove of the eye by inflammation and stye in the eyelids, and for facial ailments.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia es que·l malaute strenha le col sieu am una benda, e aprop fleubotoma aquelas, e tu sias stant sobre le cap de lu.	The quality of the lancing is that the hernia strengthens the hole in itself with a band, and then lance those areas, and you stand over the head of the patient.
E sia fayta la fleubotomia segon le transvers a longitut un pauc am fleubotomi pauc, quar en le loc no es carn; e si le fleubotomi es subtil, fort leu la extremitat de lu es trencada.	And the lancing should be made transversely along the length for a little while with a small lancet, for in that place there is no flesh; and if the lancet is thin, strengthen its extremity, for it may break.
E aprop fay correr del sanc atant quant es a tu necessari, e pausa sobre aquelas coto, e strenh aquelas per una nueyt, e aprop deslia aquelas.	And then let the blood run until it is necessary, place your hand over those points, strengthen them for one night, and then remove those.
Mays le fleubotomi de la vena del nas es conferent a febre acuta e a soda vehement, e a las malautias de la cara e emigranea e rogor que accideys en la cara, e majorment quan es antiqua.	May the femoral puncture of the vein be performed for acute fever and severe pain, for facial ailments, migraine, and swelling that occurs in the face, especially when it is chronic.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col e aprop te le sieu nas am la tua ma sinistra, e pren le fleubotomi subtil lonc e fica aquela en le mieg loc del cap del nas segon rectitut, quar la vena no appar al sentiment aqui, e quar le sanc comensa a fluir tantost.	And the quality of the femoral puncture is that the patient raises his leg and closely places his left hand on his nose, takes the delicate long lancet, and inserts it in the middle location of the nasal tip according to proper alignment, for the vein does not appear here through sensation, and the blood begins to flow quickly.
Cove que tu ultimes la tua ma am le fleubotomi petit a petit e fassas correr del sanc segon la tua necessitat; e aprop lia aquela per una nuoyt, quar aquela es restaurada leugierament.	Cover your hand with the lancet little by little and let the blood flow according to your need; then remove it after one night, for the wound is healed rather quickly.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de las doas guidegui a constriccio de ale e a comensament de lepra e a motas malautias e inpetige e malas ulceracios corrosivas ayssi cum herpotromeno.	May the judgment of the femoral puncture lead to the construction of ale and the onset of leprosy and various other ailments and corrosive bad ulcers similarly as with hemtophoresis.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que el malaute strenha dejos quascuna en le sieu col am liament; e estia le artifexs sobre le cap del malaute, e le malaute sia sezent sobre una sezela.	And the quality of the femoral incision is that the patient strains to defecate at each hole in his side with lint; and the attendants are over the head of the patient, and the patient lies on a bench.
E aprop fleubotoma la vena al lonc am fleubotomi ample petit a petit; e aprop extratz de sanc segon temprada quantitat o segon aquo que vezes de necessitat que es ad aquo; e aprop fay semblant del autra vena.	And gradually perform the femoral incision along the vein with a small and ample cautery; and extract blood according to the season's quantity or according to what is necessary; and make it seem as if you are dealing with another vein.
E aprop deslia le liament e strenh las doas venas am strictura migiera per so que·l malaute no sia prefocat, e laysa entro al mati quar la plagua es sanada.	And gradually remove the lint and strengthen the two veins with a mid-straughtener so that the patient does not become overheated, and leave enough room in the flesh for the wound to heal.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de las venas algerich, comfereys a petitas apostemas e pustulas de la boca e corrupcio de las gengivas e malas ulceracios e fissuras, e a malas ulceracios que so en le nas e en le circuit de lu.	And the benefit of the femoral incision for the veins Algerich, it helps to reduce small abscesses and pustules in the mouth, and the corruption of the gums, as well as bad ulcers and fissures, and those that are in the nose and around it.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que fases cezer le malaute denant tu, e strenh le col de lu am una benda, e aprop revolveys las labias de lu e reguarda a doas venas de las quals la una es de la dextra de la labia e la segonda de la senestra; e la demonstracio de quascuna es per la negror de quascuna de amdos, e aquo mays es quar en le circuit de aquelas so venas menudas negras; e adonc inscideys cascuna per inscizio inscident.	And the quality of the femoral incision is that you make the patient face you, and strengthen the side of his neck with a bandage, and then turn the lips and look at two veins, of which one is on the right side of the lip and the other on the left; the demonstration of each is by the blackness of each of both, and this is more so in the area around those are small black veins; and then incise each with an incident incision.
Mays si dubitacio es dejos tu, e no sabes qual es de aquelas, lahoras tu enten a inscisio de la major de aquelas, e de la pus manifesta de aquelas.	But if you are in doubt about which of those is the one, then you understand the incision of the largest of those and of the most obvious.
E fay le semblant de las doas venas que so en las labias desus.	And make the resemblance of the two veins that are in the lips above.
Mays costuma corr mays a inscidir las doas venas que so en la labia dejos.	But it is customary to incise the two veins that are in the lip above.
Mays de doas venas que so dejos la lengua le juvament es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a prefocacios que so en le guolayro, a la malautia de la uvula, e a malautias de la boca.	But of the two veins that are below the tongue, the juice for the phlebotomy of the cephalic vein is near the grooving for the uvula, in the treatment of uvulitis, and other mouth ailments.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es que segue le malaute entre las tuas mas denant le solel, e eleva la lengua de lu, e reguarda dejos la lengua, de la un latz de lu vena e del autre latz vena, e la color de quascuna es declinant a negror.	And the quality of phlebotomizing those is to follow the illness between your fingers in front of the sun, and elevate the tongue, and look at the tongue, on one side of its vein and on the other side of its vein, and the color of each is declining to black.
E adonc fleubotoma quascuna; e guarda te que no ultimes la tua ma en fleubotoman aquelas, quar dejos aquelas so arterias.	And then phlebotomize each; and guard that you do not end your hand in phlebotomizing those, for those are arteries.
E las tuas venas que so fleubotomadas en le coyde so en las quals corr costuma en totz les homes, e la fleubotomia de lor es fayta segon dos manieyras, o pongen am le fleubotomi mirtilat o olivar a subtilitat declinant; o secsar am fleubotomi cutellar, e apelha si alnessil, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And your veins that are lanced in the groin are in which customarily flows in all men, and the lancing of their veins is done according to two methods, or they apply a myrtle or olive needle at subtlety declining; or with a surgical lancet lancing, and call it annelid, and this is its form:
E aquest alnessil es que conveneys a seccio e de aquels so specias latz e subtils segon la amplitut de las venas e segon la strictura de aquelas.	And this annelid is that you apply to the section and of those are species lax and subtle according to the width of the veins and according to the structure of those.
Forma de fleubotomi mirti:	Form of myrtle lancing:
sia le latz de lu ayssi cum vezes, e conveneys a obrir las venas concavas plenas procedentz apparentz grossas, e ad aquelas que conteno sanc gros torbat.	It is the lax of the myrtle thus as you see, and you apply to opening the concave veins full of apparent large vessels, and at those that contain coarse turbid blood.
E aquesta es la forma de fleubotomi olivar:	And this is the form of olive lancing:
E aquest fleubotomi es de menor latitut e de pus subtil extremitat, e conveneys a fleubotomia de venas subtils que conteno sanc subtil citri.	And this lancing is of lesser width and more subtle extremity, and you apply it to lancing thin veins that contain fine citrus blood.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena basilica la qual es una de tres venas: quar extratz le sanc de las malautias que so dejos le guolayro e·l col, e de aquo que siec le pietz e·l ventre.	May the youth of the femoral incision of the basilic vein which is one of three veins: from where you extract the blood from the ill areas which leave the gout and the cold, and from what affects the foot and the abdomen.
E conveneys al fleubotomador, quan fleubotomia aquela, que guarde be aquela e sia sobre-temor en aquela, quar dejos lu ha arteria, e si erra e ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi, inscidira aquela arteria e accidira fluxs de sanc, per so que cove que no fleubotomes aquela am fleubotomi pungent, abantz sia sectant cum alnessil.	And it befits the phlebotomist, when performing that phlebotomy, to guard well that and be over-cautious about that, for if he leaves the artery there in the puncture of the phlebotomy, he will incise that artery and cause fluxes of blood, so you must ensure that you do not phlebotomize at that point before cutting with a knife.
E si no appar la basilica per apparicio manifesta, lahoras cove que tu laysses aquela e que tu mudes a la autre, o que cerques alcun ram sieu; o que fleubotomes en loc de lu finis del bras, quar aquela es manifesta; e secsa aquela am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the basilic vein does not appear by clear manifestation, then you must leave that and change to the other, or seek some of its branches; or perform phlebotomy in a location at the end of the arm, for that is manifest; and dry out that vein with a knife as we have said.
Mays si tu voles la fleubotomia de lu meteyssa, lahoras cove denant la strictura del bras que toques le loc entro que conogues le loc dels pols, e aprop senha sobre lu am tencha; e aprop lia le bras e secsa la vena am seccio concava am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit; e guarda te que caja la percussio per alcu spazi del loc de la arteria.	May it be that you wish the phlebotomy of the median vein, then before the structure of the arm, touch the location between where you know the pulse location, and then place your hand over it with a cloth; then raise the arm and dry the vein with a concave section for the phlebotomy with a knife as we have said; and guard that the percussion does not occur in some space of the location of the artery.
E quan tu vezes, cum strenhes le liament, imflacio en le loc que has senhat am tencha, lahoras aquela inflacio es inflacio de la arteria, e donc squiva aquela.	And when you observe, as you strengthen the ligament, inflation occurs in the place that you have touched with your hand, then that inflammation is of the artery, and therefore avoid that.
E si vezes le sanc fluir en la fleubotomia ayssi cum aurina de enfant, e·l sanc es subtil rog, lahoras sapias que es del sanc de la arteria; e lahoras tu coyta e pausa le tieu dit sobre aquel per lonc spazi; e aprop osta le tieu dit, e si lo sanc es abscindit, quar motas veguadas es abscindit, lahoras tu strenh le bras e layssa aquel.	And if you observe the blood flow during phlebotomy as golden like a child's, and the blood is thin and rosy, then you know it is arterial blood; then withdraw your hand for a long time; and bring your hand close to that place; and if the blood is divided, four or five drops are divided, then strengthen your arm and leave that.
E guardes le malaute de la moccio de lu, e sia sobre-temor de lu e no maugua aquel per alcus dias entro que sia sanat.	And keep the patient from the moccio of the disease, and have a fear over it, and do not wet that for several days until it is healed.
Mays si le sanc no es abscindit, e vezes que deves tu no es present medicina ad aquo, lahoras tu inscideys la arteria, si appar a tu; quar la extremitat de lu es contrayta, e es abscindit le sanc; o que prenguas scorsa de fistic, e fen aquela, e pren la una maytat e strenh aquela sobre le loc de la vena am strictura descent am liament e am pulvils entro al autra dia.	And if the blood is not divided, and you see that the proper medicine for this is not present, then incise the artery if it appears to you; for its extremity is contracted and the blood is divided; or take some recently drawn from a fistula, and do that, and take half of it and strengthen it over the location of the vein with stricture descent on the ligament and with powder the next day.
E lahoras si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, lahoras cura aquel am aquo del qual es precedit a la rememoracio del loc de las polveras abscindentz flux de sanc.	And if the wound is incised, that is good; otherwise, treat that part as described previously in relation to the location of the powders causing the flow of blood.
E la abscizio del sanc de lu es dificil en motas disposicios per le loc petit de la plagua e la possibilitat del liament del bras.	And the incision of the wound is difficult due to the small size of the injury and the possibility of tendon damage.
Mays de la vena fusca la fleubotomia es juvament que extratz lo sanc de la partida subirana del cap e a la partida dejos del cors; per aquo quar es composta de ram de la basilica e de ram de cephalica, ayssi cum havem dit.	More than the dark vein, phlebotomy is beneficial when extracting blood from the part above the heart and from the part below the body; for this, it consists of a branch of the basilica vein and a branch of the cephalic vein, as we have said.
E cove al fleubotomant aquela que sia sobre-temor en la fleubotomia de lu, quar dejos aquela es un nervi; e adonc si ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi e atroba le nervi, accidira a lu stupor, e es difficil la sanacio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot, E aquest nervi motas veguadas apar al sentiment; e si es ocultat ad alcus homes e es subtil e no es monstrat, lahoras cove que tu pauses le fleubotomi am le qual tu fleubotomas am seccio de alnessil, e evita le nervi am la tua fortalesa.	And beware of the vein that is over-tender in phlebotomy; for, that is a nerve. Then, if you puncture the phlebotomy and find the nerve, it will cause stupor, and its recovery is difficult, and it does not fully recover easily. This nerve shows many vibrations in sensation; and if hidden, it is subtle and not visible, so when performing phlebotomy at the section of alnessil, pause to avoid the nerve with your strength.
E si la vena es entre dos nervis, lahoras tu fen la vena en la longitut.	And if the vein is between two nerves, then cut the vein lengthwise.
Le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena cephalica es que atratz le sanc del cap e comfereys a las malautias dels huels.	The purpose of phlebotomy of the cephalic vein is to draw blood from the head and relieve symptoms of headaches.
E cove en aquest propriament, si vols que la fleubotomes pungen am fleubotomi olivar o am fleubotomi mirti; quar es la pus salva de totas las venas, quar no es dejos lu arteria ni nervi.	And in this manner, if you want the phlebotomy to be effective, perform it either at an olive phlebotomy or a myrtle phlebotomy; for it is the pure blood from all the veins, without affecting the artery or nerves.
Mays empero conveneys a tu deves la fleubotomia que guardes que am le fleubotomi no punguas le cap del lacert tant solament, e cerques le loc pus leugier, e no notz a lu, si no es atrobat am la percussio primieyra que sia sobre aquela am fleubotomia alcunas veguadas.	Nevertheless, you should perform the phlebotomy carefully, ensuring that you do not puncture the head of the vein solely, and choose a location that is slightly lower. Do not be overly cautious, but wait until after the first percussion when it is appropriate to make the incision for the phlebotomy several times.
Mays empero fort leu es apostemat en alcus homes, quan no es fleubotomat en la primieyra percussio, mays no notz en re aquel apostema.	Nevertheless, in some individuals, an abscess is more severe, and if not phlebotomized during the first percussion, it may not be noticeable in the subsequent treatment.
Mays la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquela e les accidentz de lu so motz, en les quals te cove cogitar en lor rectificacio.	Moreover, the quality of the phlebotomy and the accidents that arise from it are matters that you should consider in their correction.
Le primier de lu es del qual cove que sapias que fleubotomia no es aministrada sino en conservacio de sanetat e per speransa de lu e cautela de aveniment de malautias, e que sia fayta fleubotomia en la una de las venas que so en le coyde, so es: cephalica, fusca e basilica; e que sia fayta fleubotomia al comensament de primaveyra, sobre dejun en primaviera e autunppne, e en invern aprop la comestio, quan apparo significacios de replecio.	The first is that you must know that a phlebotomy is not administered except for the conservation of health and with hope for it and caution regarding the outcome of ailments; and that a phlebotomy should be performed in one of the veins that are in the groin, namely: cephalic, femoral, and basilic; and that a phlebotomy should be performed at the beginning of spring, on an empty stomach in spring and autumn, and in winter before meals, when signs of congestion appear.
E sia fayta fleubotomia e le tertz dia o al primier pus que del jorn siran passadas tres horas.	And the phlebotomy should be performed on the third day or at the first opportunity after three hours have passed from the beginning of the day.
Mays fleubotomia que es aministrada, mays quan provoca convenencia e necessitat ad aquo, o de nuoyt o de dia, en tota hora e en tot temps.	The phlebotomy that is administered more frequently causes greater convenience and necessity at that time, whether at night or during the day, at any hour and at all times.
E cove que efant no sia fleubotomat entro que aja xiiii ans, e femna que sia prenhs no sia fleubotomada sino del quart mes entro al sete, e les viels no sian fleubotomatz les quals ja han passatz lx ans.	And you must know that a child should not be phlebotomized before it has reached four years of age, and a woman who is pregnant should not be phlebotomized except in the fourth month between the seventh and eighth months. Women who have passed their thirtieth year should not be phlebotomized.
E cum alcu vol esser fleubotomat per qualque manieyra sia, cove que mondifique les sieus budels denant la fleubotomia am clisteri leon, si en aquels ha mota fenda retenguda, per so que las venas no atiro las superfluitatz en la fleubotomia dels budels, que son puridas, e que no noguan als membres principals.	And when someone wishes to be fistulectomized in any manner whatsoever, make sure to modify his intestines before the fistulectomy with a leonine enema, if there is a motile fenestra retained, so that the veins do not eject superfluous fluids during the fistulectomy of the intestines, which are purified, and do not injure the principal members.
E no sian fleubotomatz les pascientz naucea sacertiva e crapula, ni evasent de malautia ni de ebretat entro que aquo sia remaugut aquo de lor, ni malaute de ydropici, e mays que fleubotomia sia temuda aprop colica passio e aprop vomit, e aprop cos de ventre, e aprop multiplicacio de coyt e de trebal e de exercici de dejunis o de vigilias e de tota causa que dissolveys la vertut, o sia corpore28 o animal.	And the patients shall not be fistulectomized while nauseous or vomiting, nor from illness or drunkenness until what is within them is sufficiently relieved, nor from dropsy or gout, and more importantly, fistulectomy should be avoided near colic pain, near vomiting, near abdominal conditions, near multiplication of coitus and labor, and near fasting or vigil, and from all causes that dissolve the virtue, either corporal or animal.
E aprop considera en subtiliacio de humos denant aquo si le sanc es gros, am viandas e beures, e am medicinas si aquo es a lu possible ad aquo.	And consider in the subtlety of gases before proceeding if the wound is large, with food and drinks, and with medicines if that is possible at that time.
E aprop intre en banh si alcuna causa no prohibeys, o sia excersitat per alcun exercici per so que·l sanc sia subtiliat.	And consider between the bath if any cause does not prohibit it, or by exercise to make the wound subtler.
E pausa la fleubotomia de lu en le pietz del dia, so es enviro la hora de tercia, ayssi cum havem dit.	And pause the femoral incision at the foot of the bed, so around three o'clock, as we have said.
E perforsa te que·l pietz de aquel sia guardat en aquel dia de totz mals accidentz animals, ayssi cum es angustia, ira, temor, e de totz accidentz corporals, ayssi cum es trebal e pena superflua e coyt e semblantz a lor.	And I assure you that the foot of that side should be guarded on the day of all evil accidents, as when there is anxiety, anger, fear, and all bodily accidents, as when there is toil and superfluous pain, or similar.
E a la sua sezelha fassa esser presentz las causas en le us de la qual corr costuma dels homes am aromaticitat e odorament e am bals e semblantz ad aquels segon la cantitat de possibilitat.	And to her, let the causes be presented in the use of which there is a custom among men for their aromatics and odors, as well as balms, according to the quantity and possibility.
E segua le fleubotomador sobre un coyssi que sia pus aut que·l coyssi de aquel que deu esser fleubotomat.	And follow the femoral incision over a cushion that is placed higher than the cushion of the one to be flebotomized.
E aprop extragua le sieu bras, e fregue aquel am la sua ma le fleubotomador doas o tres veguadas; e aprop strenha le liament am correia e involva aquel doas veguadas.	Then draw out his arm, and rub that area with your hand three times; then tightly bind the ligament with a rope and wrap it twice.
E sia la strictura temprada, quar la strictura quant no es engual, o la strictura es am superfluitat, lahoras prohibeys de fluxs del sanc; o es am mollificacio, e lahoras prohibeys le cors del sanc eyssament.	And let the stricture be tempered, for if the stricture is not equal, or if the stricture is due to excess, then prohibit the flow of the blood; or if it is due to softening, then similarly restrict the body's flow of blood.
E aprop la strictura, cove que aquel que deu esser fleubotomat fregue las suas mas ensemps entre lor entro que las venas sian imfladas, e sian declaradas al sentiment.	And near the stricture, make sure that those who are to be lanced press their hands between them while the veins are swollen and visible to the touch.
E aprop le fleubotomador unte le sieu fleubotomi am un pauc de oli antic propriament; e aprop pausa le sieu di indic de la ma senestra sobre aquela vena, dejos le loc del qual vol la fleubotomia, per que la vena fuja un pauc, e la percussio sia sessada quar de las venas es la qual atrobas ayssi cum corda fugent deves la fleubotomia, e de aquelas es que es plena de ventositat e quan pauses le fleubotomi sobre aquela es contrayta deves le fleubotomi, e es desceubut le fleubotomador; e le fleubotomi no uobre la vena, e si uobre, aquela es streyta.	And near the lancer, apply a little antiseptic ointment to the site of the lancing properly; then place his finger of the left hand on that vein, leaving the location where the lancing will occur, so that the vein swells a little and the puncture is felt clearly. This is like a cord escaping, indicating the fullness of venosity. When you pause the lancing over that area, it contracts, revealing the position to the lancer; if the lancing does not reach the vein, but if it does, it is narrow.
E donc, per aquo cove que·l fleubotomador sia fermat e sia sollicit en totas aquestas causas.	And therefore, make sure that the lancer is firm and attentive to all these causes.
E aprop depause le fleubotomi, mays si la vena es huberta en una veguada, lahoras bo es; e sino, tu itera aquo autra vaguada dejos aquel loc un pauc, o sobre lu am festinacio, si le loc no es apostemat.	And near the puncture, but if the vein is already open in one go, that is good; otherwise, repeat this or another pass over that area a little, or with greater urgency if the location has not become septic.
Et si le loc es apostemat, o le malaute se spauresca, lahoras tu le layssa per un dia o per dos, e no strenha le liament, quar fort leu atirara apostema caut, ni no intre en banh.	And if the area is suppurated, or the patient sweats, then you let it be for a day or two, and do not apply a lint, because strong it would cause an abscess to burst, nor enter into bath.
E aprop itera la fleubotomia si la ama.	And repeat the phlebotomy if necessary.
E si la apercio es petita e corr sanc subtilment, e temes que non yesca sanc la cantitat que voles, lahoras tu itera le fleubotomi en aquel trauc segon rectitut e ajusta en la appercio un pauc, e fay aquo am festinacio denant que·l loc sia apostemat, quar le loc es apostemat en motz homes deves pauca apercio.	And if the abscess is small and deep, and you fear that it might not drain enough, then repeat the phlebotomy in that vein according to rectitude and adjust the incision a little, and do this before the area suppurates, for when the area does suppurate, you should make a slight incision.
Mays si vezes aquel ja apostemat, lahoras no iteres sobre lu, quar no escusa a tu alcuna causa; e pausa sobre aquel alcuna partida de la fenda de oli, quar alleuja le cors del sanc.	But if you see that it has already suppurated, then do not repeat the incision there, for it is unnecessary for any reason; and place your hand over a part of the wound, for it alleviates the pain from the blood.
E es milhor en aquest loc que oli e que les autres olis.	And it is better in this place than olive oil and other oils.
E semblantment aministra fenda de oli en tota fleubotomia am la qual fleubotomes las venas deves la prohibicio de cors de sanc, e fan aquo tyriaca alfadoc e sagzenea quan es pausat de la una de aquelas sobre le loc, quar le sanc es subtiliat e es revolvut quan es gros.	And similarly, administer a part of olive oil in all phlebotomies where you incise the veins; they do this with tyriaca alfadoc and sagzenea when placed over the area, for the blood becomes finer and is agitated when it is thick.
E si en le loc de la fleubotomia es engendrat gran apostema, quar motas veguadas accideys, e majorment ad aquel que no es stat sangnat sino aquela veguada, o en la apercio de la vena pauca, e lahoras tu coyta, e pausa sobre le loc sponja infuza en aygua e sal, un pauc scalfada, e strenh aquela per una hora, quar es dissolvut.	And if in the place of the flebotomy a great apostema is generated, many blotches appear, especially to that one who has not been bled during that day or at the time of the appearance of the small vein, then you apply, over the area, a sponge infused in water and salt, slightly heated, and keep it there for an hour, for it dissolves.
E cove que fassa aquo aprop le yssiment del sanc de aquela vena am compliment de lu o de autra vena.	And make sure to do this near the site of the blood from that vein with the help of the patient or another vein.
E si roman en le loc per alcus dias alcuna negror o viriditat, no notz aquo; e si voles, pausa sobre aquel alcuna causa de aloen e de mirra dissolvut, o alcuna causa de suc de mentastre o de calament o semblant de lu.	And if there is any darkness or greenish color in the area for a few days, do not notice this; if you want, place over it some cause of aloes and myrrh dissolved, or some juice of mint or camphor, or something similar to it.
E motas veguadas accideysso apostemas e eminencias deves fleubotomia de la basilica.	And many blotches appear; these are signs of the apostema and prominences from the flebotomy of the basilicus vein.
E donc pausa la tua ma sobre aquela, e si lahoras tu atrobas mollicia deves la tua compressio sobre aquela, lahoras aquela eminencia es malvada e mala; e adonc guarda te que pauses sobre aquela alcuna causa de aquo que havem dit, quar fort leu fluira de la arteria sanc.	And place your hand over that area. If then you find it soft, apply a compress to that area; this prominence is bad and harmful. Then be careful to place over it some cause as we have said, for strong blood will flow from the arterial vein.
E fay emplaustre am aquo en que es stipticitat, per que le loc sia endurat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And apply a plaster to where there is stiffness, so that the area may harden, and then treat it with another remedy until it is healed.
E cove que extraguas del sanc a tot hom segon la quantitat de la sua vertut e segon la color vencent sobrc le sanc segon que appar.	And you should extract from the wound all humors according to the quantity of its virtue and according to the color prevailing over the wound as it appears.
Quar si le sanc es negre, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia rog; e semblantment si tu le vezes gros, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia subtiliat; e semblantment si es agut, entro que sia ostada la acuitat de lu.	And if the blood is black, you let it remain until it becomes thin; and similarly, if you see it thick, you let it remain until it becomes finer; and similarly, if it is sharp, you wait until its acuity is reduced.
E cove ad aquel que es ple e fort e ha necessitat de extraccio de sanc en una veguada, que sia amplificada la fleubotomia de la vena e le fleubotomi sia lat.	And for one who is full and strong and has the need for a single bloodletting, the incision of the vein should be enlarged and the bleeding should be allowed to continue.
E en aquel que es freul, sia fayt le contrari de aquel, e cove que extragua aquel en tropas veguadas, e que le trauc sia streyt.	And for one who is weak, do the opposite, and ensure that the blood is extracted in several sessions, and that it be drawn out thoroughly.
E le milhor que es administrat en fleubotomia de vena es que sia la seccio transversa, no punctura.	And the best method in vein bloodletting is the transverse section, not puncture.
E aquesta manieyra de fleubotomia es salva de flux de sanc e de inscizio de nervi, e es pus lausabla e pus salva que fleubotomia segon latitut e longitut.	This method of femoral incision avoids the flow of blood and injury to nerves, and is more advantageous and safer than incision based on breadth and length.
E a la qual es acostumat sobrevenir sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e cove que tu cures aquel denant la fleubotomia am un petit de pa infus en vi de milgranas o de oximel simple scalfat; e extratz a l u del sanc en tres veguadas o quatre.	And in which it is customary for syncope to occur after the femoral incision, and know that you should give a little of wine infused with milgranas or simple scalded oxymel before the femoral incision; and extract at the side of the blood in three or four draughts.
E si es enfregiditat de compleccio, lahoras prengua denant la fleubotomia pa infus en eyssarop de mirra o en eyssarop de mel aromatizat am specias ayssi cum am pebre, canela, gingiebre e semblantz, o en eyssarop aromatizat e mot odorant.	And if there is a cold condition, then before the femoral incision take a draught of mirbane infused with mirbane powder or aromatic honey infused with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and sweetly scented herbs, or of aromatic and fragrant honey.
E si accideys sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e es causa de lu issiment de mot sanc, lahoras cove que prengua en beure aygua de carn e eyssarop mot odorant subtil; e use de aromaticitat am algualea, e sia linit le sieu pietz am aquela.	And if syncope occurs after the femoral incision, and is caused by the discharge of foul blood, then know that you should take a draught of meat water and subtle fragrant honey; use its aroma from an alehoof, and bind your foot with it.
E usa de las autras causas que havem ditas en la divisio en le capitol de sincopi per evacuacio.	And use the other causes that we have said in the division of syncope by evacuation.
E qui vol eventar le sieu bras e dissolver le sieu sanc segonda veguada, cove a lu del qual la fleubotomia es per mota evacuacio, e la vertut de lu es freol, que evacue le sanc petit a petit, so es segon la quantitat de la vertut en les dias continuables.	And to cool his arm and dissolve his blood for the second time, incise from which the phlebotomy is by main evacuation, and the virtue of it is cold, which evacuates the blood little by little, so it depends on the quantity of the virtue over consecutive days.
Mays qui vol eventar le sieu bras, e gitar lo sieu sanc segonda vetz, e le sieu cors es fort, lahoras fassa aquo aprop vii horas o ix de la primieyra fleubotomia.	And if one wishes to cool his arm and draw his blood for the second time, and his body is strong, then do this about seven or nine hours after the first phlebotomy.
Mays qui vol atirar le sanc del cors sieu al contrari de la partida a la qual declina, cove que sia eventat en le segon dia o le tertz.	And if one wishes to draw the blood from his body in the direction opposite to which it naturally flows, then do this on the second or third day after cooling.
Mays aquel cors en le qual es mot sanc ja scalfat e es acuit e fa accidir febre, cove que sia gitat de lu sanc en una veguada e sia de lu gitada gran cantitat e sia amplificada la apercio entro que accidesca sincopi, pus que tu auras conservadas totas las condicios de fleubotomia; e que pauses la tua ma sobre le pols de lu deves le cors del sanc, per que no endevengua mort en loc de sincopi, quar motas veguadas endeve aquo quan le fleubotomador es ignorant e negligent.	And if that body in which there is hot blood already scorched and heated, causing fever, then draw the blood from it all at once in a large quantity, and intensify the perception before syncope occurs; for you should have preserved all the conditions of phlebotomy. And place your hand over the pulse to control the body's loss of blood, so that it does not die instead of experiencing syncope. For when the phlebotomist is ignorant and negligent, this should be done in multiple stages.
E no cove quan tu voles desliar le bras e evacua le sanc segonda veguada, cum ja sia claus le orrifici de la vena e sia fayt difficil issiment del sanc, que tu premas subre aquel am vehemencia e encurvat sia extendut leugierament, quar aquo es trop mal.	And do not cover when you want to release the arm and evacuate the blood for a second time, as the openings of the vein are already closed and it is difficult for the blood to issue forth, that you press upon it with force and slightly extend it, for this is too much.
Habantz le layssa entro que sia fleubotomat segondament; o remau aquo am la acuitat del fleubotomi que es coagulat del sanc en le orrifici de la vena; o pausa sobre aquel de tyriaca alfarach, o de sagzenea, e comprem aquel am compressio leugiera entro que·l sanc sia fora yssit.	Let it remain in the state of being phlebotomized; or keep what is at the acuity of the phlebotomy where the blood coagulates in the openings of the vein; or place over it a piece of tyriaca alfarach, or sagenea, and apply a light compresson while the blood has subsided.
E si la vena es apostemada, lahoras layssa aquela e no la toques entro que·l apostema sia sedat.	And if the vein is inflamed, let that be and do not touch it until the inflammation subsides.
E si necessitat te provoca a evacuar le sanc segondament, e no es excusacio, lahoras tu sagna aquel sobre aquel loc o en l’autre bras en autra vena.	And if necessity prompts you to evacuate the blood again, and there is no excuse, then let that (the blood) flow in that same place or in the other arm at another vein.
E la vena apelada “funis del bras” es fleubotomada en loc de la fusca o de la basilica, quan no so atrobadas o so amaguadas, quar es composta de aquelas.	And the vein called "funis del bras" is phlebotomized in place of the fascia or basilica when they are not found or are hidden, for it is composed of those.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intrometa la sua ma en aygua cauda entro que·l focil se enrogezesca e que la vena apparia manifestament.	The quality of the femoral puncture is that the patient introduces his hand in water after the fire has reddened and the vein clearly appears.
E aprop sia strengut sobre aquel am liament am strictura migana; e aprop fleubotoma segon le tranvers petit, no latitudinalment ni segon la longitut.	And then strengthen it over that area of the galled middle vein; and then perform the femoral puncture according to the transverse small vein, neither longitudinally nor according to its length.
E sia la apercio ampla e sia la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas aquela sobre la junctura de la ma un petit.	And make the incision wide and let your femoral puncture be at the place where you perform it near the joint of the hand a little.
E si es prohibit le fluxs del sanc, lahoras tu itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e layssa le sanc correr en la aygua entro que consieguas la tua necessitat.	And if the flow of blood is stopped, then immerse your hand in water again and let the blood run into the water until you achieve your necessity.
Mays si tu eras en les dias d’estiu, lahoras tu yest excusat de la iteracio de la ma en l’aygua cauda, e le mes es pausat le cors del sanc en aygua cauda en temps de yvern.	But if you are in the days of summer, then you are excused from immersing your hand in water again, and it is better to hold the body of the blood in water during winter.
E la fleubotomia de aquesta vena es pus salva que de totas las autras venas, quar dejos lu no ha vena pulsatil, ni nervi.	And the femoral puncture is safer than that of all other veins, for it does not have a pulsating vein or nerve.
E la fleubotomia de la savatella de la ma dreyta es conferent a las malautias del fetge.	And the venesection of the thumb of the right hand is relevant to liver diseases.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que tu strenguas la ma am liament o am la tua ma, pus que tu l’as mesa en ayga cauda, entro que la vena sia imflada e sia be demostrada al vezement; e aprop fleubotoma aquela transversan; e si inscidas aquela de tot no nozera aquo en re.	And the quality of the venesection on it is that you tightly tie the hand with a ligament or your hand, putting it in a hanging position so that the vein is swollen and clearly visible; then proceed to make the incision transversely; and if you cut it completely, no harm will ensue.
E conserve que no ultimes la tua ma am la fleubotomi, quar dejos lu so les nervis dels ditz denudatz de carn.	And make sure that you do not bring your hand close to the venesection, but leave it with the nerves of the fingers naked and without flesh.
E aprop itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e laysse correr le sanc en aquela, quar si tu no iteras aquela en l’aygua cauda, le sanc sira coagulat en lo orrifici de la vena, e es prohibit de flux.	And then immerse the hand in a hanging basin and let the blood flow into it. For if you do not immerse it in the hanging basin, the blood will coagulate in the orifice of the vein, which is forbidden to flow.
E cum es extrayt le sanc segon la quantitat de necessitat, lahoras tu pausa sobre la vena oli e sal, per que no sia consolidada coytadament; e semblantment cove que tu fassas en tot ram streyt.	And when the blood is extracted in the required quantity, then pause over the vein with oil and salt to prevent it from closing completely; similarly ensure that you do this for all related veins.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de aquela de la ma senestra, es que es conferent a las malautias de la melsa.	May the youth of the femoral incision on that side be such that it is related to the ailments of the spleen.
E fay semblantment en la fleubotomia de lu ayssi cum has fayt en l’autra.	And make the same in the femoral incision on this side as you have done on the other.
E le juvament de la vena sephena de la fleubotomia es a las malautias que so en la partida dejos del cos, ayssi cum so malautias de la mayre, e a retencio de mestruas, et a las malautias dels ronhos e ulceracios de coyssas e de cambas antiquas, e a lor semblantz de las malautias.	And the youth of the vein sephena in the femoral incision is for the ailments that are on the left side of the body, as with ailments of the liver, and retention of menses, and for the ailments of the hemorrhoids and ulcers of thighs and ancient wounds, and their likenesses of ailments.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute entrometa lo sieu pe en aygua cauda e fassa sobre aquel fricacio entro que be apparen las venas; e lia sobre la junctura del pe am correia; e le loc de la vena le talo apparent deves le dit pous, e de aquela so ramificatz en la facia del pe motz ramps.	And the quality of the femoral incision is that the patient inserts his foot in warm water and makes friction thereupon, through which the veins become apparent; then place a bandage over the joint of the foot; and at the location of the vein, cut it out as described above, from which its branches run along the surface of the foot.
E donc fleubotoma le pus ample ram o dejos la camba deves le talo deves la agreguacio de lu, quar es milhor e pus sal.	And therefore, in the femoral incision, if you leave the hernia, cut it out as described, which is better and more secure.
E si fleubotomas aquela en la facia del pe, lahoras tu te guarda dels nervis que so dejos aquela sobre la facia del pe, e pausa la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas per le travers, quays cum si tu la volias inscidir.	And if you perform a fenestration there on the surface of the foot, then you must guard against the nerves that are left on the surface of the foot, and place your incision for the fenestration at right angles to it, as if you were going to cut through it.
E sia le fleubotomi vosil.	And let the fenestration be useful.
Mays si es prohibit le issiment del sanc; lahoras tu itera le pe de lu en l’aygua cauda e layssa correr le sanc en aquela entro que sia evacuat.	But if the bleeding is prohibited; then you wash the foot in cold water and let the blood flow into the place where it should be evacuated.
E si le fleubotomador erra en la primieyra veguada, lahoras itera am le fleubotomi en sus un pauc, quar le loc es sal; e no temes de lu malician, mays que te guardes dels nervis ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the fenestration is made incorrectly in the first attempt, then redo the fenestration a little more, where the location is correct; and do not worry about its danger, but rather guard against the nerves as we have said.
E semblantment fay de la sophena del autre pe engualment.	And do the same for the other foot similarly.
E de la vena sciatica, le loc ayssi cum havem dit es deves le talo dejos la cavilha de la partida silvestra.	And for the sciatic vein, as we have said before, you should cut the thigh at the place of the wild flax nerve.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de lu es a dolo de anca quan es per sanc caut.	And the result of the fenestration is pain in the ankle when it is due to blood clots.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intre en banh, e festine e strenha la cueyssa de lu del latz de la ancha entro desus le talo desus quatre ditz an una benda longua subtil, quar no appar sino per aquo.	And the quality of the femoral incision is that the malate (illness) enters bathed, and quickly and strongly washes the thigh of the patient from the loins above the four fingers on one thin bandage, which only becomes apparent through this.
E donc quan appar, lahoras tu fleubotoma aquela segon cascun engen que es a tu possible e segon le tranvers, e es milhor; o inscidas aquela per inscizio o secces aquela per seccio, quar le loc de lu es sal.	And therefore, when it appears, then you perform the femoral incision according to whichever instrument is at your disposal and possible, or excise it through an excision, for the place of the illness is clean.
E ela es en motz homes mot ameguada; e si atrobas aquela, e no appar al sentiment de tot, lahoras fleubotoma alcun ram de lu, e es aquel que appar en le dos del pe enves le dit auricular e le anular.	And it is often somewhat hidden; and if you find it but do not appear by the feeling of the whole, then perform a femoral incision on some branch of it, and that is the one that appears on the back of the foot between the auricular and the annular toes.
E guarda te dels nervis, e fay correr del sanc la quantitat que voles.	And guard the nerves, and let the quantity of the incision run where you want.
E aprop deslia la strictura e pausa sobre le loc de la fleubotomia coto e strenh le loc, quar leugierament es sanat.	Then release the tension and place your hand over the site of the incision strongly, for it heals quickly.
De ventozacio e de las qualitatz de uzar de aquelas.	For ventilation and the qualities of using those.
Ventozas so de corns, o de eram, o de veyre.	Frigid winds are of corners, or of air, or of vapors.
E ventozacio es fayta segon doas manieyras: la una de lor es am scarificacio e extracio de sanc, e l’autra es ventozacio ses scarificacio.	And cold is made according to two methods: one of which is by incision and extraction of blood, and the other is by cold without incision.
E aquesta ventozacio que es ses scarificacio es segon doas manieyras, quar o es am foc o ses foc.	And this cold that is without incision is also made according to two methods, either by heat or with heat.
E a las ventozas que so administradas am scarificacio e extraccio de sanc son xiiii locs del cors, dels quals la un en lo qual so pausadas ventozas es alnocrati, e es la deriera partida del cap; e le mieg loc d’el de doas partz del col ensemp; e ventozas del mento dejos la mandibula pus dejos de la boca; e ventozas de doas spatulas; e ventozas de alohoster, e es sobre la fi de la coeta; e ventozas de dos focils, e so de dos brasses; e ventozas de doas cavilhas; e ventozas de doas cuoyssas.	And for the colds that are administered by incision and extraction of blood, there are four parts of the body, of which one where cold is applied is sometimes, and it is at the very back of the head; and the middle part between the two sides of the neck; colds to the chin leave the jaw last; colds to the cheeks leave below the mouth; colds to the elbows, which are on the end of the forearm; colds to the kneecaps, which are about two fists wide; colds to the ankles; and colds to the thighs.
E ventozacio no extratz le sanc sino de las venas menudas sparssas en la carn, e per aquo no catz la vertut per aquelas, ayssi cum es cazement per fleubotomia; ni no cove que ventozacio sia fayta am foc o ses foc en alcuna malautia fayta per replecio entro que le cors tot sia evacuat.	And cold does not extract the blood but from the small veins scattered in the flesh, and by this it does not lose its virtue as with venesection; nor is cold applied by heat or with heat in any malady caused by excess within the body until all is evacuated.
Mays si necessitat provoca a ventozacio per malautia o per continua, aministrem aquela en tota hora al comensament del mes e en la fi de lu, e en le mieg loc de lu e en qualque temps sia.	But if necessity provokes ventilation due to illness or continuously, we administer it at the beginning of the month and at the end, as well as in the middle of the month and at any time.
La qual causa es quar dels homes es en les quals es sanc multiplicat entro que indigeys de extraccio de lu per ventozacio e atroba en le sieu cap graveza e soda; e de aquels es que atroba replecio e rogor en la sua cara e en le sieu cap, e en le sieu col; e de aquels es que atroba pruziment en la sua cara e en le sieu front e tenebrositat e hebetut en les sieus huels; e de aquels que gieta le loc de la sua ventozacio; e de aquels es que le lor ris es multiplicat; e de aquels es que atroba gustament de sanc en la sua boca, o que la lengua es apostemada e escup sanc; e de aquels es que lor dormir es multiplicat, e de aquels que vetz sanc en lo dormir rogor e antics e plaguas e autras causas a lor semblantz.	The cause is that in those people where the humor is increased with indigestion of food by ventilation and finds great weight and hardness in their head; and among them are those who find fullness and redness in their face and head, and in their neck; and among them are those who find pain in their face and forehead, as well as darkness and dullness in their eyes; and among those who know the place of their ventilation; and among them is that their laughter is increased; and among them is that they find taste of humor in their mouth, or that their tongue is swollen and they spit humor; and among them is that their sleep is increased, and among those who see humor in their sleep redness, spots, and other causes similar to theirs.
E donc quan vezes en alcuna causa de aquelas, e propriament si es en le tertz o miga del mes, lahoras comandam ventozacio esser fayta pus que so passadas del dia dos o tres horas.	And therefore, when times occur due to any of those causes, and particularly if it is in the third or last part of the month, then command ventilation to be made rather than after two or three hours have passed.
E juvament de ventozacio de la nuca es que quan aquela confereys a gravitat en le cap e ad aquo que es efondit als huels; mays cove que aquo sia aprop evacuacio de tot le cors.	And the benefit of ventillation at the neck is when you apply it to gravity in the head and to what is embedded in the heels; more correct that this be an approximate evacuation of the whole body.
E aquesta ventoza es en le loc de fleubotomia de la cephalica.	And this ventillation is at the location of craniotomy.
E no es legut que use de lu aquel que es de frega complecio, o en le qual es catarr, quar dona ad aquel gran nocument.	And it is not advisable to use that which is filled with pus or in which there is catarrh, as it causes great harm.
E per aquo no cove que uso de aquela les vielhs, e en les caps dels quals so malautias frejas.	And for this reason, it is not advisable to use those of the elderly, in whose heads there are gouty afflictions.
Mays ad aquel que sobre aquela es continuant sobre lu es fayta oblivio; e per aquo cove que tu comandes al ventozador que depause la sua ma un petit am la ventosa a las partidas dejos, temen de la generacio de oblivio.	More so for those who continue to be over it, it causes oblivion; and for this reason, you should command the ventillator to place his hand a little on the ventosa at the affected parts, to prevent the generation of oblivion.
Mays ventozacio de alkehel es en loc de fleubotomia de la vena fusca e de la basilica: e per aquo confereys a asma, e a la constriccio de ale e a la scissura del sturment de ale, e a tos, e a replecio.	More so, ventillation at alkehel is at the location of craniotomy of the jugular and basilic veins: and for this reason, it affects asthma, and the constriction of blood and the splitting of the windpipe, and coughing, and swelling.
E cove que sia enpellida la ventoza alkehel un petit, quar si es pausada dejos, engendra debilitat en le cors e en le stomac.	And make sure that the alembic is slightly heated, for if it is paused, it will cause weakness in the body and the stomach.
E la ventozacio de alhagdahan confereys a las dolors accident en le cap e a obtalmia, e emigranea, e prefocacio, e a dolors en las razitz de las dentz; e es en loc de fleubotomia de la basiliqua.	And the application of alhagdahan fomentation relieves headaches and ocular pain, migraines, precordial pain, and toothache; it is equivalent to a basilic vein phlebotomy.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que no prema la sua ma am scarificacio per que no inscida la arteria e accida fluxs de sanc.	And make sure that you command the fomentator not to press his hand on the scarification so as not to injure the artery and disrupt the flow of blood.
E ventozacio dejos le mento comfereys a alcola en la boca, e a corrupcio de la gingiva, e a semblantz a lor de las malautias que so en la boca, e stan en loc de fleubotomia de aliheric que so en las doas labias.	And the fomentation of the mentum relieves alcohol in the mouth, corruption of the gingiva, and appearances related to illnesses in the mouth that are equivalent to a phlebotomy of the jugular located between the two lips.
Mays la ventozacio que es fayta sobre las doas spatulas confereys a caphatan, le qual es fayt per replecio de caliditat.	More appropriately, the fomentation applied to the two spatulas relieves cough, which is done by replenishing heat.
E la ventosacio de las doas partidas dedintz dels focils confereys juvament de la fleubotomia de tres venas, so es de la basilica, fusca e cephalica, quar aquela atratz le sanc de totas aquelas venas pus manudas que so en la carn, e aquelas venas menudas de las autras venas pus grossas entro que pervengua la atraccio a las tres venas.	And the fomentation of the two internal parts of the flasks relieves youth similar to a phlebotomy of three veins, namely the basilic, femoral, and cephalic, for those veins drain the blood from all those veins that are in the flesh, and those small veins from other larger veins through which the drainage reaches the three veins.
E comanda al ventozador que trop no procezesca en scarificacio, quar le loc es denudat de carn, e dejos lu so nervis e arterias.	And command the boy who fans not to approach during incision, for the place is stripped of flesh, and leave only the nerves and arteries.
E es una ventoza am la qual es ventozat sobre alshosses e confereys a las emorroydas del cul e a las ulceracios pus dejos.	And it is a fan with which the patient is fanned, and you attend to the hemorrhoids of the buttocks and to the ulcers but leave them.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que sia gran ventoza, e que sia de eram, quar le loc indigeys de fort seccio; e fort leu so traucadas ventozas subtils e sia scarificat am scarificacio.	And ensure that you command the fan to be a large fan, made of palm, for the place needs strong dryness; and use fine, light fans for fanning but leave it fanned during incision.
Mays ventozas de las cambas minueysso per minuicio manifesta, quar atiran le sanc de tot le cors, e comfereysso a dolors antiquas dels ronhos e de la mayre, e de la vesica; e provocan las mestruas, e comfereysso a bothor e ademil; e stan en loc de fleubotomia de doas sophenas, e alahorcoben, e de doas cavilhas.	More fans on the legs I diminish by diminishing manifestly, for they carry the infection from the whole body, and attend to old pains in the kidneys and the liver, and the bladder; and induce menstruation, and attend to boils and ulcers; and stand in place of a femoral flebotomy and colotomy, and footligatures.
Enpero mot debelitan tot le cors e fan accidir sincopi en motz homes.	Otherwise they strengthen the whole body and cause syncope in many men.
E de las ventozas alahorcoben le juvament es propda al juvament a las ventozas de doas cambas.	And from the windpipes they hang the youth to the windpipes of both sides.
E la qualitat de la posicio de las ventozas es que pauses la ventoza al comensament vueda e sucguas per succio temprada, e no prolongues la posicio de las ventozas, mays pausa aquelas leugierament, e reman aquelas coytadament, e que las humors venguan al loc per adveniment engual.	And the quality of the position of the windpipes is that you place the windpipe at the beginning view and suck through gradually cooled suction, and do not prolong the position of the windpipes, but pause them slightly, and retain them steadily, so that the humors come to the place by chance equally.
E no cesses iterar aquo e continuar entro que veja le loc ja enrojezir e inflar e que appara la rogor del sanc.	And do not cease to repeat this until he sees the place already turn red and swell, and the rash of the sore appear.
E lahoras tu scarifiqua e itera la succio pauc a pauc, e aprop considera en la dispozicio dels cors.	And then you incise and repeat the suction little by little, and meanwhile consider the disposition of the bodies.
Quar aquel home que es de tendra carn de rars pors, cove que tu le scarifiques una veguada e no pus, per que le loc no sia ulcerat.	If the person has tender flesh, make sure you incise only once and not more, so that the place does not become ulcerated.
E comanda al ventozador que amplifique la scarificacio e pronde un pauc, e atempre la succio am facilitat.	And command the windpicker to enlarge the incision slightly, and increase the suction accordingly.
E si en le sanc es grossitut, lahoras cove que scarifiques doas veguadas, quar en la primieyra veguada es uberta la via de subtiliacio al sanc e a la aquositat de lu.	And if in the urine it is thickened, then cut twice, for in the first time the way of subtilization to the urine and its moisture is opened.
Mays en la segunda a la perscrutacio aquisida de la extraccio del sanc gros.	And in the second time to the acquired scrutiny of the extraction of thick urine.
E si le sanc es mot feculent, lahoras sia fayta scarificacio la tersa veguada per que consiegua le derier.	And if the urine is motile and feculent, then let the cut be made in the third time so that it may heal properly.
E derierament, quan volem extrayre le sanc pauc a pauc o un petit, abasta a nos una scarificacio.	And finally, when we want to extract the urine little by little or just a little, suffice us one cut.
E si volem extraccio de mot sanc, scarificam am mota scarificacio; e si nos conoyssem que·l sanc es gros, lahoras cove que scarifiquem per scarificacio preonda.	And if we want the extraction of motile urine, let the cut be motile; and if we know that the urine is thick, then let the cut be made with a jagged edge.
E le terme de scarificacio en la qual es la profunditat de la codena tant solament.	And the term of the cut in which the depth of the needle is solely.
E si aquel del qual la codena es grossa, dura, fusca, e les sieus pors so streytz, cove que les locs de las ventosas sian untatz lenitius, apertius resolutius; si es en temps d’estiu, ayssi cum es oli de aloen o oli de violat, o oli de amellas dossas, o oli de cemensa de coja; e si es en temps ivern, lahoras oli narci, o oli de liri, o oli de camamilla, o de sanc, e ad aquels semblantz.	And if the needle is thick, hard, dark, and its points are straight, then let the places for the suction cups be anointed gently, openly, and resolved; if it is in summer, then use olive oil of aloes or olive oil of violet or balsam oil or incense oil; and if it is in winter, then use narcissus oil, or chamomile oil, or saffron oil, and to those similar.
E si la superfluitat es grossa, freja, lahoras le oli sia amaranti, o oli de balsamita, o oli de aloen, o oli aneti, e a lor semblantz.	And if the excess is large, apply, then oil of saffron, or balsam oil, or aloes wood oil, or nutmeg oil, and in their likeness.
Mays si le ventozador es de amples pors de tendra carn, lahoras cove que sia prohibit de oli, e cove que ad aquest les locs de ventozas de lor aprop la ventozacio sian lavatz am ayguaros o am aygua freja de solatrum, o am aygua de coja, o am aygua de bordolaguas, e semblantz ad aquelas.	And if the winddrawer is of wide pores with tender flesh, then it should be prohibited from oil, and to these places of winds near the winddrawing let them be washed with cool water or cold water from Solomon's seal, or water from oak, or water from hellebore, and similar to those.
E aquel del qual le sanc es de mota humiditat, lava las suas ventozas am vi agre, o am aygua de mirt e sumac e semblant ad aquels.	And for that of which the root is due to dampness, wash its winds with wine, or water from myrtle and sumac, and similar to those.
E de aquel del qual las superfluitatz son grossas, lava las suas ventozas am vi antic, o am aygua de sansuc, que es majorana, o de decoccio de anet, o de camamilla, e a lor semblantz.	And for that of which the excesses are large, wash its winds with old wine, or water from sage, which is marjoram, or decoction of nutmeg, or chamomile, and similar to those.
E cove que la ventozacio sia guardada denant de banh; habantz cove que sia aministrada aprop issiment del banh per una hora o per doas, e cove que dorma aprop la ventozacio.	And it should be kept before bathing; having it should be administered shortly after the bath for one or two hours, and it should sleep near the winddrawer.
Quid est quo oportet ut regatur ventosandus aus phlebotomatus ante ventosationem.	What must be regulated before the evacuation of winds and bloodletting?
Cove que consideras al comensament: lahoras si le ventozador o aquel que·s deu fleubotomar es coleric e ventz sobre lu sanc agut e imflamacio, lahoras cove que prengua causas infrigidantz, ayssi cum milgranas acetosas, e endivia an vi agre e laytuguas, e secanabin, e julep, e a lor semblantz.	Consider the beginning: when the patient is choleric and windy with a sharp pain and inflammation, then consider causes that cool down, such as acetic milken blisters, endive mixed with vinegar, lettuce, saffron, and julap, and things like them.
E pausa a lor viandas ayssi cum poletz, e carns de auzels serbiges, e viandas conditas am agras, e a lu semblantz.	And give them foods such as lentils, roasted meats, and seasoned dishes with herbs, and things like them.
E de aquel del qual la compleccio es freja, cove que prengua en beure eyssarop almiva, o eyssarop de alsecanabin de semensas, e sumac, e vi mot odorant migier entre viel et noel; e que a lu sia comendat que use de paucitat de beure e de mangar, e pausa las viandas de lu poletz e canabir e pissers e petitz auzels e colombat.	And for those of whom the complexion is phlegmatic, consider giving them to drink essarop of almond, or essarop of saffron of seeds, sumac, and wine mixed with ginger between vinegar and honey; and that they be advised to use moderation in drinking and eating, and avoid lentils, beans, pears, small roasted quails, and pigeons.
E cove que en lo dia de ventozacio e de fleubotomia le beure sia major que la vianda.	And consider that on the day of wind evacuation and bloodletting, their drinking should be greater than their food.
E cove que sia donat en beure en alcunas horas ad alcus homes tyriaca alpharac, o medicamentz de musc, so es muscada, o alcelita denant la ventozacio o denant fleubotomia o aprop, per so que·ls membres principals sian confortatz e que·l sanc sia subtiliat; e no cove que prenguan aquela scalfatz.	And it is proper that some men be given to drink tyriaca alfarac or medicines from musk, so as muscada or acelita, before ventilation or before phlebotomy or shortly after, so that the principal members may be comforted and that the sickness subside; and they must not take any scalding.
Mays las ventozas que so ses scarificacio sian ventozas que so pausadas sus le fetge, e sobre la melsa e podagra, e sobre le umbelic, en les locs dels jonolhs, e la pixida del ancha, quar aquestz membres no suffertan scarificacio sobre si.	May the ventilation that is ses scarification be ventilation that is paused over the liver, and over the melsa and podagra, and over the umbilicus, in the locations of the joints, and the pit of the groin, for these members do not suffer scarification upon themselves.
E no es querit per aquelas sino atraccio de sanc de membre, ayssi cum pausam ventosa sobre mamilha en malautia de flux de sanc del sanc de las nars; e usam de aquela per que sia dissolvuda ventositat freja inviscade del membre, ayssi cum pausam sobre le ventre e l’umbelic; quar aquela rarifique le membre e scalfa lu e ramau la dolor quar resolveys ventositat.	And it is not desired for those, but rather an attraction of the sickness from the member, as when we pause ventilation over the mamilla in illness of flux of blood from the blood of the nose; and we use that so that the solid, viscous matter of the member may be dissolved. Just as we pause over the abdomen and the umbilicus; for that rarifies the member and scalds it, and relieves the pain by dissolving the swelling.
E ja es pausada sobre les ronhos quan accideys en lor opilacio o poyra, quar per vertut de atraccio fort leu huobre opilacio e erradica le poyra de son loc.	And it is paused over the liver when accidents occur in their operation or disorder, for by virtue of its strong attraction, the liver heals the disorder in its location.
E semblantment fa quan es pausada sobre le fetge e la melsa deves ventositat en aquels enclausa.	And it seems when it is pressed on the liver and spleen, you should relieve distension in those enclosed.
E aquestas ventozas so administradas vuedas amb succio tant solament; e alcunas veguadas so administradas am foc.	And these distensions are administered sometimes only with suction; and in some cases, they are administered with heat.
E alcunas veguadas so administradas plenas de aygua tebeza en las malautias de la melsa.	And in some cases, they are administered full of clear water for the illnesses of the spleen.
E aquo es per que la ventoza sia umplida e sia pus gran, so es aygua cauda sola o aygua en la qual sian cuytas herbas ad aquo convenientz.	And this is to ensure the distension is full and larger, it should be filled with clear water or water in which herbs suitable for the condition are added.
Forma de ventoza aministrada am foc: sia la amplitud del orrifici de dos ditz, segon que nos la havem formada; e la quantitat del preon sia la maytat de un palm; e sia en lo latz de lu, en le loc que es en le circuit, la maytat de lu, le trauc sia petit segon la quantitat que intre en lu una agulha.	Form of the distension administered with heat: let the width of the orifices be two fingers, as we have formed it; and the quantity of the preon be half a palm; and place it in the middle of it, in the location that is in the circuit, making it small according to the quantity that enters it through an needle.
Sia fayta de eram rog o citri, de grosses marges, leon, enguals e terses per so que no leda le membre deves la sua posicio sobre lu.	Let it be made of elm wood or citrus, with thick edges, lion's bark, equal and thin so that it does not lead the limb to lose its position on it.
E sia al mieg de lu vergua transversa de eram o de ferr, on es pausada candela am lo foc.	And place a candle on the middle of the sore or wound, near the fire.
E ja sia aquesta ventoza gran major de aquela la qual havem recomtat; e la pauca mendre de aquela segon las malautias e la etat de aquel que usa de aquela.	And let this larger sponge be greater than the one we have used; and use less water according to the illness and the condition of the person who uses it.
E las ventosas dels efantz e extenuatz so autres que las ventozas dels joves e de grosses corssas.	And the suction cups for children and those who are weak are different from those used for young and pregnant women.
E la qualitat de pausar aquesta ventoza am foc sobre le membre es que extenda la meca am foc de lenha decentment denant una pauca candela de cera, e pausa aquela sobre le mieg de la vergua transversa en le mieg loc de la ventoza, per que le foc sia accendut enviro la partida dejos per que no sia comburit le cors del malaute.	And the quality of placing this suction cup near fire on the limb is to extend the wick of a good wooden stick in front of a small wax candle, and place that over the middle of the transverse sore at the center of the suction cup, so that the fire is lit around the area where the suction cup will be placed, to prevent the body of the patient from being burned.
E aprop sia pausada sobre le membre del malaute, e le dit sia sobre le trauc que havem dit, entro que quan tenem las ventozas e non indigem que osten le dit e que yesca la vapor sobre aquel trauc, lahoras la ventoza sira tantost dissolvuda.	And then place it on the limb of the patient, and let it be on the wick as we have said. When we have the suction cups and do not need to hold the wick, and let the vapor settle over that wick, the suction cup will soon dissolve.
E prop igneys la meca segon la sua manieyra, e itera aquela si indigeyssas de aquela.	And then heat the iron according to its manner, and repeat it if you need to do so.
Mays en ventosa que es aministrada en la malautia de plauressi, am aygua, en la qual no ha vergua transversa ni trauc, e no es aministrada sino que sia umplida de aygua, e es pausada sobre le membre tant solament.	In the case of ventosa (cupping) used for pleurisy, it is applied with water, in which there is no transverse or longitudinal scar, and it is not applied unless it is filled with water, and is placed on the limb only temporarily.
E aquesta es la forma de lu: E aquesta ventoza quant plus es gran, tant es milhor, per que puya recebre gran quantitat de aygua.	And this is the form of it: And this cupping device, the larger it is, the better, because it can receive a greater quantity of water.
Capitol .xcvii.	Chapter 74.
Sanguissuguas no so administradas en motz membres sino en les membres en les quals non es possible posicio de ventosas, per la parvitat de aquels, ayssi cum le pot e gingiva e semblantz a lor; o en membre denudat de carn, ayssi cum le dit e·l nas e lors semblantz.	Sanguissuguas are not administered on larger members but on the members where it is impossible to place cups due to their small size, such as the palate and gums similar to them; or on a member stripped of flesh, such as the nose and ears similar to them.
E la qualitat de usar de aquelas que si has trobadas sanguisugas que so en las ayguas dossas de poyredura mundas.	And the quality of using those that you have found sanguissuguas in two-boiled waters purified.
E aprop sian layssadas le dia e la nueyt en aygua dossa entro que sian famolentas, e que no romangua alcuna causa en le ventre de aquelas; e aprop sia evacuat le cors en le comensament am fleubotomia e am ventozas; e aprop fregua le membre del malaute entro que s’enrojezesca; e aprop sian pausadas sobre lu.	And it is advisable to let them lie in warm water until they are relaxed, and that no cause of inflammation arise in their belly; and it is advisable to purge the body at the beginning with venesection and fomentations; and it is advisable to rub the limb of the patient until it becomes red; and it is advisable to place them over a cloth.
E cum son umplidas e caso.	And when they are filled up and swollen.
E si es possible succio del loc am ventoza, es mays derier en juvament.	And if possible, apply suction to the area with a venesection tube, which is more effective for recovery.
E sino, lahoras lava le loc am vi agre e aprop am mota aygua; e sia freguat e expremut.	And if not possible, then wash the area with water mixed with wine and then apply warm water; and rub and squeeze it.
E si es prolonguat le cors del sanc aprop le cazement de las sanguissuguas, e es aquo resudan, lahoras tu enfon un drap de li en aygua freja, e pausa aquel de sobre entro que sia abdida la resudacio.	And if the flow of blood continues for a long time at the site of the incision in the veins, and if this is where it accumulates, then you insert a cloth soaked in cold water, and place another on top to prevent the fluid from leaking out.
E si le sanc es multiplicat, lahoras polveriza sobre lu vitriol trissat, o guallas e semblantz a lor de las causas stipticas, entro que·l sanc sia abscidit; o sian pausadas sobre le loc las maytatz de favas excocicadas, e sian layssadas entro que las favas aderescan al loc, e es le sanc abscidit.	And if the bleeding increases, then sprinkle vitriol trissat, or powders similar to those used for staunching blood, over it until the bleeding is stopped; or place cloths soaked in decoctions of fennel over the area and let them remain until the fennel adheres to the area, and the bleeding has stopped.
E cove, si es necessaria, iteracio de sanguissuguas, quan es possible mudar aquelas.	And dig, if necessary, an iteration of bloodletting, when it is possible to change those.
E si las sanguissuguas son prohibidas de suspenssio, lahoras sia freguat le loc am sanc recent o fique una agulha en les locs entro que yesca sanc; e aprop sian pausadas, quar aquelas quan sento alcun sanc tantost adarysso.	And if bloodletting is prohibited by suspension, then apply heat to the area where recent bleeding occurred or insert a needle into the areas that retain blood; and subsequently pause, waiting for any retained blood to dissipate.
E quan voles que cajan, polveriza sobre aquelas un pauc de aloen trissat, o sal, o cendre, e cazo tantost.	And when you want them to subside, powder over them a little aloes triphala, or salt, or ashes, and apply it promptly.
Ayssi comensa lo prolec de la tersa partida: de restauracio.	Thus begin the procedures of the third part: restoration.
Aquest capitol es motas veguadas necessari en la art de medicina; e es restauracio de fractura e de dislocacio accident en les osses.	This chapter is a necessity in the art of medicine; it deals with the restoration of fractures and dislocations in the bones.
O, filh, sapiatz que jactan se de aquest capitol les fols metges e les vulguars e aquels que degun temps no reguardero les libres dels Antics ni legiro de aquels una letra.	Oh, son, know that both the learned doctors and the common folk, and those who for a time have not read the ancient texts or glanced at them even once, rely on this chapter.
E per aquesta causa es fayt que aquesta manieyra dels scients in terra nostra es privat; e yeu no ho e obliat en aquo degun temps be de tot; e no he adhibit aquo que apres, sino per longitut de lectio dels libres dels Antics e studi sobre le entendement de aquels, entro que extrayssi la sciencia de aquels.	And for this reason, this method of the scientists in our land is kept private; I have not forgotten it even after a long time; and I have not adopted what follows, but only through extensive reading of the ancient texts and study over my understanding, from which I extracted the science.
E aprop adirigui a experiment e studi en la longitut de la mieua vida.	And direct my experience and study in the length of my life.
E yeu ja he de aquo descrit en aquest capitol tot aquo que conte la mieua sciencia e sobre le qual es passat lo mieu experiment; pus que agui abreujat aquo a vos autres e deliuregui aquo de occupacio de elonguacio; e abreujegui aquo en la fi de abreujacio; et e monstrat aquo en la fi de declaracio; e formegui en aquo motas formas dels sturmentz que so administratz en aquel, cum es fayt per addicio de declaracio, ayssi cum he fayt en dos capitols precedentz.	And I have already described in this chapter all that my science contains and about which my experience has passed; thus here I abridge it for you others and deliver it from long discussion; and I abbreviate it at the end of the abbreviation; and I show it at the end of declaration; and form it with forms of instruments that are administered there, as is done by addition of declaration, just as I have done in two previous chapters.
Capitol primier.	First Chapter.
Summae et collectiones ex esse fracturae ossium, ex eis quarum praemissio necessaria est, antequam incipiamus rememorationem membrorum fraftorum et diversorum si uniuscuiusque.	Summary and collection of fractures of bones, from those for which a preliminary discussion is necessary before we begin the recall of fractured members and various aspects of each.
Cove donc que diguam en le prohemi de aquest capitol las summas del sermo; e les capitols al entendament dels quals en le comensament es forsat le artifexs e a stacio sobre la veritat de aquels; so es vos e aquels que so promptz que sapian o aprenguan aquesta art nobla autres de vos.	Therefore, let us begin this chapter with the summary of the discourse; and those chapters which must be understood at the beginning are necessary for the artisan to consider and stand firm on the truth of those. It is you and those who are quick to know or learn this noble art from others.
E donc dic que quan accideys a alcu fractura o dislocacio o torcio o cazement, lahoras cove que tu te coytes al comensament am fleubotomia o aleyar aquel, o quascu ensemps, si no prohibeys alcuna causa, ayssi cum debelitat de vertut, o es aquel al qual accideys effant, o viel en decrepitat, o es temps de vehement calor, o de vehement freg.	And thus say that when accidents occur such as a fracture or dislocation or twist or setting, when you approach the beginning with a venesection or remove it, or both together, if no cause is prohibited, such as weakness of virtue, or it is to which it occurs by effusion, or old age in decrepitude, or is a time of intense heat, or of intense cold.
E aprop sia content en vianda sieua de erbas frejas e de carns de auzels e de crabotz; e prohibem carns grossas e umplir si de viandas e de tota vianda que umple las venas de sanc, entro que siras segurat de apostema caut, e si no temes efusio de materia al membre.	And thus it is content in food consisting of fresh herbs and meat of partridges and crabs; and we prohibit fatty meats and those filled with foods and all food that fills the veins. Within which you must be sure to guard against abscess, and if you fear effusion of matter in the member.
E lahoras retorne le malaute al sieu regiment primier am le qual corr costuma de lu.	And then return the patient to its primary regimen according to the custom of which it is accustomed.
E donc cum le os trencat comensa esser restaurat, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia pascut de viandas nutritivas de nutriment mot e gros e greu en les quals sia viscositat, ayssi cum so viandas faytas de froment cueyt am aygua, e ris, e caps, e pes, e ventres de vacas, e huous, e peys fresc, e vi gros e semblants ad aquels, e am aquest regiment es fayta coagulacio de fractura pus leugierament e miels.	And thus, when the broken bone begins to be restored, then you must feed the patient with nutritious foods rich in both moisture and fat, which are viscous, such as foods made from cooked wheat in water, rice, eggs, fish, cow's stomachs, nuts, fresh meat, and similar fatty foods. And with this regimen, coagulation of the fracture is facilitated slightly and more effectively.
E sapias que les osses trinquatz quan so en les homes que so en la primiera vilura e en los decrepitz, no es possible que sian continuatz e sian consolidatz segon lur natura per la exsiccacio dels membres de lor.	And be aware that the bones crack in those men who are in their prime and in the decrepit, it is not possible that they be continuous and consolidated according to their nature due to the drying of their limbs.
E son consolidatz e continuatz segon lor natura tot temps per la exsiccacio de aquels membres, e so continuatz e consolidatz aquels que so de lor en la fi de la lenitat, ayssi cum les osses dels petitz effantz.	And they are continuous and consolidated according to their nature at all times due to the drying of those limbs, and those that are of them in the end of youth, thus like the bones of the small animals.
Mays empero natura ajusta e amnecteys sobre le os trencat de tota partida alcuna causa semblant a glut en le qual es grossitut que adhereys e strenh aquel entro que so ensemps conglutinatz e liatz ensemps, entro que venen la fi de fortitut e de fermesa, ayssi cum foc al comensament, entro que denguna causa no prohibeys aquel de las suas obres.	Moreover, however, nature adjusts and ameliorates over the broken bone from any part due to a cause similar to glue in which it thickens and adheres, conglutinating and joining together, bringing about the end of strength and firmness, thus like fire at the beginning, wherein no cause prevents it from its works.
E per aquesta causa es necessari que pauses las viandas del malaute, viandas en las quals so gravitat e viscozitat e grosseza, ayssi cum havem dit.	And for this reason, it is necessary to restrict the diet of the patient, a diet in which there is gravity, viscosity, and thickness, as we have said.
Mota diversitat de fractura segon diversitat del membre.	Various types of fracture according to the different parts of the body.
E sapias que las specias de fractura son diversas segon la diversitat dels membres, quar fractura del os de la camba es diversa de la fractura del os del cap; e la fractura del os del pietz es divers de la fractura del os del dos; e semblantment totz les autres membres son diverses entre lor.	And be aware that the species of fracture are diverse according to the diversity of the limbs, for a fracture of the bone of the thigh is different from the fracture of the skull bone; and the fracture of the foot bone is different from the fracture of the arm bone; and similarly all other limbs are different among themselves.
E yeu venc am rememoracio de tota specia de fractura, expausada en le sieu capitol distincta del autre.	And I renew my memory of all species of fracture, expounded in their separate chapter distinct from the others.
Mota diversitat de fractura en si meteyssa.	A greater diversity of fractures within themselves.
E son diversificadas las specias de fractura del os en lor meteyssas; quar es fayta fractura arcuada otra aquo que accidan en lu stellas; e alcunas veguadas es fayta fractura segon la longitut del os: e so las fracturas de lu satagia e astelhas e addicios procedentz e no-procedentz, ayssi cum es fayt en la pena quan es preparada a escriure, e es fractura am plagua e disrupcio en le cap, e es fractura fissura petita.	And the species of fracture in bones are diversified; for some fractures occur arcuately or where they strike at the bone's surface; and sometimes fractures occur according to the length of the bone: such as those of the diastasis, astylar, and addition and non-addition, just as when preparing to write a document, there is a fracture by cut and disruption in the head, and a small fissure-like fracture.
E a tota specia es engen o turment propri en restauracio de lu segon que vindra rememoracio de lu distincta en les sieus locs.	And for each species there is a specific or torment in restoration, according to the memory of it, which will be remembered separately in its places.
Mota senhal de fractura del os.	Sign of fracture of the bone.
E per aquo es conoguda fractura del os: es tortuositat de lu, e de aquel eminencia e appericio de lu al sentiment, e so de lu quan compremes aquel am la tua ma.	And for this, a bone fracture is known: it is the distortion of the bone, and the prominence and appearance of that part when touched by your hand.
E donc quan no es en le loc tortuositat apparent ni so no es feyt deves le tieu tocament quan toques le os am agitacio e le malaute no atroba gran dolor, lahoras no es aqui fractura.	And therefore, when there is neither apparent distortion nor pain, you should test by touching the bone with some movement; if the patient does not experience great pain, then this is not a fracture.
Habantz es possible que sia tortuositat o petita fissura, adon no cove que tu mauguas aquel am la tua ma e am compressio de tot; habantz pausa sobre lu de las medicinas de las quals ve rememoracio aprop aquel moment le qual conveneys al loc; e aprop sia streyt per strictura subtil.	It is possible that it is a distortion or small crack. Therefore, feel the area with your hand and apply pressure uniformly; pause over the place where you observe a remembrance of the medicine at approximately that moment which corresponds to the location; and then it will be straightened by subtle constriction.
E sapias que·l loc quan es arcuat e no es scindit en dos o otra aquo que no accidan en lu satagie, cum es remauguda tota partida de la sua compar, lahoras cove que comenses de la tua hora a rectificacio de lu habantz que a lu accida apostema caut.	And perceive that the area when it is curved and does not split into two or more parts as accidents do not occur in it, such as all parts of its composition being inflamed; therefore, you should start your correction from this point, having an abscess form at this place with a cautery.
E si a lu accida apostema caut, lahoras layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que cesse le apostema; e aprop engualha aquel segon quascuna manieyra que podes de levitat e de engen.	And if an abscess occurs in him, then leave that for some days until the abscess ceases; and then equalize it according to any way you can of levitation and ingenuity.
E sapias que restauracio de lu e agulacio de lu es pus leugiera que del os en le qual accideysso sathagie.	And know that the restoration and ligation of it is lighter than the operation in which you intervene.
E aprop strenh aquel segon que vindra la rememoracio de lu.	And then strengthen it according to the memory of what will come next.
Mays si en le os so satagias, lahoras es necessaria extencio de aquest membre trencat de doas partz, si es la ma o le pe; o am la tua ma si le membre es petit; o am doas cordas o am una corda e la ma.	More if in the bone you find it necessary, then for the extension of this broken limb into two parts, if it is the hand or the foot; or with your hand if the limb is small; or with two cords or one cord and your hand.
E sia la tua posicio am la qual pauses le membre loc engual segon la sua figura natural, mentre que las partidas so extandudas del membre trenquat, lahoras te perforsa que fassas retornar aquelas addicios am engen e segon quascuna manieyra que poyras en lor locs.	And place your position such that you level the limb according to its natural figure, while the parts of the broken limb are extended, then force yourself to return those additions with ingenuity and according to any way you can in their places.
E guarda te segon la tua forssa que no accida sobre le malaute per la tua operacio delor ni lesio; e perforsa te segon le tieu poder que tu appliques la un os am l’autre son companho segon lors milhors formas.	And guard yourself according to your strength so that no pain or injury occurs to the patient due to your operation; and force yourself according to your power to apply one bone to its companion bone according to their best forms.
E cove que en aquela hora aprofitablament tu toques am la tua ma aquel, e si vezes aqui alcuna causa diversa, rectifiqua aquel e enguala aquel per la quantitat de la tua vertut.	And carefully in that profitable hour touch with your hand there, and if you see any other cause different, correct it and equalize it by the quantity of your virtue.
E exquiva vehement extenssio e compressio, ayssi cum fan mots fols metges que motas veguadas fan accidir apostema caut per la sua operacio, o fan accidir contraccio en le membre ayssi cum havem vist aquo per la operacio de lor motas veguadas.	And avoid excessive extension and compression, as foolish doctors sometimes cause an abscess through their procedures by these means, or cause contraction in the limb, as we have seen through their practices.
E aprop annecteys, aprop equacio e decent operacio e strictura de aquel membre, e repaus e tranquilitat; amoneste le malaute sobre aquo e fay le squivar que no maugua aquel en la hora de las suas vigilias e del sieu dormir, e ves la sua revolucio e agitacio, e deves la sua egestio, e deves totz les sieus movementz am tota la sua vertut; e aguarda se que la posicio del membre sia posicio am la qual sia asegurada la dolor, la qual causa es quar quan sent en la disposicio de la posicio del membre delor o lesio; lahoras cove que permutes aquel ad autra disposicio de aquela am la qual non senta dolor; e guarda am aquo que la posicio de lu aquela sia dreyta e engual, per so que al membre non accida tortuositat quan es restaurat.	And carefully attach, maintain equilibrium and a proper operation and stricture of that limb, with rest and tranquility; advise the patient about this and ensure they avoid the cause that might provoke it during their waking hours and sleep, observing its reaction and agitation, and regulate its evacuation, and all its movements by your entire virtue; wait until the position of the limb is in a position where the pain is assuredly relieved, which causes is when felt in the disposition of the position of the limb in pain or injury; then carefully change that to another position where no pain is felt; and note that the position itself must be straight and equal, so that when restored, the limb does not incur tortuosity.
E la qualitat de la strictura del membre tranquat es aquela que yeu recomti; per que sapias que·ls membres trencatz so diversificatz en lor parvitat e en lor grandeza e en la forma de aquels.	The quality of the fracture of the limb treated is such as I describe; that you may know that the limbs broken are diverse in their smallness and in their largeness and in the form of those.
E de aquels que son petits ayssi cum le bras e·l dit e·l focil e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras cove que la envolucio sia de drap mol subtil.	And of those that are small like the arm and the thigh and resemble those, see that the wrapping is of fine soft cloth.
Mays aquels que so grosses ayssi cum la cuoyssa o la camba, cove que en aquels sia envolucio lada e dura, quar la liadura lada connecteys le membre gran e strenh aquel de tota part am strictura engual, enayssi que en lu no intre macula.	And of those that are large like the thigh or the chest, see that in those there be a wrapping tight and firm, for the tight binding connects the large and strong member from all sides at the fracture equally, ensuring no blemish enters.
E aprop comensa, aprop la tua evacuacio de equacio, pausar liament convenient ad aquo, sobre le loc de aquela fractura am tres envolucios o quatre segon que·l membre mereys; e strenh la tua ma un petit am le liament.	And then begin, after your first application of bandage, gently tie it conveniently over the place of that fracture with three or four wrappings according to which limb needs it; and hold your hand tightly on the tying.
E aprop ve am aquel a la partida pus sobirana del loc de la fractura, e strenh mens que no foc la tua strictura am la qual has strengut le loc de la fractura.	And then place it at the uppermost part of the location of the fracture, and hold firmly so that your binding is secure at the site of the fracture.
E aprop elongua te am envolucio del loc de la fractura un pauc, e mollifiqua la strictura petit a petit, entro que prenguas del loc sa una gran partida.	And then slightly extend the bandage around the fracture area, gradually soften the tension little by little, while you take off part of it from that place.
E aprop pren una autra benda e envolveys aquela autra veguada sobre le loc trenquat am envolucio, e aprop ve am las envolucios a la partida pus dejos de la fractura; e sia la tua operacio en la strictura de la envolucio e en mollificacio de aquela segon que havem dit en la envolucio primieyra desus.	And then take another bandage and wrap the other part around the fracture area, gradually aligning the bandages to the part of the fracture; and let the fracture be in the tension of the wrapping while you operate on the tension of the wrapping and in softening it as we said in the first wrapping above.
E aprop pausa entre las volucios de stopa leon o drap am le qual sia engualada la tortuositat de la fractura, si en lu es tortuositat; e sino, no pauses en lu alcuna causa.	And then place the stops or cloth bandage on which the tortuosity of the fracture is equalized, if there is any tortuosity; otherwise, do not pause at all.
E aprop pausa sobre lu autra benda, e aprop enguala sobre aquestas envolucios stelhas decentment faytas tantost, si en le loc no es imflacio o apostema caut, e lahoras pausa sobre lu aquo que sede le apostema aquel e que oste la imflacio; e layssa aquela per alcus jorns; e lahoras tu strenh sobre lu las stelhas.	And then place it over the other bandage, and gradually equalize on these wraps, which should be properly made as soon as possible, if there is no swelling or abscess in that area. Otherwise, place it over what is the abscess there and what causes the swelling; leave that for a few days; then strengthen the stellate bandages.
E sian las stelhas de la maytat de canna lada raza, e be formada saviament; o sian de fust de pi; o de ramps de palma ; e sia le ample de quascuna stelha segon aquesta forma e aquesta figura:	And let the stays of the splint for the left side be firm or made of wood; or of palm ribs; and let the width of each stay be according to this form and this figure:
Empero cove que la astelha que es pausada sobre aquela fractura sia pus grossa e pus lada un petit que las autras astelhas, e la longitut de la stela segon qu’es legut al membre en magnitut e parvitat; e aprop strenh sobre las astelhas am autra benda segon la tua primieyra strictura; e aprop lia desus am fiel decentment segon que havem dit de strictura, e es que sia la tua strictura segon le loc de la fractura mes, e quant mes es alonguat de la fractura, es mendre la strictura.	However, ensure that the bandage placed over the fracture is thicker and a little longer than the other bandages, and the length of the splint according to what is read about the member in magnitude and minuteness; and further strengthen around the splints with another bandage according to your first stricture; and further apply a layer of flax decently according to what we have said about the stricture, and it should be your stricture most at the place of the fracture, and the more it is stretched from the fracture, the less the stricture.
E cove que les fils sian migiers en grossesa e subtilitat, e sian de li mol; e si les fils so grosses, ayssi cum yeu he vist per la operacio de alcus fols pausantz les lors fils de cordas de li tort, e es error gran, quan catz la strictura fora equalitat.	And ensure that the threads are medium in thickness and fineness, and should be of silk; if the threads are thick, as I have seen in some operations where they used threads of rope for their bandages, it is a great error when the stricture is not equal.
E eyssament fils subtils no so convenientz, quar tu no consaguiras per strictura am aquels aquo que voles, e no cove que entre astela e astela haja mens de un dit.	And such thin threads are not convenient, for you will not be able to apply the stricture with them where you want, and it must not be less than one digit between splint and splint.
E si le malaute es ledit per las extremitatz de las stelas aprop la strictura en les locs sas, lahoras pausa dejos aquelas de stopa leon o lana carmenada entro que aquo no li fassa lesio.	And if the patient is injured at the extremities of the vessels near the site of constriction in the areas affected, then place those of stops of leather or dyed wool between them so that they do not cause injury.
Alcunas veguadas fractura es am plagua, e accideys disrupcio en la codena, e yeu vindre am rememoracio en aquela en le capitol segon singularitat.	Some fractures are from a blow, and accidents causing disruption in the chain, and you will find them remembered in that at the Capitol according to their singularity.
E sapias que ges tot membre trencat no es streyt am stelhas al primier dia; la qual causa es quar le membre, quan es gran, no cove que pauses sobre lu stelhas sino aprop v dias o vii o mays, segon la tua seguratat de adveniment de apostema caut.	And know that for any broken limb, it is not straightened with braces on the first day; this cause is that the limb, when large, cannot be held still with braces but requires several days or seven or more, according to your safety of the onset of abscess.
E aquesta es la manieyra dels emplaustres am les quals les Antics restauravan, les quals so pausatz sobre fractura e dislocacio e torcio.	And this is the method of plasters with which the Ancients restored, which are applied over fractures, dislocations, and twists.
Manieyra de emplaustra comu abruejat de restaurament de fractura, convenient a motas compleccios e majorment a las femnas e als efantz, quar es de aquo sobre le qual no ventz calor ni freg: e es que prenguas de polvera de moli, e es la medula de la farina que pen deves le movement de la mola en las paretz del moli.	Method of plastering for the opening of restoration for fractures, suitable for complex cases and especially for women and children, which is made from powder of millstone, the marrow of the flour that hangs from the movement of the mill in its walls.
E comfeys aquel ayssi cum es, sino que cribelles aquel am album de huou, e pausa la comfeccio de lu no-spessa ni subtil; e aprop usa de aquela.	And you must apply it thusly, but sift that white powder of wheat, and place the application not too thick nor too thin; then proceed with that.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre restaurant fractura e dislocacio e torcio: recipe de assafetida, de lapdanum, de acacia, de enula, e migrach, que es razit de milgraner salvage, de totz ana drac. x; de mirra e aloen ana drac. v; alochil ana drac. xx; totz sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian mesclatz am aygua alichil o am album de huou si la compleccio del malaute es scalfada; e aprop usa de aquest emplaustre, quar es de bona composicio e restaura les osses trencatz leugierament, e confereys a motz homes.	Another method of plastering for fractures, dislocations, and sprains: take a recipe of asafetida, of lapdanum, of acacia, of garlic, and myrrh, which are razed from salvager mint, of all use 10 drachms; of frankincense use 5 drachms; of alcohol use 20 drachms; all be sifted and sieved and then mixed with alcohol water or with wheat flour if the wound is superficial; then apply this plaster, which is of good composition, to restore lightly broken bones, and you confer upon it a mixture suitable for men.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre le qual comfereys a fractura e torcio: recipe migrach e met de altea blanca ana drac. x; de mirra e de aloen ana drac v; de acacia drac. vi; de bol armenic drac. .xx.	Another method of plaster for which you must apply to fractures and sprains: take myrrh and 10 drachms of white wormwood; of frankincense, 5 drachms; of acacia, 6 drachms; of Armenian bark, 20 drachms.
Totz sian trissatz en mortier am mota contricio, e sian cribellatz, e sian comfitz am aygua o am album de huou e sia administrat.	All be ground in a mortar with the contrary ingredient, then sieved, and compounded with water or wheat flour and administered.
Manieyra de emplaustre a juncturas e osses separatz de lors locs, e seda dolor accident en aquels e a fissuras e fractaduras: sia presa lana sutza e sia submersa en vi agre e oli cuyt e sia pausat sobre le loc.	Manieyra de emplaustre a juncturas e osses separatz de lors locs, e seda dolor accident en aquels e a fissuras e fractaduras: sia presa lana sutza e sia submersa en vi agre e oli cuyt e sia pausat sobre le loc.
Mays en aquest emplastre no es vertut de restauracio, de apostema caut e expelleys dolors propriament.	Mais in this plaster there is no virtue of restoration, of abscess cautery and expel pains properly.
Autra manieyra de emplastre que restaura os trancat: pren fuelas de figuier sort e fuelas de papaver salvatge; contereys tot e fay emplastre de lor.	Another way of plaster to restore sprains: take leaves of fig tree and leaves of wild poppy; mix them all and make a plaster from them.
Manieyra de emplastre abreujat aministrat deves la restauracio de fractura de os e quan tu voles resolucio del romanent de apostema: recipe razitz de altea, de camamilla e flors de violes, de farina de ers, de totz ana partida i; sian totz trissatz e sian cofitz am vi, si·l membre no es scalfat.	Method of a shortened plaster to administer for the restoration of bone fracture and when you want resolution of abscess: mix root of hyssop, chamomile, and flowers of violets, flour of rye, all in equal parts; make them into a paste with wine, if the member is not scalded.
Mays si es scalfat, lahoras comfeys aquel am aygua de coliandre humit o am aygua e usa de lu.	But if it is scalded, then moisten that with water of fennel or with water and use it.
Autra manieyra de emplastra pus fort en resolucio que aquest primier, quan accideys apostema dur deves la restauracio del membre: recipe de razitz de altea e de semensa de li, e de balaustia, e mellilot, majorana, flors de viol, de camamilla, de totz ana partida i engual; totz sian trissatz e sian cofitz am aygua de sauze o am aygua dousa o am vi, tot aquo segon la qualitat del membre e le repaus de la color de lu.	Another stronger method of plaster for resolution that is better than the first, when you encounter a persistent abscess, to restore the limb: mix root of hyssop, seed of flax, pomegranate rind, sweet marigold, clover, majoram, flowers of violet, chamomile, all in equal parts and equal; make them into a paste with water of oak, or with two waters, or with wine, according to the quality of the limb and the color of it.
Mays Ypocras no diyssec en le sieu libre que sia pausat sobre le membre trenquat deves la restauracio de lu sino cerot fayt de cera e de oli e no autre causa; e recomtec que sia migier entre grossitut e subtilitat.	May Hippocrates not say in his book that it should be placed on the member soaked you must perform the restoration of it instead a cauterization made of wax and oil and no other cause; and recommend that it be mixed between coarseness and subtlety.
Mays a Gualia es vist que sian pausatz sobre le membre trencat deves la restauracio de lu e las causas en las quals es exsiccacio am petit de caliditat so ayssi cum mirra, enses e semblantz a lor de aquelas causas que havem recomtadas.	May Galen see that it should be placed on the member broken you must perform the restoration of it and the causes in which there is drying due to low quality heat such as myrrh, resin, and similar to those causes we have recommended.
Manieyra de emplastre que comfereys a lesio e dolor: recipe migat, de cezes, de pels de home inscizes o pena de auzel, e de altea, e sal, partidas enguals; sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian cofitz, e sia fayt emplastre.	Method of poultice that comforts injury and pain: mix equal parts of cypress, bark of a cut man or hazel branch, and salt; crush and sieve them, then make the poultice.
Mays la quantitat segon la qual cove que romangua la liadura e aprop sia disliada, es que consideres si no es accidit dolor ni pruziment ni le os es trencat no es maugut de son loc, lahoras tu no deslies de motz jorns.	May the quantity according to which one should grind the paste and then disintegrate it be that you consider whether pain nor swelling has occurred and whether the bone is broken, does not move from its place, then do not dissolve it for many days.
E si accideys al loc dolor vehement o prusiment o imflacio, lahoras tu te coyte o deslie aquel en la hora, e osta le emplastre de lu.	And if pain severe or swelling or inflammation occurs at the site, then you should apply or dissolve that part in the hour, and cover it with the poultice.
E pren drap de li e spongia marina leon humida, e submergeys aquela en aygua tebeza, e am aquela lava le loc entro que cesse aquel pruziment e la dolor sia sedada; e aprop layssa repausar le membre per una hora; e aprop pausa sobre lu lana sutza submersa en vi agre e oli o oli rozat, e lia sobre lu per una nuoyt entro que sias segur de apostema caut, e que repause la imflacio del membre, e sia remauguda la dolor de lu.	And take a cloth and a sponge soaked in wet mule urine, immerse that in clear water, and with that wash the area until that application and pain are subdued; then place the member to rest for an hour; afterwards lay over it the submerged wool saturated in vinegar or rubbed oil, cover it overnight until you are sure of the abscess, and let the inflammation of the member subside, and alleviate the pain of it.
E aprop itera aquela strictura subtil e emplastre petit e no·l strenhas per la tua constriccio primieyra, e subtilia am aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then apply that subtle stricture little by little and do not strengthen your original constriction, but keep it subtle until it is healed.
E si vezes que le apostema e la rogor e la dolor e la imflacio e tots les accidentz ja so remaugutz de tot, e indigeysses de emplastre e de strictura, lahoras tu itera aquel ayssi cum has fayt al comensant engualment.	And if you see that the abscess and the redness and the pain and the inflammation and all the accidents are already subsided, and there is no need for application and stricture, then proceed to apply it as you did at the beginning equally.
E si no accideys al membre alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no deslies aquel sino aprop tres dias o quatre o v o vii; e alcunas veguadas tot aquo es layssat per xx dias segon que a tu appar per la desliadura del membre, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que la fractura adhereys, e se acosta a la coagulacio de la carn sobre aquel.	And if no cause occurs in the member of those we have said, then do not remove it but keep it for three to four days or five to seven; sometimes all this is left for twenty days according to how it appears by the sloughing of the member, as we have said, until the fracture adheres and settles into the coagulation of the flesh over it.
E lahoras ajusta en la strictura mays que en la tua strictura primieyra tota, e ayusta en la engrossacio de la vianda del malaute, segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu.	And then adjust it more tightly than in your first binding, and adjust it according to the swelling of the patient's abdomen, as the recollection of it precedes.
Mays si tu vezes le loc de la fractura ja desiccar e extenuar mays que no cove, lahoras sapias que·l nutriment es prohibit pervenir ad aquel; e donc embroca aquel am aygua tebeza deves tota veguada que delias aquel; e sia aquo en totz tres dias; e alleuja la strictura un petit, e per aquesta operacio corr al membre le nutriment, e es sanat leugierament.	And if you see the place of the fracture already dried and exhausted more than it should, then perceive that nutrition is prohibited from reaching there; therefore, soak that area with water of honey for a full day that you would use for that; and let this be done over three days; and loosen the binding a little, and by this operation bring the nutrition to the member, and it will be healed lightly.
Mays aquo que fan les fols restauradors de la fractura del membre autra veguada quan no es restaurat al comensament, segon que cove, e es restaurat segon tortuositat, es error segon la operacio de lor, e temor gran, e si fos dreyturier aquo agrandit les Antics en lors libres e agueran am aquo obrat.	And what the fracture restorers do another time when it is not restored to its original state, according to its condition, and is restored according to tortuosity, is an error in their operation, and a great fear. If they were right about this, they would enlarge the Ancients' works on their books and have done so with this work.
E yeu no he vist ad alcu de lor aquo far, per que es pus razonable que aquo no fassa.	And I have not seen them do this, so it is more reasonable that they do not do it.
Capitol segon: De fractura quan accideys en le cap.	When a fracture occurs in the head.
Las specias de fracturas son motas, e las figuras de lor son diversas, e las causas son distinctas, quar de fracturas alcuna es fayta per percussio de spaza, e la percussio osta tot le os entro al ciphac, le qual es dejos le os, ayssi cum fay ayssa en le fust, e per aquo aquesta specia es nompnada ascial; o la spaza inscideys alcuna partida del os, e inscideys la carn de lu e no passa la inscizio entro al derier de lu; e aquesta specia de fractura es nompnada levatio absoluta.	The types of fractures are motas, and their figures are diverse, and the causes are distinct. For some fractures, they are caused by the impact of force, which breaks the bone completely through the skin, leaving the bone exposed, just as one would break a stick, and for this reason, this type is named ascial; or the force incides on a part of the bone, cutting the flesh but not passing through to the other side; and this type of fracture is named levatio absoluta.
E la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca, e de fractura que es contricio o atricio; e causa de lu es percussio am poyra o cazement sobre peyra, e a lor semblantz.	And the swelling of these two types of fractures is great or small, and for a friction fracture; its cause is a blow by a heavy object or fall on a hard surface, resembling these.
E aquesta fractura o es penetrant que ja apropinqua al pannicol le qual es dejos le os; o es en la facia del os, e la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca.	And this fracture is penetrating, nearing the periosteum which covers the bone; or it is in the surface of the bone, and the swelling of these two fractures is great or small.
E de fractura es que es ameguada en le os, en la subtilitat del cabel petita, e per aquo es nompnada aquesta specia fractura capillar.	And for a fracture, the bone is weakened in its细小的密度，因此这种类型的骨折被称为毛细管骨折。
E es fractura que es fayta o per cazement o per percussio de peyra e a lu semblantz, que fa intrar alcuna lamina del os a las partidas dedintz, e es fayta en le loc concavitat ayssi cum accideys als payroles de eram quan accideys a lor percussio e es partida de lor intrada a las partidas dedintz.	And it is a fracture that is caused by impact or percussion of the foot, resembling which causes some layer of the bone to enter the inner parts, and is formed in the concave location as happens when you percuss an anvil and its inner part enters.
E majorment es fayt aquo en les cors de osses humitz, ayssi cum so caps de efantz.	And it is mostly caused in the bodies of humid bones, such as those of children.
E so a totas aquestas specias fracturas satagias, so son pessas ayssi cum stelhas separadas.	And to all these species of closed fractures, they are painful as if by separate wounds.
E yeu vindre am reremoracio de tot aquo en son loc.	And I will return to remind you of all this in its place.
E conoyssem totas aquestas specias de fractura per deteccio sobre aquelas e per inquisicio de lor am tentas e ostament de carn corrumpuda que es sobre lor.	And we know all these species of fracture through detection by their appearance and through inquiry about the torn and damaged flesh that is upon them.
E specia capillar es conoguda per aysso que es descubert sobre le os, e es abstergit, e linit sobre lu am tentha, quar la fractura appar negra.	And the capillary species is known because it is discovered on the bone, is abraded, and limits along its torn edge, where the fracture appears black.
Mays en la curacio de fractura considera al comensament les accidentz del malaute, e lahoras si tu vezes per los accidentz que signifique per significacio manifesta sobre paor, ayssi cum es vomit de colera, e extencio, e perdement de entendament, e abscizio de votz, e sincopi, e febre acuta, e eyssiment dels huels e rogor de aquels, e semblantz a lor dels accidentz en las majors disposicios, ses dopte no es sanat.	More in the cure of fractures consider the beginning of the patient's condition, and if you observe through these accidents what they manifest as signs of fear, such as vomiting of bile, extension, loss of understanding, hoarseness, fainting, acute fever, swelling of the extremities, and heat of those areas, and symptoms similar to them in more serious conditions, then you should doubt that it will not be cured.
E si vezes accidentz no-correntz tu speras salut, lahoras tu comensa la curacio de lu.	And if you encounter accidents not common, then hope for healing, when you begin the cure of it.
La qual causa es quar si es vengut a tu le plaguat en le comensament cum es plaguat e aquo es en les dias de ivern, lahoras cove que tu studias en le ostament del os denant le dia xiiii segon tota disposicio.	And the cause is that if the patient has come to you at the beginning of the injury as injured and this is in the days of winter, then consider that you study in the bone on the following fourteenth day according to all disposition.
E si es en les dias d’estiu, lahoras cove que te coytes ostar le os denant le vii dia, habantz que aquo que es dejos le os sia corromput del pannicol, e que accidescan les accidentz que havem recomtatz.	And if it is in the days of summer, then consider that you cut the bone on the seventh day, having that which has been left of the bone be corrupted by the sinewy tissue, and that accidents occur which we have recounted.
E si la fractura ja es pervenguda al pannicol cubrent le cervel, e es am partidas menudas e atricio, lahoras cove que inscidas la partida conminuta e atrita, segon que yeu recomtare a tu.	And if the fracture has already reached the sinewy tissue covering the marrow, and is broken into many pieces and rubbed, then consider that you incise the fractured part and rub it, according to what I have recounted to you.
E es que tu razas le cap del malaute plaguat, e descuebres sobre le os segon costuma e manieyra a tu possible segon la figura de la plagua, e que sia leugier sobre le malaute.	And when you reason about the thigh of the injured patient, expose over the bone according to custom and your method as possible based on the figure of the injury, and let it be light over the thigh.
E si accideys a tu deves la deteccio del os, fluxs de sanc o apostema caut, lahora tu te oppausa a lu am aquo que cove, e es que huemplas le loc de draps infuzes en vi e oli rozat, e fassa repausar la plagua entro que sia sedat le apostema, e sies segur de fluxs del sanc; e aprop comensa en la circuicio del os e en la ablatio de lu.	And if it happens to you to detect the bone, flow of blood or abscess caut, then you apply yourself to it with what is suitable, and you fill the area with infused cloths in wine and rubbed oil, and make the wound rest until the abscess is sedated, and you are sure of the flow of blood; and then begin at the circuit of the bone and in its excision.
E aquo sia segon una de dos manieyras de operacio.	And this is according to one of two ways of operation.
E la una manieyra es que tu inscidas le os am inscisori de streyt tal, e aquesta es la forma de lu: E aprop administra un autre inscissori aquest, un pauc pus lat que aquel; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And one way is that you incise the bone with an incisor straight such, and this is its form: And then administer another incisor here, a little more lateral than the first; and this is its form:
E aprop administra mays le inscissori pus lat que·l segon.	And then administer more to the incisor more lateral than the second.
E cove que sia deves tu nombre de inscissoris diverses, dels quals alcus so pus latz que alcus autres; e alcus de lor so pus breus que·ls autres e sian en le derier de acuitat de las suas extremitatz, e sian de ferr indi o felod.	And make sure that you have the number of different incisors, some of which are more lateral than others; and some of them are shorter than the others and situated at the rear of their extremities, and be made of iron or steel.
E usa de lor am facilitat en percussio sobre le inscissori per so que no concutesca le cap e leda aquel.	And use their assistance in percussing over the incisions to prevent them from trembling and causing pain.
E si le os es fort, dur, lahoras cove que perfores en le circuit de lu denant que tu administres los inscissoris am les taravels, les quals so nomnatz taravels no-profundantz.	And if the bone is strong and hard, first drill in the circuit around it before you make incisions with the trephines, which you call shallow trephines.
E no so nomnatz ayssi sino quar aquels no pausan le terme de l’os del test ad aquo que es aprop lu, per so quar al taravel es redonda extremitat o marge sobre aquel que es dejos le cap de lu agut semblant a marge o a cercle petit, le qual prohibeys esser submergit e passar la spissitut del os.	And they are not called so, but only those that do not reach the end of the bone's thickness to where it is close, for which the trephine has a round edge or margin over that which leaves the sharp top agout like a small circle or a little circle, which you must not submerge and pass through the thickness of the bone.
E es convenient que tu prenguas de aquestz taravels gran nombre dels quals quascu convenesca a la spicitut de quascun os, entro que sia a tu present en tottz testz del cervel la extremitat del qual sia aguda, la quantitat en longitut e brevitat sia segon la quantitat de spicitut de aquest test.	And it is convenient that you use many of these trephines, each suitable for the thickness of each bone. While in all parts of the skull, the edge of which should be sharp, the length and shortness of quantity should be according to the thickness of this bone.
E aquesta es la forma de tres specias de teravels: La qualitat de perforar en le circuit del os trencat es que pauses le teravel sobre le os e revolvas aquel am les tieus ditz entro que sapias que l’os ja es penetrat; e aprop permuda le terevel ad autre loc, e pausa aquo que es entre tot trauc la quantitat de la grosseza del ray o enviro aquo.	And this is the form of three kinds of trephines: The quality of drilling in the circuit of the broken bone is that you place the trephine on the bone and turn it with the tweezers until you know that the bone is already penetrated; then, move the trephine to another location, and pause where everything brings the quantity of the size of the ray or around that.
E aprop inscideys am inscissoris aquo que es entre quascun trauc del os, e fay aquel pus subtil que podes sobre aquo en fi de levitat, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que erradiques le os, o am la tua ma, o am alcuna autra causa per alcus sturmentz les quals auras apparelhatz ad aquo, ayssi cum tanalhas e forceps subtils.	And then incise with a scalpel that which is between each tooth of the bone, and make that small incision subtle which you can do at the end of levitation, as we have said, during the removal of the bone, or by your hand, or by some other cause through certain instruments which you will have prepared for this, such as fine forceps.
E cove que tu guardes am tota cautela que l’inscissori no toque alcuna causa del ciphac.	And see that you take all precautions so that the scalpel does not touch any part of the joint.
E donc cum auras circuit le os perforan, e sira separat del ciphac si es continuat am lu, e auras aquel extrayt, cove que razas e enguales aquel en la asperitat de lu de aquo que es en le os am autra sturment semblant a inscissori, mays empero cove que sia pus teon e pus subtil que les autres inscissoris.	And so, after you have circled the bone and perforated it, and if it is continuous with the joint, you will extract that part. See that you rasp and smooth it out to match the roughness of the bone using another instrument similar to a scalpel, but ensure that it is finer and more delicate than other scalpels.
E si roman alcuna partida dels osses petitz e satagias, lahoras pren aquela am facilitat am aquo que es deves tu dels sturmentz; e aprop aquo cura la plagua am lichinis e enguentz les quals havem ditz.	And if any small part of the bones is removed and smoothed, then take that with ease using the instruments you have; then cure the wound with lint and ointments as we have said.
E l’autra manieyra de operacio es leugiera, longinqua de paor, la qual diyssec Gualia e la lauzec per gran lausor; e aquest es le sermo de lu: necessari es a tu en le comensament que comenses descobrir la partida del os del loc en le qual es la fractura pus vehement e pus manifesta, entro que quan auras descubert aquela partida e auras pausat dejos lu la extremitat de aquest inscissori lent e alegre del qual aquesta es la forma:	And another way of operation is light, far from fear, which Diyssec Gualia and the louse by great labor; this is the manner of it: at the beginning, you must begin to uncover the part of the bone in which the fracture is most violent and most evident; when you have uncovered that part and have placed the other hand on the extremity of this incisor instrument of which this is the form:
E es que la partida lenticular es leon e no inscideys alcuna causa, e la partida aguda es de lu en dos latz avantz en longitut, ayssi cum vezes; que la partida lenticular sia ajustada al ciphac am la facia de lu inscident aguda en le os.	And that the lens-shaped part is lion and you do not incise any cause, and the acute part is divided into two halves longitudinally, as you see; that the lens-shaped part be adjusted to the cusp facing the acute part towards the bone.
E aprop percuteys sobre le inscissori de una partida am un petit malhet entro que inscidas tot le os am facilitat ayssi cum es revolvut, e tu sias segur del pannicol que no accida en lu accident que temas en denguna manieyra, e si le medicant14 era le pus fol de totz les homes e le mays ignorant de lor; certament, e si era dorment.	And then strike on the incisor at one small measure between cutting through the entire bone with ease as it is turned, and you be sure of the panniculus that no accident occurs in the manner you fear; and if the medicant14 was the most foolish of all men and the most ignorant of them; certainly, and if he were sleeping.
Lahoras si romania alcuna causa annexa al os del pannicol en alcus locs de os, inscidira aquel de lu am la extremitat del inscissori aquel lenticular, e deliuraria aquel de lu am facilitat, quar es deliurat de lu ses nocument e ses paor.	When some cause breaks the bone of the tendon at certain places of the bone, it will cut that one from the end of the cutters, and release that one with ease, for it is released from its harm and fear.
E si fractura del os no penetra entro al pannicol, e aquo que es abscidit o es ostat del os es la facia de lu, e roman en lu asperitat e satagias subtils, lahoras cove que razas aquela asperitat e erradiques aquelas satagias am razoris subtils per les quals tu has preparat le nombre, de diversas quantitatz per que sia a tu possible administrar de aquels en tot loc les pus convenientz de lor e le pus dreyt de aquels segon aquo en que te perduzeys la tua operacio aquel os trencat e la figura de lu.	And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate into the tendon, and what is severed or left from the bone is its surface, which remains rough and fine irregularities, then you must remove that roughness and eliminate those fine irregularities with sharp instruments that you have prepared in various quantities so that you can apply them most conveniently to all places of the bone fracture and the shape of the bone.
E cove que administres en la tua razio am la qual razes le os al comensament le pus lat de aquels razoris, e aprop usa aprop lu del pus subtil de lu, e no cesses far aquo segon continuitat entro que pervenguas ad aministrar le pus teon e·l pus subtil de totz aquels.	And you must apply the sharpness of the instruments in proportion to which you shave the bone at its beginning, and then use increasingly finer parts of it, and do not cease doing this continuously until you reach administering the thick part and the fine part of all.
Mays en quascuna de las autras fracturas petitas capillars e fractura subtil, cove que administres cura segon aquo que perduseys ad rectificacio de lu.	In any other small capillary fractures or fine fractures, you must administer care according to what you have done for correction of them.
E es causa que no es ameguada sobre totz les quals han studi en aquela art.	And it is because they are not accustomed to treating all those who have studied that art.
E stec sobre aquo que nos scriut havem mostrat en grans fracturas.	And place this on what we have written about in great fractures.
E si le pannicol es retangut quan tu erradiques le os, lahoras cove que prenguas drap de li segon la quantitat de la plagua, e submergeys aquel en oli rozat, e pausa aquel sobre le orrifici de la plagua; e aprop pren autre drap doblat o triplicat e submergeys lu en vi e oli rozat e pausa aquel sobre drap prim e fay aquo al pus leugierament que podes sobre aquel, que no graves le ciphac; e aprop administra sobre aquel liament lat, e no strenhas aquel sino per quantitat que tengua la plagua tant solament.	And if the bandage is cut when you remove the bone, then take a piece of cloth according to the size of the wound, and immerse that in olive oil, and place it over the opening of the wound; and then take another piece of folded or triple-folded cloth and immerse it in wine and olive oil, and place it over the first cloth, and do this gently enough so as not to disturb the dressing; and then administer linseed on top, and do not press that until its quantity equals that of the wound.
E layssa aquel am aquesta cura per un dia o per dos entro que sias segur de apostema caut; e aprop deslia aquel e aprop aministra medicinas am las quals es superflua siccitat, ayssi cum razitz de lin e farina de errs, e polvera de enses e de aristologia, e de semblantz ad aquels.	And leave it to this treatment for one day or two until you are sure of the abscess; and then remove that, and then administer medicines in which excessive dryness is superfluous, such as linseed and wheat flour, and powder of thyme and myrtle, and similar.
E es que tu fassas de aquestas medicinas polvera que sia pulverizada sobre la plagua, ayssi cum son secas; e universalment, administra en aquel tota medicina de proprietat de la qual es que abstergesca e no mordique.	And you make these medicines into powder that is sprinkled on the wound; and generally, administer to it all medicine of a property that cleanses and does not irritate.
E guarda te segon la tua vertut que la plagua en la tua curacio sia neta; e no sia en lu surdicia de enguent ni autra; ni no layssas agreguar virulencia en lu; quar quan es ajustada sobre le pannicol del cervel, corromp aquel e poyreys aquel, e accideys sobre le malaute aprop aquo malicia maligna.	And guard according to your virtue that the wound in your cure be clean; and do not let it become surdy of ointment or other; nor leave virulence in it; for when adjusted over the linen of the brain, corrupt that and spoil that, and happen to the patient about this evil malice nearby.
E accideys en le ciphac del cap, cum de lu es mondificat le os e majorment quan es menspresada la cura de lu, e es negror en la superficia de lu; e donc considera lahoras si accideys al malaute les accidentz que havem ditz, sapias que es parnicios ses tot dopte.	And it happens in the scabb of the head, as from it the bone is changed and especially when the cure of it is neglected, and blackness appears on the surface of it; and therefore consider when it happens to the patient the accidents that we have said, know that it is pernicious indeed.
E si no accideys negror sino de la medicina que es pausada desus, e es en vertut de aquela medicina que fassa aquela negror, lahoras cove que tu prenguas de mel una partida e de oli rozat partidas iii, e am aquels linieys un drap, e aprop pausa aquel sobre le ciphac; e aprop cura aquel am las specias de curacio que conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if no blackness occurs but from the medicine that is applied above, and is by virtue of that medicine that causes that blackness, then take part of honey and part of rubbed oil in equal parts, mix those lines on a cloth, and place it over the scabb; and cure it with the spices of cure as they are convenient until it is healed.
Capitol .iii.	Capitol iii.
De restauracio del nas quan es trincat.	For the restoration of the nose when it is broken.
Sapias que no es trencat del nas sino doas partidas ensemps pus sobiranas, o una de aquelas alcunas veguadas, per so quar en lu has dos osses, quar la partida dejos es cartillaginosa, e no es trencada e no accideys a lu sino atricio e tortuositat e sinuitat.	Know that it is not the nose itself that is broken, but two parts together with some additional tissue above, or one of those several layers, since in the nose there are two bones; the part you leave behind is cartilaginous and is not broken, so do not harm it, but merely rub, smooth, and curve it.
Mays si es trencada la una de las doas partidas de lu, lahoras cove que tu intrometas le dit petit en le sieu nas, e que engualhas aquela fractura dedintz am le tieu dit indic, e am le dit pous defora, entro que retorne le nas segon la sua figura natural.	But if one of the two parts is broken, then you must introduce the small piece into the nasal cavity, and equalize that fracture inside according to your directive indication, and outside, between the thumb and forefinger, so that the nose returns to its natural shape.
E sia fayt aquo per tu am facilitat, e guarda te que no caja per aquela tua operacio sobre le malaute delor.	And do this for you with facilitation, and guard that the patient does not suffer from your operation on the ill foot.
E si la fractura es en la pus sobirana partida del nas, e le dit no perve ad aquela, lahoras cove que sia equat am la extremitat del ray en le qual sia petita grossitut.	And if the fracture is in the upper part of the nose, and you cannot reach it, then you must equalize it at the end of the bone where there is a small swelling.
E si la fractura es en doas partidas, lahoras tu fay le semblant de aquo.	And if the fracture is in two parts, then you make it appear as such.
E coyta te am restauracio de lu en le primier dia de la fractura, si es possible; e sino, lahoras aprop le vii o·l x deves le repaus del apostema caut.	And by application you restore him on the first day of the fracture, if possible; otherwise, as soon as the seventh or tenth day, you provide him rest from the abscess with a cautery.
E aprop entromet en la extremitat del nas una meca de drap de li, si la fractura es en una partida, o metz doas calguas, si la fractura es en doas partidas, e sia en la calgua grossitut de tanta quantitat que umpla le trauc del nas.	And then insert into the extremity of the nose a mecha of linen cloth, if the fracture is in one part, or two cloths, if the fracture is in two parts, and let the cloth swell to such a quantity that it fills the nostril.
E diysso alcus dels antics restauradors que las calguas sian enfundudas en boder, e sian permudadas en tot dia, mays no es vist a mi; habantz cove que la meca sia enfunduda en album de huou comfit am polvera de moli; e aprop layssa la qualgua entro que l’os sia fermat e sia endurazida la cartillage.	And some of the ancient restorers say that the cloths should be soaked in butter, and changed throughout the day. But I do not see this practiced; instead, they use a mecha soaked in honey comfit powder. And you leave the cloth until the bone is set and the cartilage becomes hardened.
E alcunas veguadas sia entromes en le nas, en loc de calgua, pena de auca pus que es envolopada de drap de li leon; e sia que ja te la fractura del nas pus vehement e que le malaute no sia prohibit de inspiracio.	And sometimes insert into the nose instead of a cloth, a pad wrapped in linen cloth; and do this if the nasal fracture is severe and the patient is not prohibited from breathing.
E aquesta causa no es a tu necessaria; e si voles, fay aquo, e si voles, fay calguas.	And this cause is not necessary for you; and if you wish, do this, and if you wish, use cloths.
E si accideys autra veguada apostema caut, emplastra le nas am cerot o am coto enfus en vi agre e oli rozat, o am diaquilon.	And if another abscess occurs, cauterize it, apply a plaster on the nose with wax or cloth moistened in vinegar and olive oil, or with a pustulum.
Mays si no accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que emplaustres aquel defora am farina de sizami e am polvera de enses cofitz am album de huou; e aprop pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e no lies le nas am alcuna causa.	And if no abscess occurs, when you need to plaster that area externally with sesame seed flour and fenugreek powder mixed in honey; then place your hand over the site, and do not touch the nose for any cause.
Mays si so trencats les osses del nas am fractura petita o so conminuitz, lahoras cove que scindas sobre aquels, e extraguas aquels am insturmentz que conveno ad aquels; e aprop cos la scissura, e cura aquela am aquo que encarna e consolida, e am emplastres ad aquo convenientz.	And if the nose bones are broken by a small fracture or have been set, you should split those areas, and extract them with instruments suitable for those parts; then, at the site of the split, treat that area with something that heals and consolidates, and apply plasters as appropriate.
E si accideys plagua dedintz le nas, lahoras cove que cures aquela am calguas e administra canulas de plom entro que sia de tot sanat.	And if a plague occurs inside the nose, you should treat that with waters and administer lead tubes until it is completely healed.
Capitol .iiii.	Chapter IV.
De restauracio de la mandibula quan es trincada.	On the restoration of the jaw when broken.
Quan la mandibula dejos es rompuda e la fractura de lu no es am plagua, reguarda lahoras si la fractura es deforas tant solament, e no es trencada en dos e es curvada a las partidas dedintz, lahoras la sua cognicio es leugiera.	When the jaw is broken and the fracture is not displaced, consider whether the fracture is only superficial, and not broken into two parts but bent inward, in which case its perception is slight.
E cove donc, si la fractura es en la part dreyta, que tu intrometas le tieu indic senestre en la boca del malaute; e semblantment si la fractura es an la mandibula senestra, lahoras intromet le dit indic de la ma dreyta; e impelleys am aquel la gilbositat de la fractura dedintz am facilitat a las partidas defora, am la tua autra ma de la partida defora del os; am aquel decentment equa aquelam.	And thus, if the fracture is on the right side, you should insert your left hand index finger into the mouth of the patient; and similarly, if the fracture is on the left jaw, then insert the said index finger of your right hand; and push the swelling of the fracture inward with ease to the parts outward, with your other hand from the part outward of the bone; do this properly as much as that.
E si la fractura de la mandibula ja es separada en doas, lahoras cove que administres extensio de doas partz segon rectitut entro que sia possibla la equacio de lu.	And if the fracture of the jaw is already separated into two parts, then you should administer extension to both parts according to the straight line within which their alignment is possible.
E si accideys conmocio de dentz a disrupcio, lahoras strenh aquelas de las quals speras que romandran am fil de aur o de argent o de ceda; e aprop pausa sobre la mandibula trencada cerot, e aprop pausa sobre lu drap duplicat, e pausa sobre le drap gran stelha decentment fayta, o una pessa de sola engual a la longitut de la mandibula; e aprop lia aquela desus segon que a tu es apparelhada la liadura de lu e que conveneys la applicacio, entro que no es destruida.	And if you encounter the loosening of teeth with disruption, then strengthen those of which you expect that they will break on the edge of gold or silver or lead; and place a cautery over the broken jaw, and place another over the doubled cloth, and place one over the large star-shaped stake decently made, or a single piece equal to the length of the jaw; and place this above as it is convenient for your ligature and application, so long as it is not destroyed.
E comanda al malaute que use de repaus e tranquilitat, e pausa la vianda de lu sorbicios leons.	And command the patient to take rest and tranquility, and stop his eating for lion's share of his services.
E si extimas que ja es alterada la figura en alcuna manieyra, lahoras tu te coyta e deslia aquel al tertz dia; e aprop rectifica aquo que ja es alterat de lu e emplaustra aquel am polvera de moli, am album de huou, o am farina de cisami, pus que tu auras ostat le cerot de lu, e pausa sobre le emplastra lana leon.	And if you estimate that the figure has already been altered in any way, then on the seventh day you should cut it and remove it; and then correct what has already been altered in it and plaster it with powder of molybdenum, or with chalk of alum, or with flour of cinammon, after which you have stayed the cerot of it, and place woolen cloth over the plaster.
E adonc cum sta annex e ajustat aquel emplastre sobre lu, e la disposicio del os no es alterada, layssa aquel, que no le deslies entro que sia sanat e strenh la fractura; quar motas veguadas aquesta fractura es streyta en tres sempmanas.	And then, when the plaster is applied and adjusted to it, and the position of the bone is not altered, leave it as it is, without removing it until the fracture is healed and strong; for this fracture is strengthened in three weeks.
E si autra veguada accida apostema caut, lahoras administra aquo que havem dit motas veguadas en la sedacio de lu entro que sia sanat, e sia remaugut aquel apostema.	And if another time an abscess occurs, then administer what we have said previously in the treatment of it until it is healed and drained.
E si la fractura es am plagua, lahoras considera si es pessa del os separada o satagias, lahoras tu te subtilia que ostes aquelas satagias am aquo que conveneys ad aquo en la remocio de aquelas dels sturmentz.	And if the fracture is displaced, then consider whether it is a bad separation of the bone or displacement, and then carefully examine those displacements as you would in the removal of those from the muscles.
E si le orrifici de la plagua es streyt, lahoras tu le amplifique am le fleubotomi segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And if the wounds are wide, then enlarge them by means of incision according to the quantity of your necessity.
E aprop quan tu auras ostat aquelas satagias, e de aquelas no sira remaugut re, lahoras tu cos le orrifici de la plagua si es ampla; e sino, pausa sobre aquela un dels emplaustres que conveneysso ad aquo e encarnan aquela, entro que sia sanada.	And when you have completed those stages, and there is no need to ream them out, then enlarge the wounds if they are wide; otherwise, place one of the plasters that suit this over it and allow it to heal.
Capitol .v.	Chapter V.
De restauracio de la furcula quan es trinquada.	On the restoration of the furcula when it is fractured.
Motas veguadas es trencada la furcula de la partida denant deves le muscle, e aquela fractura es fayta en una de tres manieyras.	When the clavicle is fractured, examine the wound carefully. The fracture can occur in one of three ways.
Quar o es trencada, o seperada, o es seperada en doas partz otra que no accidan satagias; e es leugier a la restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que accideysso en lu satagias, e es dificil a restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que la fractura es am plagua.	If it is fractured, or separated, or separated into two parts without undergoing stages, then its restoration is easy; if such stages occur in it, then its restoration is difficult; or if the fracture is within the wound.
E la operacio en aquela, quan la fractura es ses plagua, es que tu fassas esser present dos ministres, per so que la un tengua le adjutori e siegua la furcula trencada, e l’autre extenda le col ves aquela partida.	And the operation when the fracture is within the wound is to have two assistants present, so that one holds the aid and guides the fractured clavicle, and the other extends the neck at that part.
E aprop enguala la fractura am les tieus ditz entro que sia fayta la forma de lu segon que cove, e no sia en lu eminencia pauca ni concavitat.	And then adjust the fracture by the pins called intramedullary, so that the shape of it is made according to its nature, and not in a slight prominence or concavity.
E si indigeysses mes de extencio, lahoras cove que pauses dejos le titillic del malaute spera de drap o de lana, e sia la grandesa de lu segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat; e exten e eleva la furcula e coarta la spera am la tua ma entro que enguales la frectura segon que cove.	And if you need more extension, when you place the patient's foot on a pad or wool, let it be the size according to your necessity; extend and elevate the fork and press the pad with your hand so that you adjust the fracture according to its nature.
E si no podes atirar la extremitat de la furcula a las partidas defora, per so quar es pervenguda al preon, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e pauses sobre le muscle de lu un coyssi migier en grandeza.	And if you cannot pull the extremity of the fork to the parts outward, because it is stuck at the pin, when you can place the patient on their side with their neck supported, and place a cushion of moderate size on their muscle.
E le ministre prema le muscle de lu a las partidas dejos entro que l’os de la furcula sia elevat que es en le preon en sus, e lahoras tu rectifique la fractura e enguala aquela am les tieus ditz.	And the surgeon presses the muscle of the patient inward until the bone of the fork is elevated to its place, and then you correct the fracture and adjust it with the pins called.
Mays si sentes satagias de la furcula e so maugudas, lahoras cove que fendes sobre aquela e extraguas aquelas satagias am facilitat.	But if you feel the threads of the fork and they are loose, when you can cut over those and remove those threads easily.
E si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu ingenia inscisio de lu am un dels inscissoris les quals has apparelhatz ad aquo, pus que havias pausat dejos la furcula le sturment que serve le ciphac; e es sturment de fust o de ferr del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if it is retained in the bone, then you skillfully incise it with one of the instruments you have prepared for this, after placing a clamp on the furca to stop the flow; and this instrument is made of wood or iron, and this is its form:
E es semblant a culier del qual aquesta es la concavitat; e sia la sua latitut segon aquo que has necessitat de lu, segon la grandeza del os o la pauqueza de lu.	And it resembles a spoon, of which this is the concavity; and its width according to what you have needed from it, according to the size of the bone or its smallness.
Mays la longitut de lu sia segon que es a tu possible a la operacio; que haja doas extremitatz ayssi cum vezes, e la una extremitat sia ample e l’autre streyta.	But the length of it should be according to what is possible for the operation; that it have two ends thus as you see, and one end wide and the other narrow.
E si la disrupcio de la plagua la qual has inscidida quan has extraytas la satagia del os es ampla, e yest segur de apostema caut, lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura.	And if the disruption of the wound which you have incised when you have extracted the splinter from the bone is wide, and you are sure there is an abscessed hematoma, then you adjust the two edges of the wound with sutures.
E si la disrupcio es pauca, o temes apostema caut, lahoras tu uemple la plagua am draps e pulvils segon la quantitat de la scissura de la plagua.	And if the disruption is small, or you fear an abscessed hematoma, then you dress the wound with cloths and powders according to the amount of the incision of the wound.
E si accideys apostema caut, lahoras infon drap en vi agre e oli rozat e vi, e pausa sobre aquel.	And if an abscess occurs, then immerse a cloth in warm oil and vinegar, and place it over that area.
Mays la strictura del os quan es ses plagua e ses seccio, es que pauses emplastre fayt de farina de moli am album de huou, e pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e aprop pausa la spera dejos le titillic de lu, si indigeyssas de aquela, e aprop pren humemate, so es torca la qual teno les Sarrazis , que sia mot longua, e sia latitut de lu de un palm o entorn aquel; e aprop pausa pulvils duplicatz sobre la stopa e l’emplastre; e aprop pren una stela de taula subtil de la qual la latitut d’ela sia de tres ditz e en longitut semblantment; e aprop envolopa aquela en drap, e aprop envolopa aquel drap am la stela en lo loc sobre le loc de la fractura; e aprop pausa humemati ayssi cum es revout, e revol aquela sobre le col de lu e dejos le titillic de lu sa e dejos le titillic de lu malaute, e reduzeys aquela sobre tota partida, e quan vezes que la strictura de la fractura am strictura descent, e es aquo que no es occultat sobre tu.	When the bone structure is swollen and septic, then place a plaster made of flour mixed with albumen of egg, and place it over the affected area, stopping the bleeding. If needed, take one long strip of linen that is about as wide as your palm or close to that; and then place a doubled powder on top of the plaster; next, take a thin table straw whose width is three fingers and about the same length; wrap this in cloth, and wrap that cloth around the straw over the location of the fracture; place the liniment so it covers all parts, and when the swelling of the fracture decreases, this is what you cannot overlook.
E tot, que no sia mauguda la stelha desobre le os trencat; e per so cove que tu vejas le malaute quascun dia, que quan le liament es mollificat o vezas la stela ja esser remauguda, lahoras tu rectifica aquo e strenh la liadura.	And always ensure that the straw does not touch the broken bone; and so make sure you check the patient daily, as when the liniment becomes softened or you see the straw already moistened, then you should adjust this and strengthen the healing.
E aprop pausa le dormir del malaute sobre le col de lu, e pausa dejos le titillic de lu deves le dormir de lu en la nueyt un petit coyssi; per so que am aquel sia elevat le adjutori de lu del latz de aquel, e donc es elevada la la fractura de la furcula a elevacio del muscle; o sia le bras de lu liat al col de aquel.	And then place the patient's head on their pillow, and leave them to sleep in that position overnight with a small cushion; so that thereby the support of the affected side is elevated, and therefore the fracture of the furcula is raised to the elevation of the muscle; or the arm on the side is laid at the level of the furcula.
E no deslies le liament si no accideys en le loc prusiment o apostema, entro a xii dias.	And do not remove the bandage unless there is an abscess or pus at the site, within twelve days.
E aprop renovelha le emplastre si has vista la facia de lu ad aquo, e ajusta en la strictura e restaura aquel e layssa entro que sia restaurat e sia coagulat la fractura de la furcula.	And then renew the plaster if you see any change in its appearance, and adjust it to fit tightly and restore it, allowing the fracture of the furcula to coagulate and heal.
E es strenguda e comfortada segon le mes en xxviii dias, e alcunas veguadas en alcus homes es fayt en mens de temps de aquel.	And it is strengthened and made more comfortable over the course of twenty-eight days, and in some cases, it is done in less than that time.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter VI.
De restauracio de fractura de la spalla.	On the Restoration of Fractures of the Shoulder.
Spatula tart es trencada en le loc lat de lu e no so trencatz de lu sino les marges.	The blade of the spatula is broken at the affected side, and you should not break it further but only the edges.
E donc quan es trencat le loc de lu — e es trencat en le mieg loc de lu — e no es conogut sino per tocament, lahoras segon que es la figura de la fractura sforsa te la preparacio de lu e reduzir aquela segon la figura natural en tota manieyra de engen la qual es a tu possible.	And when the place is broken — and it is broken in the midst of the place — and cannot be known except by touch, then according to the figure of the fractured area prepare its treatment and reduce it according to the natural figure in every manner of skill which is at your disposal.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc polvera de moli am album de huou e stopa leon; e aprop pausa pulvil de drap duplicat; e aprop pausa sobre lu stela lada de taula subtil segon la quantitat de la spatula tota o mays un pauc.	And then place on the area powder of ground alum of honeysuckle and stopped lily; and then place the powder of doubled cloth; and then place over the stick under the table a thin slice according to the quantity of the spoonful, or more by a little.
Mays si dejos la stela es concavitat en alcu dels locs de la spatula, lahoras tu enguala aquela concavitat am stopa leon, e aprop pueja la stela segon equalitat.	If you leave the stick concave in some part of the spoonful, then level that concavity with stopped lily, and then place the stick according to equality.
E aprop strenh desus am humemati longua ab constriccio decent e am fermesa de la stela entro que no sia remauguda del sieu loc.	And then strengthen above with firm hand on the stringent and with the stick firmly in place so that it is not displaced from its location.
E considera le liament en quascun dia; e totas veguadas que sia mollificat, lia autra veguada e stren le e equa la stela si es remauguda del sieu loc.	And consider the binding on each day; and every time that it becomes softened, rebind another time and strengthen and adjust the stick if it is displaced from its location.
E jagua le malaute sobre le sieu latz sa.	And apply the badulaque over its side.
E la spatula es restaurada en xx dias o en .xxv.	And the spatula is restored in xx days or in .xx five (or 25).
E donc quan es complit aquest nombre, lahoras tu dissolveys le liament, e que tu scias ensegurat quar aquela es dels osses dels quals la cominicio no es temuda ni lor dissolucio.	And when this number is completed, then you dissolve the bond, and know for sure that it belongs to the bones whose beginning was not feared nor their dissolution.
E si procezeys del loc del os pessa e pongeys dejos la codena, lahoras tu scindeys sobre lu, e osta le, e fay segon que havem dit en la fractura de la furcula de sadacio de apostema caut si accideys aqui.	And if you proceed from the place of the bone to the joint, then put on the chain, and cut over it, and hold it, doing as we have said in the fracture of the scapula with an iron clamp if this happens here.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter VII.
De restauracio de la fractura del pietz.	On the restoration of the fracture of the foot.
Le pietz alcunas veguadas es romput en le mieg loc de lu e aquo tart endeve; mays las extremitatz de lu mot endeve que so ciccadas e comminuidas.	The foot sometimes breaks in the middle of its length; but its ends remain that they are callused and comminuted.
E dels accidentz de lu quan es trencat le mieg de lu es que declina a las partidas dedintz e accideys a lu gran dolor, e dificultat en lo hale, e tos, e fort leu e vomeys sanc; e es declarada en lu cavitat en le os trencat e no es occulta al sentiment.	And the accidents when the foot breaks in its middle decline towards the internal parts, causing great pain, difficulty in walking, coughing, fever, and vomiting; these are declared within the cavity of the broken bone and are not hidden from sensation.
E la restauracio de lu es que sia resupinat le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa entre las spallas de lu un coyssi; e aprop prem als muscles de lu, e ajusta las costas de lu am las mas de dos costatz, e subtilia te en la operacio de lu e en la equacio segon tota manieyra que es ad aquo possibla e que conveneys ad aquo, entro que retorne la figura del os segon que cove.	And the restoration is that he be resupined on his back, and a cushion placed between his shoulders; then press on his muscles, adjust his ribs against the spine, and proceed with subtlety in the operation and equilibrium in every way possible until the figure of the bone returns as it should.
E aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e estopa e pausa desobre astela de taula subtil de sauze o de caligi e de a lor semblantz en levitat, pus que tu envolopas aquela en drap; e aprop subtilia te en lian aquela sobre le os trencat que no sia maugut; e vay am liadura segon retonditat al dors alcunas veguadas, e strenh aquel am strictura decent; e aprop considera la liadura en tota hora, e quan es mollificada strenh aquela.	And then place it on the plaster and sponge, and put it over the tablecloth of fine linen or cotton, similar in lightness, as you wrap that in cloth; then proceed with subtlety over that upon the broken bone so it is not muddled; and bind it around the back several times, and strengthen it with proper tension; and always consider the bandage at all times, and when it becomes softened, strengthen it.
E si necessitat provoca a desliament de aquela deves corrossio o pruziment, o dolor, o apostema que accideysso en le loc, lahoras tu coyta e deslia aquela e erradica le emplastre e rectifique aquo que accideys per aquo am manieyra de curacio de lu; e aprop reduzeys le emplastre, si vezes ad aquo la facia; e ajusta a lu strictura entro que sia sanat.	And if necessity causes a discharge from that, you should incise or puncture it, or relieve the pain, or treat the abscess that occurs in that place. When you do so, remove that and eradicate the plaster, correcting what has occurred with methods of treatment; then reduce the plaster, if necessary, and adjust its tension until it is healed.
Capitol .viii.	Capitol. viii.
De restauracio de las costas quan son trincadas.	For the restoration of the ribs when they are fractured.
Sapias que fractura de las costas no catz sino en locs grosses que siegon le dos; e de las extremitatz de lor de la partida denant no accideys ad aquelas contricio sino per aquo quar so cartillaginosas.	Know that a fracture of the ribs occurs only in large areas where they join together; and from the ends of their parts in front, such collision does not cause any fracture but because they are cartilaginous.
E cognicio de lu no es amaguada al sentiment deves la inquisicio de lu am les ditz.	And the knowledge of this is not hidden from the feeling; you must inquire about it with your fingers.
E la restauracio sia ayssi que enguales la fractura am les ditz segon la manieyra possibla, entro que sia engulhat segon que cove, e aprop emplastre e strenh le os trencat am stela, si indigeys de aquel.	And the restoration should be done by equalizing the fracture with your fingers according to the possible method, ensuring it is properly aligned as it heals, and then apply a plaster and strengthen the broken bone with a splint, if needed.
E si la fractura de las costas es declinant a las partidas dedintz, lahoras accideys al malaute dolor vehement e punctura, ayssi cum punctura que accideys ad aquel que ha pleureci, e per aquo quar le os ponh le velament; e accideys a lu difficultat de hanelit, e tos, e vomit de mot sanc; e aquesta es de dificil curacio.	And if the fracture of the ribs is located towards the internal parts, then it causes severe and piercing pain, similar to the pain that occurs when something has punctured. For this reason, you apply a敷料; and it results in difficulty breathing, coughing, and vomiting blood; and this is difficult to cure.
E ja les Antixs so engeniatz en aquela am motz engientz.	And already the Ancients were ingenious in that matter using joints.
E de lor so que diso: cove que pauses viandas del malaute que engendro imflacio e ventositat, per que le ventre sia imflat e sia extendut, e la fractura sia impellida a las partidas defora.	And from them they say: Place the patient on foods that cause inflammation and swelling, so that the belly becomes swollen and extended, and the fracture is driven to the outward parts.
Mays nos avoreyssem aquo per so que no sia causa leugiera a generar apostema caut, si no accideys; e si ja accideys, lahoras ja ajuda ad aquo.	But let us consider this so that it is not a trivial cause for generating a carbuncle; and if it has already occurred, then help is needed for this.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia pausada desus ventoza e aprop que sucque am fortitut; e es semblant a ratiocinacio, mays empero es temut que la ventoza atire las superfluitatz al loc per la debilitat.	And some of them said that it should be placed above the belly and near where it swells with strength; and this seems like a reasonable argument, but nonetheless, it is feared that the belly will draw the superfluities to that place due to its weakness.
E diyssero alcus de lor: cove que·l loc sia cubert am lana que ja es submersa en oli caut, e sian pausatz pulvils entre las costas entro que sia umplida, que sia la liadura engual quan envolopas aquela segon retonditat; e aprop sia curat le malaute am curacio de pleuresi de vianda e de medicina.	And some of them said: Place the area under a cloth soaked in oil, and sprinkle powders between the ribs while it is filled, ensuring the poultice is even as you wrap it around according to its roundness; and treat the patient with dietary therapy and medicine.
E si causa vehement constrenh le malaute la qual no sufferta, e le os punh le velament am punctura ledent, temem sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que fendam sobre le loc, descubram de la costa trencada, e aprop pausem desobre aquela instrument que conserve le ciphac, la rememoracio del qual es precedida, e que inscidam le os am facilitat, e extraguam aquel.	And if the patient is greatly constrained by the malaise which he cannot bear, and the os punh (a kind of forceps) holds the veil with puncture teeth, fear for the patient, then cut over the place, uncover from the broken rib, and place ourselves over that instrument which conserves the ciphac, the memory of which is precedented, and incise the bone with ease, and extract that.
E aprop que ajustem las doas labias de la plagua, si es gran, am cozidura, e curem aquela am emplastres entro que sia sanada.	And when we adjust the two edges of the wound, if it is large, with缝合, we treat it with plasters until it heals.
E si accideys dedintz apostema, lahoras tu coyta e enfon pulvils en oli rozat e pausa sobre le loc, e que sia curat le malaute am aquo que cove a la apostema dedintz.	And if an abscess occurs inside, then incise and insert powder in oil rubbed and place over the area, and treat the patient with what is suitable for the abscess inside.
E sia ressupinat sobre le latz sobre le qual dorm, entro que sia sanat.	And let it be wrapped in a cloth on which he sleeps, until it heals.
Capitol .ix.	Capitol. ix.
De restauracio de fractura del spondil del dos e del col.	On the restoration of fractures of the spine in the back and neck.
Alcunas veguadas endeve fractura als osses del col, e tart endeve a lor atricio, e semblantment als spondils del dos.	Some times when there is a fracture in the bones of the neck, then apply to them friction, similar to that for the vertebrae of the back.
E cum aquo accideys ad alcu e voles saber si sara sanat o no, lahoras considera, quar si vezes las sieuas mas ja mollificadas e stupefaytas e mortas e no pot maure aquelas ni extendre ni strenher aquelas e quan constrenges aquelas am les tieus ditz o punges aquelas am agulha e no sent en aquelas dolor, lahoras sapias que no es sanat, e en las mes de disposicios es mortal.	And when this happens to someone and you want to know if they will recover or not, then consider whether their pulses are already softened, numbed, and dead, unable to grow, extend, or strengthen. When you press on them with your fingers or prick them with a needle and they do not feel pain in those areas, you should know that they are not recovering, and in such cases, the condition is fatal.
E si mau aquelas e sent en aquelas constriccio am les ditz e punctura, lahoras sapias que la nucha de l’os es salva e que le malaute guereys am curacio.	And if you press on them and they feel pain in that area with your fingers or prick them, then you should know that the marrow of the bone is saved and that the disease will recover through healing.
E si ve als spondils del col le semblant ad aquo e voles saber si sira sanat o no, lahoras considera als pes de lu.	And if you see in the vertebrae of the neck any similarity to this, and you want to know if they will recover or not, then consider the pulses in their feet.
Lahoras si tu vezes que so ja mollificatz, accideys ad aquels aquo que es accidit en las mas, e aprop quan jatz sobre le sieu dos, yeys ventozitat e egestio ses la sua volontat, e alcunas veguadas es resupinat sobre le sieu dos e vol urinar e no pot, lahoras sapias que es mortal, e adonc no trebales en la curacio de lu.	And if you see that they are already softened, apply what happens to the pulses in their feet. When they lie on their back and have a desire for ventilation and evacuation according to their will, and sometimes are unable to turn over on their side and want to urinate but cannot, then you should know that it is fatal, and then do not trouble with the healing of them.
Mays si no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, la causa es milhor e pus leugiera.	If no other cause occurs, the cause is better and lighter.
E la curacio de lu es que te perforses a la sedacio del apostema caut que pauses sobre le spondil atrissat oli rozat sol, o am mugols de huous asatz; pausa sobre aquela aquel alcunas veguadas le dia entro que sia sedat le apostema caut.	And the treatment for it is to perfuse with the sedation of the abscess caut that you place over the sacral spine or buttock, or with pieces of hot wool; place this over that area for several minutes each day until the abscess is sedated.
E lahoras pausa un dels emplastres confortantz e exsitans, e strenh sobre aquel am liament; e comanda al malaute que use de repaus e de tranquillitat e que no dorme sobre la partida am la qual atroba dolor entro que sia sanat.	And then place one of the comforting and relaxing plasters, and warm it over that area; command the patient to take rest and be tranquil, and not to sleep on the part where he feels pain until he is healed.
E si accideys deves la atricio del os satagias o alcuna causa que ja es seperada de lu, lahoras cove que secces sobre la codena e que ostes aquel os; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua, am sutura si es gran; e aprop cura aquela am alcu encarnatiu dels enguentz, entro que sia sanat.	And if it happens that you find the articulation of the socket damaged or any cause that has separated from it, then make sure to dry the area and keep the bone in place; then close the two edges of the wound,缝合如果伤口较大；然后用一些膏药涂抹那个部位，直到它痊愈。
Mays si es trencat le derier del os alhoses, e es la fi de la coeta, lahoras cove que tu entrometas le dit pous de la ma senestra en le cul, e que enguales le os trencat am l’autra ma segon que es possible per equacio segonda; e aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e astelha, si indigeysses de aquels, e aprop strenh aquel.	And if the end of the thigh bone is broken, and it is the head of the femur, then you must insert your left thumb into the buttock, and align the broken bone with your other hand as much as possible for secondary reduction; then place a plaster and bandage over it if needed, and keep it warm.
E si sentes satagias trencadas en lu, lahoras tu fen sobre aquela, e osta aquel, e cura la plagua am la curacio que es precedida entro que sia sanada.	And if you feel broken stages in it, then operate on that, and stop it, and cure the wound with a cure that is performed before it is healed.
Capitol .x.	Capitol.
De restauracio de la ancha.	For the restoration of health.
Les osses de las anchas tart so trencats, e si trencan, lahoras la fractura de lor no es sino communicio en las extremitatz de aquelas e son inscidas en la longitut e declinan a las partidas dedintz; e accideys al malaute dolor en le loc e punctura, e la camba es stupefacta quan es fractura.	The bones of the ankle are broken, and if they break, then the fracture is simply communication at the extremities of those bones and they split lengthwise and incline towards the inner parts; and accidents occur in the patient pain at the site and puncture, and the leg is paralyzed when it is fractured.
E la restauracio de lu es que tu extendas la tua ma sobre aquel entro que sia sobre la fractura qual es la figura de lu.	And the restoration of the leg is that you place your hand over it while it is at the location of the fracture, which is the shape of the leg.
E si fractura es en la extremitat de lu tant solament, lahoras tu enguala aquela segon que a tu es apparelhat per equacio engual entro que sia asemblat a la sua figura natural.	And if the fracture is only at the extremity of the leg, then you align that part according to how it appears to you by equilibrium and alignment so that it resembles its natural figure.
Mays si la fractura es en le lonc o que ja declina a las partidas dejos, lahoras tu fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu ventre entro que sia preparada a tu la restauracio de aquela fractura.	But if the fracture is in the length or already inclined towards the inner parts, then you apply pressure to the patient's abdomen while preparing for the restoration of that fracture.
E donc quan auras engualada aquela, pausa sobre lu emplastre, e aprop pausa sobre aquel astela de fust o de codena, e strenh per strictura sobre la qual no temas punctacio de fractura ni remocio de la stelha.	And when you have equalized that, place a plaster over it, and then place the wooden or copper rod, and firmly hold it over the spot without fearing puncture or removal of the rod.
E enguala la concavitat am aquo que uempla aquela entro que aquela prengua la strictura segon equalitat, e comanda al malaute que dorma sobre le sieu dos o desobre le sieu costat sa.	And equalize the cavity so that what fills it enters where the stricture is according to equality, and command the patient to lie on his back or on his side.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu cessa de extencio de lu e de la sua restauracio entro que sia sedat le apostema caut, e pausa sobre lu aquo que sede aquel segon que es precedit; e aprop retorna a la restauracio de lu, e strenh aquel ayssi cum cove.	But if an abscess comes to head, stop the extension of it and its restoration until the abscess is sedated. Then place over it what sedates it according to what was previously mentioned; then return to its restoration and strengthen it thusly.
E si accideysso en le os satagias o son comminuidas, lahoras tu las tratz.	And if there arise in the bone fractures or are comminuted, then treat them accordingly.
Capitol .xi.	Capitol. xi.
De restauracio de la fractura del adjutori.	Of the restoration of the fracture of the adjutrix.
Adjutori es aquo que es entre le coyde entro al cap de la spalla.	Adjutori is that which is between the codice (thigh bone) between the head of the shoulder.
E si es trencat, lahoras la restauracio de lu es en una de doas manieyras, de las quals es la una que tu prenguas fust pla de migiera groceza segon aquesta forma:	And if it is broken, the restoration of it is in one of two ways, of which one you will take as a bundle of large twigs according to this form:
E sian liatz en doas extremitatz dos liamentz, e aprop sia suspendut del loc elevat.	And let two threads be at the two ends, and then suspend it from the elevated place.
E segua le malaute sobre una sezela; e aprop gieta fora le sieu bras trencat sobre le fust entro que pervengua al titillic de lu en le mieg loc del qual sia annexa la curvitat del fust.	And place the patient on a cushion; and then throw its broken arm onto the bundle so that it reaches the node of the bundle where the curvature of the bundle is attached.
E aprop suspen sobre aquel alcuna causa greu, o·l minestre extenda aquel a las partidas dejos; e aprop le metge eque la fractura am las sieuas mas ensemps, entro que la fractura retorne segon que cove.	And place it above that with some heavy weight, or the servant extend it to the parts left; and then the doctor apply pressure to the fracture with his hands at the same time, until the fracture returns according to its nature.
E l’autra manieyra es que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sieua cervitz e suspen la ma del col de lu am liament; e aprop comanda a dos ministres que la un de lor tengua aquo que es desobre la fractura am las suas mas; e l’autre tengua le pus dejos de lu; e quascu de lor extenda a la sua partida.	And the other way is that the patient be resuspended on its neck and hold the doctor's hand from the collar with a thread; and then command two servants that one of them holds what is above the fracture with his hands; and the other holds the rest of the patient; and each of them extend to their part.
E si voles que la extencio sia pus fort, lahoras tu strenh sobre la fractura am liament e sobre aquela am autre liament, e quascu dels dos ministres extendan a doas suas partidas.	And if you want the extension to be stronger, then strengthen over the fracture with one stick and over another place another stick, and each of the two ministers extend to their parts.
E donc si la fractura es propinquada a la extremitat del muscle, lahoras cove que sia pausat la mitat del liament sobre le citillic e l’autre dejos la fractura deves le coyde.	And if the fracture is close to the end of the muscle, then place the middle of the stick over the tendon and leave the other end at the fracture to hold it.
E semblantment si la fractura es propdana al coyde, lahoras cove que sia pausat le liament sobre aquel loc e sobre aquel coyde.	And similarly, if the fracture is close to the joint, then place the stick at that location and over the joint.
Enguala aquela am facilitat e ses trebal, e aprop quant sira engualada segon que cove e es applicada per bona applicacio, lahoras strenh aquela si no accideys apostema caut.	Equalize that with the other side and well perform the operation. And when it is equalized according to what fits and is applied correctly, then strengthen it if no abscess occurs.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras layssa la strictura entro al vii dia, e pausa sobre lu lana sutza enbeguda en vi agre e oli rozat entro que repause le apostema, e lahoras tu stren aquela.	But if an abscess does occur, then leave the incision open for five days, and place a bandage soaked in vinegar and rubbed with oil over it until the abscess subsides, and then strengthen it.
E la manieyra de strenher aquela es que pauses emplastre sobre la fractura, e aprop pausa envolopament de drap nau sobre le emplastre; e aprop ajuste le bras sobre aquel adjutori, e pause la sua ma uberta sobre le sieu muscle.	And the way to strengthen it is to place a plaster over the fracture, and then wrap a linen bandage around the plaster; and adjust the arm on this support, and place your hand open over its muscle.
E pausa le drap e strenh sobre le adjutori le bras per so que·l bras sia en loc de stelhas, si no prohibeys de aquo alcuna causa del os trencat.	And place the cloth strongly over the helper's arm so that the arm is in a stable position, without prohibiting anything due to the broken bone.
E lahoras usa de stelhas.	And then use splints.
E es que pauses sobre la fractura aquela stela que sia pus lada e pus fort de las autras stelas; e pausa entre quascuna stela la latitut del dit, e sia la longitut de las stelas segon la trencadura am addicio de tres ditz de tota partida.	And you should place that splint over the fracture which is longer and stronger than the other splints; and place the width of each splint according to the break, with the length of the splints according to the break plus three fingers in total.
E aprop strenh sobre las stelas am la strictura la qual he dita al comensament del capitol.	And then strengthen the splints at the joint which I mentioned at the beginning of this chapter.
E es que la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura sia pus streyt.	And make the joint over the location of the fracture stronger.
E quant pus es alonguada la fractura sia la strictura menor.	And when the fracture is longer, make the joint smaller.
E donc si vezes le situament de las stelas e la strictura ayssi cum havem dit en la hora en la qual restauras le membre al sieu assituament, lahoras tu fay.	And so, if you adjust the position of the splints and the joint as we have said when restoring the limb to its position, then do so.
E si temes apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la strictura e las stelas entro al dia vii ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you fear an abscess, cauterize it, then leave the joint and splints in place as we have said.
E aprop considera le liament en totas partidas per tres dias per so que no accida en le loc pruziment o imflacio; o es prohibida la vianda pervenir al membre per disposicio de superfluitat de strictura; e donc rectifiqua tot aquo segon que havem dit.	And for three days consider the ligament in all parts to prevent accident or inflammation at the site; or prohibit food from reaching the member by disposition of excess stricture; and therefore correct all this according to what we have said.
Mays si tu yest sobre confizanssa que no accida alcuna causa de aquo, lahoras no deslias la liguadura sino aprop tres dias o mays.	And if you are confident that no cause of this will occur, then do not loosen the ligature for at least three days or more.
E sia la sua dormicio del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e las sieuas mas sian sobre le stomac.	And let the patient's thighs be on their back, and their hands on the stomach.
E pausa sobre le adjutori cocena plena de lana engualment, e considera en tota hora de la nueyt o del dia que no sia deliada ni dissolta la figura del membre trencat, o que sia le liament mollificat, donc rectifica aquo tot am la tua vertut.	And place your hand on a support cloth filled with wool evenly, and consider at all times of the night or day that the figure of the broken limb is not distorted, or that the ligament is softened, therefore correct this entirely with your virtue.
E pausa la vianda del malaute segon le orde le qual havem denant mes, enayssi que la vianda sia subtil en le comensament entro que es comensat strenher; e lahoras cove que egrossas la vianda de lu.	And restrict the diet of the patient according to the order we have mentioned before, ensuring that the diet is subtle at the beginning until it begins to strengthen; then gradually thicken the food.
Quar de constuma del adjutori e de la camba de lu es que sian strengutz en xl dias; e lahoras cove que sian desliatz e sia administrat banh e sia medicat am enguentz los quals rectifican aquel.	Four days after the application of the support and belt, they are usually strengthened for four days; then loosen them and apply a bath, and treat with ointments that correct this.
E si la fractura es layha atrita, lahoras tu no deslies de aquela le liament e las stelhas entro a l dias o entro a dos meses.	And if the fracture has been allowed to irritate, then you do not remove the bandage or the straps for one or two months.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter XII.
De restauracio de fractura del bras.	On the restoration of fractures of the arm.
Bras es compost de dos osses les quals so appelatz dos focils; dels quals la un es petit, e es aquel que siec le dit pous, e l’autre es gran e es aquel le qual es pausat dejos le petit dit, de la partida pus dejus.	The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the ulna and the radius; of which, the former is small, and is that known as the little bone, and the latter is large and is that which is placed outside the small one.
E fort leu es trencat le focil major solament, o le petit, e fort leu son trincatz ensemps.	And if the larger bone is broken alone, or the smaller one, and if they are both broken together.
E quan es trencat le focil petit desus, lahoras la restauracio de lu es leugiera, e la sanacio de lu es pus leugiera.	And when the smaller bone is broken above, then the restoration of it is easier, and the healing of it is more rapid.
E quan es trencat le focil de lu dejos la fractura de lu es mala, e la sanacio de lu es dificil.	And when the larger bone is broken, the fracture is severe, and the healing is difficult.
E pus mala de aquela es quan son trencatz dos osses essemps.	And worse still is when both bones are broken together.
Donc si l’os le qual es trencat es le focil petit desus, lahoras es convenient al metge, deves la restauracio de lu, que pauze petita extencio am facilitat entro que aquel sia engualhat.	So if the broken bone is the small toe, then it is convenient for the doctor to restore its continuity with a slight extension until it is properly set.
Mays si le focil gran es aquo que es trincat, lahoras cove que pause extencio pus vehement.	But if the large bone is what is broken, then it is necessary to apply more extension.
E si les dos focils so ensemps trincatz, lahoras cove que tu pauses la extritura mot pus fort.	And if both bones are broken together, then you must apply the traction more forcefully.
E cove que pauses la figura de la ma deves la restauracio de lu e la extencio de lu estenduda sobre un coyssi, e sia le pols de la ma a las partidas desus, pus aut que totz les autres ditz, e le dit auricular sia pus bas dels autres ditz, e le malaute sia cezent sobre una cezela cayrada.	And you must place your hand to facilitate the restoration and extension of the bone over a cushion, with the palm of the hand above, more so than the others, and the auricular finger below the other fingers, and the patient's foot on a inclined board.
E sia un coyssi denant lu en la altetut o endreyt de lu, per so que·l malaute no encorra trebalh.	And place a cushion in front of the patient in an upright position, so that the patient's foot does not further strain.
E aprop le ministre extenda le bras de la partida pus dejos am la sieua ma o am liament, e autre ministre extenda desus semblantment.	And then the minister extend the arm above with his hand or a towel, and another minister extend it below similarly.
E aprop le metge engualhe le os entro que redugua aquel segon la milhor figura que pot.	And then the doctor equalizes the bone within that which he reduces according to the best form that he can.
E si en la factura del os so satagias, lahoras te perforsa raduzir tota pessa en le sieu loc am la tua vertut.	And if in the fracture of the bone there are symptoms, then you must reduce the whole piece to its place with your virtue.
E si appar en lu satagia separada que punh la codena e no es a tu speransa en la restauracio de lu, lahoras tu fen sobre lu e osta aquela segon la manieyra la qual havem dita desus.	And if there appears a separate symptom that the bone is out of alignment and it is not to your satisfaction in the restoration of it, then you set it again according to the manner we have said above.
Mays si la fractura es am plagua, yeu ja he fayt ad aquo capitol singular, e donc pren la curacio de aquel.	But if the fracture is compound, I have already treated that in a separate chapter, and therefore take the treatment of that.
E si accideys apostema caut al comensament de la tua restauracio, lahoras tu lineys un drap am cerot fayt de oli rozat e cera blanca, e sia migier entre specitut e subtilitat, e strenh drap sobre aquel am strictura subtil entro que le apostema sia cedat; e lahoras remau le cerot e pausa emplastre preparat de polvera de moli am clayre de huou, e aprop pausa stelhas; e sia la stela la qual es pauzada sobre aquela fractura pus lada e pus fort.	And if an abscess occurs at the beginning of your restoration, then you apply a cloth made of cotton soaked in olive oil and white wax, making it moderate in thickness. Place the cloth tightly over that area with a fine string to keep the abscess from expanding; then remove the wax and apply a prepared plaster made from linseed powder mixed with honey; and place a bandage over it securely. Ensure that the bandage is placed on that fracture well aside and stronger.
E sapias que·l nombre de las stelas del bras so vi en las majors disposicios, o sia la fractura en un focil o en dos focils ensemps.	And you shall know that the number of ribs in the arm I saw in the major dispositions, or rather in a fracture in one bone or two bones together.
E aprop pausa la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura pus fort e pus vehement, e quan mays sira la extrictura a las partidas desus de la fractura o a las partidas pus bassas de lu, pausa la strictura un pauc pus molh segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu en le comensament del capitol.	And then place your compression firmly on the location of the fracture more strongly and vehemently. When the compression is applied to the parts above or below the fracture, continue it a little more intensely according to how the memory of it is recalled at the beginning of the chapter.
E les draps que so envolopatz sobre la fractura sian draps mols humitz, e no sian durs ni aspres, e·l fiel am le qual es strenhut sia de li propriament migier entre subtil e gros, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And the cloths that you wrap around the fracture should be moistened cloths, neither hard nor rough. The fat of the pig which is strengthened should be a mixture between fine and coarse, as we have recommended.
E considera le membre e·l liament aprop alcus dias.	And consider the limb and joint for several days.
E si accideys alcuna causa de la qual rectificacio es necessaria, ayssi cum prusiment le qual accideys al membre, e lahoras cove que tu enbroques le membre am aygua cauda entro que cesse aquel pruziment.	And if any cause arises for which correction is necessary, as you would previously have determined for the limb, then immerse the limb in water until that condition ceases.
E leysses le membre no costreyt entro que repause, e aprop torna la strictura.	And let the limb not be restrained until it rests, and then remove the compression.
E si la extrictura ja es mollificada e l’os ja es remaugut e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras rectifiqua tot aquo am la tua vertut.	And if the stricture is already softened and the bone has been rubbed and appears like those, then correct all this with your virtue.
E considera mays si le nutriment es prohibit pervenir al membre per superfluitat de strictura, quar lahoras cove que mollifiques aquel un petit e laysses aquel per alcus dias entro que corra ad aquel le nutriment, e aprop strenh aquel.	And consider more if the nourishment is prohibited from reaching the member due to excessive stricture, for then you must soften that a little and leave it for some days until nutrition flows to that, and then strengthen it.
Mays si al malaute no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no cove que sia desliat entro aprop xx dias o enviro de aquels.	And if to the patient none of the causes we have mentioned occur, then it is not necessary for it to be let loose within about ten days or around those.
E aprop sia suspenduda la ma del malaute per la sua vertut de movement agitatius, e fay aquel dormir sobre le sieu dos.	And place the patient's hand by its virtue of movement agitation, and make it sleep on its back.
E sapias que aquesta fractura es restaurada en xxx dias o en xxxii dias, o fort leu es restaurada en xxviii dias, e tot aquo es segon la disposicio de las compleccios e las disposicios de la vertut.	And know that this fracture is restored in thirty days or in forty-two days, or more fully in twenty-eight days, and all this depends on the complexity and the disposition of the virtue.
Capitol .xiii.	Capitol. xiii.
De restauracio de fractura de la pinche de la ma e dels ditz.	On the restoration of fractures of the wrist and fingers.
Sapias que a la pinche de la ma e als nuzes dels ditz tart endeve fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio motas veguadas.	Know that at the wrist of the hand and the joints of the fingers there may be a fracture, and do not harm them but rub with visible moles.
E quan accideys a la ma fractura o atrissio, lahoras cove que·l malaute segua cayrat e denant lu lies cezent segon equalitat, e aprop pausa la ma de lu sobre aquela extenduda.	And when there is a fracture or dislocation of the hand, make sure the patient remains lying down and in front of the limb for about an hour according to equality, and then place your hand over the extended one.
E aprop le ministre extenda les osses trencatz e·l metge engualhe aquels entro que sian congongitz am bona congoncio.	And then extend the broken bones and the doctor align those between which good reduction has occurred.
E lahoras cove que pause emplastre e estopa, si no accideys apostema caut; e aprop pausa stela desus segon la quantitat del loc, e tu ja has envolopada aquela en drap de li.	And then apply plaster and cotton, if no abscess develops use a cauterization; then place a candle above according to the size of the area, and you have already wrapped that in linen.
Mays si la trincadura es en las partidas dedintz deves le ventre de la palma, e lahoras fay semblant de spera de drap, e comanda al malaute que strenha aquela am la sua palma trincada; aprop sia strenguda am drap lonc.	More so if the tear is within the palm, then make a pad of linen, and command the patient to hold that with their torn palm; then tightly bind it with long linen.
E sia la stelha de cuer am drap en le qual sia levitat, per so que le cuer sia aplicat a la palma; e strenh aquela segon que cove.	And let the candle be placed on linen upon which the cure is applied, so that the cure is pressed against the palm; then hold that tightly as needed.
Mays si la fractura es a las partidas defora, lahoras cove que pauses desus stela e autre estela de la partida dejos en la palma, per so que la ma sia uberta e dreyta; e aprop pausa la strictura, ayssi cum es revolvuda la ma a la rateta entre les ditz am liamentz.	If the fracture is at the outer parts, then place another piece of the part above the stone and another piece from the part on your palm, so that your hand is open and straight; then place the constriction in this manner, as you turn your hand like a wheel between your fingers with grains.
E si accideys fractura a alcu dels nozes dels ditz, lahoras si es le dit pous, sia engualat segon que cove e aprop sia strenhut am la palma e si·t voles, pausa a lu astela petita dreyta per so que sia elevada la fractura e no sia mauguda.	If a fracture occurs in one of the bones of the fingers, then if it is the base of the finger, equalize it according to what you can see and then strengthen it on the palm. If you wish, place a small piece straight on it so that the fracture is elevated and not weakened.
Mays si la fractura es en les autres ditz, ayssi cum en aquel del mieg loc, o en le indic, o en le auricular, o en le anular, lahoras sia engualhat e liat am le dit sa le qual siec aquel; o sian totz liatz segon continuacio, e es milhor; o pausa sobre aquel stela petita, ayssi cum havem dit en le pous.	If the fracture is in the other fingers, as in the middle finger, or the index, or the ring, or the little finger, then equalize and ligate it on the finger where that bone is; or ligate all of them according to their continuity, which is better; or place a small piece over it, as we said for the base of the finger.
E considera, en la tua restauracio, e aprop aquela, la disposicio de apostema caut e oppose — am la tieua operacio — am aquo que cove quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, segon que es iterada la narracio de lu.	And consider, in your restoration, and especially that, the placement of cautery marks and opposites—during your operation—according to what you see when a cause from those occurs, as indicated by the repeated narration of it.
Capitol .xiv.	Chapter XIV.
De restauracio de fractura del os de la coyssa.	For the restoration of fracture of the hip bone.
Le os de la cueyssa motas veguadas es trencat e es declarat al sentiment segon que es convertit a la partida denant e a la pus sobirana.	The hip bone fractured is felt as pain, which is localized in front and behind.
E la restauracio de lu se fa enayssi que·l liament es strenhut sobre la fractura e autre liament dejos la fractura, e le malaute sia prostrat sobre le sieu ventre e sobre la cara.	And the restoration is done by strengthening the ligaments over the fracture and another ligament below the fracture, with the patient lying on their belly and facing down.
E aprop le ministre extenda tot le liament a la sua partida segon la qualitat, quan la fractura es en le mieg loc del os.	And then the surgeon extends the ligament to its proper place according to the quality of the fracture, when it is in the middle of the bone.
Mays si es propdana a la razitz de la cueyssa, lahoras sia le liament propda al denolh a la partida del pentenilh, per so que la extencio caja en sus, e le autre liament dejos la fractura.	But if it is close to the groove of the hip, then the ligament is extended to the hollow below the pelvis, so that the extension fits there, and another ligament below the fracture.
E semblantment si la trencadura es propdana al denolh, lahoras sia fayt le liament propda al denol, e sia la extencio a las partidas dejos.	And similarly, if the fracture is close to the hollow, then the ligament is attached to the hollow, and the extension is to the parts below.
E aprop le metge enguale le os am amduas las sieuas mas entro que reduzesca aquel segon la semblansa natural e l’os es conjungit per bona conjunccio; lahoras cove que pauses emplastre e strictura, si no accideys al membre apostema.	And then the doctor equalizes the bone by bringing his hands close to where you have reduced it according to the natural form; the bone is joined by good union. Then apply a plaster and bandage, so as not to cause an abscess in the limb.
Mays si accideys en lu apostema, lahoras tu layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que l’apostema caut sia cedat, e aprop retorna a la tua curacio.	But if an abscess does occur, then you let it be for some days until the abscess is ready to be cauterized, and then return to your treatment.
La strictura de lu sia ayssi fayta: cove que envolopes sobre la fractura una benda dura, e dobla aquela dos o tres veguadas, e remaugua de lu superfluitat; e aprop envolopa la camba entro que pervengua al talo e a la razitz de la cueyssa.	The bandaging should be done as follows: first, wrap a hard bandage around the fracture, fold it two or three times, and secure it to remove any excess; then wrap the bandage until it reaches the heel and the back of the thigh.
E intromet lonc fiel entre la cueyssa e la camba prop del denol a las partidas dejos, e venguan las extremitatz del fiel de la partida pus sobirana de las doas partz, e aprop revolveys sobre la camba e la cueyssa aquo que superflueys de la benda.	And insert a long piece of flax between the thigh and the upper part of the leg where you left the divisions, ensuring that the ends of the flax extend well beyond both parts, then wrap this area with the bandage.
E aprop pausa sobre la cueyssa en le loc de aquela fractura astelhas, e pausa de aquelas una stela sobre le os de la camba.	And place the splint on the thigh at the location of the fracture, and place a stick over the bone of the leg.
E aprop uempli las vacuitatz entre la camba e la cuoyssa am draps mols, per so que sia coagulada la extrictura.	And then fill the space between the waist and the thigh with several cloths, so that the constriction is constricted.
E aprop comensa am strictura fort del mieg sobre le loc de la fractura am tres envolucios o quatre, e quant mays tu te alonhas am liament del loc de la fractura, la tua strictura sia menor e pus leugiera e pus molha.	And then start the strong constriction around the middle over the place of the fracture with three or four layers, and the more you move away from the site of the fracture, your constriction should be smaller and lighter and softer.
E aprop exten a doas extremitatz del fiel a las partidas dejos entro que pervengua a la cavilha del pe, e strenh amdoas las extremitatz de las stelhas del autra part per so que·l liament no sia remaugut del sieu loc.	And then extend the two ends of the bandage to the parts where it will reach the foot cavity, and tighten both ends of the straps on the other side so that the plaster does not shift from its place.
E aprop leyssa la strectura sobre aquel, don esta ayssi que no accideys al membre corrosio ni apostema caut ni emflacio e semblantz ad aquels; e si accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, adonc cueta te am desliament de lu, e rectifica aquo que accideys tot aprop, segon que havem dit motas veguadas.	And then place the constriction over it so that it does not affect the limb with corrosion, abscess, or inflammation; and if any of these conditions occur, treat it accordingly, and correct what has happened as soon as possible, according to what we have said previously.
Mays si en le os es pessa del os la qual pongua, lahoras cove que tu engualhes aquel segon que a tu es possibla; e sino, fen sobre lu e remau aquel, e cura am aquo del qual es precedida la rememoracio entro que sia sanat.	More so if there is a bad fracture of the bone where it is placed, then you must align that as much as possible; and if not, treat it and let it set, and cure what preceded the recall before it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es strenhuda aquesta fractura de la coyssa otra aquo que sian ajustadas a lu stelhas, ayssi cum havem dit en le adjutori e·n le bras.	And sometimes this fracture of the pelvis is strengthened by this method or that which fits to it straps, as we said in the assistant and on the arm.
Mays empero en la restauracio de lu en tal manieyra fayta no accideys al malaute claudicacio; e si es restaurada sola, otra aquo que li sia applicada l’autra camba, lahoras es necessari que claudique aquel del qual es tostemps.	But more importantly in the restoration in such a manner made no accident occurs to the patient claudication; and if it is restored alone, or that the other leg is applied, then it is necessary for that one to claudicate which is at the moment.
E sapias que la coyssa es strenhuda en xl dias o un pauc mes o un pauc mens, e tot aquo es segon la diversitat de las compleccios e de las autras dispozicios.	And know that the pelvis is strengthened in four days or a few more days or a few more months, and all this is according to the diversity of the complexities and other dispositions.
Capitol .xv.	Capitol.xv.
De restauracio de la fractura de la rodela del denolh.	On the restoration of the fracture of the tibia.
Sapias que fractura de la rodela del denol tart endeve, mays accideys a lu motas veguadas atrissio.	Know that the fracture of the tibia occurs rarely, but often it takes several weeks to heal.
Mays si accideys a lu fractura, lahoras no es sino fissura o trauc en las suas partidas, e aquo es am plagua o ses plagua, e sobre aquo tot es estat am le sentiment.	But if a fracture does occur, it is often not a complete break but a crack or a tear in its parts, and this is either a single crack or several cracks, and on top of that, it is always accompanied by pain.
E la restauracio de lu es enayssi que sia engualat aquo que es romput de las partidas de lu am les ditz entro que sia agreguat e conjongit segon que es possible per equacio e facilitat e fabricacio.	And the restoration of it is attempted to be equalized as much as broken parts are laid between the fingers and then added and joined according to what is possible by equilibrium, ease, and construction.
E aprop pausa emplastre e pausa sobre aquel stela redonda, si indigeysses de aquela; e strenh desus am strictura ad aquo convenient.	And then place the plaster and cover over that round stencil, if you need it; strengthen above at the structure to what is convenient.
E aprop considera totas las disposicios las quals havem recomtadas en las autras fracturas, ayssi cum es apostema caut e semblant ad aquels enaissi que se oppause a tot accident am aquo que a lu es convenient entro que sia sanat.	And then consider all the disposotions which we have recommended in other fractures, thus as for abscess caut and appearance to those that oppose themselves to every accident at what is convenient until it is healed.
Capitol .xvi.	 Chapter XVI.
De restauracio de la fractura de la camba.	On the restoration of the fracture of the ilium.
Sapias que en la camba so dos osses dels quals la un es gros, e es le nompnat per nom de la camba; e l’autra es subtil, e es nompnat focil.	Know that in the ilium there are two bones, of which one is thick and is named the ilium; the other is thin and is named the flail.
E accideys a quascus de las specias de fractura aquo que accideys als dos osses del bras, e per aquo es fayta restauracio de lu ayssi cum restauracio del bras engualment, e la operacio de lu es una.	And accidents to the species of fracture that occur in both bones of the arm, and for this reason, the restoration of it is done as equally as the restoration of the arm, and its operation is one.
E si so trincatz dos osses ensemps, la camba es convertida a totas partidas.	And if you break two bones together, the fracture will be treated in all parts.
E si es trinquat le os pus subtil, la camba es convertida a las partidas Denant.	And if the finer bone is broken, the fracture will be treated from all parts in front.
E si es trincat le os pus gros, atrobas aquel dejos, e es de aquelas causas que no so a tu ameguadas.	And if the thicker bone is broken, you find the fracture, and this is one of those conditions that are not within your control.
E aprop aministra extencio e equacio e liguacio de las astelas segon aquel engualment.	And then administer extension, reduction, and ligature of the tendons according to this method.
Mays empero cove, si la fractura de la camba es laja havent motas satagias, que la extencio sia mendre e pus leugiera, e alleuja am la tua vertut.	But more importantly, if the fracture of the bone is badly done with visible marks, let the extension be less and lighter, and aid it with your virtue.
E en la camba es alcuna causa de operacio sobre le bras, e es quan tu engualas las stelhas e que comples tota la tieua operacio, lahoras tu prendras pessas de fustz de pi le qual es pausat dejos las cauzas las quals so pausades en solies, e so faytas eyssament de brancas de palma; aligeys de aquelas a las quals es petita groceza, e no sia ges de las manudas, e sia la longuesa de aquelas segon la longuesa de la camba, e del denol entro al pus dejos.	And in the bone, if there is any cause for operation on the arm, and when you equalize the stars and complete your entire surgical operation, then take pieces of pine wood which are placed under the causes that are held in the soles, and make them thus from palm branches; select those with little grain, not too thick, and let their length be according to the length of the bone, and place them inside the thicker part.
E aprop envolopa sobre quascuna drap en doas envolucios segon la longitut de lu, e pausa la una sobre la partida de la camba de la una part e l’autra del autra part, e sian del denol entro al pus bas loc del pe.	And then wrap each one in two cloths according to the length of it, and place one over the middle of the leg on one side and the other over the other side, and they should be below at the base of the foot.
E aprop lias las doas stelhas en tres locs de doas extremitatz e al mieg loc, quar am aquesta strectura la camba es prohibida de clinar a la partida dextra e sinistra, e sta per bona stacio.	And then place the two stakes in three locations of both extremities and the middle location, for at this structure the leg is prohibited from leaning to the right or left side, and it should be in good position.
E ja es aministrat un brasset de fust segon la longuesa de la camba; e sia pausada en lu la camba per so que conserve aquel de movement.	And already a brass rod has been placed according to the length of the leg; and place the leg so that it maintains its movement.
E majorment cove que tu fassas aquo en fractura, e quan am aquela es plagua propriament.	And especially ensure that you do this in fractures, for when there is a fracture, it is properly called.
E aprop considera en quascun jorn la camba e studia am aquel per derier studi, e tu le guardes de apostema e de imflacio o de autres causas semblantz; e cum accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, lahoras opausa te a lu am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	And then consider the leg on each day and study it from your previous observations, and you should guard it against an abscess or inflammation or other similar causes; and whenever any of these causes occur, then pause treatment until it is healed.
Capitol .xvii.	Capitol XVII.
De la fractura del talo e dels osses del pe e dels ditz.	Of the fracture of the ankle and the bones of the foot and toes.
Al talo no accideys fractura de tot; mays als osses del pe accideys fractura alcunas veguadas; e als ditz del pe pauc accideys fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio en las mes de disposicio.	Fracture does not occur in the ankle itself; more often fractures of the foot bones do occur; and fractures of the toes of the foot rarely occur, and do not fracture but are rubbed in their proper place.
E si als osses del pe endeve fractura e vezes aquels osses esser elevatz sobre si entre lor, lahoras le malaute pause le sieu pe sobre la terra preparat ayssi cum anant.	And if fractures of the foot bones do occur and sometimes those bones are elevated over each other, then place the patient's foot on prepared earth in this manner.
E aprop pausa la un pe sobre aquo que es elevat de aquels osses, e aprop calca aquels, e prem, e engualha aquels entro que torno en los locs.	Then place the other foot on what is elevated from those bones, and compress, press, and align those bones back into their places.
E aprop pausa emplastre e stopa desus, e pausa dejos le ventre del pe una petita taula a la qual sian dos caps plas.	Then apply a plaster and set a small table above it, on which place two pillows.
E aprop strenh aquela am le pe am strectura descent, pus que tu has envolopada aquela am draps e am autres causes de las quals indigeys.	Then strongly bind the foot with a structure in proper order, since you have already wrapped that area with cloths and other causes of which you are aware.
E cum a lu passan tres dias o quatre, lahoras tu deslia le liament, quar tu atrobaras les osses engualatz, o sian trincatz o sian dislocatz, e la operacio en aquels es ayssi co coneysses.	And when three or four days have passed, then you untie the bandage, for you will find that the bones are equalized, or are broken, or are dislocated, and the operation in those cases is as you know.
Mays si alcus ditz son trincatz, lahoras restaura aquels, e enguala aquels ayssi cum yeu e recomtat a tu en la restauracio dels ditz de la ma.	And if some are said to be broken, then restore those, and equalize them as I and recounted to you in the restoration of the fingers of the hand.
E aprop pausa al dit trincat stela segon la longitut del dit, e sia pus lada de lu un pauc; e aprop dejos le pe aquesta taula la qual e a tu recomtada, e strenh aquela am strictura decent.	And then place the broken finger straight according to the length of the finger, and slightly to one side. Then lay the skin on this table which you have recounted to me, and tighten that bandage properly.
Mays si aquo que es trincat dels osses so dos o tres o mays, lahoras tu pausa sobre quascun dit astela de la sua quantitat envolopada en drap leon, e strenh la taula en le pus bas del pe, e sia stant sobre la un dels caps de la taula foro le ventre del pe per que la tengua am bona retencio.	And if what is broken of the bones are two or three or more, then you place each broken bone straight according to its quantity wrapped in a linen cloth, and tighten the table under the base of the foot, and standing on one of the corners of the table, make a hole in the sole of the foot so that it has good retention.
E es convenient a tu que no oblides que no consideres totas las causas las quals que e ditas a tu en las autras fracturas dels accidentz que havem dit; e opausa te a tot accident am aquo que cove.	And it is convenient for you not to forget that you should not consider all the causes which we have told you in the other fractures of the accidents that we have discussed; and pause thee at every occurrence as it comes.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter XVIII.
De fractura del conh de la femna e del os del pentenilh e de la vergua del home.	On the fracture of the thigh bone and the patella and the groin of a man.
Quan le conh de la femna es trincat, lahoras fay aquela ceser en cezela cayrada, e aprop enclina aquela a la partida del dos un petit, e sia tenguda detras.	When the thigh bone is fractured, make that incision in a sloping manner, and slightly incline it towards the outer side, and keep it behind.
E aprop la matrona umpla le conh de coto, e sia fayt en le conh de lu ayssi cum spera; e aprop la femna sia concutida, e eleva le dos de lu petit a petit, quar tot aquo es fora-getat entro que sia denant la partida del conh ayssi cum spera e l’os trincat retorna.	And the midwife fills the fracture with cotton, and it should be done in the thigh as desired; and the woman is anesthetized, and her leg is slowly elevated little by little, for all this must be done within the outer part of the thigh as desired and the fractured bone returns.
E aprop pausa pulvils sobre le dos de lu, e quan vol urinar remaugua le coto am facilitat e aprop urine, e reduzeys e retorna aquel segon la manieyra segon la qual mezist aquel al comensament, e aprop retorne al sieu pulvil primier.	And place powders on the leg, and when she wants to urinate, moisten the cotton to facilitate it; then let her urinate, return to her original position, and restore it according to the manner in which you initially placed it, and finally return to her first powder.
E fassa ayssi per vii dias o enviro aquels, quar aquel es restaurat.	And do this for seven days or until it is restored.
E si voles, pren una vezica de ovela e strenh sobre le trauc de lu una canula de canavera; e entromet tota la vesica en le conh de lu, e aprop ensuffla en la canula am vertut entro que la vesica sia imflada dedintz le conh, quar la fractura retorna.	And if you wish, take a bladder of sheep and strengthen it; place a hollow reed on the patient's trunk; insert the entire bladder into the wound, then blow through the reed with virtue until the bladder inflates inside the wound, for the fracture returns.
E aprop sia umplida de coto e estia per alcus dias segon que havem recomtat, entro que sia sanat.	And it should be filled with pus and left for some days as we have recommended, until it is healed.
E quan le os del pentenil de home o de femna es trincat, lahoras aministra en la restauracio e agulacio de lu aquo que havem recomtat en l’os del anca.	And when the bone of the pelvis of a man or woman is fractured, then administer in the restoration and reduction of it what we have recommended for the bone of the hip.
E aquo que es dreyt no es occultat en aquestas fracturas proprinquas e que pauc endeveno, majorment ad aquel al qual es alcun studi e us e enten aquest meu libre mot; quar aquela fractura significa a tu en las majors disposicios via dreyturiera en la restauracio e en la strictura de lu, e donc enten be.	And what is right is not hidden in these nearby fractures that occur rarely, especially to those who have some study and use and understand this my free will; for that fracture means to you through the major disposals via rightful in the restoration and in the constriction of it, and therefore understand well.
Mays en la vergua del home quan es trincada, pren guarguamela de auca, e met la vergua en aquela; e aprop pausa sobre lu envolucio de drap, e sia envolopada, e aprop sia layssada per tres dias o enviro aquels, e sia sanada.	In the case of the thigh bone of a man when it is fractured, protect it from infection, and insert the thigh into it; then place your hand over the wound wrapped in cloth, wrap it well, and leave it for three days or about that time, until it is healed.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XIX.
De restauracio de fractura dels osses quan es am plagua.	For the restoration of bone fractures when they are displaced.
Convenient es ad aquel al qual accideys fractura am plagua, e majorment si le os es gran ayssi cum es le os de la cuoyssa o de l’adjutori, o semblant ad aquel, que tu te cuoytes e fleubotomes aquel tantost si las condicios de fleubotomia a tu o testifican ayssi cum desus havem dit.	It is convenient to apply this treatment to those who have suffered a displaced fracture, especially if the bone is large, such as the femur or tibia, or similar. You should bind and leech that area frequently, provided that the conditions for leeching are favorable as we have mentioned above.
E si la plagua eflueys sanc, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la retencio de lu enayssi que tu polverizes sobre lu zegi trissat, si a tu autra causa no es present.	And if the displacement exudes pus, then apply binding to retain it and attempt to sprinkle saffron on the wound, unless another cause is present.
E aprop comensa restaurar la fractura en aquel meteys dia, e no prolongues aquo, si no accideys apostema.	And immediately begin to restore the fracture on that first day, and do not delay this if an abscess does not occur.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la restauracio de lu entro al ix dia, entro que sia cedat le apostema, e no apropinques a lu en le tertz dia e·l iiii de tot, quar tu faras accidir mals accidentz.	But if an abscess does occur, carefully wait until the ninth day, when the abscess is ripe, before resuming the restoration of the fracture. Do not approach it on the seventh and tenth days, for then you will likely cause harmful accidents.
Mays si le os trencat es eminent sobre la codena descubert, lahoras cove que te perforses reduzir aquel e engualar aquel am las tuas mas am facilitat e am pauca extencio.	But if the bone is broken and protrudes outside the knee joint, then you must pierce it to reduce it and equalize it with your hands with ease and little extension.
Mays si extencio no es a tu preparada e la equacio de lu am las tieuas mas, lahoras tu reduzeys aquel am las tuas mas am aquest sturment; e es sturment le qual es fayt de ferr, la longitut del qual es de vii ditz o de viii e la latitut del qual es segon la quantitat de la plagua; e per aquo es necessari al metge que prengua de aquels tres o quatre segon la quantitat que indigeys ad aquo en la curacio en tota specia de fractura.	But if the extension is not at your prepared hand and cannot be equalized with your hands, then you must reduce it with this instrument; and this instrument is made of iron, its length being seven or eight inches and its width according to the quantity of the wound; and for this, the doctor must take three or four of them according to the quantity needed in the cure for all kinds of fracture.
E sia redon, e sia en lu pauca groceza per so que no sia doblat deves la comprecio sobre aquel en la hora de la operacio.	And it should be round, and of small thickness so that it does not bend during the operation.
E sia de aguda extremitat al qual sia marge en las sieuas extremitatz; e sia le desus de lu a grossetut tendent, e de la maytat de lu entro a las partidas.	And it should have sharp ends, with margins at the outer ends; and be thick on the underside, but thin in the middle.
E aquesta es la forma de lu:	And this is the form of it:
E es nompnat en grec “labre volentz atelarem”, so es paleta pauca.	And it is named in Greek as "labre volentz atelarem," so it is a small spatula.
Per que cove que sia pausada la extremitat de lu acuda elevada sobre la extremitat del os eminent.	In order that the extremity of the limb be elevated above the end of the prominent bone.
E inpelleys aquel en una veguada entro que retorne le os, e sia engualat am alcuna equacio.	And gently push it all at once into the place where the bone will return, and equalize it with some equation.
E donc esforsa te engualar las extremitatz de la fractura entre lor, e si la extremitat de lu trencada es subtil, e no pren aquela le sturment per bona axcepcio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas la extremitat de aquel os entro que l’insturment haja poder de aquo.	And therefore strive to equalize the extremities of the fracture between them, and if the broken extremity is delicate and does not take that instrument for good reason, then you must introduce the extremity of that bone where the instrument has the power to do so.
Mays si no podes reduzir le os de tot am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras enscideys aquel am aquo que coveneys a lu dels inscizoris les quals havem ditz; o serra aquel am una de las serras en qualque manieyra sia a tu possible.	But if you cannot reduce the bone completely as we have recommended, then incise that part with the appropriate incisor, which we have mentioned; it may be one of the blades in any manner that is possible for you.
E aprop ratz aquel que roman en le os de asperitat e de scorsas menudas.	And then clean the bone of roughness and small chips.
E cum le os es reduzit, e aprop la reduccio le malaute atroba dolor vehement ledent, lahoras sapias que le os no es retornat al sieu loc natural; e adonc fay aquo quar tu confereyses al malaute gran juvament.	And when the bone is reduced, and after the reduction, if the patient experiences intense pain in the bone, then you should know that the bone has not returned to its natural place; and then do what you have agreed will greatly benefit the patient.
Cum es complida la tua restauracio la qual fas al os, e lahoras submergeys drap en vi stiptic negre, e propriament si es en estiu, e no pauses sobre la plagua cerot ni autre causa en la qual sia oli, per so que no fassa en lu accidir poyredura e corropcio.	When your restoration of the mouth is completed, and then submerge a cloth in vinegar tied with a black string, and properly in summer, and do not pause over the wound to cauterize or any other cause which may be oil, so that no accident happens leading to suppuration and corruption.
E aprop aministra stelas en la hora del tieu compliment de la restauracio de l’os, e layssa la plagua descuberta enayssi que inscidas le trauc am forfexs e uses de envolucios segon la quantitat de la plagua.	And then administer steams at the hour of the full moon after the restoration of the bone, and leave the wound uncovered to see if it improves with clamps and use dressings according to the size of the wound.
E guarda te am tota cautela que no strenhas la plagua am la fractura, quar motas veguadas an fayt aquo les fols metges, e fero accidir sobre les sieus malautes mort o malautia corrodent o zuthement, so es sania.	And guard yourself with all caution that you do not irritate the wound near the fracture, for many times doctors have caused harm to their patients, leading to death or severe corruption or gangrene, which is unhealthy.
E si la tieua strictura leugiera, molli, diversa de la strictura de las autras fracturas.	And if the lunar eclipse is slight, moist, different from the strictures of other fractures.
E si la plagua es gran o es plagua mala, e temes sobre aquel alcus accidentz mals les quals havem recomtatz, e atrobas dolor en le loc, lahoras no cove que pauses sobre aquel astelas, mays fay ad aquel envolucio de draps durs en loc de stelas e strenh lu am aquelas.	And if the wound is large or a bad wound, and you fear certain adverse accidents which we have mentioned, and find pain in that area, then do not pause over placing steams there. Instead, use cloth bandages in place of steams and strengthen it with those.
E cum aprop un dia o dos vezes ja la plagua comensar, que en lu sia engendrat brac, lahoras tu osta desus le drap le qual havias pausat sobre aquel am vi, e aprop aministra calguas, enguentz am les quals de nostra constuma es que mediquem las plaguas, ayssi cum enguentz tetrafarmacon e semblantz ad aquel.	And when after one or two days the plague begins to spread where a blister has formed, then lift up the cloth you had placed over that area, and then apply calxes, ointments which according to our custom we use to treat plagues, thus with tetrafarmacum and resembling those.
E conveneys a tu que deslias le liament e considera la plagua en quascun dia mati e vespre entro que sia consolidada e fermada, e cove que·l membre sia preparat en tal manieyra que la poyredura corra de lu a las partidas dejos am facilitat.	And you should loosen the bandage and observe the plague each day in the morning and evening until it is consolidated and closed, and ensure that the member is prepared in such a manner that the suppuration flows from it to the areas left open for drainage.
si a la plagua passan motz dias, e no es consolidada ni es abscindit de lu le brac, lahoras sapias que aqui so satagias de las petitas per que cove enquieras la plagua am tenta.	If the plague passes many days and is not consolidated, nor has the blister been removed from it, then you should know that here you are dealing with the smaller ones, so examine the plague by puncturing it.
E de aquelas satagias aquelas que so separadas remau e extratz, aquelas que de lor no so separadas e pongen le membre e fan accidir dolor, perforsa te a inscidir aquelas segon que a tu aquo es possibla.	And of those abscesses that are separated, remove and extract them. Those from which the pus does not separate, causing pain in the member, forcibly incise them according to what is possible for you.
E si accideys a la plagua zuchem o eluchen, so es stiomenios, o autra specia de corrupcio e de putrefaccio, lahoras cove que pauses a quada un de aquels am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio del qual es precedida narracio en le sieu capitol.	And if the plague becomes hot or foul-smelling, it is stiomenial, or another species of corruption and putrefaction. Then you should know that this is preceded by a narration of the treatment for which there is a separate chapter in its own section.
E de aquo en le qual cove que stia lo mieu sermo e tu fassas present la tua pessa: quan os gros es trincat, emineys sobre le membre ayssi cum le os de la coyssa e del ajutori e semblantz ad aquels dels membres grans, e que no presumas atraccio de lu, ni la extraccio de lu quar motas veguadas accideys per aquo la mort; habantz layssa aquel entro que poyresca, quar fort leu cayra per si aprop xx dias o xxx; e lahoras cura la plagua si a tu es vist, e si no layssa aquela.	And from there where his main voice is heard and you make yourself present near the affected part: when the bone is broken, examine the member as with the bones of the thigh and the helper, seeming like those of large members, and do not suspect fracture or extraction due to these visible signs, which may lead to death; having left that, it will heal by itself within about 20 days or 30; then cure the wound if you can see it, otherwise leave that.
Capitol .xx.	Capitol.xx.
De la curacio de nodacio que accideys en le vestigi de alcuna fractura.	For the cure of nodation that occurs in the vicinity of any fracture.
Motas veguadas accideys aquesta nodacio en le vestigi de sanacio de fractura, e majorment que es prop de las juncturas, e es orrasada per lu la figura del membre; e fort leu prohibeys le membre de la sua operacio natural.	Visible signs occur for this nodation in the vicinity of the healing of a fracture, especially as it is near the joints, and often distorts the shape of the member; and strongly you forbid the member from its natural operation.
Adonc considera si la nodacio es recent e aministra en aquela medicinas que han stipticat ayssi co es aloen, e enses, e mira, e sercacollo, e acrassia, e semblantz ad aquels; enayssi que prenguas de aquela alcunas o totas, e comfesiys aquelas am vi stiptic, o am album de huou, o am vi agre, e pausa aquela sobre la nodacio en estopa, e constringeys aquelas sobre lu per bona constriccio.	Then consider if the nodation is recent and administer those medicines that have astringent properties, such as aloes, saffron, look at them, search for them, clarify them, and compare them to similar substances; try taking some or all of them, confirm that they are astringent, or are white of hawthorn, or are sweet, place them over the nodation in wool, and constrain them on it with good constriction.
E leyssa extrictura que no deslies aquela per motz dias; e aprop deslia aquela e itera autra, entro que sia remauguda la nodacio; o strenh sobre aquela lamina de plom descentment, quar plom ha proprietat de remaure tot aquo que es imflat en les membres.	Let the stricture remain untied for not many days; then untie it and tie another, during which time the knot should be remoistened; or strengthen upon that lead strip descending, for lead has the property of remoistening whatever is swollen in the limbs.
Mays si nodacio ja es en peyra convertida e streyta es e nessessitat provoca a ostar aquela coytadament, e lahoras scindeys aquela per la partida pus sobirana de lu, e inscideys la superfluitat e eminent, o ratz aquela am alcus rezoris entro que sia remauguda; e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But if the knot is already in a rope-like condition and tightened, and necessity demands to loosen it, then split it along its most convenient part, and incise the excess or loosen it by applying some hot iron until it is remoistened; and cure that until it is healed.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI.
De restauracio de fractura quan es restaurada e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul no segon la sieua natura.	On the restoration of fractures when restored and then, approximately, the member subtle and fine do not according to their natural nature.
Quan fractura de os es restaurada, e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul, lahoras aquo no es fayt sino per motas causas: de las quals la una es multitut de solucio del liament e de la liguacio de lu fayta no segon que cove; o per superfluitat de strictura dels liamentz entro que·l nutriment sia prohibit correr al membre; o per multitut de embrocaccio superflua; o per movement superfluent no en la sua hora; o per pauquesa de sanc en le cors del malaute e per debelitat de lu.	When a bone fracture is restored, and then the subtle and fine member is rejoined, this is done for various reasons: one reason is the excessive solution of the ligament and its joining not according to what is convenient; or due to excess stricture of the ligaments while nutrition is prohibited from flowing to the member; or due to excessive ointment application; or due to excessive unnecessary movement; or due to insufficient strength in the body of the patient and its weakness.
E curacio de aquo es dar a mengar al malaute e far le cor de lu tendre entro que·l sanc sia multiplicat en lu; e aministra banh; e entromet gaug e leticia sobre lu.	And the treatment for this is to give the patient something to eat and make the body soft while the disease multiplies within it; administer baths; and insert tubes and joy into it.
E aprop pausa pegua sobre le membre, per so que la pegua atire a lu mot nutriment, o continua embrocacio de lu am aygua tebeza, entro que·l nutriment corr e retorne a la sua figura natural.	And place your hand over the limb, so that the hand draws in nourishment, or continue the application of the strong decoction, while the nourishment flows and returns to its natural form.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXII.
De curacio dels osses trincatz quan so restauratz tortuozament e prohibeys la operacio de lor de aquo que cove.	For the treatment of broken bones when they are reduced tortuously and prohibit the operation from which this results.
Quan accideys al membre ja restaurat aprop la sanacio de lu de tortuositat e eminencia al os trincat e nodacio, e es per aquo fededa de forma del membre, mays empero le membre no es prohibit de la sieua operacio natural, lahora no cove que tu recipias la paraula de aquel que exsistima aquel membre sia de novel trincat.	When the limb, already reduced, is near recovery from tortuosity and prominence of the broken bone and healing, and this is due to the form of the limb, yet nevertheless the limb does not prohibit its natural operation, then do not receive the word of one who thinks that member is newly broken.
Mays ja so statz motz fols metges e restauradors les quals han fayt aquo en nostra tera; e aquesta operacio es mot vituperable perduzent a gran temor le senhal de la qual es mortal.	Yet there are many foolish physicians and reducers who have done this in our land; this operation is greatly reproachable, leading to great fear from the sign of which is fatal.
Mays si claudicacio e nodacio son recentz, lahoras cove que sian enbrocatz am aygua tebeza en la qual so coytas erbas mollificantz, ayssi cum son fuelas de altea e razitz de lu, e mellilot, e semblantz ad aquels; e sia fayt a lu emplastre am emplastre mollificatio ayssi cum dyallaquilon ben fayt; o que sia preza mucillage de razit de altea e sia contucida am gray de gualina o am oli de cirami, e sia emplastrat am aquel; o que sian prezes figuas grassas e sian trissadas am fems de colom, e semblantz ad aquels de las medicinas que son nompnadas amermans consolidacio.	If claudication and nodulation are recent, then immerse them in a solution of thin water mixed with herbs that soften, such as hyssop, raz草本植物, and melilot, similar to those mentioned; then apply a soft plaster, well-prepared; or use mucilage of raz草本植物 and wrap it with cotton gray or olive oil, applying the paste; or use fatty figs wrapped in pigeon dung, resembling those used for medicines named as Arabian consolidatio.
E alcunas vetz es dissolvuda am assidua fricacio leugiera que sia am las mas humidas, e sia administrat movement del membre a tota partida en totas horas.	Sometimes it is dissolved through frequent light friction applied to the most humid areas, and movement of the limb should be maintained at all times in all hours.
Mays si tortuositat ja es anada denant e es fayta fort e convertida es en peyra e provocada es necessitat a curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que sia le pus desus cecsat e la continuacio del os sia dissolvut, e sia inscidit aquo que superflueys de nodacio de aquel meteys am le os am inscissoris subtils, e sia aministrada facilitat en aquel am sollicitut e studi.	If tortuosity has been present and becomes strong, forming a stone and requiring treatment, then it is necessary to remove the pus above the cecum and dissolve the continuation of the bone. Using sharp scissors, excise any superfluous nodulation from that method on the bone, and administer with ease in that area, often stimulating and studying it.
Capitol .xxiii.	Chapter XXIII.
De sermo en dislocacio.	On speech concerning dislocation.
Dislocacio es eyssiment de alcuna de las juncturas del sieu loc, per que es prohibida de movement, e es orrezada la figura del membre, e fa venir sobre le malaute dolors e lesios grans.	Dislocation is the displacement of a part of one of the joints of that locality, for it is forbidden movement, and distorts the shape of the limb, causing great pain and injuries in the patient.
Donc quan accideys ad alcu dislocacio, lahoras cove tantost perforsar que sia reduzit, e no tarde aquela reduzir, quar si es tardada, le loc es apostemat e fort leu am aquo es fayta dificil la reduccio de dislocaccio.	Therefore, when a dislocation occurs, it is important to promptly attempt to reduce it, and not delay the reduction, for if delayed, the area may become gangrenous, making the reduction of the dislocation much more difficult.
E per aysso no cove que sia maugut ni stendut en la hora de la apostemacio, quar motas veguadas fa venir spasme e dolors ledentz.	And for this reason, you should neither cut nor stretch in the hour of gangrene, for hot applications can cause spasms and severe pains.
Mays quan aquo accideys, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la flaubotomia del malaute, e aprop sia layssat entro que repause le apostema; e aprop le membre sia embrocat am aygua cauda e oli, e aprop sia reduzit am facilitat.	More specifically, when this occurs, you should immediately attend to the incision for an inguinal abscess, and allow it to rest until the gangrene has subsided; then, the limb should be soaked in hot water and oil, and finally, the dislocation should be reduced with ease.
E tot membre sia curat am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra en son loc.	And every member be treated with water of which the memory will come to its place.
E yeu ja e ordenatz les capitols de dislocacio segon que es precedit en fractura; de la partida del cos pus sobirana entro a la partida pus dejos.	And I have already and ordered the chapters of dislocation according to what is preceded in fracture; from the part of the body first up to the part last.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter XXIV.
De curacio de dislocacio de la mandibula dejos.	For the treatment of dislocation of the jaw, proceed.
So dislocadas las doas mandibulas si no tart; e la dislocacio de amdos es fayta segon una de dos manieyras: que o son remaugudas de lurs locs per pauca remocio, e so mollificadas un petit; o so dislocadas per entiera dislocacio e complida, entro que sian mollificadas a la partida de la junctura entro que corro saliva del malaute e que no puesca tenir aquela ni puesca claure la sua boca, e la lengua de lu sia envolopada en sa paraula.	When both jaws are dislocated without fracture; and the dislocation of both is made according to one of two manners: either they are slightly displaced from their places with little movement and somewhat softened a little; or they are completely dislocated, and at the part of the joint where saliva flows from the patient's mouth, neither can have that nor can close their mouth, and the tongue of the patient is wrapped in its cloth.
Mays quan la dislocacio de lu es pauca, lahoras en las majors disposicios retorna per si an pauca causa.	More often, when the dislocation is slight, it returns to its place in major displacements by itself for little cause.
Mays si la dislocacio es entiera e complida, lahoras cove que sia administrada reduccio de lu leugierament, e no sia tardada de tot.	More often, when the dislocation is complete and full, it is necessary to administer a gentle reduction, and not be delayed entirely.
E es que·l ministre tengua le cap del malaute, e entrometa lo metge le dit pous de la una sieua ma en la razit de la dislocacio de la mandibula dedintz la boca de lu, si la dislocacio es de la una part; o que entrometa les sieus dos pouzes ensemps, si la dislocacio es de doas partz, e les autres ditz de las mas de lu sian defora am les quals enguale; e comanda al malaute que cesse las suas mandibulas e absolva aquelas anar de quascuna partida; e le metge engualhe la mandibula e enpellisca la mandibula entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And the minister should hold the patient's head, and the doctor should insert one of his hands behind the dislocated jaw in the mouth, if the dislocation is on one side; or he should insert both his fingers together, if the dislocation is on both sides, and the other fingers should be outside equally; and command the patient to stop moving his jaws and bring those going from any direction back to their place; and the doctor equalize the jaw and push it back into its proper location.
E si dificil es la reducio de lu, e majorment si amdos las mandibulas so essemps dislocadas, lahoras aministra evoporacio am aygua cauda e oli, entro que sia fayta leugiera la reduccio de amdos e no tardes la reduccio de amdos de tot, ayssi quo havem dit.	And if the reduction is difficult, especially if both jaws are completely dislocated, then administer evaporation with hot water and oil, while performing a light reduction of both and not delay the reduction of both entirely, as we have said before.
E donc cum retornam e so engualadas, e es clausa la boca del malaute e no es mollificada, lahoras pausa sobre aquelas polvils de drap am cerot, e sia fayt de cera e oli rozat; e aprop sia liat am facilitat am liamens mols.	And when returned and equalized, and the mouth of the patient is closed and not softened, then place it over those powder substances of cloth mixed with cerate, made of wax and rubbed oil; and apply them to facilitate the healing with many bandages.
E sia le dormir del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e·l cap de lu sia stant entre dos aurelhes, per so que no maugue aquel a la partida dreyta ni a la sinistra; e no li fassas per forsa masteguar alcuna causa; habans la sieua vianda sia forbicio leon, entro que quan las dolors sian remaugudas e las mandibulas so nozadas, lahoras maugue aquo que vol.	And let the patient sleep on their back, with their head standing between two pillows, so that it does not become wet on either the right or left side; and do not force them to spit for any cause; having their food ready in a lion skin, when the pains are relieved and the jaws are moistened, then wet what they wish.
E aquo sia aministrat am facilita, e no trebalhe sobre la apercio de la boca deves la comestio e beure e ocitatio, entro que la mandibula sia nozada e sanada.	And this should be given easily, and you must not work on the opening of the mouth for eating, drinking, and breathing, until the jaw is moistened and healed.
E si es dificil la reduccio de duas mandibulas quan so dislocadas en alcuna hora e no so convertidas als lors locs, lahoras motas veguadas accideysso febres e soda assidua, e fort leu es alerguat le ventre del malaute, e fort leu e vomeys colera pura.	And if the reduction of two jaws when dislocated at any time and cannot be returned to their proper places, then pain and fever often occur, and there is a strong urge to defecate. The abdomen of the patient is also strongly distended with pure bile.
E quan tu vezes aquo, lahoras sapias que es perdicio; e motas veguadas mor aquel al qual accideys aquo en x dias.	And when you see this, then know it is dangerous; and severe pain often occurs to those upon whom this happens in a few days.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter 25.
De reduccio de la dislocacio de la furcula e de la extremitat del muscle.	Of reducing the dislocation of the furcula and the extremity of the muscle.
Furcula no es dislocada del latz dedintz per la sua continuacio am le pietz; e alcunas veguadas es dislocada a la partida defora, e aquo es declarat al sentiment.	The furcula is not dislocated from the hip inward by its continuation to the foot; and sometimes it is dislocated outward at the other end, and this is declared by the sensation.
E la restauracio de lu es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos e extenda les sieus brasses.	The restoration of it is that the patient lie down and extend his arms.
E aprop coarta le loc am la tua palma am fort coartacio, quar ela retornara.	Then firmly compress the area with your palm, for it will return.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre e pulvils e strenh aquela.	Then place your hand over the area, apply the plaster and powder, and strengthen it.
Mays la extremitat de aquel que siec le coyde e·s continuat am aquel, no es dislocada en alcun dia; lahoras cove que sia reduzida e engualhada segon que havem dit e segon que es a tu aparelhat.	More so, the extremity of that which is connected to the thigh is not dislocated in any day; therefore, it must be reduced and aligned as we have said and as is appropriate for your situation.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre, e pulvils, e extrictura, e comanda al malaute adherir a trenquilitat e a repaus entro que sia sanat.	Then place your hand over the area, apply the plaster and powder, and perform an extraction, and command the patient to maintain tranquility and rest until it is healed.
E am aquesta meteyssa curacio es reduzida la extremita del muscle quan es separada del sieu loc.	And in this therapeutic procedure, the extremity of the muscle is reduced when it is separated from its place.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter XXVI.
De la reduccio de la dislocacio del muscle.	On the reduction of the dislocation of the muscle.
Sapias que·l muscle no es dislocat sino segon tres manieras, de las quals es la una que sia dislocat a la partida del titillic a la partida dejos.	Know that the muscle is not dislocated in any of three ways, one of which is when it is dislocated from the tendon to the bone.
E la segonda es que sia dislocat a la partida desus del muscle, e aquo es fayt tart; e no es dislocat a las partidas detras per la spalla; e no es dislocat a las partidas denant per les nervis.	And the second is when it is dislocated above the muscle, which is called tart; and it is not dislocated at the rear parts by the shoulder; and it is not dislocated at the front parts by the nerves.
E majorment es dislocat e defora eyssit a las partidas dejos deves le titillic, e majorment en aquels dels quals las carns son paucas, leugierament es dislocat; mays en aquels en les quals so motas carns, es eyssit fora am dificultat.	And mostly it is dislocated externally when situated at the rear parts of the tendon, and bone. In those where the muscles are few, it is easily dislocated; more so in those where there are many muscles, it is done with difficulty.
E fort leu accideys ad alcus homes percussio o cazement, e le muscle de lu es apostemat de apostema caut, e es cujat per aquo que ja sia dislocat.	And sometimes, due to the striking or injury of some individuals, a swelling occurs, and the muscle is affected by a boil, which has already caused it to be dislocated.
Adonc cove que tu sproes aquo entro que estias sobre-sertetut de lu, e lahoras procesiscas en la curacio de lu.	Then cover what you have sprinkled there, especially over him, and proceed with the cure.
E es conoguda la dislocacio de lu quan es a las partidas dejos deves le titillic; per so que distingescas entre le muscle dislocat e·l muscle sa, quar tu atrobas entre aquels diversitat manifesta; e atrobas en le cap del muscle concavitat e dejos le titillic deves le tocament del cap del muscle ayssi quo un huou, e al malaute no pot redusir la sua ma a la sieua aurelha, ni maure aquela per totz movementz.	And the dislocation is known when it is in the shoulder joints; by shaking you distinguish between the displaced muscle and the attached muscle, for which you find a clear difference; and at the head of the muscle you find a concavity. By shaking the head of the muscle, it feels like a hollow, and the patient cannot bring his hand to his ear nor raise it with any movement.
Si es dislocat deves le pietz o ensus, e tu lahoras atrobas manifest tocament, e no es amaguat.	If it is dislocated, you should shake the foot or up to the thigh, and then you will find a clear touch, which is not hidden.
E de aquesta dislocacio es fayta leugiera reduccio quan es fresca e le malaute es enfant.	And for this dislocation, a gentle reduction is made when it is fresh and the patient is unconscious.
E la reduccio de lu es que·l ministre eleva la ma de lu a las partidas desus; e aprop pause les tieus pouses dejos le titillic de lu, e eleva la junctura am fortaleza en sus al sieu loc, e·l ministre eleva la ma de lu, e extenda aquela en sus; e aprop pausa aquela dejos quar ela retorna leugierament.	And the reduction is that the minister raises the patient's hand above the shoulder joints; then places his fingers on the shoulder to shake the patient, and elevates the joint with strength at its location. The minister raises the patient's hand and extends it properly; then places his fingers there so that it returns gently.
Mays si per aquo que havem dit no retorna, e so del comensament que accidic la dislocacio, motz dias, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia banhat en aygua cauda e sia aministrada enbrocacio que mollifique e liniesca ayssi cum si so coytz razitz de altea, e fenugrec, e melillot en aygua, e sia administrada.	If, however, it does not return through what we have said and only from the beginning of the dislocation, for several days, then it should be bathed in cold water and a moistening lotion applied as if with roots of althea, fenugreek, and melilot in water, and this should be administered.
E aprop le malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu dos e sia pausat dejos le titillic de lu espera de lana que sia engual entre levitat e strictura, e aprop le metge pause le sieu talo sobre la spera, e eleva le cap del muscle am vertut, e atire la ma del malaute per que no sia mauguda a las partidas dejos, e autre ministre tengua le cap del malaute, que no sia maugut a las partidas dejos, quar aquela tantost retorna al sieu loc.	And then the foot should be pressed on its sole and placed with the toe waiting for the wool that equals between levity and stiffness, and the doctor places his hand on the sole, elevating the head of the muscle by virtue, and pulls the foot of the patient so that it is not damaged at the joints, and another minister holds the head of the patient to prevent it from being injured at the joints, for it soon returns to its place.
E si voles, reduzeys aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu fassas esser prezent un home le qual sia pus lonc que·l malaute, e estia de la part de aquel latz, e entrometa le sieu muscle dejos le titillic del malaute e eleve le titillic de lu a las partidas desus entro que·l malaute sia suspendut en ayre, e autre ministre tire la ma del malaute de las partidas dejos del sieu ventre.	And if you wish, return the second in this manner: and it is that you have someone present who is longer than the foot, standing on that side of the sole, and interposes his muscle under the toe of the foot, elevating the toe towards the parts above while the foot is suspended in air, and another minister pulls the foot from the joints of his abdomen.
Mays si le malaute es leugier, lahoras cove que am lu que autre causa sia suspenduda, per so que grave aquel, quar la dislocacio retorna tantost.	But if the patient is light, then find what other cause is suspended, for fear that gravity will return the dislocation quickly.
E es reduzit eysament segon autra manieyra: e es que sia ficat en terra un fust lonc le cap del qual sia redon de figura, ayssi cum pilo de mortier, que no sia gros ni subtil, e aprop sia pausat dejos le malaute; pus que so pausatz sobre·l cap del fust draps leons, e·l malaute sia stant segon la longitut del fust, e aprop sia extenduda la ma de lu a las partidas dejos del autra part; e sia extendut le cos de lu del autre part am fortaleza, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And it is reduced by another method: and it is that a long stick with a round head, like the bristle of a mortar, neither too thick nor too thin, is placed under the patient; then cloths are spread over the head of the stick, and the patient is laid according to the length of the stick. Then extend your hand at the parts left on the other side; and stretch the body from the other side with strength, for the joint returns to its place quickly.
E si es dificil reduccio de lu per totas las causas que havem ditas, lahoras usa de aquesta cura: e es que tu prenguas un fust la quantitat del qual sia en le lonc de dos brasses, e latitut de aquel sia de quatre ditz, e la grossetut de lu sia aleujat en le preon del tittilic segon aquesta forma:	And if the reduction is difficult due to all the causes we have said, then use this cure: and you should take a stick whose length is that of two braccia, its width be four digits, and its thickness be increased in the palm of your hand according to this form.
E aprop sobre le cap redon sian liatz drap leons per so que·l fust no ledesca le malaute.	And over the round head, spread lion's cloths so that the stick does not press on the patient.
E aprop sia pausat dejos le titillic del malaute, e sia extenduda la ma o le bras sobre·l fust entro a las partidas dejos, e sia liat le fust sobre le adjutori e le bras e la extremitat de la ma.	And then place the patient's head, extend your hand or arm along the spine between the parts, and tie the spine onto the helper and the arm and the extremity of the hand.
Aprop sia pausat le bras sobre un scalo de scala segon la latitut, e la ma sia extenduda a las partidas dejos, e l’autre cos sia suspendut de l’autre part, quar la junctura intra tantost.	And then place the arm on a step of the ladder according to its breadth, and the hand extended along the parts left, and the other side be suspended from the other part, that the joint may soon come together.
E cum le intrament de lu es complit segon quascuna maniera que es a tu possibla, e lahoras cove que tu pauses dejos le titillic spera de lana de engual quantitat; e aprop pauza emplastre perparat de polvera de moli am enses e album de huou sobre tot le muscle, ayssi quo es revolvut desus, e aprop strenh dejos le titillic am strictura decent; e le liament sia revolvut sobre le emplastre, e la ma de lu sia annectida al col de lu, e sia leyssat, e no sia mauguda la ma de lu per vii dias.	And when the instrument for it is completed according to any manner that is possible, and then cover the head with a woolen cloth of equal quantity; then place a plaster prepared from powder of mallow leaves and honey over all the muscle, thus thoroughly mixed above, and strongly tie the head with a decent bandage; let the plaster be applied over the bandage, and the hand be attached to its neck, and let it be left alone, without disturbing the hand for seven days.
E cove que sia pausada la vianda del malaute pauca, entro que·l membre sia confortat, quar es pus leugier a la sanacio de lu.	And ensure that the food of the patient is light, until the member is comforted, for it is easier to recover.
E aprop la vianda sia donada major aprop vii o v e sia exercitat un movement; e donc si es fermat e no es mollificat, lahoras ja es sanat.	And then more food should be given about seven or five times a day and exercise should be performed; and thus if it is closed and not softened, then it is already healed.
Mays si la junctura es dislocada motas veguadas per humiditat que accideys a lu o per autra causa, lahoras cove que en aquela sia administrat cauteri am tres traucs, segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri.	And if the joint is dislocated due to several days of humidity that affects it or for another cause, then you must apply a cautery three times, as stated previously in the chapter on cautery.
E si tot aysso es fayt e aprop vii dias es desliat le liament e la junctura no es fermada, e le emplastre e la strictura son reduzitz sobre lu alcunas veguadas, e no es fermada e catz e no pot elevar aquel bras a las partidas desus, lahoras sapias que·ls nervis de lu, les quals so al cap del muscle, ja so inscizes o extendutz o mollificatz, e sapia que la junctura nul temps no sira ficada en loc sieu.	And if all this is done and within seven days the ligament and joint are not closed, and the plaster and bandage remain on it for several days, yet still are not closed with stitches and do not allow that arm to raise above the parts above, then you should know that the nerves of the area, which are at the head of the muscle, are either incised or stretched or softened, and you should know that the joint will never be fixed in its proper place.
De la dislocacio de aquela qu’es fayta deves le pietz e la mamilha o las partidas detras, la reduccio es fayta am impulcio e extencio am las mas, entro que retorne.	For the dislocation of that which is caused, you should move the foot and the ankle or the parts behind, the reduction is done by impulse and extension with the hands, while it returns.
E sia administrada en aquela l’autra strictura, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And it should be administered in the other constriction, and cure that within which is healed.
E si accideys aprop la sanacio gravitat en le membre e tarditat en le movement de lu, lahoras le malaute uze de banh motas veguadas entro que aquela gravitat sia alleujada e que retorne a la natura de lu primiera.	And if there happens to be gravity in the healing and tardiness in the movement of the limb, then the patient uses baths with warm water until the gravity is alleviated and returns to its natural state.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter XXVII.
De curacio de dislocacio del coyde.	On the cure of dislocation of the shoulder.
Sapias que la junctura del coyde es dislocada am difficultat e semblantment retorna am difficultat; e aquela es dislocada a totas partidas, e majorment a la partida denant a la partida detras, e la dislocacio de lu no es amaguada a tu quar es cazent dejos le vezement o dejos le tocament segon qualque figura sia dislocat, e quan ajustes le coyde disloguat am le sa, aquo es a tu declarat manifestament, quar la junctura es concavada e no pot doblar le bras, ni tocar am aquel le sieu muscle.	Know that the joint of the shoulder is dislocated with difficulty and seems to return with difficulty; it can be dislocated in all directions, but most commonly in front and behind. The dislocation is not concealed from you—whether you see it quickly or feel it upon touch depending on the shape to which it is dislocated. When you set the dislocated shoulder in place, this is manifestly clear to you, for the joint is concave and cannot bend the arm or reach its own muscle.
E cove que·t coytes, e reduzescas la dislocacio tantost denant que vengua a lu apostema caut, quar si ve a lu apostema caut, dificil es la reduccio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot; e majorment quan es a las partidas detras, quar pus mala es de totas las autras specias de dislocacio, e de major dolor, e motas veguadas deyssen am aquela la mort.	And note that when it comes to the shoulder, reduce the dislocation as soon as possible before an apostema (abscess) forms, for if it does form, reducing it becomes difficult, and even with great effort, it may not be fully healed. Especially when it is in the rear part, for it is worse than all other types of dislocation, causing more pain and often leading to death if not treated promptly.
E la restauracio de lu, quan es aquela que es possibla reduzir, es que la ma de lu sia extenduda am doas mas, e le bras de lu sia expandut, e las mas del metge sian sobre le coyde e dejos lu, e el empellisca la junctura am les pouzes de las suas mas ensemps, o am la razit de la sua palma entro que torne en son loc.	And the restoration of it, when that is what can be reduced, is that his hand be extended by two others, and his arm be stretched out, and the hands of the doctor be on his knees and let him, and push the joint with the heels of his hands or with the edge of his palm as it returns to its place.
Mays si la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras retorna ayssi que dobla la ma am la sua ma, entro que percuta le coyde am la razit de la sua palma.	And if the dislocation is in the front parts, then return it thus by folding his hand against his own hand, between striking the knee with the edge of his palm.
E si la dislocacio no obezeys a la reduccio, lahoras aministra vehement extencio e mot fort.	And if the dislocation does not yield to reduction, then administer violent extension and strong motion.
E es que dos ministres extendan le bras, e tenguan aquel eyssament dos ministres per so que no sia remaugut deves la extencio.	And let two ministers stretch out the arm, and hold that position with two ministers so that it is not reduced during the extension.
E aprop sia revolvut le bras deves tota part, pus que es envolopat drap doblat lonc sobre la ma de lu, o liament.	And then rotate the arm completely, as it is wrapped in a long folded cloth around his hand, or bandage.
E quant le metge toca la junctura am la sua ma, unte aquela am alcun oli per so que aquo sia aquelas causas las quals ajudan en lubricitat de la junctura am facilitat; e aprop empellesca la junctura am empulcio vehement entro que retorne.	And when the doctor touches the joint with his hand, anoint that area with some oil so that it helps in the lubrication of the joint for ease; and then push the joint vigorously as it returns.
E aprop la reduccio de lu cove que sia pausat sobre aquela empastre en le qual sia stipticitat e excequacio am album de huou, e sia extrenhut am strictura descent, e·l bras sia suspendut del col, e sia layssat per alcus dias.	And after the reduction of the cavity let it be placed on that cushion in which there is a plug of linen soaked in oil and vinegar, and it should be maintained with a belt tightened, and the arm be suspended from the neck, and let it be left for some days.
E aprop sia desliat; e donc si la junctura es formada en le sieu loc, lahoras tu deslia le liament de lu e layssa aquela.	And then release it; and therefore if the joint is formed in that location, then you release the ligament and leave it.
E si vezas la junctura no be strenher, lahoras tu itera le emplastre e·l liament, e layssa aquela per alcus dias entro que sia extrenhuda; e aprop deslia aquela.	And if you see the joint not well strengthened, then repeat the application of the plaster and the ligament, and leave it for some days until it is tightened; and then release it.
Mays si accideys a lu gravitat aprop la reduccio de la junctura, e la disposicio de lu es en movement, lahoras aministra humectacio en banh e fricacio subtil, e comprecio, entro que sia aleujat; o pausa sobre la junctura aleliati, so es coyssa de moto grassa; e aprop sia liada, e layssa aquela sobre le os le dia e la nueyt.	Mais if it happens to him gravely after the reduction of the joint, and its position is in motion, then administer moistening in bath and gentle friction, and compression, until it is healed; or pause over the joint for a while, so that the limb is at rest; and then bind it, and leave it over the bone day and night.
E aprop osta aquela, e met aquel en banh; e quan suza, lahoras tu fregua la junctura am fricacio temprada, e aprop itera sobre aquela aleliati, so es ronhonal de moto, una veguada, e la segonda, e la .iii.a.,	And then expose that, and put it in bath; and when soaked, then friction the joint with gentle friction, and then repeat over it for a while, so that it is treated once, and the second, and the third time.
am intrament de banh, entro que sia linit.	am intrament de banh, entro que sia linit.
E si voles, pausa sobre aquela fenda de vaca humida e scalfada am boder e stren sobre aquel; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas, quar aquela es humida e reduzeys a la sua disposicio.	And if you wish, place your hand over that moist and cracked crack on the skin and press firmly upon it; do this several times, for that is moist and will return to its proper position.
Capitol .xxviii.	Capitol.xxviii.
De curacio de dislocacio de malassen, so es de la junctura que es entre·l bras e la ma.	For the treatment of dislocation of the shoulder, it is the joint where the arm meets the hand.
Malassen de la ma alcunas vetz es deslocada, e la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es leugiera, e·l contrari es de las autras juncturas, mays empero cove que sia velocitat en la reduccio de lu en la hora en la qual es deslocada, denant que le loc sia apostemat o que accida en lu apostema caut.	Shoulder of the arm is sometimes dislocated, and the reduction of such dislocation is easy. The opposite is true for other joints; however, more importantly, it is crucial that there be speed in the reduction at the moment of dislocation, before the area becomes inflamed or an abscess forms.
E la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es que tu pauses la junctura de la ma del malaute sobre una taula e le ministre extenda la ma de aquel, e le metge pause la sua ma o o la sua palma sobre la iminencia de la junctura, e empellisca aquela entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And the reduction of the shoulder dislocation is that you place the patient's arm joint on a table and have them extend their arm. The doctor then places their hand or palm near the joint and gently push it back into its proper position.
Mays empero cove que sia considerat si la palma ja es ostada al ventre de la ma, lahoras le malaute pause le dos de la sua ma sobre una taula deves la extencio e la reduccio; e si la dislocacio es precedent deves le dos de la ma, lahoras sia la posicio de la ma de aquel intrinicequement sobre la taula, per so que la ma del metge caja sobre aquela iminencia de la junctura.	But first ensure that the palm is already placed on the belly of the hand, then the patient places both hands on a table for extension and reduction; and if the dislocation is prior, place both hands, then the position of the hand of the patient intrinsically on the table, so that the doctor's hand falls over that potential of the joint.
E donc si retorna tantost, bon es; e sino, lahoras strenh aquela am empastre cedant le apostema e layssa aquel; e no iteres aquo, quar sino, no soferta ni no podes sobre la reduccio de lu pus que passan a lu dias.	And so if it returns quickly, that is good; and otherwise, then strengthen the area by packing it yielding to the abscess and leave it as it is; and do not repeat this, for if you do, you will neither be able nor permitted to proceed with the reduction of it after a day or two passes.
Mays empero la junctura roman segon la sua tortuositat; e no notz al malaute alcuna causa, sino que la ma es mollificada e no pot strenher alcuna causa; lahoras sapias que les nervis son trincatz o trissatz, e lahoras no es engen en lu sino que sia strenhuda am cauteri prop le cazament de lu e fort leu aquo confereys alcuna causa.	But first according to the joint's tortuosity; and do not note any cause to the patient, but rather that the hand is softened and cannot strengthen any cause; then you know that the nerves are twisted or thrashed, and thus there is no strength in it but rather strengthening it with a cautery near its location and fortify it with this you confer some cause.
Donc cum malassem es retornada, lahoras pausa sobre lu empastre le qual havem recomtat, e sia layssat e strenhut per v dias; e aprop sia desliat e sia layssat e la ma de lu sia excercitada.	And since the swelling has returned, then place it on the packing which we have recommended, and let it be softened for five days; and then release it and let it be, and exercise the hand of the patient.
Mays si le movement de lu es ostat e accideys en lu alcuna gravitat, lahoras leniys aquela am aygua cauda e am fricacio alcunas veguadas, entro que sia alleujat.	If the movement is restricted and some gravity has occurred in it, then apply that which is cold and with friction several times, until it is relieved.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter XXIX.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels ditz.	On the cure of dislocation of the fingers.
Alcunas veguadas so dislocatz les ditz a tota partida.	For some time, the fingers are completely dislocated.
E quan es dislocat alcun dit de aquels al dos de la palma o al ventre de lu, lahoras sten le dit e impelleys la dislocacio de lu am les tieus pouses, entro que retorne.	And when one of the fingers is dislocated at the base of the palm or in the palm itself, then hold the finger and push the dislocation back with your thumbs, until it returns to place.
E aprop sostenta le cap del dit, e suspen aquel deves la part a la qual es dislocat, e layssa aquel per dos dias.	Then hold the base of the finger, and suspend that part which is dislocated, leaving it for two days.
E aprop suspen aquel e exten aquel entro que dreyt sia engualhat en aquel sieu dia.	Then suspend that part and extend it until it is straightened in that day.
E quan sira noyt, lia aquel segon aquela narracio, e no cesses desliar aquel en le dia e exercitar am movement, e lia aquel en la noyt; e fay aquo per alcus dias entro que sia streyt.	And when it is night, lay it according to that narration, and do not cease to stretch it during the day and exercise with movement, and lay it at night; and do this for several days until it is straight.
E fay semblant am aquo, si es dislocat al ventre de la ma, e lia aquel ad aquela partida e fay am aquo la tieua primiera operacio, entro que sia sanat.	And make it seem as if you do this, if it is dislocated in the hand, and join that to that part, and do this with your first operation, until it is healed.
E semblantment fay am aquo quan es dislocat a las autres partidas.	And make it seem as if you do this when it is dislocated in other parts.
Capitol .xxx.	Capitol.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels spondils del dos.	For the cure of dislocation of the spine in the second.
Quan accideys ad alcun dels spondils del dos o del col dislocacio complida, e so remaugutz motz spondils de lors locs, lahoras en aquela no es curacio, quar la mort se coyta al malaute.	When a complete dislocation occurs in any of the spine or neck vertebrae, and multiple vertebrae are displaced from their proper positions, then there is no cure, for death ensues.
E senhal de aquo es que la egestio del malaute es fora-eyssida ses voluntat, e no pot retenir aquela; e motas veguadas so mollificatz alcus membres de lu o doas cambas de lu o dos brasses de lu, o un de aquels; o es remaugut un spondil de son loc, quar motas veguadas es remaugut e motas veguadas es fayta la remocio de aquels a quatre partidas.	And the sign of this is that the patient's excretion is forced out against their will, and they cannot retain it; often, parts of the body or one or both hips or one arm of the patient become soft. Or a vertebra is displaced from its proper position, for many times a vertebra is displaced and multiple operations are performed to remove those displacements into four parts.
Donc aquela ja es remauguda a las partidas detras e es nompnada gelbozitat.	Then it is already remoistened at the rear parts and is named gelbozitat.
Mays la curacio de lu es que lahoras consideras si la gelbozitat accidey de puerissia, quar lahoras en aquela no es curacio ni de aquela no es sanacio de tot.	May the cure of it be that when you consider if the gelbozitat accrues from puberty, for in that case there is neither cure nor will it be cured entirely.
Mays en aquela que ve per cazement o per percussio o per semblant ad aquels, ja diyssero les Antics las manieras de curacio am sermo prolixs, del qual lo mays retorna am profieyt; mays yeu ja e abreujat de aquel del qual lo pauc escusa del trop de lu, per la mieua propinquitat a la entencio mieua exposicio, am la qual he aquo expausat et format ex instrument divers de aquel am le qual mostrero aquo e espausero aquel.	May it be that in those cases which arise from birth or by percussion or by resemblance to them, the Ancients have already spoken of the methods of cure at length, concerning which the main point is prophetic; but I shall now abbreviate what I have exposed and formed from various instruments of that with which I will show and expand it here.
E dic que en gelbosita que accideys de la partida denant en le pietz, no es engen ni sanacio de aquela; e semblantment en aquela que es fayta a dos latz.	And I say that in the gelbozitation that accrues from the front part at the foot, neither is it engendered nor will it be cured; similarly in that which arises in two locations.
E de aquelas no es curada sino aquela que accideys en le dos propriament am aquo que yeu recomti.	And of those, only the one that arises in two places properly is cured as I recommend.
E es que·l malaute sia extendut sobre la sua cara sobre pug engual prop de paret, e sia extendut dejos lu esturment molh per so que no sia lidit le pietz de lu.	And that the patient be extended on his back close to the wall, and be covered with a moist cloth to prevent his feet from freezing.
E aprop un fust dreyt sia pausat, ficat en la terra en la extremitat del pug entorn le cap de lu, e autra fust en aviro les pes de lu en l’autra extremitat del pueg.	And place a straight stick, placed in the ground at the end of the back near its head, and another stick across its feet at the other end of the stick.
E·l ministre tengua le fust, e no sia fermat en fossa; e autre ministre tengua l’autre segon aquela forma.	The minister hold the stick, and it should not be fixed in a hole; another minister hold the other end according to that form.
E aprop envolopa sobre le cap del malaute e dejos les titillic liamen leon ferm; e exten la extremitat del liamel al fust le qual es deves le cap de lu, e lia aquel en lu; e aprop strenh l’autre liament sobre las ancas de lu les denols de lu, e deves las cambas de lu; e aprop ajusta totz les liamentz e lia aquels en l’autre fust le qual es deves les pes de lu.	And wrap a cloth around the patient's head and tie it tightly with a ligature; extend the end of the ligature to the stick which is fixed at the head, and tie that end to it; and tightly tie another ligature around the patient's waist below the armpits, and hold his arms; and adjust all the ligatures and tie those to the other stick which is fixed at the feet.
E aprop le ministre cascu extenda le liament a la partida del fust, e no sian remaugutz les dos fustz e les liamentz dels sieus locs en les quals son ficatz, mays empero no so fermatz ayssi cum havem dit.	And the minister should extend the ligature to the part of the stick, and do not loosen both sticks and the ligatures in which they are fixed, but still do not fix them as we have said.
E le metge pause las suas palmas sobre le spondil am fortaleza entro que retorne, o que pause sobre aquela una taula, e aprop que ajuste sobre la taula les sieus pes entro que retorne.	And the doctor places his palms on the spine with strength so that it returns, or he places one hand on a table and adjusts his feet on the table as it returns.
Mays si no retorna per aquesta forma, lahoras pren una taula de la qual la latitut o la longitut sia en aviro de tres brassas, e cava en la paret de la qual havem dit que es prop le malaute un loc en le qual intre la extremitat de la taula.	And if it does not return in this way, then take a table of which the width or length is about three braccia, and挖一个位于我们之前提到的靠近患处的位置，在桌子的一端。
E aprop pausa la maytat de la taula sobre le spondilh, e·l metge pause les sieus pes sobre l’autre extremitat, e estrenha be entro que le spondil sia coartat e que retorne al sieu loc.	And place the majority of the table on the spine, and the doctor places his feet on the other end, and presses well so that the spine is compressed and returns to its place.
E si tu voles, obre am torn le qual es revolvut am la ma; e es que tu fiques en terra deves le cap del malaute en le derier del pug dos fustz, la longitut dels quals sia d’un bras, e deves le cap de lu en le derier del pug eyssament dos fustz; e sia la longitut que es entre quascun fust un palm, e ja es fayt en quascun fust trauc en le qual corr torn, e quascun sia mot fermat en terra per so que no sia maugut.	And if you want, open the groin which is relaxed in your hand; and when you are on the ground, place the patient's head at the heel of one stick, whose length is that of a man's arm, and place his head at the heel of another stick; and let the distance between each stick be a palm, and already make it so that each post is firmly anchored to the ground to prevent them from moving.
E sia mes un fust redon en le qual es le torn, e sia revolvut en les dos traucs dels dos fustz.	And there should be a round rod for the turn, and it should be turned in the two holes of the two rods.
E en la extremitat de lu es un trauc en le qual es format le fust, la longueza del qual es un palm am aquo que es revolvut; e en les dos autres fustz es semblant de aquel.	And at the end of it is a hole through which the rod passes, the length of which is one palm's breadth as it is turned; and in the other two rods, it is similar to that.
E aprop strenh les liamentz que has streyt en le pietz del malaute en le trau le qual es deves le cap de lu, e les liamentz que has streyts en las coyssas de lu en le torn le qual es deves les pes de lu.	And then strengthen the ligaments you have stretched in the feet of the patient in the hole through which you place the head of it, and the ligaments you have stretched in the thighs of the patient in the turn through which you place its feet.
E aprop deves quascun torn e stia un ministre que torssa le torn am la sua ma, e le metge engualhe le spondil segon que havem dit.	And then you should place each turn and have a minister twist the turn with his hand, and the doctor align the spine as we have said.
E aquesta es la forma del torn:	And this is the form of the turn:
E aprop pus que le spondil es retornat, e le loc es engualhat, lahoras cove que pauses empastre exciccatiu am album de huou, e aprop estopa; e aprop pause sobre le empastre astela de taula de la qual la latitut sia de tres ditz o enviro aquels, e la longitut de lu sia quantitat que prengua le loc de la gelbositat, e sobre la partida del spondil sa.	And when the spine is returned and the area is aligned, then cover it with a paste of honey, and some wool; place a piece of cloth over the paste, whose width should be about three fingers or slightly more, and its length should fit the area affected by the yellow bile, and over the part of the spine.
E aprop sia liat am liament le qual havem dit, e uze le malaute de nutriment subtil entro que sia sanat.	And then apply the litharge which we have mentioned, using the patient as a substrate for the subtle nourishment to become healthy.
E si roman alcuna iminencia en le loc en la fi de la sanacio, lahoras cove que sian aministradas medicinas que moilifico e liniscan am aministracio de la taula per lonc temps, la qual havem recomtada; e ja es aministrada en aquel loc lamina de plom.	And if there is any danger at the site near the end of the healing, then it should be ensured that medicines that mollify and soothe are administered through continuous use as we have recommended; and already a lead plate has been applied in that location.
E alcunas veguadas accideys imminencia en le derier dels spondils del dos, e es cujat per aquela dislocacio; e es aquel os le qual ja imineys per que no cove que sia fayta prosompcio a lu am aquesta medicina, quar fort leu fara a tu accidir mort.	And sometimes dangers occur near the end of the spine, and are caused by that dislocation; and it is that bone for which you should beware so as to avoid any suspicion about this medicine, because it will greatly affect your condition and may lead to death.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter XXXI.
De curacio de anca dislocada.	On the treatment of dislocated hip.
Sapias que la junctura del ancha e la junctura del muscle no endeve sino dislocacio tant solament, e no accideys ad aquelas aquo que accideys a las autras juncturas de petita remocio e concavitat.	Know that the joint of the hip and the joint of the muscle should only be dislocation to such an extent, and not occur with those things that occur in other small joints with little movement and cavity.
E la junctura de la ancha es dislocada segon quatre manieyras, quar es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, o a las partidas defora, o a las partidas denant, o a las partidas detras.	And the joint of the thigh is dislocated according to four manners; it is dislocated to the inner parts, or to the outer parts, or to the front parts, or to the rear parts.
E majorment es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, e pauc a las partidas denant o a las partidas detras.	And primarily it is dislocated to the inner parts, and rarely to the front or rear parts.
E senhal de la dislocacio de lu a las partidas de dintz es quar, quan tu ajustas la camba del malaute sana am la malaute, es pus longua e·l denolh es pus heminent que de la sana, e·l malaute no pot doblar le sieu pe deves le lenguonar, e es le loc que siec le lengonar apostemat de apostema caut, per so que·l cap de la coyssa ja es pervengut aqui.	And the sign of dislocation to the inner parts is that when you adjust the belt of the healthy thigh against the diseased one, the former appears longer and the latter more prominent than the healthy side. The diseased thigh cannot bend its knee; it must be ligatured, so that the head of the hernia is here already secured.
E·l senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio es a las partidas defora, es que les accidentz de lu so contraris ad aquest accident.	And the sign of those to which dislocation occurs to the outer parts is that their symptoms are contrary to this condition.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas denant es quar expan la camba sieua segon compliment, mays empero no dobla aquela ses dolor que es en le denol, e si se perforsa ad anar e no pot sobre aquo a las partidas denant; e la urina de lu es retenguda e l’engonar de lu es apostemat, e deves la ambulacio de lu sobre le talo.	And the sign of those to which dislocation occurs to the front parts is that the swelling expands according to its complement, but it does not bend the knee in pain. If it is forced to go forward and cannot do so at the front; his urine is retained and his engagement becomes an apostema; you should ligature him on the tendon.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas detras es que no expande le denol, ni no puesca doblar aquel denant que doble le engonar, e la camba de lu es pus breva que l’autra, e l’engonar es mollificat, e·l cap de la coyssa es deves aquel loc.	And a sign of dislocation in the rear parts is that the hollow does not expand, nor can what is front folded be bent to fold it backward, and his waist is shorter than the other, and the affected area is softened, and the groin cap is deviated from that location.
Mays reduccio de las specias de aquesta dislocacio es que tu consideras, lahoras, si la dislocacio es vetusta et antiqua, que ja es anticada am le havent aquela aprop tu aministras reduccio de lu e roman segon la sua disposicio, lahoras no es en aquela curacio de tot; e adonc no cove que en aquela sia fayta prosompcio.	The main sign of this dislocation is that you consider, at the time, if the dislocation is old and already hardened, then after examining it closely, you apply reduction to it according to its condition; but this is not part of the complete treatment. Then, you should not presume anything in that treatment.
Mays en aquel del qual la dislocacio es recent, e es una de las quatre specias de dislocacio, lahoras te coyta ad aquo que volvas la junctura e extendas aquela a las partidas dedintz e a las partidas defora, e mau aquela a la dextra e sinistra, quar fort leu retorna e no indigeys de autra cura.	For the case where the dislocation is recent and one of the four types of dislocation, you should turn the joint and extend it to the internal and external parts, and move it to the right and left sides, as it will naturally return with force, and you do not need any other treatment.
Mays, si no retorna en aquesta manieyra, lahoras cove que tu prepares ministre fort e extendas la camba de lu de la partida pus dejos, o am las suas mas, o am liament lo qual es liat sobre la camba desus le denol; e autre ministre extenda la ma de aquel desus enayssi que meta las suas mas dejos les titillics de lu; e aprop strenha am liament leon sobre la razit de la coyssa, e tengua autre ministre ters le extremitat del liament.	Moreover, if it does not return in this manner, you should prepare a strong counter-pull and extend the waist on the side where it is more relaxed, or on their hands, or use a piece of wood that is dipped in oil over the hollow part; then another person should stretch the hand from above so that it touches the back of their hands. Then apply strong ointment of lion's grease to the affected area, and have another person hold the end of the wood.
E sia extencio de lu o de la partida dedintz a l’angonar a la partida de la furcula, o de la partida detras a la partida del dos.	And it is an extension of his arm or from inside the armpit to the side of the furcula, or from behind to the side of the thigh.
E sia la extencio de totz aquels en una veguada entro que·l malaute sia elevat am le sieu cos de terra e que romangua pendent.	And it is the extension of all these in one go, lifting the patient's leg from his body and allowing it to dangle freely.
E aquesta specia de extencio es specia cominal a totas quatre.	And this type of extension is common for all four.
E donc si la dislocacio retorna am aquo que havem dit, sira bo; e sino, lahoras es necessari a tota specia aquo que dire de la propria curacio.	And therefore, if the dislocation returns as we have said, it will be good; but if not, then for each type, what I say about its own treatment is necessary.
En la reduccio de lu propria, quan es dislocada, e la dislocacio es a las partidas dedintz, cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu latz sa; e aprop pausa les liamentz sobre la razit de la coyssa en aquel loc le qual entre le cap de la coyssa e·l loc que es dejos le langonar; e aprop exten le liament en sus de la part del angonar a la pus auta partida de la furcula.	In the reduction of its own, when dislocated, and the dislocation is from inside, make sure the patient's leg is returned to its normal position; then place the ligaments over the ribcage at that location where between the head of the rib and the location where the armpit is placed. Extend the ligaments above the side of the armpit to the other part of the furcula.
E aprop autre ministre fort prengua les brasses de lu, e amerme le loc gros de la coyssa malaute e extenda a las partidas deforo per extencio vehement, quar aquela retorna en le sieu loc.	And then another minister firmly takes hold of the thighs, and compresses the thick part of the bad hernia and extends it outward forcefully, for that which returns to its place.
E aquesta specia es de pus leugiera curacio am la qual aquest membre es reduzit que las autres specias.	And this species is of a gentle cure for which that member is reduced more than with other species.
Mays si es excusat sobre tu e no obezeys al entrament am aquesta specia de curacio de tot, lahoras cove que sian liatz les dos pes del malaute ensemps am liament fort, leugier, sobre amdos les talos e amdos les denols.	But if you excuse yourself and do not follow this treatment for this cure, then firmly bind both feet of the patient together tightly over both the calves and both the thighs.
E sia la longitut de quascun de son par la quantitat de quatre ditz, e sia la camba malaute extenduda mays que l’autre per quantitat de dos ditz.	And let the length of each be that of four fingers, and let the bad hernia's cushion be extended more than the other by the amount of two fingers.
E aprop le malaute sia suspendut sobre le cap del fust, e que sia en la mayso; e sia la longitut de lu de la terra la quantitat de dos brasses.	And then the hernia be suspended above the head of the stake, and let it be in the hand; and let the length of it from the ground be that of two cubits.
E aprop comanda a un jove fort que minuesca le cap de la coyssa, e sia suspendut am le malaute autre jove, e l’autre jove minuent la coysa am fortaleza empellesca, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And command a strong young man to hold the thigh, and let him suspend the hernia with another young man, while the other man holds the thigh with great strength, for the joint returns to its place quickly.
Mays en la reducio propria, quan es dislocacio a la partida defora, cove que·l malaute jaga sobre pug segon que havem recomtat en le havent gelbozitat; e sia strenhut le liament sobre la camba malauta propriament e sobre le pietz de lu.	In the proper reduction, when there is dislocation at the outer part, move the patient's leg according to what we have recommended in our treatise on healing; and strengthen the ligament over the injured thigh and over its knee.
E aprop dos fustz sian pausatz, la un als pes de lu, e l’autre al cap; e aprop sian pausatz fustz ajustatz al mieg del pueg ficat sobre·l qual draps humitz sian envolopatz, per so que·l malaute no sia dampnajat per que·l fust sia entre las coyssas de lu, per que deves la extencio a las partidas dejos no sia atirat.	Then place two stakes firmly in the ground, one under the patient's foot and the other under the head; then stake the stakes securely above which damp cloths are wrapped, so that the patient is not injured by the stakes being between their thighs, for you must maintain the extension of the limbs left as they are.
E aprop quascun ministre extenda a la sua part, e·l metge am la sua ma enguala la reduccio segon l’art.	Then each minister extend to their part, and the doctor with his hand equalize the reduction according to the art.
Donc, si obezeys a revercio, sira bo grandament; e sino, pausa sobre aquela diligentment e ayssi quo havem dit en gelbozitat per aquela engualment.	Then, if you obey reversal, it will be very good; otherwise, place your hand diligently over it and do so as we have said in our treatise on healing regarding equalization.
Mays cove que·l malaute jagua sobre les sieus latz sa quetament.	Then move the patient's leg sideways so that it is at rest.
E quan la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras cove que la camba sia extenduda leugierament, e es segon aquesta meteyssa narracio sobre pueg; e le metge pause la palma de la sua ma dreyta sobre·l langonar malaute, e aprop coarte aquel am l’autra ma, e am aquela coartacio pausa aquel extendut a las partidas dejos a la partida del denol.	When the dislocation is in the front parts, then you should extend the leg slightly, and according to this method of narration for the thigh; the doctor places the palm of his right hand on the inner side of the diseased knee, and then cauterizes it with the other hand, and by that cauterization he extends it to the front part leaving it at the side of the knee.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas detras, lahoras no cove que·l malaute sia extendut a las partidas dejos, e es elevat sobre la terra; habantz cove que sia pausat sobre causa dura, ayssi cum cove le eyssament si l’ancha de lu es dislocada a las partidas defora, segon aquo que havem dit del jasement de lu sobre dos anchas; e es sobre la sua cara e les liamentz sian extendutz, segon que havem dit, no ha guayre.	And if the dislocation is in the rear parts, then you should not extend the leg to the sides leaving it, and it is elevated above the ground; having done this, you should place it on a hard surface, just as would be done if the broad end of it were dislocated to the front parts, according to what we have said about its position on two broad surfaces; and it should be on its face with the ligaments extended, according to what we have said, not in any other way.
E cove que sia aministrada compressio am taula sobre le loc al qual yeys la junctura.	And a compress should be applied on the area where the joint is dislocated.
Donc cum la reducio es complida segon que cove — e·l senhal de la reduccio de lu no es amaguat a tu, e es que tu extendas del malaute doas cambas, e quan tu vezes aquelas enguals e le malaute extrenh la sieua camba e expandeys aquela ses excusacio, lahoras sapias que·l membre segon que cove es retornat — e lahoras tu ajusta doas coyssas e pausa empastre e extrenh am benda ayssi que la ancha no sia mauguda en alcuna de las partidas; e adheresca le malaute a repaus per tres dias o per quatre.	So, when the reduction is completed as it should — and the sign of the joint's reduction is not hidden from you, which is that you extend two legs of the patient, and when you see those equal parts and the leg returns to its natural position and expands that space, then you know that the member has been returned according to what is needed — then you place two cushions, apply a bandage so that the width is maintained in any part; and adhere the leg to rest for three or four days.
E aprop deslia le liament e l’empastre, e compara la una camba am l’autra.	And then separate the thigh from the hip, comparing one leg to the other.
Lahoras, si vezas aquelas enguals en vustament, lahoras sapias que la dislocacio ja es fermada, e adonc layssa le malaute anar.	When you see them equal in size, you know that the dislocation is already fixed, then allow the patient to go.
E si vezas alcuna causa de mollificacio, lahoras tu retorna e emplastra aquel, e extrenh aquel segon la tua primiera strectura, e layssa aquel en tres dias.	And if you see any sign of swelling, then return and apply a plaster to that area, and stretch it according to your original structure, and leave it for three days.
E aprop deslia aquel, e fay aquel tardar en ambulacio sobre quascu per alcus dias, entro que sia confortat.	Then return the area to its original position and allow it to recover ambulation over each part for some days until it is comfortable.
Capitol .xxxii.	Capitol.xxxii.
De curacio de dislocacio del denolh.	On the treatment of dislocation of the shoulder.
Le denolh es dislocat segon tres manieyras, quar es dislocat a las partidas defora, e a las partidas dedintz, e a las partidas dejos mays a las partidas detras; e a las partidas denant no es dislocat.	The shoulder can be dislocated in three ways: it can be dislocated to the outer parts, to the inner parts, and more towards the back than the front; it is not dislocated towards the front.
E le senhal de dislocacio de lu es que comandes al malaute que aplique la sua camba am la coyssa; lahoras sapias que·l denol es dislocat.	And the sign of shoulder dislocation is that when you command the patient to apply their leg to their hip; you know that the shoulder is dislocated.
E la restauracio de totas las manieyras de lu es que fassas cezer le malaute dreyt, enayssi que ja extenda la sieua camba, si pot sobre aquo; adherir le tieu dos a la cara de lu, e pausa le pe de lu entre les tieus pes; e aprop fay adherir le denol de lu am las tuas palmas, e rete aquelas entre les tieus ditz sobre le denolh de lu am fortaleza, e autre ministre extenda le sieu pe entro que·l denol retorne a son loc.	And the restoration of all these methods is that you make sure the patient lies straight, try to extend its leg as much as possible; attach your two hands to the face of the leg, and place his foot between your feet; then make sure the sole of the foot touches your palms, hold those between your toes on the sole of the foot with strength, and another helper extends his leg so that the sole returns to its place.
E senhal de reddicio de lu es que la sua camba adharesca am la coyssa am levitat no-laboroza.	And the sign of relief is that its leg adheres to the thigh with ease without effort.
E aprop emplastra aquel e fay adhirir la camba am la coyssa, e aprop lia aquelas emsemps am una benda per tres dias o per quatre, e aprop deslia aquelas.	And then apply that and make the leg adhere to the thigh, and wrap those several times with a bandage for three or four days, and later remove those.
E no uze le malaute de ambulacio per alcus dias, entro que sia sanat e cofortat.	And do not use the patient's leg for walking for a few days until it is healed and comfortable.
Mays si la reduccio de lu a tu es excusada, lahoras aministra fort extencio am liamentz dels quals en la curacio de la hancha precedit narracio.	But if the reduction of the hernia is excused, then administer strong extension to those ligaments involved in the treatment of the hip as previously narrated.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Capitol.xxxiii.
De la curacio de la dislocacio del talo.	Of the cure of the dislocation of the ankle.
Le talo alcunas veguadas es remaugut per petita remocio, e alcunas veguadas es dislocat segon compliment, e la dislocacio de lu es fayta o a las partidas dedintz o a las partidas deforo.	The ankle is sometimes reduced by a slight movement, and sometimes dislocated according to the complement, and the dislocation of the ankle is performed either on the inner sides or on the outer sides.
E le senhal de la dislocacio de lu es que vezes le talo imflat procedent a la partida a la qual es dislocat.	And the sign of the dislocation of the ankle is that you see the swelling of the ankle proceeding from the side on which it is dislocated.
Mays la curacio de la remocio de lu es de leugiera reddicio, e es que sia extendut am facilitat am las mas e sia engualhat entro que retorne.	More the cure of the reduction of the ankle is by a gentle return, and it is that it be extended with ease and equalized so that it returns.
Mays en la curacio de lu quan es dislocat segon compliment, cove que fasses cezer le malaute dreyt, e tengua aquel un ministre fort e valent de la partida detras del dos de aquel en le mieg loc de lu.	More in the cure of the ankle when it is dislocated according to the complement, make sure you straighten the patient, and have a strong and brave assistant at the back of the ankle near the middle of the leg.
E aprop te tu am la tieua ma dreyta le pe de la pus sobirana part, e am la tua ma sinistra de la part pus dejos del pe en le loc de la cavilha.	And then place your right hand on the upper part of the foot, and with your left hand hold the lower part of the foot near the ankle.
E aprop atira le pe a tu am la tua ma dreyta, e aprop am la sinistra per dos veguadas, e aprop exten am la sinistra; e empelleys le pietz del pe am la dreyta deves la camba ses trebalh.	And then draw the foot to your right hand, and to your left hand twice, and extend your left hand; and push the foot with your right hand while bending the knee.
E fay aquo doas veguadas segon que havem comtat.	And do this twice according to how we have counted.
E aprop empelleys le pietz del pe a la camba la tersa veguada, e tu es a la cavilha.	And then push the foot towards the knee for the third time, and you are at the ankle.
Donc si retorna en una veguada o en dos segon aquesta manieyra, e si vezes le pe engualhat, es bo; e sino, lahoras sobre lu itera la operacio, quar aquel retorna.	So if it returns in one or two pushes according to this manner, and if you close the foot properly, that is good; otherwise, then iterate the operation, for it may not have returned.
Mays si a tu es prohibida la reduccio de lu am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu dos sobre terra, e estrenh un paysel mot en terra fermat, e que caja entre las coyssas de lu, e tu ja has envolopat sobre lu drap per so que no ledesca le malaute.	But if reducing the foot as we have recommended is forbidden to you, then place the foot in a basin on the ground, and put a wet cloth in a firm basin, and let it fit between the patient's thighs, and you have wrapped it with a cloth so that the foot does not get cold.
E aprop le ministre de lu tengua las suas coyssas, e aprop autre ministre extenda le pe am las suas mas o am liament que lie sobre le col del pe; e aprop extenda aquel quascun ministre contre extencio del sieu par, e le payssel sia extant entre las coyssas del malaute retinent aquel, per so que·l cos de lu no sia atirat a las partidas dejos deves la sua extencio.	And then the minister should hold their thighs, and another minister extend the foot with their hands or with flax that is tied around the ankle of the foot; and each minister extend themselves against the extension of their part, and the cloth should be spread between the patient's thighs, retaining it there, so that the body of the patient is not pulled towards the sides you bend them.
E aprop le metge enguala la dislocacio am las sieuas mas, e autre ministre tengua la coyssa sana a las partidas dejos, quar la dislocacio retorna am la facilitat.	And then the doctor equalizes the dislocation with his hands, while another assists holding the healthy thigh at the parts left, so that the dislocation returns with ease.
E donc cum retorna la dislocacio e es declarada a tu la sanetat de la reduccio de lu, lahoras pausa emplastre e extrenh aquela am liamentz fortment, e ligua le pe am liament a la camba.	And then as the dislocation returns and its reduction is declared to be sound, then apply a strong paste externally to it, and bind the foot with lint to the leg.
E cove que temes o te guardes dels nervis les quals so detras sobre le talo, per que le liament sobre aquel no sia vehement e leda aquel fortment.	And be careful not to press on or guard the nerves behind the ankle, lest the lint over that area be too strong and severely irritate them.
E aprop layssa aquel per dos dias o per tres; e si le liament es mollificat, extrenh aquel.	And leave it for two or three days; and if the lint has softened, remove it.
E aprop deslia aquel en le ters dia o en le quart, e prohibeys le malaute de anament per xl dias.	And remove it on the third day or the fourth, and prohibit the patient from walking for forty days.
Mays si es forsat de anar denant aquel spazi, no es fayta segurtat que la dislocacio no sia sobre lu dissolvuda e corrumpuda, e aprop aquo que no recipia curacio.	More if it is necessary to walk before that time, then there is no assurance that the dislocation has not become dissolved and corrupted, and what does not receive healing.
E si accideys a lu apostema caut, lahoras cove que tu aministre en la cedacio de lu aquo en lo qual precedic la nostra narracio, en autre loc de curacio e de embrocacio, entro que sia remauguda.	And if an abscess occurs at this point, then ensure that you administer in the extraction of it what we have previously narrated in another section on healing and fomentation, until it is well resolved.
Capitol .xxxiiii.	Chapter XXXIV.
De curacio de dislocacio dels ditz dels pes.	On the treatment of dislocation of the toes of the feet.
Cove que aquel qu’es dislocat sia engualhat am pauca extencio ses trebal; e aquo que no es dificil, abantz es leugier.	First, ensure that the one that is dislocated is gently reduced within a small extent; and what is not difficult, is easily done.
Mays si la dislocacio es en alcus nozes del dos del pe, lahoras cove que fassas cezer le malaute le sieu pe sobre loc engual de la terra o sobre taula, e sia estant ayssi cum si anava.	But if the dislocation is in several toes of the foot, then you must place the sole of the affected foot on the ground or a table, and keep it thus as if it were walking.
E aprop tu sta de pes, e pausa le tieu pe sobre aquo que imineys de las juncturas, e aprop calca aquel am le tieu pe am vertut entro que retorne, e que vejas aquel ja engualhat e no aparesca en le loc eminencia.	Then stand on the foot, and place your own foot over the area near the joints, and press that part with your foot using its natural strength to help it return to place, and observe that it is reduced and does not appear as an elevation in the area.
E aprop pausa dejos le ventre del pe de lu una taula que prengua tot le pe, a la qual sian dos caps, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent e ferma per tres dias; e aprop deslia aquel e fay aquel repausar de ambulacio per motz dias, entro que sia estrenhut e de reddicio sia assegurat.	Then place the abdomen of the foot on a table that can support the entire foot, which has two ends, and firmly and decently hold that part with three strong bandages for three days. Then release that and allow it to rest by walking for several days until it is strengthened and its reduction is assured.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter XXXV.
De las specias de dislocacio que sian faytas am plagua o am fractura o am quascuna ensemps.	Of the species of dislocation that occur from strain or fracture or any combination thereof.
Quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, e tu te perforssas en la curacio de aquela e en la restauracio de lu, motas veguadas succezeys la mort.	When any of these causes occur, and you are involved in the cure of that and its restoration, mistakes can lead to death.
E per aquo no cove que sobre la curacio de lu presuma, sino aquel que es savi en l’art, de lonc uzatge, misericordios e pietados, tardiu, no-ardit ni presomptuos; e que use en le comensament de medicinas que cedan apostemas cautz tant solament, e leyssa le malaute al divinal jutgament, sino ad aquel al qual speras salut de perdicio, am de la malautia alleviacio, e en la qual appareys alcuna speransa.	And for this reason, you must not presume in the cure of it, but only one who is wise in the art, long accustomed, merciful and pious; and who delays, neither impatient nor presumptuous. He should use at the beginning of medicines that cause abscesses only with a cautery, leaving the evil to divine judgment, rather than to someone whom you hope for relief from suffering, or alleviation of the illness, in which case any hope should appear.
E adonc esforsa te tantost far de lu la reduccio en le comensament de la causa, denant que endevengua apostema caut.	And then strive to perform the reduction at the beginning of the cause, before it develops into an abscess.
E adonc si le membre retorna segon que volem, lahoras aministra regiment le qual ceda apostema caut e cura la plagua am aquo que conveneys a lu dels enguentz desiccatius.	And then, if the limb returns as we wish, proceed to administer treatment that causes an abscess with a cautery and heals the strain using what is appropriate for it from drying ointments.
E si dislocacio es am fractura e accideys en le os satagias separadas, lahoras tu perforsa le stement de lor, e fay en aquo so que havem dit en las malautias simplas de aquo que es precedit en les locz de aquels.	And if dislocation is associated with a fracture and accidents in the bones separated, then you must reduce their joint, doing so as we have said in simple ailments that precede these in the places of those.
E guarda e esquiva segon la tua vertut aquel del intrament en las vias de temor segon que a tu es precedida la mia predicacio; quar aquo es milhor a tu deves le tieu Creator, e mays permanent a la tua gloria, e mays saludos al tieu cos verays aquels en le tieu temps.	And guard and avoid according to your virtue that of the instrument in the ways of fear according to which my preaching precedes you; for this is better to you from your Creator, and more permanent to your glory, and more greetings to your true essence those in your time.
Ayssi fineysso las paraulas de Albucasim perfieytament de las quals Dieus ne sia benezeyt.	Thus you finish the words of Albucasim perfectly, for which may God bless.
Amen.	Amen.
