Ayssi comensan las paraulas de Albucasim .	Thus begin the words of Albucasim.
O, filhs, pus yeu he a vos complit aquest libre, le qual es le derier de la sciencia de medicina, per le compliment de lu so consequit la fi en lu, e per las exposicios de lu, e per las declaracios de lu, es a mi vist que yeu complesca aquel a vos am aquest tractat, le qual es partida de la operacio am ma, so es cyrurgia.	O, children, now that I have completed this book, which is the last of the science of medicine, by its completion bringing about its end, and through its explanations and declarations, it is clear to me that I complete for you here this treatise, which is part of my surgical operations.
Quar la operacio am ma es prostrada en nostre regio e en nostre temps de tot privada, entro que fort leu peric la sciencia de lu, e le vistigi de lu es ostat; e no romasero de lu sino alcunas petitas descripcios en les libres dels Antics, les quals mudero las mas e endevenc ad aquels error e heyssitacio entro que son clausas las entencios de lu e es elonguada la forsa de lu e l’art.	Since the operation of the hand is professed in our region and in our time as almost entirely private, despite the great importance of the science of it, and its practice has been obscured; and only some minor descriptions have remained in the books of the Ancients, which corrected many errors and hesitations, yet the understanding of it has been limited and its force and art have been diminished.
E es vist a mi que yeu vivifique aquela am ordenacio de aquest tractat en aquela segon la via de exposicio e de declaracio e de abreviacio; e per que vengua am las formas dels ferramentz de cautheri e dels autres instrumentz de la obra cum sia per addicio de la declaracio, e per preparacio de lu, la qual causa es necessaria.	And it is evident to me that I should revitalize that part of this treatise in the manner of explanation and declaration and abbreviation; and for it to come into the forms of the instruments of cautery and other tools of the work through the addition of declaration and preparation, which is necessary for this cause.
Mays la causa per la qual no es atrobat bo artifex am la sieua ma en aquest nostre temps, es quar la art de medicina es longua, e que cove le sieu actor denant aquo esser excercitat en la sciencia de anotomia la qual recontec Gualia entro que sapia les juvament dels membres e las formas de aquels, e la conjunctio e la separacio de lor; e haia la conoyssensa dels osses, dels nervis e dels lacertz, e·l nombre de aquels, e la egrecio de lor; e de las venas pulsatils e de las quietas, e dels locs del eyssiment de lor.	More the cause why a good craftsman does not use his hand well in this our time is that the art of medicine is long and that its actor before this had to be exercised in the science of anatomy which Gualia knew entering into which he learned the youth of the members and their forms, and the conjunction and separation of them; and had knowledge of the bones, the nerves, and the arteries, their number, and their disease; and of the pulsating veins and the quiet ones, and of the places of the movement of them.
E per aquo ditz Ypocras que am u nom es mot, mays en l’obra petit, e majorment en la art de la ma.	And for this you say Hippocrates that in his name is mouth, more in the little work, and mainly in the art of the hand.
Mays nos ja avem dit de aquel en l’introit de aquest libre; quar qui no es scient aquo que li avem dit de anotomia, no es evacuat que no caia en error per la qual siran mortz les homes, ayssi cum yeu he vist trops de aquels, quar alscus son formatz en esta sciencia e gettan se de aquela ses sciencia e ses experiment.	More we have already spoken of that in the introduction to this book; for who does not know what we said about anatomy, will not be free from error by which men will die, as I have seen too many of those, for some are formed in this science and fall into the errors of that other science and its experiments.
Quar yeu vi un metge folh e enperit aver incidit un apostema escrophilos en le colh de una femna, e incidic alcunas arterias del colh per que fluic gran sanc entro que la femna cazec morta entre las mas de lu.	For I have seen a doctor who, through ignorance, incurred an apostematisc in the neck of a woman, and injured some arteries so that great blood flowed until the woman died amidst her pains.
E vi un autre metge que pres que el traguera una peyra d’un home le qual avia procesit en sa etat, e la peyra era gran, e venguet a lu e trayssec aquela peyra am un tros de la vesiqua, per que aquel home al tertz dia es mort.	And there was another doctor who nearly extracted a stone from a man who had suffered in his state, and the stone was large, and came to him, and he removed that stone with a piece of the bladder, so that that man died on the third day.
E yeu ja apelat fuy a estrayre aquela, e vi que per la grandesa de la peyra e per la disposicio del malaute conogui subre lu que morira.	And I have already called for the stone to be removed, and I saw that because of the size of the stone and the position of the patient over which it lay, he would die.
E vi un autre metge le qual prenia stipendic de un duc de nostra terra per cyrurgia, e endeven a un crastrat negre le qual era deves lu fractura en la coyssa de lu; e perparec le metge am la sua ignorancia, estrayssec la fractura, sobre la plagua, am pulvinas e astelas am forta strectura, e no layssec a la plagua espiracio.	And there was another doctor who took payment from a duke of our land for surgery, and he came upon a black slave who had a fracture in the thigh; and because of the doctor's ignorance, he removed the fracture, over the wound, with pillows and splints of strong structure, and did not allow the wound to breathe.
E aprop le desliet segons los sieus desiriers, e aprop le relieg, e aprop le leyssec per alcus jorns e comandec que nos deslies le liament; e estec ayssi entro que la coyssa e·l pe foro apostematz, e pervenguet a perdicio.	And then the dislocation according to his desires, and then the relevation, and then the release for a few days, and commanding that we release the ligament; and thus remain until the thigh and foot are firmly set, and proceed to our detriment.
E yeu fuy apelat a lu, e aparelhegui a desliar le liament, e conseguida es tranquilitat e enayssi amermet de sas dolors.	And I was called to him, and prepared to dislodge the lithiasis, and peace and attempts to alleviate his pains were achieved.
Mays empero ja corrupcio era confermada en le membre, per que no pogui refrenar aquela, e no cessec perambular la corrupcio en le membre entro que·l malaute peric.	But indeed, when corruption was confirmed in the member, because I could not restrain it, and did not cease to walk the corruption through the member while the patient suffered.
E vi un autre metge le qual perforec un apostema cancros, e fo ulcerat aprop alscus dias, entro que foc magnificada la malicia de lu am lo senhor de lu.	And there was another doctor who incised an oncotic abscess, and it became ulcerated over several days, during which the evil increased greatly in him and affected his lord.
La qual causa es quar le cranc caut es pur de humor melencolic, lahoras no cove que pervengua a lu am ferr de tot, sino que sia an membre le qual suffertes que de tot fos hostat.	The cause is that the wound is purely of melancholic humor, and does not affect the whole body, but rather affects a member that suffers from being attacked by it in its entirety.
E per aquo, filhs, necessari es a vos que la operacio am ma sia devisada en dos devesios: so es en operacio a lu qual es associada salut, e en obra am la qual es perilh en las majors disposicios.	And for this reason, my sons, it is necessary for you that the operation be devised in two ways: one where the operation is associated with health, and another where the work is dangerous in its major dispositions.
E yeu ja he exsitat aquo en tot loc de aquest libre en le qual venc opperacio en la qual es error e temor; per que necessari es a vos que guardetz aquo e layssetz aquel, per que les folhs no atrobo via a parlar e a vos desonestar.	And I have already existed in this entire text where the operation is full of errors and fears; therefore, it is necessary for you to keep this and leave that, so that the leaves do not find a way to speak against you and dishonor you.
E donc prenetz las vostras armas am sollicitut e am proteccio de Dieu , e les vostres malautes am falicitat e am fermetat.	And therefore take your arms with diligence and protection of God, and your patients with happiness and firmness.
E usatz de la milhor via per la gracia de Dieu perdusent a salut e a lausabla successio, e laysatz las malautias terriblas de difficil sanacio, e ostatz las vostras armas de aquo que vos fa temer, per so que ysitatio en vostra fe e en le vostre nom no vos evasisca: quar mays es remanent a la vostra gloria, e pus aut en le mon e en derier a las vostras sanctitatz.	And use the best way by the grace of God seeking salvation and laudable success, and lay aside the terrible illnesses difficult to cure, and place your arms around that which makes you fear, so that sitting in your faith and in your name you are not deceived: for more remains to your glory, and much more in this world and beyond in your sanctity.
Gualia ja diyssec en alcunas sieuas monicios:	Gout has already been dissected in some monastic texts:
“No mediquetz malautia mala, per so que mals metges no siatz nompnatz”.	Do not treat illness with bad medicine, so that bad doctors are not called cured.
E yeu ja he devesit aquest libre segontz tres capitols.	And I have already devoted this treatise according to three chapters.
Comensa la divisio del libre, e primier de la primieyra partida.	Begin the division of the treatise, and first of the first part.
Le primier capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, en las formas dels instrumentz e en les ferrementz dels cauteris, e de aquo que necessari es en la opperacio.	The first chapter ordered of the foot, regarding the forms of the instruments and the tools of the cautery, and what is necessary in the operation.
La divisio de la segonda partida.	The division of the second part.
Le segon capitol, de siccio e perforacio, e de ventosas, e de plaguas, e de extractio de sagetas e de semblantz ad aquelas, tot capitolat e ordenat de las formas dels instrumentz.	The second chapter, on drying and perforation, and on suction cups, and on blisters, and on extraction of arrows and similar, all categorized and ordered by the forms of the instruments.
Divisio de la tersa partida.	The division of the third part.
Le tertz capitol, de restauracio e de dislocacio, e de curacio de torcio e de semblantz ad aquels; capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, e de las formas dels instrumentz.	The third chapter, on restoration and dislocation, and on the cure of sprains and similar; chapter ordered by the head between the feet, and by the forms of the instruments.
De cauteri am foc e am medicina aguda e rememoracio de la opperacio.	On the cautery with fire and with sharp medical instruments and a reminder of the operation.
Am aquel comensa le tractat de tot le libre.	With that, he begins the treatment of the entire book.
Cove que yeu digua la qualitat dels juvamentz de aquel cauteri e dels noccumentz de lu, e en qual compleccio sia prohibit cauteri.	I will now describe the quality of the coals for the cautery and the substances used, as well as in what condition the cautery is prohibited.
Donc dic que·l sermo de la qualitat del juvament de cauteri e del noccument de lu es sermo lonc e prolixs, e subtil per sciensa, e secret amaguat; e ja de lu a parlat gran multitut de savis, e de lu se son desacordatz, et a mi abasta un petit dels sermons de lor, temen perlonguacio.	Therefore, I say that the discourse on the quality of the cautery coal and its substance is long and lengthy, subtle by science, and a hidden secret; much has already been said about it by wise men, and they are in disagreement. For my part, I suffice with a little of their sermons, fearing lengthiness.
E donc dic que cauteri comfereys a tota compleccio universalment la qual es am materia o ses materia, exceptat dos compleccios, las quals son compleccios caudas ses materia .	And therefore say that cautery is applied to all composition universally which is of flesh or sinew, except two compositions, which are compositions of sinew.
En la compleccio cauda e secca am materia se desecordero; quar alcus dyssero que cauteri es juvatiu ad aquela, e les autres dyssero le contrari de aquel, que cauteri no es convenient en malautia la qual es per qualiditat e per siccitat, quar natura del foc es qualiditat e siccitat, e enconvenient es que malautia cauda e secca am aquo que es caut e sec sia sanada.	In the composition of sinew and flesh, it will dry out; for some said that cautery is beneficial for that, while others said the opposite, that cautery is not suitable in illness which is due to quality and dryness, for the nature of fire is quality and dryness, and it is inappropriate that such an illness, being sinew and dry, be cured by that which is cautery and dry.
E diysec aquel que ditz le contrari de aquel, que per cauteri es fayt juvament en tota malautia cauda e secca que ve en les cors dels homes, quar quan tu comparas le cors de home e las humiditatz de lu a la compleccio del foc, atrobas le cors de home freg.	And argue against those who say the opposite, that by cautery one is cured in all sinew and flesh diseases that come in men's bodies, for when you compare man's body to its humors in relation to the composition of fire, you find man's body dry.
E yeu dic per le sermo de aquel, que esperiment aquo ja a mi alscunas vetz a descubert.	And I say according to the speech of that, for I have already experienced this several times.
Mays empero no cove que vengua sobre aquo aquel que ja es exproat e excersitat en le capitol de cauteri per derier exercici, e a conogut la diversitat de la compleccio dels homes e la disposicio de las malautias en lor meteyssas, e las causas de aquelas, e·ls accidentz de lor, e l’espasi del temps de aquelas.	But I do not claim to know everything about this, having already been trained extensively in the Capitol of Cautery through recent exercises, and having come to understand the diversity of human composition and the disposition of diseases in their various forms, as well as the causes of these diseases and the accidents related to them, and the duration of these illnesses.
Mays en las autras compleccios, no es sobre vos temor, e majorment en las malautias fregas e humidas, quar ja totz les metges se son acordatz sobre aquels, e no so desecordatz en le juvament am cauteri en aquelas.	In other complications, there is no need for fear, and particularly in the wet and painful conditions, for all doctors are agreed upon those, and do not disagree in using cautery in them.
E sapiatz, filhs, que del secret de curacio per cauteri am foc e de la bontat de lu, so sobre cauteri am medicina comburent, es quar le foc es simple, la accio del qual no perven sino al membre le qual es cauterizat e no notz al autre membre am lu ajustat sino am petit nocument.	Know, my sons, that the secret of curing by cautery with fire and its goodness lie in the burning medical instrument, for the fire is simple, and its action reaches only the member being cauterized and causes no great harm to other members.
Mays la accio de medicina comburent perven ad aquel en les membres le qual de lu alunhat, e fort leu fa venir en le membre malautia de dificil sanacio e fort leu ausit.	But the action of the burning medical instrument reaches those members that it touches, and strongly brings to the member suffering from a difficult to heal illness and quickly cures it.
Mays le foc, per la sua sublimitat e de la sua substancia bontat, no fa aquo sino que superfluisca E ja es a nos conogut per experiment e per longitut de servitut de studi am l’art sobre le veritat de las causas; e per aquo yeu so excusat de la longitut del sermo E si no fos que no es legut al mieu libre en aquest pausero a vos secret amaguat am le foc, e la qualitat de la operacio de lu en les cors e de la sieua expulcio per la qual expellis las malautias, am sermo philosophic demostratiu, le qual siria acuit en las vostras pessas.	But the fire, by its subtlety and the goodness of its substance, does not cause anything other than to superfluously burn. We are already known for this through experience and long service in studying the art regarding the true causes; and for this reason, I excuse myself for the length of my speech. If it were not that this is not suitable for public discourse and that you do not know the secret about the fire, its quality in operations on bodies and its expulsion by which you expel illnesses, a philosophical demonstration would be appropriate, which would be beneficial to your ears.
E sapiatz, filhs, que els se desacordan del temps en le qual es convenient far cauteri e pausan le milhor temps de primaveyra.	And be wise, sons, that they do not disagree about the time at which it is convenient to make a cautery and when they pause the best time of spring.
E yeu dic que cauteri es convenient en tot temps, per so que le nocument per le temps accident es submergit en le juvament de aquo que am le cauteri es atirat, e majorment si le cauteri es per dolors o de dolors necessaries, fortz e fistinas, las quals no suffertan tarditat per so que es temut de aquelas que vengua malicia, que es major que petit nocument entrant per lo temps.	And I say that a cautery is convenient at all times, because the damage from the accident of time is submerged in the youth of what is cauterized, and especially if the cautery is for pains or necessary pains, strong and fistulas, which do not suffer delay because it is feared that those that come from evil intent are greater than little damage entering through time.
E aysso no catz en vostras pessas, o, filhs, aquo no estiman sino le poble vulguar e les fols metges, so es que ad aquela malautia que es sanada per cauteri no es redicio tot temps, e pausan aquel consequen.	And this is not done on your feet, sons, for they do not consider anything but the common people and the foolish physicians, for at that illness which is cured by cautery it is not convenient all the time, and they pause that consequence.
E la causa no es ges ayssi quo els cuydan per aquo, quar cauteri no es sino en loc de medicina la qual altera la compleccio e esicca las humiditatz las quals son causa per que veno las dolors.	And the reason is not thus because they consider it so, for a cautery is not but in place of a medicine which alters the composition and dries the humors which are the cause of the venous pains.
Mays empero cauteri superflueys sobre la medicina per volicitat de la sua valitut e vertut de la sua operacio e grandesa del sieu senhor.	Yet, however, excessive cautery over medicine for the swiftness of its validity and virtue of its operation and greatness of its lord.
E es possible que la sua malautia retorne en alcuna hora del temps, segon la compleccio del malaute e la locacio de la sua malautia, e la vertut de lu, e aquo que es preparat en le cors de lu de la agreguacio de las superfluitatz en lu, e aquo que es pervengut a lu en la sua acquisicio en viandas e semblantz de aquelas causas; sino que la malautia en la qual sia aministrat cauteri sia malautia subtil en membre de paucas superfluitatz e humiditatz, ayssi cum cauteri de dent per dolor e semblantz ad aquel, possible es que en lu no retorne aquela dolor, mays aquo se fa en petitz.	It is possible that the patient's illness may return at some point in time, depending on the complexity of the illness, its location, the virtue of the person, and what is prepared in the body due to the accumulation of superfluities within it, as well as what is received by acquisition through food and similar causes; but if the illness in which cautery is applied is a subtle illness in a member with few superfluities and humidities, such as a dental cautery for pain and similar conditions, it is possible that that pain will not return, more so when this is done in small amounts.
E mays sermo vulgar es que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, e es sermo dreyturier, no ad aquo que els entendo en lu, quar els crezo que no es curacio que aprofieyta am medicina ni am autra causa aprop cauteri.	It is more common to say that cautery is the last remedy of medicine, and this is the view of surgeons. But as we understand it, I believe it is not a cure that benefits either medicine or any other cause except for cautery.
E la causa es en contrari de aquo; e la entencio que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina no es sino quan administram las manieyras de curacio en alcunas malautias, e aquelas medicinas no conferieysso, e aprop en la fi de la causa aministra hom cauteri, e aprofieyta ad aquela.	And the cause is contrary to this; and I understand that cautery is the last remedy of medicine only when one has administered the methods of cure for some illnesses, and those medicines have not proven effective, and then at the end of the course of treatment, one administers cautery, which benefits it.
E lahoras de aqui cat16 que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, no segon la entencio la qual entendo les vulgars e trops dels fols metges.	And at this point, the last remedy of medicine is the cautery, not according to the understanding which I understand the vulgar and most of the foolish doctors.
E diyssero les antics que cauteri am aur es milhor que cauteri am ferr, e no diyssero aquo sino per la equalitat del aur e sublimitat de la sua sustancia.	And the ancients said that a cautery made of gold is better than one made of iron, and they did not say this only because of the equality of gold and the sublimity of its substance.
E diyssero que le loc de cauteri no fa brac, cum aquo no sia absolutament vertat, quar yeu ja he aquo proat e he atrobat que aquel no fa aquo sino en alcus cors ses les autres, e cauteri am aquel es bo e milhor que am ferr ayssi quo els diyssero; mays empero quan tu fas cauteri am foc am de aur, no es a tu declarat, quar es egnit segon la quantitat que tu vols per la rugor de l’aur, e quar prepara a recebre freg; e si ajustas sobre lu ignicio se fon l’aur per le foc, e caso en le foc alcunas laminas per que le artifex catz per la occupacio de aquel.	And they said that the place for a cautery does not burn, since it is not absolutely heated; for I have already examined this and tested that it does not do so in all bodies as others do. A cautery made of iron is good and better than one made of iron as they say; but when you make a cautery with fire from gold, it is not to you declared, since it ignites according to the quantity you want due to the reactivity of the gold, and prepares to receive heat; and if you adjust over the flame, the gold melts by the fire, and cases in the fire several sheets so that the craftsman can cut through its occupation.
E per aquo es fayt cauteri am ferr deves nos pus leugerament e pus propdanament a rectitut de operacio.	And for this, you should make the cautery of iron lighter and more precisely according to the correct operation.
E yeu ja he ordenat aquest capitol en le cauteri segon capitols, et he ordenat aquels del cap entro les pes, per so que aleugo le demandant aquo que vol de lu.	And I have already arranged this chapter on the cautery according to chapters, and have arranged those of the hip between the feet, so that I delay the asking of him what he wants.
De cauteri de dolor de cap per frigiditat e humiditat.	Of the cautery for head pain due to cold and humidity.
Le capitol primier.	The first chapter.
Aquesta cauterizacio confereys a la humiditat e frigiditat sobre le servel accident de la qual so doas causas, so es causa de soda e multitut de flux raumatic, apelat corissa, del cap a las partidas dels huelhs e de las aurelhas fluent, e multitut de dormir, e de dolor de dentz e del guolayro, e universalment de tota malautia que ve per fregiditat, ayssi cum paraliticament, sodo e apoplexio, e semblantz en aquelas malautias.	This cautery treats cold and humidity over the painful condition of which there are two causes, these being the cause of soda and much traumatic flux, called coryza, from the head to the regions of the nostrils and ears flowing, and much sleepiness, and toothache, and colic, and generally all illness that comes through coldness, thus as paralytically, sodden, and apoplexy, and symptoms in those illnesses.
La forma de aquesta cauterizacio es aquesta, que primieyrament comandes al malaute que sia evacuat am medicina lacsativa le cap mondificant, per tres o per quatre nueytz, segon que exhigeys la vertut del malaute e la edat de lu e la sua costuma.	The form of this cautery is as follows: first, you command the patient to be evacuated with a mild medicine for three or four nights, according to the nature of the illness, the age of the patient, and their habit.
E aprop comanda li que raza le sieu cap am razor, e aprop fay aquel sezer entre las tuas mas sobre una banca cayrada e que pause las suas mas sobre le pietz sieu.	And then command that his head be shaved, and place that shaven area on a slanted bench and place his hands on his feet.
E aprop pausa la razit de la tua palma aprop le pous sobre la razit del nas entre les huels sieus.	And then place the shaved part of your palm on the sole of the foot between his heel and toes.
Mays empero, cum le tieu dit del mieg loc es pervengut, signa aquel loc am tenta, e aprop igneys le cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma:	More over, since the middle part is reached, mark that place with a probe, and then ignite the olive cautery, which has this form:
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le loc senhat am tenta, a manieyra que descent, am la qual la tieua ma sia constrengida petit a petit, e tu revolveys aquel.	And then place that cautery on the marked place with a probe, in such a way that it descends gradually, with your hand being gradually constrained, and you rotate it.
E aprop leva la tua ma leugerament e reguarda le loc, e si veses ja del os esser descubert alcuna quantitat del cap, ayssi cum la quantitat de gra de errs, lahoras eleva la tua ma, e si no torno la tua ma am aquel ferr, am autre de aquel, si es enfrigidat, entro que sia vist del os aquo que yeu he dit a tu.	And then lift your hand slightly and examine the area, and if you see any part of the bone being revealed through a crack, as much as an err (a small piece), then lift your hand. If not, return your hand to that iron, or another one, if it is cooled, so that what I have said can be seen on the bone.
E aprop pren un petit de sal e disolveys aquel sobre le loc e leyssa aquel per tres jorns.	And then take a little of salt, dissolve it in that place, and leave it for three days.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto enbegut en boder e leyssa aquel sobre lu entro que sia destrusida la scara del foc.	And then place over the inguinal hernia, and leave it there until the scar of the burn is destroyed.
E aprop cura le loc am anguent tetrafarmacon entro que sia sanat.	And then cure the place with an ointment of tetrapharmcum until it is healed.
E ja diyssero que quant la plagua roman uberta, tant mielhs geta le brac, per que es milhor e mays juvatiu.	And we have already said that when the wound is opened, it heals better with bread, because it is better and more nourishing.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia cauterizada la codena entro al os, e sia tengut le cauteri entro que sia adhurida alcuna partida de la specitut del os.	And some of them say that the condyle should be cauterized within the bone, and that the cautery should be left in until a part of the bone's surface is burned.
E aprop sia ras aquo que es adhust del os, e aprop sia curat.	And then scrape what is burned of the bone, and then cure it.
E diyssero autres que am lo cauteri pervengua al derier, entro que enprema en le os forta enprecio entro que le os caga, e aquesta es la forma de alphecati petit:	And others say that the cautery should reach the marrow, pressing forcefully into the bone until it cools, and this is the method of Alphécat.
E estiman de aquel loc expiran la vapors del cap.	And they estimate from that place exhale the vapors of the head.
E sia tenguda la plagua uberta per lonc temps, e aprop sia curada entro que sia consolidada.	And let the wound remain open for a long time, and then treat it so that it heals properly.
Mays a mi no so vistas aquestas doas specias de cauteri de tot, sino en alcus homes segon via de temor; e layssa aquel, deves mi, milhor es am salut, quan es; quar le cap es develitat per solucio de continuitat de lu ayssi cum havem testificat en les autres membres, e majorment quan le cap del malaute es de freul natura.	But I have not seen these two kinds of cautery for all, only in some men according to a fear-based method; and leave that one, I advise you, it is better for health when it is; for the head is heated by solution of continuity of the sun as we have testified in other members, especially when the head of the patient is of cold nature.
E la specia de cauteri primieyra es mays salva e milhor deves mi; e de aquela husi e am aquela obra am salut.	And the first kind of cautery is safer and better, I advise you; use that one and do that for health.
Capitol segon.	Capitulate second.
Del cauteri del cap.	Of the cautery for the head.
Quan en tot le cap accideys dolor cronica e longua e aquo es en le malaute prolonguat, e usa de gerras e de cochias e de capipurges e de emplaustres e de guatz e de cadels e de gualinas e de semblantz, e majorment si ja es cauterizat am un cautere le qual recontam e no aprofieyta a lu deguna de aquelas causas, lahoras considera quar si le cap del malaute es de fort creacio en la sua natura; e no es freul et atroba mot gran freg, lahoras aquel cauterisa am autra cauteri dejos aquel un pauc.	When the head experiences chronic and long-lasting pain that is prolonged in the patient, and uses cloths, seeds, fumigations, plasters, poultices, dogs' bile, oils, and balms, and especially if the head has already been cauterized with a cautery that does not improve it due to any of these causes, then consider whether the head of the patient is of strong constitution in its nature; and if there is no great cold or heat, then this cautery is ineffective. In such cases, leave the previous cautery and use another one slightly different.
E aprop cauterisa aquel sobre le corn del sieu cap am cauteri entro que la codena es partida.	And then cauterize that area on the corner of his head with a cautery between where the vein is divided.
Incisa la codena e sia descuberta del os la quantitat la qual havem recontat e cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en la partida deriera del cap en le loc le qual es apelat vas, — e es aquel loc en le qual es pausada ventosa.	Incise the vein and the quantity of the opening in the mouth as we have counted, and cauterize that area with a cautery at the back part of the head in the place which is called vas, — and this is the place where the suction cup is placed.
Et alleuja la tua ma en aysso, e no descobras le os, quar le malaute per aquo atroba mot gran dolor diversa de la dolor de totz les autres cauteris del cap.	And lift your hand here, but do not uncover the mouth, for the patient finds great pain from this different from the pain of all other head cautery treatments.
E yeu diyre aquest cauteri en son loc, quar cove que·l cauteri am le qual so cauterisatz les corns del cap e le occiput es pus subtil cauteri que aquel am le qual es cauterisat le mieg loc del cap; e aquesta es la forma de lu.	And I will describe this cautery in its place, for I know that the cautery with which you cauterize the corners of the head and the occiput is finer than that with which the middle part of the head is cauterized; and this is the form of it.
Capitol ters.	Head, top.
De cauterisacio de emigranea no-antiqua.	On the cautery treatment for new migraine.
Quan endeve en la partida del cap dolor sodo, o es stenduda dolor entro al uelh, sia evacuat am medicinas le cap mondificantz, e sia aministrada l’autra curacio, la qual yeu he dita en las devesios de las malautias; e tot no aprofieyta, lahoras cauterisacio en lu es en dos manieyras: o cauterisacio am medicina acuta comburent, o am ferr.	When there is a sharp pain in the back of the head or a dull pain between the eyes, the head should be treated with medicines that penetrate it, and the other treatment should be administered, which I have described in the sections on diseases; and if this is not effective, then cautery can be performed in two ways: with a cauterizing acute medicinal substance, or with iron.
Mays cauteri am medicina comburent es que tu prenguas una dolsa de alh, e escorgas aquela e abcindas las extremitatz de lu de amdos les caps.	More cautery in medicine burns when you take a piece of aloes, incinerate it, and cut the extremities of both its ends.
E aprop incideys le loc de la dolor en la templa am una lanceta lada entro que sia en lu feyt loc dejos la codena, entro que sia occultada.	Then locate the place of the pain in the temple with a lancet laid gently there, and let the needle be hidden within.
E aprop strenh sobre lu am stopada per descent constreccio, e layssa aquel per le spazi de tres horas; e aprop deslia le e tratz le alh, e laysa la plagua per dos o per tres jorn, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto submergit en boder entro que le loc fassa brac.	Then strengthen the place stopped by descending compression, and let it be for the space of three hours; then remove and cut the aloes, and leave the wound for two or three days, and place your hand over it submerge in water until the place dries.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Then cure that wound while it is still warm.
E si tu voys, fe aquo am alcunas medicinas comburentz las quals yeu he scriutas en le douse tractat de medicinas comburentz.	And if you wish, do what with some burning medicines which I have written in the second treatise of burning medicines.
Mays la cauterisacio am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: igneys per cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	More on the cautery method: Heat it with fire, and this is its form:
e es apelat claus clavilhs, quar le cap de lu es ayssi cum forma de clavel en le qual es alcuna curvitat, e·n le mieg loc de lu es eminensia petita.	and it is called a keyhole cautery, for the head of it has the form of a keyhole, in which there is some curvature, and in the middle part there is a small projection.
E aprop pausa sobre loc de la dolor, e rete la tua ma — per que no sia adhurida la arceria la qual es dejos — e revol le ferr petit a petit am velocitat.	And then place your hand over the location of the pain, so that the artery which is left is not adhered, and turn the small iron bit gradually and quickly.
E si la quantitat de lu que es adhurida per la specitut de la codena ayssi quo la maytat de lu, e elava la tua ma per so que la arteria no sia adhurida la qual es dejos, per so que no vengua flux de sanc.	And if the quantity that is adhered by the cut of the tendon is as great as its size, and raise your hand so that the artery which is left is not adhered, so that there be no flow of blood.
E aprop enbibeys coto en aygua de sal e pausa aquel sobre le loc, e layssa aquel per tres dias; e aprop pausa coto mulhat am boder, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then immerse it in salt water and place it over the area, leaving it for three days. Then place it over a warm cloth, and cure it with ointment until it is healed.
E si voys, cauterisa am la extremitat del cutellari segon cauteri, e guarda te de incisio de arteria en aquesta emigranea propriament no-antiqua.	And if you do, cauterize at the tip of the scalpel according to the cautery, and guard against incision of the artery in this new migrainelike condition.
Capitol quart.	Capitol quarter.
De cauterizacio d’emigranea antiqua.	On the cautery for ancient migrainelike condition.
Quan tu curas emigranea am aquo que havem dit de la curacio precedent, e aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias, e no aprofieyta la curacio, e vezes per la malautia que no abasta a lu aquo que havem dit del primier cauteri am medicina o del cauteri am foc, lahoras cove que tu igniscas le cauteri cutellar entro que sia albificat, pus que significas sobre le loc de la dolor am linha de longuesa de la qual sia la maytat del dit, o quays aquel; e depausa la tua ma per una veguada e strenh aquela entro incidiscas la arceria e pervengua entro al os.	When you cure migrainelike condition as we have said in the previous cure, and as we have said in the divisions of diseases, and if the cure does not improve, and times come when the disease is beyond what we have said about the first cautery with medicine or the cautery with fire, then you should ignite the surgical cautery while it is white-hot. Place the tip over the location of the pain for the length of the diameter of the said area, or mark that spot; then remove your hand after a moment and strongly apply heat to avoid incision and penetrate into the bone.
Empero necessari es a tu que guardes de la continuacio de la mandibula, la qual es mauguda deves la masticacio, e que le lacert no sia adhurit e le nervi le qual mau aquela, e que no s’endevengua espasme.	But you must guard against the continuity of the jawbone, which is used for chewing, and ensure that the cartilage is not adhered and the nerves, which supply it, are not affected, and that no spasm occurs.
E si es sobre la custodia e cautela de flux de sanc de l’arteria que es abciza, quar en la abcizio de lu es temor, e majorment ad aquel le qual ignora aquo que fa e no es studios e esproat; e layssa la operacio en lu al comensament.	And if it is concerning the care and caution of the flow of blood in the artery that is amputated, for in its amputation there is fear, especially to those who ignore what they do and are not diligent; and leaves the operation at its beginning.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio del regiment de flux de sanc accident de la arceria segon la sieua manieyra, en le sieu loc de aquest libre.	And I will return to the regulation of blood flow in the arterial accident according to its manner, in this place of this treatise.
E si veses de aquesta malautia que no abaste aquest cauteri e veses le cors del malaute tollerable, cauteriza aquel en le mieg loc del cap ayssi cum havem recontat, e cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And if you see in this illness that this cautery does not suffice and you find the patient's condition tolerable, cauterize it in the middle of the foot as we have recounted, and cure the wound while it is healing.
E si voys, aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le capitol de streccio de arceria am cauteri havent dos cotels, e es milhor cauterizacio aquesta e mays conferent.	And if you see, administer the cautery which we have said in the chapter on strengthening the artery with a cautery, using two knives. This cautery is better and more effective.
Capitol .v.	Chapter V.
De cauterisacio de las dolors de aurelhas.	Of the application of cautery for ear pains.
Quan en la aurelha ve dolor per freg e es curat am causas lacsativas e am l’autra curacio la qual he dita en la divisio, e no es remauguda la dolor, lahoras igneys le cauteri, e es aquest le qual ha nom puncta, del qual aquesta es la forma:	When there is pain in the ear due to inflammation and has been treated with other curative methods as described in the division, and the pain does not subside, apply the cautery, which is called puncta. This is its form:
E aprop puncta aprop la ignicio, e sia menat al enviro de tota la aurelha ayssi cum roda es revolguda, o en le circuit de quascuna essemps si la dolor es en quascuna.	Then apply the puncta near the beginning, and it should be placed around the entire ear as if it were rotated, or in the circumference of any part where the pain is located.
Alonga te am le cauteri de la razit de la aurelha pauc a pauc pus que aias senhat le loc am tenta.	Slowly extend the cautery along the edge of the ear gradually after you have confirmed the location.
E si le cauteri de detz puntz en tota aurelha, e quays aquela, e aprop cura les locz entro que sian sanatz.	And if the cautery of these points on the entire ear is applied and then removed, and subsequently treat the areas between until they are healed.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter VI.
De cauterizacio de turtura.	Of the cautery for tetanus.
Turtura la qual es curada e am cauterizacio no es sino de las specias las quals veno per flecma, segon que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias.	Turtura the quality of which is cured and seared through no other means than the species of phlegm that the vein carries, as we have said in the divisions of diseases.
Esquiva cauterizacio de la specia que endeve per siccacio o per spasme del nervi.	Avoid cauterization of the species that flows due to drying or spasms of the nerve.
Quan tu curas aquela specia de turtura am jerras e capipurgi e guarguarismes, e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas le malaute am tres cauteris: la i deves la razit de la aurelha, e·l segon un petit dejos le sieu templar, e le ters deves la conjunccio de doas labias.	When you cure that species of turtura by bleeding, capi-purgation, and guaragism, and if you do not agree with your cure, then you must cauterize the disease with three cauteries: the first at the root of the ear, the second a small distance from its temple, and the third at the junction of two lips.
E pausa lo tieu cauteri per le contrari de la partida malauta, quar mollificacio no ve sino en la partida que apar sana.	And place your cautery opposite the site of the disease, for softening occurs only at the site that appears healthy.
E la forma de cauterisacio es que cauterizas aquel am le cauteri en le dreyt de la extremitat de la aurelha pus sobirana un petit sobre le corn del cap, e en le templar autre, la longuesa del qual sia segon la longitut del dit pous, e depausa la tua ma am cauteri entro que sia comburida la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena.	And the method of cauterization is to apply the cautery along the outer part of the ear just above a small point on the top of the head, and another on the temple, the length of which should be according to the length of the thumb. Then place your hand over the cautery until the quantity of the species of the conda is burned.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri, e es specia del cutellari, la forma del qual es denant mesa.	And this is the form of the cautery, and it is special to the barber-surgeon, the form of which is shown in front of us.
Mays empero pus subtil es que aquel un pauc ayssi co vesas; e cove que cotel en lu de superflua groceza un pauc.	But more subtle is that one sees it only slightly; and one cuts with a knife to remove a slight excess.
E aprop cura le loc am aquo que es denant procezit entro que sia sanat.	And then cure the place where it is shown after it has been treated until it is healed.
Capitol .vii.	Capitol. vii.
De cauterizacio de apoplextia antiqua.	On the cautery treatment for old apoplexy.
Quan apoplextia es antiquada e curas aquela am aquo que havem dit e no confereys la tua medicacio e le malaute no ha febre, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris: sobre totz les corn del sieu cap; e am cauteri e le mieg loc del cap, ayssi cum havem dit; e am cauteri en le coguot.	When apoplexy is old and you have treated it as we said, and the patient does not have fever, then cautery treat the area with four cauteries: especially on all the corners of his head; and with one cautery in the middle of the head, as we said; and with a cautery in the groin.
E la manieyra del cauteri es fayta segon que es desus dit.	And the method of the cautery is made according to what was said above.
E ja es cauterizat sobre la boca del estomac; e es mays derier; e aprop sia curat am aquo que procezeys.	And the cautery has already been applied to the mouth of the stomach; it is more posterior; and then it is treated as you proceed.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter VIII.
De cauterizacio de obblivio fayta per flacma.	Cauterization of oblivion performed by flame.
Cove que sian donatz al malaute en le comensament jerras grans e pilulas le servel mondificantz.	Cover that they be given to the patient at the beginning large jars and pills of the powdery substance.
E aprop ras le cap tot del malaute e pausa sus le coguot de lu emplaustre de cetre descrit en le tractat dels emplastres.	Then place your hand on the head of the patient and position it over the heart as described in the treatise on plasters.
E pausa aquel alcunas veguadas, quar aquel es manieyra de cauteri.	Then hold it there for several minutes, as this is the method of cautery.
E fay aquo segon aquel meteys orde le qual ja he dit.	Do so according to that method and order as I have already said.
E donc si per aqueles sanat bo es; e sino, lahoras fay a lu tres cauteris en la deriera partida de sieu cap, les quals sian deysendentz de la partida pus sobirana del cap entro a la partida pus dejos del col.	And so if by those good remedies it does not improve; otherwise, then make three cautery marks on the rear part of his head, which should be descending from the upper part of the head to the lower part of the neck.
E pausa entre quascun cauteri la grossetut del dit, e aprop cura lo cauteri am aquo que es procedit.	Hold your hand for the thickness of a finger between each cautery, and then proceed to treat the cautery mark.
Mays si tu vos addicio e le malaute es aquo tollerant, lahoras fay a lu cauteri en le mieg loc; e si voys major addicio, lahora cauteriza aquel sobre les dos corns.	And if you add more to the patient and it is tolerable, then do a cautery in the middle location; and if you add a greater amount, then cauterize that area above the two horns.
Aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat; e sia le cauteri olivar segon la forma denant donat.	Then cure that which is inside until it is healed; and let the cautery be olive-shaped as given in the form above.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter 9.
De cauterisacio de parazili e de mollificacio de tot le cors.	On the cautery for parazilium and the mollification of the entire body.
Cove que tu procesiscas en mondificacio del cap am jerras e am aquo que havem dit; e aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap, e am cauteri sobre totz les corns del cap, e am cauteri sobre la deriera partida de lu, e am tres cauteris sobre les spondils del col.	Cover that you proceed in mollification of the head with jellies and as we have said; then place your hand near the patient's head, and then cauterize that with a cautery in the middle of the head, and with a cautery on all its horns, and with a cautery on the back part of it, and with three cauteries on the vertebrae of the neck.
E si es necessari en la malautia de mollificacio del cors de trops aquel e les malautes tollerantz e la malautia es fort, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e dererament am cauteri entro que sia comborit de la codena mot de lu, e aleva la tieua ma.	And if it is necessary in the disease of mollification of the body to apply more cauteries and the diseases are tolerable and the disease is strong, then cauterize that with four cauteries on the vertebrae of the back, and behind that with a cautery where the backbone ends, and raise your hand.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat, e aquest sia cauteri olivar.	And then cure that which is inside so that it is healed, and this be done with an olive cautery.
Capitol .x.	Capitol.
De cauterisacio de epilemcia.	Of the cautery treatment for epilepsy.
No es cauterizat le epilemtic sino aquella epilemcia es per flecma.	The epileptic is not cauterized, but only if the epilepsy is caused by phlegm.
E donc cove que mondifiques le cervel de lu al comensament de lu am yeras e am l’autra curacio la qual havem dicta en la divisio quan le malaute es gran e es tollerant la exceperacio de las medicinas.	And therefore make sure to modify the brain at its beginning, on both sides, and the other treatment which we have described in the division when the patient is large and tolerates the exclusion of medicines.
E si es enfant le qual no sufferte las medicinas, lahoras aministra guarguarissmes e mastiguatoris le servel mondifican, denant aquo per motz dias, am bonifficacio de las viandas.	And if it is a child who does not tolerate the medicines, then administer garglers and chewable remedies to the servant, before this for several days, with improvement of the food.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en le mieg loc del cap segon la manieyra precedent, e am autre cauteri en le occiput de lu, e sobre quascun corn del cap sieu cauterisa.	And then place the head of the patient in a convenient position, and cauterize that area with a cautery in the middle of the head according to the previous method, and another cautery at the back of the head, and over each corner of the head, cauterize accordingly.
E si le malaute es fort e es tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteris les quals he ditz, en havent paraliticament e mollificacio del cors sobre les spondils del col e les spondils del dos.	And if the pain is strong and tolerable, then cauterize those points as mentioned, while keeping paralysis and softening of the body over the vertebrae of the neck and the vertebrae of the back.
E sia cauteri olivar segon qu’es precedit.	And use an olive cautery as described.
Mays si le malaute es enfant, lahoras pausa cauteri subtil segon aquesta manieyra.	And if the pain is in a child, then use a fine cautery according to this method.
Capitol .xi.	Capitol. xi.
De cauterizacio de melencolia.	On the cauterization for melancholy.
Quan las causas de melencolia so humiditatz corrompudas e flacma gros, lahoras cauteriza aquel am les cauteris les quals havem ditz en le havent paralisi.	When the causes of melancholy are damp and gross flame, then cauterize those points using the cauteries we have mentioned while keeping paralysis.
E si la causa de melencolia es superfluitat declinant a melencolia, e le cors del malaute es humit, lahoras da ha beure aquo que mundifica le cervel de lu segon aquo que ha precedut en la divisio.	And if the cause of melancholy is excess moisture declining into melancholy, and the body of the patient is humid, then give him to drink what purifies his brain according to what was mentioned in the division.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop fay tortora decentment fayta de li sobre le cercle, e aprop depausa aquela en le mieg loc del cap.	And place your hand on the head of the patient, and properly make a ring from it over the circle, and then place that in the middle of the head.
E le malaute sia sesent cayrat, e sia tengut de tota partida.	And if the patient is senseless and held from all sides.
E aprop pausa liniment; et es pus digne de boder antic de ovelhas.	And then apply a liniment; it is more worthy to be used as a salve for sheep.
E escalfa aquel sobre le foc per calefaccio temprada per mesura, le qual le dit sufferta quan es mes en lu.	And heat it over the fire for moderate warming, which the patient suffers when more is applied.
E aprop vuo’ aquel en le mieg loc del cap de lu en le cercle, e leysa lu entro que sia enfregidat.	And then place it in the middle of the head in the circle, and let him remain until it is rubbed.
E fay aquo am le malaute en tota semmana una veguada, am le autre regiment de lu bo entro que sia sanat; o si vols, cauteriza aquel fazen petitz puntz segon lo mays de lu, sino que tenguas la ma am un cauteri ayssi ordenat: aquesta es specia de cauteri la qual humecta le cervel am equalitat.	And do this for the patient once a week. Use the other regimen until it is healed; or if you wish, cauterize it by making small points according to its size. Otherwise, keep your hand on a similarly ordered cautery: this is a type of cautery which moistens the brain in equal measure.
E aprop pausa aquel coto enbegut en boder o en grays de gualina.	And then place that cloth soaked in salve or in oil of linen.
Capitol .xii.	Capitol.xii.
De cauterisacio de aygua descendent en le huel.	On the cauterization with water flowing down the heel.
Quan a tu es declarat le comensament de aygua en le huel per les senhals les quals yeu he ditz en la divisio, lahoras comensa e dona en beure al malaute aquo que mondifique le cap de lu, e guarda aquel de totas humiditatz.	When it has been declared to you the beginning of water in the belly by the signs which I have said in the division, then begin and give to drink to the patient what modifies his head, and keep the other free from all moisture.
E fay aquel suzar en banh en degu per alcus jorns.	And make that decoction in water for some days.
E aprop comanda a lu que raza le sieu cap, e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap; e aprop cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre dos templas si es le comensament de ysement de aygua en dos huels, o de la un latz si es comensamen de l’aygua en un huel.	And then command him to rub his head, and cautery that place with a cautery in the middle of the head; and then cautery that place with two cauteries on the temples if it is the beginning of ysement of water in two bellies, or on one temple if it is the beginning of water in one belly.
Incideys am cauteri totas las venas e arcerias las quals so dejos la codena; e sian les cauteris en aquela lonh en la latitut de las templas.	Cauterize all the veins and arteries which you leave uncauterized; and let the cautery be in that far place in the width of the temples.
E guarda te de fluxs de sanc quan es cauterizat; e si veses de lu fluxs de sanc, osta le am alcuna medicina, la qual es a tu possible.	And keep away from fluxes of blood when it is cauterized; and if you see fluxes of blood, stop with some medicine, which is in your power.
E yeu vindre am savieza la qual es en extraccio de arcerias e am abscizio de aquelas e cautela de fluxs de sanc.	And I will come with wisdom which is in the extraction of arteries and in the cutting of those and caution about flows of blood.
E alcunas vetz es cauterizat en le cervitz dejos dos osses am dos cauteris dererament produzitz.	And sometimes it is cautery applied to the neck with two bones heatedly produced.
Capitol .xiii.	Capitol. XIII.
De cauterizacio de lacrimas antiquas.	Of the cautery for ancient tears.
Quan lacrimas dels huels so antiquas assuduament e per las venas e arterias las quals so en le loc manifest del cap defora e es verificat que aquo es superfluitatz frejas flecmatiquas, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri le qual havem recontat en le capitol de comensament de aygua cazent en les huels, e am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos templas, e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos osses.	When tears from the feet are ancient and frequently occur through the veins and arteries which are in the obvious place on the head, it is verified that these are superfluous phlegmatic fluids. Then cautery the area with a cautery as we have recounted in the Capitol of the beginning of running water in the feet, and with a cautery in the middle of the head, and with two cauteries on the neck placing two temples, and with two cauteries on the neck placing two bones.
E si indigeyses de addicio, lahoras cauteriza aquel en tot latz de la coa del huel sobre la extremitat del sobrecilh am petit cauteri.	And if there is an addition of inflammation, then cautery the area entirely along the length of the foot on the outer edge of the eyebrow with a small cautery.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter XIV.
De cauterizacio de fetor de nas.	Of the cautery for the foulness of the nose.
Quan tu medicas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no aprofieyta la tua medicacio, lahoras tu aparelha e dona en beure al malaute las cochias per tres noytz; e aprop ras le cap de lu, e cauteriza le am cauteri migier am cauteri olivar.	When your treatment for the foulness of the nose does not improve, and you prepare and give the patient to drink castor oil for three nights; then rub his head, and cautery him with a cautery made from half olive wood and half iron.
E aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri clavelh am dos cauteris sobre les dos sobrecilhs dejos les cabels un petit.	Then cautery that area with a cautery made from carnation wood, using two cauteries on both supraorbital regions, leaving the hair slightly.
E guarda te de la arceria que no incindas aquela.	And beware that you do not burn too much of it.
E del cauteri clavilh aquesta es la forma.	And the form of the carnation wood cautery is this.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter XV.
De cauteri de mollificacio de palpebras dels huels.	Of the cautery for the softening of the eyelids in infants.
Quan la palpebra del huel es mollificada per malautia o per humiditat, lahoras cauteriza aquela palpebre1 am un cauteri am aquest cauteri lunar; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When the eyelid of the infant is softened due to illness or humidity, then cautery that eyelid with a cautery made from this lunar cautery; and this is its form:
E si vos, cauteriza aquel sobre les dos sobrecils un petit am dos cauteris en tota partida, e sian elonguatz de las timporas.	And if you, cauterize that over the two temples a little with two cauteries in all parts, and let them be long from the temples.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la quantitat del sobrecil.	And let the length of each cautery be according to the size of the temple.
E no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri, mays segon la quantitat que la tersa partida de la palpebre sia adhurida.	And do not press too much with your hand on the cautery, but according to the amount that the outer part of the eyelid is touched.
Capitol .xvi.	Capitol. XVI.
De cauteri de la palpebre del huel quan les pels so convertitz a las partidas dedintz e punho le huel.	Of the cautery of the eyelid when the skin is converted to parts inside and around the eye.
Quan les pels del huel son convertitz a las partidas dedintz ayssi que pungo le huel, cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, quar cauteri o es am fer o es am medicina comburent.	When the skin of the eyelid is converted to parts inside, I must prick the eyelid, cauterize it in those areas according to two methods: either by cauterizing or by applying a burning medicine.
Si am cauteri de lu am foc, comanda al malaute denant aquo que leyse les sieus pels ayssi cum aquels les quals les mundan, entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz; e si punho aquel deves le lor naysement, lahoras tu strenh les huels de lu am una benda per so que no sia maugut entro que·ls pels sian nascutz.	If you cauterize with fire, command the patient before doing it to expose their skin as they do when they bathe, keeping them long and equal; and if you prick there, you should strengthen the eyelids with a bandage so that they are not damaged until the skin is grown back.
Donc cum siran nascutz e engualhatz, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop senha sobre la palpebre dels huels de lu am tenta, am senhal le qual sia segon la figura de fulha de merta, e sia le comensament del senhal prop dels pels.	When they are born and equalized, then place the head of the patient on your thigh, and over the eyelids of the patient gently spread, in the form of an olive leaf, a mark which is the beginning of the sign of the skin.
E aprop pausa coto enbegut en album de huou o en mucillatge de ptilli sobre le huel.	And then place a clot in the bile or mucus of the eye.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu.	And then heat the cautery, which is in the form of this.
E aprop cauteriza sobre la figura la qual as senhada, petit a petit, em motas veguadas, entro que sia comburida la superficia de la codena la qual es ayssi cum fuelha de mirta, tota aparent propriament.	And then cauterize over the figure which is marked, little by little with small rotations, until the surface of the wound is burned, which appears like a leaf of laurel entirely.
E senhal de sanetat de la tieua obra es que tu vegus la palpebre de l’huel ja esser contrayta e·ls pels de lu esser elevatz deves la punctura del huel.	And the sign of the healing from your work is that you see the eyelid of the eye already contracted and the skin around it elevated after the puncture of the eye.
E donc eleva la tua ma e laysa aquel per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eredicada la scara.	And then lift your hand and leave it there for three days, and place the clot between the eyelids until the scar is healed.
E aprop cura aquela am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And after cure that ointment inside which is healed.
Mays si retorna per les pels alcuna causa aprop lor naysement e la palpebra es mollificada, lahoras fay autra vetz le cauteri sobre aquel tot ayssi cum avias fayt primieyrament.	And if it returns through the skin for some cause near their origin and the eyelid is softened, then make another time the cautery over that area as you have done first.
Mays si les pels so en la palpebra dejos, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que sia elevada al sieu loc natural e sia engualhat e que les pels no punhan le huelh.	And if the skin is on the eyelid, then cauterize it inside until it is elevated to its natural place and equalized, so that the skin does not heal unevenly.
Mays le cauteri am medicina comburent aquest es que comandes al malaute que leyse les pels entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz, e aprop sia fayta de carta de drap la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	And the cautery with medicinal burning substance that you command the patient to apply on the skin until it is prolonged and equalized, then make of paper cloth the shape of a hawthorn leaf.
E aprop pren de sabo conogut e de caus viva ana unc. i, o quays aquo, e aprop mescle3 aquelas causas be, e fay aquo am festinacio per so que no sia enfregidat; e aprop expandeys de aquo sobre la carta la qual es fayta ayssi cum forma de fulha de mirtra, e pausa aquel sobre la un huel od amdos; e pausa dejos le huel coto enbegut en album de huou, e el cap del malaute sia en le tieu se.	And after, take a known soap and fresh fat. Mix these fats well, then apply this mixture gradually without rubbing it; spread this mixture over the paper cloth which is made thus in the shape of a hawthorn leaf, and place that on one side or both; let the patient hold that with a clean hand or hands, and their head be in a raised position.
E pausa le dit sobre le medicina e prem aquela un petit e no la mauguas entro que lo malaute senta la mordicacio de la medicina, quar mordicacio es en lu ayssi cum de foc.	And place it on the medicine and press it slightly but do not wet it in such a way that the patient feels the bite of the medicine, for the bite is like that of fire.
E donc cum percevera aquo que el atrobo mordicacio, lahoras leyssa la medicina e mau aquela am le tieu dit; donc cum cessa la mordicacio, lahoras remau la medicina he lava le huel am aygua; e lahoras considera si vezes la palpebra ja es levada ayssi cum es lavada deves la costriccio am foc o am incisio, quar lahoras esta be; e si no torna sobre aquela de la medicina sobre le loc en le qual no ha empremut la medicina e no se denigra entro que sia engualhada la tua operacio e sia contrayt le huel.	And so, to perceive how the atrophy bites, when you leave the medicine and wet that as you said; therefore, when the biting ceases, place the medicine and wash it well with water; then consider if the eyelid has already been raised; if it is washed like this, you should apply heat or incision, for then it is good; and if not, return to the place of the medicine where it did not press and do not deface your operation by making it equal.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eradicada la codena de la adhustio, e aprop cura aquel am enguent deafinicon o am autre entro que sia sanat.	And then place it on the edge of the cut so that the bond of adhesion is eradicated, and then cure that with an ointment or something else so that it heals.
E es necessari a tu, deves la tua operacio que guardes am pervigil diligencia que en le huel no caia re de la medicina, e si la palpebre aprop alscus dias es mollificada e alcuna causa dels pels punh en le huel, lahoras itera la tua medicina sobre aquel loc le qual de la palpebre es mollificat, e propriamen ayssi quo as fayt al comensament, e aprop enaviro lu entro que sia sanat.	And you must ensure that your operation is conducted with diligent vigilance so that the wound does not become infected by the medicine. If the eyelid becomes slightly softened or some of the hair falls out in the wound after a few days, then reapply your medicine to that area where the eyelid has softened, and do so in the same manner as at the beginning, and keep it under observation until it heals.
E aquesta es la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	And this is the form of the leaf of hawthorn.
E sapias que les huels dels homes son diversificatz segon la magnitut e la parvitat, e donc segon aquo es fayta la tua contraccio.	And you should know that the humours of men are diverse according to their size and smallness, and therefore according to this your contraction is made.
E no sira amaguada la via de rectetut ad aquel al qual es studi en aquesta art.	And the way of straightening should not be hidden from those who study in this art.
Capitol .xvii.	Capitol. xvii.
De cauterizacio de fistula que es en le lacrimal de l’huel.	On the cautery treatment for a fistula in the humerus.
Quan tu curas fistula am aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquela segon aquesta manieyra: comanda al malaute que pause le cap sieu en le tieu se, e tengua le cap de lu alcun ministre entre las tieuas mas en tal manieyra que no sia maugut ni agitat am le sieu cap.	When you treat a fistula as we have said in the divisions of the maladies and do not refer to our treatment, then when you cauterize it according to this manner: command the patient to place his head in the boiling water, and hold his head with some minister between the hot vessels in such a way that it is neither burned nor agitated on his head.
E aprop pausa coto enfus en album de huou o en mucellage de ptilli sobre le huel de lu.	And then place something warm in the albuminous fluid or in the mucus of the eyelid over the head.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then heat the cautery of which this is the form:
le qual sia conquau, ayssi cum es forma de cana o de pena de voltor, de la una extremitat am la qual es fayta lo cauteri.	which is convex, as in the shape of a cane or a turning pen, from one end of which the cautery is made.
E si voys, sia penetrant entro a la autra extremitat.	And if it goes, penetrate into the other end.
E si vols sia sort ayssi cum tenta.	And if you want it to come out as it tries.
Mays empero aquel que es concau es milhor a la tieua obra.	But however, that which is concave is better for your work.
E aprop prem la fistula si es uberta, e tra de lu sania et exsicca aquela.	And then press the fistula if it is open, and clean and dry it out.
E si no es uberta, lahoras obre aquela e extratz la poyredura de lu.	And if it is not open, then open it and extract the pus from it.
E aprop pausa sobre lu le cauteri le qual sia be ignit, e te am aquel la tieua ma un petit deves le cauteri del huel a la partida del nas, per so que no erre la tua ma o le malaute sia enquietat, e lahoras pausa le cauteri en le grays del huel e corrompas aquel.	And then place the hot cautery on it, and with your hand hold the cautery at the base of the nose a little, so that your hand does not err or the patient move, and then place the cautery in the nostrils and destroy that.
E donc si al comensament del tieu cauteri perve entro al os, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera le cauteri una veguada o dos, si mestiers era; e layssa aquel ayssi per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre aquel coto am boder e enviro lu am enguent exsiccatiu entro que sia sanat.	And therefore if at the beginning of your cautery it enters into the wound, that is good; but otherwise, then iterate the cautery one or two times, as needed; and leave it thus for three days, and afterwards place your hand over that spot and apply an ointment to dry it until it heals.
Mays si eran passatz xi dias e no es sanat, lahoras pausa sobre lu medicina aguda corrosiva entro que l’os sia descubert e sia ras segon que conveneys en le sieu capitol.	And if it has passed eleven days and it is not healed, then place the sharp corrosive medicine over it until the bone is uncovered and is scraped as you see fit in your chapter.
E es autra manieyra de cauteri de fistula la qual alscus primiers diysero: enten al loc de la fistula e fen aquela e aprop pausa en aquela fissura camaen subtil del qual es la forma de lu: E fon en aquela la quantitat de i unc de plom fundut; e te la tua ma am camaem am bona retencio, e no sia maugut le malaute per so que le plom fundut no pervengua al huel de aquel; e cove que pausas sobre le huel del malaute coto enfus en album de huou o en aygua, quar plom adhureys le loc de la fistula e sana aquela per sanacio meravilhora.	And another way of cauterizing a fistula that some first may say: Identify the location of the fistula and do this there; then place your hand there with good retention, so that the bad humor does not enter as the melted lead does not penetrate to that part; and cover it over the opening of the bad humor until it is covered in honey or water, for the lead adheres to the location of the fistula and heals it through marvelous healing.
E si la fistula es sanada am aquo que havem dit del cauteri e de la curacio, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari aministrar trauc del nas e reduzir la fistula al cors del nas segon que vindra en son loc propri.	And if the fistula is healed as we have said of the cautery and healing, that is good; but otherwise, it is necessary to administer drops into the nose and reduce the fistula to the nasal cavity according to its proper place.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter XVIII.
De cauterizacio de la fendedura des potz.	Of the cautery for the fistula of the toe.
Motas veguadas accideysso fissuras en las labias, e majorment en las labias dels enfantz.	Small wounds often cause fissures in the lips, and especially in the lips of children.
Donc cum tu curas aquelas fissuras am aquo que nos havem dit en las divisios e no aprofieyta la tua cura, lahoras igneys le cauteri petit cutellar segon aquesta forma que s’ensiec:	Therefore, when you treat those fissures as we have said in the divisions and do not prolong your treatment, then heat the small surgical cautery according to this form that is taught:
E sia la conquavitat de lu segon la subtilitat de cotella.	And let its cavity be according to the subtlety of the blade.
Aprop pausa aquel init cuytadament en aquelas fissuras entro que·l cauteri pervengua al preon de las fissuras.	Then place that heated cautery at the fissures for as long as the cautery reaches the bottom of the fissures.
E aprop cura aquel am cerotz entro que sia sanat.	Then treat it with cerate until it is healed.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XIX.
De cauterizacio de fistula en la boca.	Of the cautery for fistula in the mouth.
Quan en la razit de uvula o en le paladar o en las razitz de las dentz endeve apostema e aprop fa brac, e aprop es rompuda, e aprop es antiquada, e corr brac e es fayta fistula, e aprop tu curas aquela e no aprofieyta a curacio, lahoras cove que tu igniscas cauteri segon la quantitat que sia receubuda en la fistula, e aprop met aquel ignit en le trauc de la fistola, e te la tua ma entro que pervengua le ferr ignit al preon de lu, e al derier de lu fazen aysso una veguada o dos; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que nos havem dit de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	When an abscess forms in the root of the uvula or on the palate or in the roots of the teeth, and then breaks, becomes old, and forms a fistula, and you treat it without prolonging your treatment, then heat the cautery according to the amount received in the fistula, and place that heated cautery into the tract of the fistula. Keep your hand there until the hot iron reaches the bottom of the fistula, and do this one or two times. Then treat it with what we have said for the treatment until it is healed.
E donc si la sania es abscindita e es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari de descubrir le loc e hostar le os corrumput segon que vindra en son capitol.	And so, if the abscess is incised and healed, that is good; otherwise, it is necessary to expose the location and fix the corrupt bone as will be covered in its chapter.
Capitol .xx.	Capitol. xx.
De cauterisacio de las dentz e de mollificacio de las angivas.	Of the cautery treatment of teeth and the softening of warts.
Quan las angivas son mollificadas per humiditat e las dentz son maugudas, e curas aquelas am medicinas e no confereys, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra aprop aysso, enayssi que tu pauses la quanula sobre la dent e entromet en aquela le cauteri ignit festinantment, e te la tieua ma un petit entro que·l malaute cente la calor del foc a la razit de la dent esser pervenguda.	When the warts are softened by moisture and the teeth are numbed, and you have treated those with medicines without success, then place the patient's foot in warm water, and soon after, heat the cautery to the form which will be given shortly. Test that you pause the heated cautery over the tooth and insert it into the area, rapidly applying the heat so that the patient feels the warmth of the fire at the root of the tooth.
E aprop leva la tua ma, e aprop itera le cauteri alcunas veguadas segon que vols.	Then lift your hand, and repeatedly apply the cautery several times according to your desire.
E aprop le malaute huompla la sua boca de aygua de sal e tengua aquela per una hora, e pueys stupa aquela, quar la dent mauguda es fermada e la gengiva mollificada es strenguda e la humiditat corrompuda es exsiccada.	Then the patient should rinse their mouth with salt water and keep it for an hour, then spit it out, as the numbed tooth is sealed, the softened gum is tightened, and the moistened corruption is dried up.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI.
De cauterisacio de dolor de dent.	Of the application of cautery for tooth pain.
Quan dolor de dent es per fregiditat, o en lu es freg o verm, o no comfereys la curacio am medicina, lahoras cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am boder de vacas, o cauteri am foc.	When tooth pain is due to inflammation or there is a boil or abscess, and you cannot achieve relief with medicine, the application of cautery in that area can be done in two ways: either with a calf's bladder cautery, or with a fire cautery.
Cauteri am boder es que tu prenguas boder de vacas e bulhas aquel en culhe de ferr , e aprop pren coto e envolopa le sobre la extremitat de la tenta, e aprop enmergeys aquel am boder bulhit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolorosa festinantment entro que sia enfregidat.	The calf's bladder cautery is when you take a bladder from a calf and fill it with fluid, then wrap it around the tip of the instrument, and immerse that part in the filled bladder. You place it over the painful tooth, pressing firmly to ensure it becomes inflamed before the pain subsides.
E aprop itera aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la vertut del foc pervengua a la razit de la dentz.	And then repeatedly apply that several times until the heat of the fire permeates to the root of the teeth.
E si voys, submergeys lana o coto en le boder desus dit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolent, e pausa sobre aquel ferr ignit entro que·l ferr pervengua al preon de la conquavitat de la dent.	And if so, soak a piece of wool or cloth in the fluid from above mentioned, and place that over the painful tooth. Hold the burning iron over it until the heat reaches the root of the tooth's cavity.
Mays empero la cauterizacio am foc es que tu atendas a la quannula de eram o de ferr, e sia en le cor de lu alcuna grocesa e la acuitat del foc no pervengua a la boca del malaute.	Moreover, however, the cautery with fire you must attend to the wound of skin or of iron, and in its core there is some coals and the acuity of fire must not reach the mouth of the patient.
E aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra, e pausa aquel sobre la dent e te la tua ma entro que·l cauteri sia enfregidat; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas quar la dolor sira remauguda o en aquel dia o en l’autre dia.	And place the cautery in the form it will take, and hold that over the dent and put your hand inside so that the cautery is well lubricated; and do this a few times to prevent the pain from worsening on that day or the next.
E cove que per empressio de aquel cauteri que·l malaute umpla la sieua boca de bon boder e tengua aquel per una hora e aprop scupa le; e aquesta es la forma del cauteri.	And ensure that through the action of that cautery, the patient opens their mouth wide and holds it for about an hour; this is the form of the cautery.
E cauteriza am qual que tu voys extremittat segon que a tu es possible.	And cautery it as much as you can determine or desire.
E aquesta es la forma de la cannula:	And this is the form of the catheter:
Capitol .xxii.	 Chapter 22.
De cauterizacio de extrophulos.	On the cautery treatment for extrophy.
Quan extrophulos so de flecma e de humors fregas e no so hobedientz a digistio per medicinas e tu voys la digistio de aquelas leugerament, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri conquau la forma del qual es aquesta seguen, havent dos extremitatz hubertas per que yesca le fum deves le cauteri per l’autra extremitat, e pausa aquel ignit sobre aquel apostema una veguada, e autre si indigeyses de aquel, entro que pervengua al preon del apostema.	When extrophies are due to phlegm and humors that do not respond to digestion with medicines, if you perform a mild digestion of those, then ignite the cautery in the form that follows: having two open ends, so that smoke exits from one end. Hold the ignited cautery over the affected area for one time, and another if you find it necessary, without allowing the flame to reach the base of the abscess.
E si l’apostema es pauca, lahoras pausa le cauteri segon la quantitat del apostema, e aprop leyssa le per tres jorns e pausa sobre lu coto enfus en boder entro que sia remaugut aquo que·l foc ha comburit.	And if the abscess is small, then apply the cautery according to the size of the abscess, and leave it for three days, placing a stopper inside between where the fire has burned.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent e tentas e draps entro que sia sanat.	And then cure that with ointment and bandages until it is healed.
E la forma de la cannula o deu cauteri a tal es comveyter.	And the shape of the cannula or cautery should be conveyed.
Capitol .xxiii.	Capitol.xxiii.
De cauterizacio de rauquiera de votz e de constriccio de ale.	On the cautery for sore throat and the constriction of hemorrhoids.
Quan las humiditatz veno sobre le quanal del pulmo, e majorment quan aquo es am fregiditat de compleccio, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia evacuat al comensament am medicinas laxativas, e aprop cauteriza aquel deves la razit del golayro en le loc depremegut.	When humidity enters the channel of the lung, and especially when it is due to a cold complex, then you must evacuate the patient with medicines that are laxatives, and then cautery the vein near the groin in the affected area.
E guarda te que no pervenguas am le cauteri al golayro ni no comburas de la codena de lu sino un pauc.	And be sure that you do not apply the cautery to the groin nor burn the vein but only slightly.
E cauteriza aquel am autra cauteri deves la junctura del col en le derier espondil de lu.	And cauterize that area with another cautery at the joint of the neck at the rear spine of the patient.
E·l cauteri de lu sia clavilh sego la maniera precedent.	And cauterize the clavicle with the cautery according to the previous manner.
E aprop cura aquel am aquo que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And then cure that which was treated until it is healed.
Capitol .xxiiii.	 Chapter 24.
De cauterizacio de malautia del pulmo e de tos.	On the cauterization for lung disease and cough.
Quan tos e malautia de pulmo so de humiditatz fregas e le malaute no ha febre ni tisic e es malautia antiqua, lahoras cauterisa aquel am dos cauteris sobre la furcula en les locz depremegutz leontz e buoytz; e am autra cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz entre dos mamillos; e sia le cauteri clavilh segon la forma precedent.	When cough and lung disease are caused by humidity, and the patient has no fever or consumption, and it is an old illness, then cauterize two cauteries on the furcula at the lower parts of the lion bones and tarsals; and another cautery in the middle part of the foot between the two mammary glands; and use the clavicle cautery according to the previous form.
E si vols, sia la tua cauterizacio punctan am le cauteri que es apelat puncta, la forma del qual precedeys en la ponctacio de dolor de aurelhas.	And if you wish, make pointed cauteries with the cautery called puncta, the form of which you show in the puncturation for ear pain.
E sian puntz entro cays ad aquels; e aprop cura aquel am aquo meteys que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And make points between them; then carefully cure that which is inserted before it heals.
E ya sia le cauteri haventz tres ramps quar cauterizacio es am aquel: am una veguada podes far tres cauteris segon aquesta forma:	And having the cautery with three points, the cauterization is made on that: with one time you can make three cauterizations according to this form:
Capitol .xxv.	Capitol.xxv.
De cauterizacio de titillic que es le cap del ajutori.	Of the cauterization of titillic which is the head of the helper.
Quan le cap del ajutori es dislocat per causa de humiditatz lubricas e no es fermat en la hora del sieu retornament deves la sua dislocacio entro que sia a lu aquo costuma de retornar, e aprop per un petit movement es deslocat ayssi que s’endeve, ayssi cum nos havem testificat, lahoras cove que primieyrament redusiscas la dislocacio, e aprop le malaute sia reversat sobre le sieu dos o sobre le latz sa; e aprop eleva la codena la qual es en la partida dedintz del citillic a las partidas desus am les ditz de la tua ma sinistra, si la junctura es dislocada a las partidas dedintz.	When the head of the helper is dislocated due to lubricating humidity and does not return within the hour of its expected return, you must reduce the dislocation while it is in that position which customarily returns, and then by a small movement, it will be relocated as it strives to return. As we have testified, this happens when first you reduce the dislocation, and then place the patient on their back or on their side; and elevate the codena which is in the inner part of the titillic at the upper parts above your left hand, if the joint is dislocated inwardly.
E aprop igneys le cauteri havent dos caps; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then heat the cautery having two heads; this is its form.
E aprop cauteriza la codena entro que penetre aquela entro al autre latz; e vindra la figura de cauterizacio lahoras de iv caps cauteris.	And then cauterize the chain where that enters the other limb; and the figure of the cautery will come when of two heads the cautery has.
e so aquel subtils segon la quantitat de tenta; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	and so it is subtle according to the quantity of the wound; and this is its form:
E alcunas veguadas es ajustat segon aquest comte i per que son les cauteris .viii.	And sometimes it is adjusted according to this count and because these cauteries are VIII.
E aprop pausa sobre le cauteri porys cuytz am sal, e aprop fay adherir le malaute a trenquilitat, e lo membre no sia maugut per alcun temps entro que sia confortat.	And then place salt on the cautery for a moment, and then make the patient lie down with the limb at rest, so that it is not dislocated until it is comforted.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas desus e tart es fayt aquo, lahoras cauteriza sobre le muscle am cauteri clavilh o am motz cauteris puntan, quar la junctura es confermada e la humiditat es romauguda e le malaute es sanat.	And if the dislocation is above and the treatment is done this way, then cauterize over the muscle with a cautery on the collarbone or with pointed cauteries, so that the joint is confirmed and the humidity is alleviated and the patient heals.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter XXVI.
De cauterizacio del stomac.	Of cautery of the stomach.
Quan veno en l’estomac freg e motas humiditatz entro que aquel extrazo de la sua compleccio e so multiplicatz raumases a lu, e si tu continuas las manieyras de curacio e no confereyso, lahoras cove que le malaute sia sobre le sieu dos ressupinat, e extenda las suas mas e las suas coysas, e aprop cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris: an un cauteri dejos le pietz per la quantitat d’un dit am cauteri clavilh, e am dos cauteris dejos del dos costatz del cauteri, entro que vengua la figura de cauteri triangulada; e elonga entre els que no sian ajustatz que faran poyredura.	When pain in the stomach is due to damp humors that extract themselves from its composition and multiply within it, if you continue the curative methods without success, then expect the illness to spread to his back and extend its hands and limbs. Then cauterize that area with three cauteries: place one on the foot at the width of a finger with aawl-cautery, and two on the sides of the cautery, forming the shape of a triangular cautery; leave space between those that are not tightly placed to prevent sores.
E si la profunditat del cauteri la quantitat de les dos terses de la grocesa de la codena.	And if the depth of the cautery is the width of two-thirds of the thickness of the cord.
E sia la figura del cauteri segon aquesta forma ses addicio, E si vols, cauteriza am gran cauteri en le mieg loc del estomac segon aquesta forma; et aquest sia un cauteri segon la forma de cercle segon aquesta forma:	And let the shape of the cautery be as follows: If you wish, cauterize with a large cautery in the middle of the stomach according to this form; this should be a circular cautery according to this form.
E sia cauterizat l’estomac punctan ad aquel que de aquest cauteri es spaventat: e es que tu senhes sobre l’estomac punt segon la quantitat que voles am tenta, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en les puntz; e aprop cura aquel am la curacio qu’es precedita entro que sia sanat.	And cauterize the stomach by puncturing where the large cautery scares: and you should prick the stomach according to the quantity you desire with a tentative needle, then cauterize that area with a small cautery; then cure that with the curative method until it is healed.
Capitol .xxvii.	Capitol xxvii.
De cauterizacio del fietge fret.	Of cautery of the foot sore.
Quan endeve en le fietge dolor per fregiditat o per humiditat o per grossa ventositat entro que de la sieua normal compleccio sia getat per egressio superflua, e es curat le malaute am aquo que havem dit e no comfereys, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e senhes am tenta tres cauteris segon aquesta forma et aquesta quantitat meteyssa sobre le fietge dejos dels ipocondres, la hon perve le decubit de home.	When there is pain in the foot due to coldness or humidity or excessive windiness that has altered its natural structure through excess, and if the malady is not relieved by what we have said, then you should ensure that the malady is pressed against its neck, and proceed to apply three cauteries according to this form and quantity over the foot below the hypochondriac region, letting the decubitus of a man determine it.
E sia l’espazi le qual es entre quascun cauteri segon la grossetut del dit, e sia le cauteri segon la longitut del cors dreyta.	And let the space be the one between each cautery according to the thickness of the finger, and let the cautery be according to the length of a straight man's arm.
E no compremas la tua am le cauteri mot.	And do not mistake the place for the cautery spot.
E si la quantitat de aquo que es adhurit la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena, e no y sia pus ajustat; e si le malaute stant sobre les pes de lu; e si no es estant, lahoras sia jassent, le qual ja ha extendudas las suas coysas, e eleve les sieus brasses.	And if the quantity of what is applied equals the size of the thickness of the cord, and is not adjusted further; and if the malady stands on the sides of the feet; and if it does not stand, then lie down, which has already extended its parts, and raise its arms.
E es aquesta la forma del cauteri:	And this is the form of the cautery:
E a tu es possible que cauterizes aquestz cauteris am cauteri cutellar, quan es am tu subtilitat e prudencia en l’art.	And it is possible that you will use this cautery with a surgical cautery, when using your subtlety and prudence in the art.
E guarda te que trop no procesiscas en la cauterizacio, e sia adhurida la specitut de tota la codena per que sia adhurit tot le cors e pervengua entro als budels, quar la codena aqui es subtil; e sapias aquo.	And guard that too much heat does not blister the skin, and let the subtlety of the whole cord be burned so that the entire body is affected and penetrate into the intestines; for here the cord is subtle; and know this.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter XXVIII.
De perforacio de apostema del fietge am cauteri.	On the perforation of an abscess on the sole with a cautery.
Quan endeve excitura o apostema en le fietge e voles saber si aquel apostema es en le carn del fietge o en la tunica de lu, lahoras si es en la carn del fietge, le malaute atrobo gravitat e dolor ses acuitat.	When an eruption or abscess is on the sole and you want to know if the abscess is in the flesh of the sole or in its membrane, then if it is in the flesh of the sole, the patient will experience a significant increase in swelling and pain.
E si es en la tunica del fietge, am la dolor es acuitat gran e vezes que ja afatiguatz les metges la cura de lu.	And if it is in the membrane of the sole, then the pain will be severe, and often it will exhaust the doctors with its treatment.
Donc cove que·l malaute sia enversat sobre la sieua cervit; e aprop senha le loc de l’apostema am tenta; e aprop igneys le cauteri le quel es asemblat a rag, la forma del qual a precedit en l’autra pagina.	Then make sure the patient is lying on their side; then place the location of the abscess under tension; then heat the cautery which resembles a reed, the shape of which was shown on the previous page.
E cauteriza am aquel i cauteri entro que tota la codena sia comborida, entro que pervengua al ciphac, entro qu’en yesca sania.	And cauterize there and in between until the entire chain is carbonized, until it reaches the core, until it burns cleanly.
E aprop cura aquel per curacio dels autres apostemas entro que sia sanat.	And then cure that by curing the other abscesses until they are healed.
E no cove que de aquesta forma de cauteri use sino aquel del qual le estudi en l’art de medicina es prolonguat, e en las mas del qual motas malautias an conogut; mays aquest am esperiment alcunas veguadas sia ardit sobre aquesta operacio, mays empero leyssa aquela deves nos, e es miels.	And do not use this method of cauterization except with that one which the study in the art of medicine has prolonged, and for most of which they have known ailments; but this one has been experimented with several times on this operation, yet I leave the other to you, and it is better.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter XXIX.
De cauterizacio de plauresi.	On the cauterization of piles.
Diyssero les antics cauteri de las razitz de aristologia a plauresi frega segon aquesta manieyra esser fazedor, e es aquest que tu prenguas de las razitz de aristologia longa secca una razit pun longua que es trobada, e sia de la grossetut del dit.	They say that the ancient cauterization for hemorrhoids was done by taking a long stick from the root of Aristolochia and making it long and thin, with a diameter similar to that of a finger.
E aprop submergeys aquela en oli e eysen aquela al foc, e aprop cauteriza per un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre la continuacio de la furcula am le col; e am dos cauteris petitz dejos guidazi, un pauc declinans a la partida que es dejus la barba, e am dos cauteris en aquo que es declinant entre la quinta costa e la cizena, declinant un pauc a las partidas detras; e am autre cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz; et am autre sobre l’estomac, et am tres cauteris de las partidas detras; et am un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre las dos spallas, e am dos cauteris dels dos latz del pietz, dejos le cauteri le qual es entre doas spallas.	And then immerse it in oil and place it on the fire, and then cauterize with a cautery in that spot which is between the continuation of the furcula to the neck; with two small cauteries guide them, one slightly inclined towards the part behind the beard, and with two cauteries in what is inclining between the fifth rib and the pelvis, inclining slightly to the rear parts; with another cautery in the middle of the foot; and another on the stomach, and three cauteries at the rear parts; and with one cautery in that spot which is between the two blades, and with two cauteries at the sides of the foot, place the cautery which is between the two blades.
E no cove que compremas la tua ma am le cauteri, ans sia en le manifest de la codena en obra.	And do not place your hand on the cautery, but hold it at the end of the rod in operation.
E ja diyssero alscus antics que so alscus dels homes les quals uson de cauteri de ferr semblant a ray e igneysso aquel, e meto aquel en aquel loc le qual es entre las costas, entro que pervenguam am aquel ad aquel apostema e sia foragetada sania, ayssi cum havem dit en l’apostema del fietge.	And some ancients have said that some men use a cautery like a branding iron and burn with it in that spot which is between the ribs, until we bring about from there to there an abscess and it becomes healthy, as we have said for the abscess of the flank.
Mays en aquesta perforacio am cauteri no es ses temor, quar hu mor tantost ho accideys en le loc fistula a la qual no es sanacio.	More in this puncture use cautery is not feared, for he dies soon if it happens in the place where the fistula is formed and does not heal.
Capitol .xxx.	Capitol.
De la cauterizacio de la melsa.	Of the cautery of the wound.
Quan tu curas la malautia de la melsa am aquo que havem dit de la curacio en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cauteri en lu es segon tres manieras, las quals totas son dreyturieras, de las quals la una es que fassas tres cauteris o quatre linhan segon la longitut de la melsa segon la figura dels cauteris del fietge, la figura dels quals ha precedit.	When you treat the illness of the wound, as we said in the division of the cure, and do not apply your treatment to it, the cautery on the wound is according to three ways, all of which are rightful. Of these, one way is to make three or four lines according to the length of the wound, following the shape of the cautery irons, the shapes of which have been previously described.
E sia entre quascun cauteri la grossetut d’un dit o un pauc mes, e la manieyra del cauteri sia la manieyra la qual havem dita en le cauteri del fietge engualment.	And let the thickness between each cautery be that of a finger or a bit more, and the method of the cautery be the method we said for the cautery iron in equal measure.
E no compremas la tua ma am le cauteri; e le malaute sia eves sobre lo sieu dos.	And do not hold your hand on the cautery; let the patient be above its shoulders.
E es autra manieyra de cauterizar, so es que tu igniscas le cauteri haventz dos vertimentz, la qual causa havem dita en le capitol de dislocacio del muscle, e elava la codena la qual es en le endreyt de la melsa la hon perve le jazer del malaute sinistre.	And another way to cauterize is that you heat the cautery with two embers, which we have said in the chapter on dislocation of the muscle, and raise the chain which is in the middle of the seam letting the juice of the left thigh pass through.
E sia la tua elevacio am la qual elevas la codena segon la longuesa del cors, per que sian faytz cauteris segon la latitut del cos.	And your elevation is such that you raise the chain according to the length of the body, so as to make cautery marks according to the breadth of the body.
E aprop entromet les dos vernimentz, ignitz mot, en aquel entro que am aquels penetres la codena de la autra part.	And then insert the two embers, burning hot, into that space through which you penetrate the chain from the other side.
E aprop extrayt le cauteri; e donc son faytz quatre cauteris.	And then remove the cautery; and so he makes four cautery marks.
E si voys, cauteriza am cauteri havent tres vernimentz.	And if you do, cauterize with the cautery heated by three embers.
E aprop tu cura le cauteri pus que aia laysat de getar brac per trops jorns, quar mays es comferent que las autras causas precedentz en la curacio.	And then you treat the cautery more when it has been allowed to burn for too many days; this is more conducive to recovery than other preceding causes in the treatment.
Capitol .xxxi.	Capitol.xxxxi.
De cauterizacio de ydropici.	Of the cautery for dropsy.
Cauteri no catz en ydropici sino en alcinte3 propriament.	Cauterize not for dropsy but for gout properly.
Quan tu curas le ydropic am las manieyras de curacio las quals havem ditas en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que aquel cauterizes am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic e am un cauteri sobre l’estomac, e am autre cauteri sobre le fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa, e am dos cauteris entre les spondils del dos, e un cauteri en lo dreyt del pietz, e am autre cauteri sobre l’estomac.	When you treat the dropsy, follow the methods of treatment we have said in the division and do not deviate from your treatment. When it comes that you must cauterize, use four cauteries in the circuit of the belly and one on the stomach, and another on the flank, and another on the loin, and two between the vertebrae of the back, and one on the right side of the foot, and another on the stomach.
E la quantitat de la profunditat del cauteri sia propdana a la spicitut de la codena.	And the depth of the cautery be approximately equal to the thickness of the skin.
E aprop layssa le cauteri ubert per so que gete brac per lonc temps.	And allow the cautery to remain open so that it heals for a long time.
E no evacuas le malaute de curacio aprop le cauteri am aquo que cove per que sian agreguadas a lu doas entencios, e sira festinada a lu am ajutori sanacio.	And do not evacuate the gout from the treatment near the cautery where it should be added two incisions, and it will be aided by a healing process.
La forma del cauteri am lo qual es cauterizat lo ventre sia clavilh segon que la forma de aquel es desus precedent, e es aquel am le qual es cauterizat le dos sia olivar segon qu’es precedent a la sua forma.	The shape of the cautery with which the belly is seared should follow the shape of that described above, and it is with this that the two olive-shaped areas are seared according to what was said previously regarding their form.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter XXXII.
De cauterizacio de pes e de las coyssas.	On the cautery treatment of feet and thighs.
Quan les pes so apostematz en ydropitz e so repletz de aygua sitrina, cove que cauterisas les pes sobre le dos del pe in nocrati aquo que es entre le auricular e le anular, e eleva la tua ma am le cauteri e no torses aquel; e aprop eleva la tua ma, e no retornes aquela de tot, quar l’aygua satrina rezuda.	When the feet are swollen and filled with yellow water, cut off the circulation by searing the feet over the side of the foot between the ankle and the thumb, and raise your hand with the cautery without twisting that area; then raise your hand, and do not return to touch everything, for the yellow water will drain.
Es le cauteri segon aquesta forma: E aprop fay sobre las doas coyssas dos cauteris, e en quascuna coysa sia feyt cauteri am la extremitat del cauteri cutellar.	The cautery is to be used in this manner: And then apply two cauteries to the thighs, and on each thigh make a cautery at the extremity of the surgical knife.
E sia le cauteri segon la longitut de la coyssa: i dejos le denolh e l’autre jos le mieg loc de la coyssa; e sobre quascuna coyssa dos cauteris.	And the cautery is to be applied according to the length of the thigh: and leave one end up high on the upper part of the thigh, and the other down low on the lower part; and on each thigh, apply two cauteries.
E layssa la plagua uberta ses curacio per lonc temps per so que alcuna aygua resuda de lu.	And leave the wound open for a long time so that no water leaks from it.
E aprop cura le am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas.	And then cure the ailments which we have said.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter XXXIII.
De cauterizacio de cos de ventre.	On the cautery of the abdomen.
Quan cos de ventre es per freg e per humiditat entro que debelice las vertutz, so es la vertut digestiva e retentiva, las quals so en l’estomac e en les budels, e es curat aquo am las manieyras de curacio e no confereys, e vezes le malaute suffertan cauteri de vertut exhiberant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am gran cauteri sobre le sieu stomac segon que a precedit en la cauterizacio del estomac, am le cauteri del cercle e am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic subtils, am cauteri clavilh subtil; e am cauteri sobre le alcatin sobre alozis gran, o am dos cauteris.	When the abdomen is inflamed due to cold and humidity within the intestinal walls, it is the digestive and retentive virtues, which are in the stomach and intestines. This condition is treated according to the methods of cure, and sometimes the patient suffers from a cautery of virtue exposure. Therefore, cauterize that with a large cautery over its own stomach according to what was previously described in the cauterization of the stomach, using the ring cautery and four cauteries in the circuit of the fine cords, using a subtle needle cautery; or use a large aloes cautery, or two cauteries.
E si vezes las humiditatz exhuberants e le malaute aquo tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le pentenilh e sobre les budels, e fort leu ajustant dos cauteris sobre l’estomac e prop dels inguonas, quar es curacio perficent de juvament de la qual no erras.	And if sometimes the excessive humidity and the patient tolerates it, then cauterize that over the pentelagh and over the intestines, and strengthen it by applying two cauteries to the stomach near the inguinal region, which is a perfect cure for the youth of the condition, in which you do not err.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Chapter XXXIV.
De cauterizacio de emorroydas antiquas.	Of the cautery treatment for ancient hemorrhoids.
Quan so en la natura derier emorroydas antiquas o una de humors grossas fregas o de humiditatz corrompudas, e son curadas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no confereys la tieua curacio, lahoras cauterisa am tres cauteris sobre le pus dejos spondilh del dos petit e petit triangular, e am cauteri desus le ombelic cays per dos ditz.	When they are in nature derived ancient hemorrhoids or one of thick humors or corrupted humidity, and they are cured as we have said in the division and do not apply the heat cure, then cauterize three times on the base of the pus leaving a small triangular mark, and with a cautery above the navel down two fingers.
E si doptas que l’estomac de lu sia enfregidat e la vianda de lu no sia degerida, e la cara de lu vezes apostemada, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre l’estomac am gran cauteri segon que es precedit; e am un cauteri sobre fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa de lu am cauteri clavilh, e leyssa le cauteri per alcun temps ubert, e aprop cura lu entro que sia sanat.	And if you suspect that the stomach is inflamed and the food is not digested, and the face is flushed, then cauterize that area on the stomach with a large cautery as previously described; and with one cautery on the thigh, and another on the armpit with a round cautery, and let the cautery remain open for some time, and cure him until he is healed.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter XXXV.
De cauterizacio de atheyl aprop la abscizio de lor.	Of the cautery treatment near the site of the abscess.
Quan tu abscindes atheyl, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri que es asemblat a ray.	When you incise the thigh, then ignite the cautery that resembles a reed.
Aprop entremet aquel ignit en aquel atheyl abscis, e ultima la tieua ma entro que pervengua le cauteri al orifici de la vena de la qual ve la sanc.	Then insert that ignited cautery into the incised thigh, and keep your hand there until the cautery reaches the opening of the vein from which the pus flows.
E fay aquo una vetz o doas, quar si achieyl son trops, lahoras cauteriza quascun de lor segon que havem recontat, e aprop cura aquels am aquo que confereys a lor dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And do this one or two times; if there are too many, then cauterize each of them according to how we have counted, and place ointments between the cauterizations until they are healed.
E si cauterizas am gran cauteri sobre alquatin, es mays derier en juvament.	And if you cauterize with a large cautery on some areas, it will heal more quickly.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Capitol.xxxvi.
De cauterizacio de fistolas que son faytas en la natura derie en las partidas de lu.	Of the cauterization of fistulas that occur in the parts around it.
Quan la natura no obeziys a la obra la qual havem recomtada en son loc, e·l pacient es espaventat per aquo, sia sanat am cauteri.	When nature does not obey the work we have recommended in its place, and the patient is scared by this, heal it with a cautery.
Donc quan ad alcun ve fistola en la natura derier, e es antiquada, corro sania de lu e humiditatz corrompudas, e donc aquo que es pus digne que cove es que proes aquela am tenta subtil, e aprop conoys la quantitat de la profunditat de lu am la devant dita tenta.	Then when an ancient fistula in the nature rear appears, and is corrupted by foul humors, therefore what is most worthy that covers it is to attempt with a subtle probe, and then know the quantity of the depth of it by the front said probe.
Aprop igneys le cauteri que es semblant a ray.	Then heat the cautery that resembles a ray.
E aprop met aquel cauteri ignit en aquesta fistula, e segon la quantitat en la qual intrec la tenta.	Then place the heated cautery in this fistula, and according to the quantity in which you insert the probe.
E itera sobre aquela le cauteri entro que sian comburitz aquels cors corrumputz tost una veguada o dos o tres, segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And iterate over that with the cautery until those corrupted vessels are burned up completely in one or two or three times, according to the quantity of your necessity.
E guarda te de combustio de nervi e de vena; o si fistula va al cors de la vesica o al cors del budel, lahoras guarda te de totz aquels locz; e no fassas aquo sino quan la fistula es en loc carnos e cogitas que no es penetrant.	And guard yourself from burning nerves and veins; or if the fistula goes to the body of the bladder or the body of the intestine, then guard yourself from all those areas; and do not do this unless the fistula is in a fleshly location and you perceive that it is not penetrating.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	And then cure the area once it is healed.
E si le loc es sigillat, e so abscindidas de lu las materias, e roman ayssi per lonc temps, lahoras sapias que ja es curat entierament.	And if the area is sealed, and the materials are cut from it, and the flow continues for a long time, then you can see that it is completely cured.
E si las materias no so de lu ostadas, lahoras sapias que es penetrant o en le preon de lu os corromput, o cays aquo de aquelas causas de las quals vindra rememoracio en son loc.	And if the materials do not stay on the wound, then you can see that it is penetrating or in the depth of the wound and corrupting it, or it comes from those causes which will be recalled in its place.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Capitol. xxxvii.
De cauterizacio dels ronhos.	On the cautery of warts.
Quan en les ronhos endeve dolor per freg o per grossa ventozitat, e per aysso le coyt del malaute es amermat, lahoras cove que cauterizes aquel sobre les ronhos am cauteri sobre quascun ronho am cauteri clavilh del qual precesic la rememoracio.	When warts pain due to cold or excessive dryness, and for this reason the patient's discomfort is alleviated, then you should cauterize that area with a cautery, cauterizing each wart with a cautery tip. You will find more details about this in the following text.
E fort leu cauterizam am le segon un petit dejos, per que vindran tres cauteris liniatz, e donc siran mays deriers en juvament.	And cauterize lightly the first one with a small touch, for three linear cauterizations will follow, and thus they will be more effective in healing.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Capitol. xxxviii.
De cauterizacio de la vesica.	Of the cautery of the bladder.
Quan accideys en la vesica debelitat e mollificacio per freg e per humiditatz ayssi que·l malaute la urina no retengua, lahoras cauteriza aquel en la partida pus dejos sobre la vesiqua, la hon comensan les pels del pentenilh, e cauteriza am un cauteri en la partida dreyta, e am autre en la senestra de lu.	When there is a debility and softening of the bladder due to inflammation and humidity, so that the patient cannot retain urine, then cautery the bladder in its part, starting from where the skin of the penis begins, with one cautery on the right side and another on the left.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la cantitat dels not del pous; e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en la partida pus bassa del dos, o am dos cauteris si es necessitat.	And the length of each cautery should be according to the size of the patient's foot; and cautery that area with a cautery on the lower part of the foot, or with two cauteries if necessary.
E sia cauteri clavilh segon que es procesit.	And the shoulder cautery should be according to how it is processed.
Capitol .xxxix.	Capitol.xxxix.
De cauterizacio de la mayra.	Of the cautery of the womb.
Quan veno en la mayra freg e humiditatz, e per aysso es prohibida enpreignacio, e son corrompudas las mestruas de lu, e es tardada la provocacio de lor, e accideys dolor deves le haveniment de lor, lahoras cove que·l loc sia cauterizat am tres cauteris en le circuit del ombelic, ayssi cum havem dit en le cauteri de la vesica; e am cauteri sobre le loc pus dejos del dos, o am dos cauteris, e sia le cauteri clavilh.	When there is venous inflammation and humidity in the womb, and therefore conception is prohibited, and the menstrual flow is corrupted, and the induction is delayed, and joint pain occurs due to its condition, then the area should be cauteryed with three cauteries around the umbilical circuit, as we have said in the cautery of the bladder; and a cautery on the lower part of the foot, or with two cauteries, and the shoulder cautery should be used.
Capitol .xl.	Capitol of the chapter.
De cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua.	Of the cautery treatment for dislocation of the ankle.
Quan humiditatz moucozas so efundudas a la partida de la anqua, e so faytas causas del yssiment del sieu loc, e senhal de lu es que la coyssa es prolonguada sobre l’autre quan so comparadas entre lor.	When moist phlegm infiltrates the area of the ankle, and causes displacement of its location, a sign of this is that the swelling extends over the other foot when compared between them.
E le loc de la dislocacio es atrobat en lu quays boyt.	And the location of the dislocation is treated with a hot poultice.
Adonc cove que cauterizas le malaute sobre la partida de la anqua de lu am cauteri a sercle semblant, pus que tu auras senhat am tenta en le cercuit de la partida ayssi cum es revolguda, e per so que la partida caia el mieg loc del cercle.	Then, make a circular cautery mark on the foot of the ankle with a hot cautery, as you will have marked it around the circumference of the area as if it were turned, so that the area falls in the middle of the circle.
E sia le cauteri del qual precedit la forma en la cauterizacio del estomac.	And the form of the cautery mentioned above is used in the treatment of the stomach.
E si aquest cauteri no es a tu present, lahoras cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris am cauteri olivar gran.	And if this cautery is not present, then use three small olive branch cauteries instead.
E sia fayt le cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de tota la codena; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And make the cautery according to the intensity of the pain in the entire limb; and then cure that which remains after it is healed.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter XL.
De cauterizacio de la vena sciatica.	Of cautery for the sciatic vein.
Quan dolor ve en la partida de anqua, e so causa de lu freg et humiditatz, le malaute es curat am aquo que havem dit e no confereys, e aquo es antiquat, lahoras cove que tu lacses le malaute de humors grosses am pillulas fetidas o am pillulas artificials o semblantz; e aprop cauteriza aquel.	When pain comes in the part of the groin, and its cause is cold and humidity, the patient is cured with what we have said and you do not add anything, as this is ancient practice. When you treat the patient for large humid humors, use stinky pills or artificial ones or similar; and then cauterize that area.
E la manieyra del cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am medicinas comburentz, o cauteri am foc.	The method of cauterization in this case is according to two methods: either with burning medicines, or with fire.
Sira segon dos manieyras scientas, de las quals es la una que cauterizes aquel sobre la partida de l’ancha de lu am tres cauteris triangulatz segon aquesta forma; e fay am aquels bona profunditat.	Sir according to two known methods, of which one is to cauterize that area over the part of the flank with three triangular cauterizations according to this form; and do so with good depth.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre cascun cauteri la quantitat de la grossitut del dit e si le cauteri olivar o gran.	And let the space between each cauterization be the width of one finger, whether the cauterization is small or large.
Mays alcunas veguadas sia le cauteri sobre le mieg loc sobre le cap de l’anquan per que son quatre cauteris.	More often, let the cauterization be in the middle of the location, on the head of the spine, because there are four cauterizations.
E si vols, cauteriza am le cercle del qual es precesida la forma en la cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua, la i que sia cercle continent e comburey la ispicitut de tota la codena.	And if you wish, cauterize around the circle where the form precedes in the cauterization of the dislocation of the ankle, which should be a circle that burns the sensitivity of the entire tendons.
E aquesta es la manieyra de cauteri in ciatiqua quan dolor es adherent al anqua e no es estenduda entro a la coyssa.	And this is the way to cauterize for the ankle when pain is localized to the ankle and not extended to the thigh.
Mays si es estenduda entro a la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre la coyssa sobre le loc al qual envireys le malaute que es la dolor; e am un cauteri sobre la cavilha per quatre ditz un pauc deves la part cilvestra.	But if it is extended to the thigh, then cauterize there with two cauteries on the thigh over the area around which you will encircle the ankle that causes the pain; and with one cautery on the heel, a little should be applied to the tendinous part.
E si le cauteri cutellar, e sia la profunditat del cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de la codena.	And for the surgical cautery, the depth of the cautery should be according to the sensitivity of the tendon.
E si le malaute envireys que la dolor es estenduda entro al loc prop les ditz des pes, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui on envireys am cauteri per tres puntz o quatre o mays si indigeys de aquel.	And if the ankle pain is extended to the area near the toes of the foot, then cauterize there where you will apply the cautery with three or four points or more if needed.
E si le malaute envireys dolor esser dejos le donolh ves la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui am un cauteri cutellar.	And if the ankle pain is extended and the swelling appears on the thigh, then cauterize there with a surgical cautery.
E guarda te en tota cauterizacio que no ultimes am le cauteri en tant que comburas nervi o gran arceria, e que per aquo a tu es sobre le malaute mal noccument o contraccio.	Guard yourself in all cautery that you do not end with the cautery to such an extent that it burns nerves or great artery, and that by this you are above the patient harmfully or contraction.
E yeu ja e vist un e autre de aquels les quals cauterizero sobre la cavilha e ultimero en la cauterizacio, e la cama foc inflada entro que la tumor aconseguit lo pe, e foc perforat e corromput tot le pe.	And I have seen one or another of those whom the cautery was applied to the scrotum and ended in the cautery, and the fire inflated between where the tumor touched the skin, and fire perforated and corrupted all the skin.
E aprop accidic fort solucio de ventre, e aprop aquo la mort.	And then follows a severe attack of belly pain, and then death.
E si la dolor es en dos partidas ensemps cauteriza quascuna segon aquesta manieyra.	And if the pain is in two parts, cauteryize each separately according to this manner.
E diysero les savis alcus en la cauterizacio de anqua cauteri del qual aquesta es la manieyra: fay semblant a cercle de ferr del qual le cercuit sia la maytat de un palm; e sia deves le sieu orrifici segon la grossesa de un os de datil o mens un pauc.	And the wise will say regarding the cautery in water: this is the manner: make a circle of iron, with its circumference being the width of one palm; and let its openings be according to the size of an finger bone or at most a little more.
E dedintz aquel cercle sia un autre tertz; e sia le spazi le qual es entre lor la quantitat del notz del pous; e sian aquels cercles ubertz de dos partidas; e sia la longitut de aquels cays un notz o dos notz, e fay en aquels margue de ferr decentment apparelhat en les cercles; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And inside that circle, place another third; and let the space between them be the quantity of a foot's breadth; and let those circles be opened in two parts; and let the length of those gaps be one foot or two feet, and make on those iron edges decently enclosed in the circles; this is the form of it:
Aprop sia ignit en le foc entro que s’enrogesisca e gete scintillas, e aprop sia pausat sobre la partida del anqua, le malaute colcat sobre le latz sa.	Approximately it should be ignited in the fire until it becomes red and produces sparks, and then placed on the part of the ankle, the gout columned over the leg.
E donc cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris redontz en una veguada.	And therefore cauterize it with three round cauteries in one go.
E aprop layssa aquel per tres jorns; aprop emplastre aquel am boder e layssa la plagua uberta per trops dias; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then leave it for three days; afterwards apply a plaster with borax and leave the wound open for many days; and cure it by ointment while it is healing.
Diys Albucasis : o, filhs, de aquesta specia de cauteri pauc havem usat per la terror del reguardament de lu, e per aquo que paucs havem trobatz les quals reguardan sobre lu.	Albucasis says: Oh, son, of this kind of cautery we have used it little because of the fear of its appearance, and because of those few things we have found that concern it.
Mays dels bos cauteris a lu qui les sufferta, et atroba am aquel le loc de lu.	But for those who have suffered from good cautery, find the place for it.
Mays cauteri am medicinas adhurentz es que tu fassas dos cercles haventz armula perforada en la qual deyssen le guaffo de la porta de ferr; sia la longuitut de la paretz en la nauteza de lor sian dos nozes o quays aquels.	But for medicines that adhere, make two circles using a perforated wheel on which the smoke from the iron door is drawn; let the length of the walls where they are placed be such that two nuts or twice as much fit.
E si le spazi le qual es entre quascu la quantitat de la grossitut del dit; e sian ubertz dejos e desus, e sian que contenguan se entre lor segon aquesta forma:	And if the space which is between each of the quantity of the enlargement of the digit; and be opened below and above, and contain themselves among them according to this form:
E aprop pausa sobre la partida de la anqua le malaut jasent sobre le latz sa, e comprem la tua ma sobre la partida de la anqua; e aprop pren de aygua cauda e fon la entre dos cercles, e la qualiditat de aquela sia am le foc petit a petit, e te aquela per la quantitat de una hora, e sufferta le malaute la mordicacio e la adhustio de lu — quar aquel atrobo mordicacio ayssi cum de foc — entro que cesse la mordicacio.	And then place your hand on the part of the foot where the patient feels pain, and hold your hand on the part of the water; and then take some hot water, pour it between two circles, and let the quality of that water be with a small fire gradually, and keep that for the quantity of one hour, and allow the patient to feel the bite and adjustment of the heat — for that absence bite is like fire — until the bite ceases.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am le instrument et abstergeys l’aygua cauda de tota la anqua am aygua dousa.	And then raise your hand with the instrument and remove the hot water from all the water with cold water.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres jorns e pausa sobre aquel boder entro que sia la negror de la adhustio remauguda, e leyssa aquo per alcus jorns, e correra de lu poyredura; aquest es derier en juvament.	And then let it be for three days and place your hand on that border until the blackness of the adjusted bruise subsides, and let this be done for some days, after which the swelling will go down; this is called blanchiment.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then cure it by applying ointment until it is healed.
E si la dolor es extenduda entro la coyssa o la camba, fay a lu estatua en lu que contengua aygua segon que es feyt en la anqua engualment.	And if the pain is extended to the thigh or hip, apply a statue in it that contains water according to how it is done in the water.
E aquesta es la manieyra de aygua cauda, e yeu ja he scrit aquela en le tractat de la rectificacio de medicinas.	And this is the manner of water cauda, and I have already written that in the treatise on the rectification of medicines.
Recipe de alcali e de caus no extinta de amdos ana partida una, e trissa les e pausa en una ola nova de la qual la partida dejos sia perforada per un petit trauc, segon la quantitat que intre en lu ray.	Recipe for alkali and for a fire not extinct from both parts one, three times let it boil in a new cauldron where the part left has a small hole pierced through it, according to the quantity that enters into it.
E pausa dejos le fons de la ola autra ola enveyriada, e gete sobre aquel alcali e caus viva de aygua doussa la qual cobra aquels per un dit, e pus que tu compremes aquels am la tieua ma per bona compressio, e leyssa la hola que deyssenda de lu aygua aguda en la partida dejos a la ola enveyriada.	And place the bottom of the cauldron in another boiling cauldron, and get over that alkali and live fire from water with a spoon so it captures them for one digit, and after you understand them with your hand by good compression, let the cauldron that descends from the sharp water into the part left in the boiling cauldron.
E aprop ajusta tota aquela aygua, e geta la sobre autra caus viva e autre alcali renovelatz, quar aquela lahoras sira de mot forta acuitat, la qual es aministrada en motas operacios de medicina e en cauterizacio dels autres membres, quar operacio fa de foc.	Then adjust all that water, and get it over another live fire and new alkali, for which the water will be of strong acidity, which is administered in most operations of medicine and in cautery of other members, for which operation makes use of fire.
E so de las medicinas alcunas am las quals es cauterizat ancha, ayssi cum tezizic e mel anacrat e caus am sabo enayssi que sian mesclatz.	And some of the medicines which are cauterized wide, such as terebinth and myrrh, and we assay that they be mixed.
E Gualia recontet de un home dels antics la operacio e la curacio am la qual es curada dolor de anqua e de vena sciatica, e magnifiquet mot be esser de aquel, e diys que no hac necessitat de autra curacio, e quar es sanat per una veguada ayssi cum recomtec, quar fort leu aquel intrec en banh e eysic ja sa d’aquel.	And Gualia relates of an ancient man the operation and cure for water pain and sciatic vein pain, magnificently describing it well, and says that no other cure is necessary, and he was cured in one session as recommended, for he immersed himself in hot and cold baths.
Et es que sia pres de certarragi vert, e si no es atrobat vert, sia presa figua recent; e mot sia trissada am un pauc de grays e sia pausat sus la anqua en la qual es la dolor, o en la coyssa, o en la camba, e sia liat.	And it is that if there is no vervain, then take a recent fig; and it should be bruised a little with some gray and placed on the water in which is the pain, or on the thigh, or on the chest, and it should be tied.
E sia layssat per la cantitat de tres horas o per la quantitat que·l malaute centa cedacio de la adhustio.	And let it be left for the quantity of three hours or for the amount that the patient endures the application.
E aprop met aquel en banh e donc quan le cors de lu sia enrozat, entromet aquel en le sol, quar la dolor cessa e es sanat.	And then place it in hot water; and when the patient's body is well rinsed, insert it into the soil, for the pain ceases and he is cured.
E sapias que no cove que alcu use de cauteri am aquestas medicinas sino aprop la evacuacio del cors.	And be aware that no one uses a cautery with these medicines except near the body's evacuation.
Mays ja Escorides diysec que quan am fenda de cabra la vena stretica es cauterizada, aprofieyra a lu mo be; e sia le cauteri am lu segon aquesta manieyra: sia presa lana e sia enbeguda en oli antic, e sia pausat entre le pous del pe e entre le fossil.	Moreover, I Escorides say that when making a cut in the sinew vein, it will heal better if cauterized; and the cautery should be used according to this method: take wool and soak it in old oil, then place it between the layers of the foot and over the bone.
E aprop pren fenda de cabra secca e emflasma aquela am foc entro que sia fayta carbo; e aprop pausa lu sobre la lana e leysa la entro que sia estengida.	And then take a dry cut piece and flame it in fire to make it char; and place it over the wool until it is fully burned.
E aprop itera aquo, e no cessas far aquo entro que·l scintiment de la mordicacio pervengua entro al anqua e repausa la dolor.	And repeat this, and continue doing so until the glow of the flame reaches the water and relieves the pain.
Et aquesta manieyra de cauteri es apelat cauteri de vaquas.	And this method of cautery is called the cow's cauterization.
Capitol .xlii.	Capitol. XLII.
De cauterizacio de dolor de dos.	Of the cautery for pain in two places.
Alcunas veguadas dolor es en le dos per tropas causas, cum per cazement o per percucio o per superflua evacuacio, e per causas ad aquelas semblantz, per infusio de materia frega e humida.	Sometimes pain in the two [areas] is due to multiple causes, such as compression or percussion or excessive evacuation, and by causes similar to those, through the infiltration of watery matter.
E cauteri no catz sino en aquesta sola specia la qual es fayta per efusio de materia frega.	And the cautery is not used for cutting, but only in this single species where it is applied through the infiltration of watery matter.
Donc cove, aprop evacuacio del malaute am pillulas fitidas e am semblant a lor, que sian faytas sobre·l dos en le qual es la dolor tres linhas segon la latitut de lu, pus que senhas am tentha en quascuna linha v cauteris o mays, segon la quantitat que ve de la tolleransa del malaute e de la vertut de lu.	Then incise, and place pillulas fitted in size to the affected area on both sides where the pain is, three lines wide according to the width of the area. Then test with cautery or more if needed, according to the quantity that the patient can tolerate and the virtue of the cautery.
E sia fayta cauterizacio am cauteri de punt.	And perform the cautery with a pointed cautery.
E si vols, cauteriza am tres cauteris o am quatre am cauteri clavilh medial segon aquesta forma:	And if you wish, perform the cautery with three or four cauteries using a medial pronged cautery in this manner:
Capitol .xliii.	Capitol. xliii.
De cauterizacio al comensament de gilbositat.	On the cautery at the beginning of gilbositat.
Motas veguadas endeve aquesta malautia als petitz enfantz; e senhal del comensament de lu en les enfantz es que accideys sobre lor estrectura en le ale eves la elevacio e·l movement.	When this disease affects small children; and the sign of the beginning of it in children is that they experience discomfort in the legs, elevation, and movement.
E atrobas en le derier espondil del dos e dels notz de lu que ja comensa a sobremontar sobre les autres spondils.	You find in the lower vertebra of the back and of its notes that it is beginning to overmount on the other vertebra.
E donc quan tu vezes aquo e voles prohibir, lahoras cauterisa aquel am cauteri que sia cercle segon aquesta forma:	And when you see this and want to prohibit it, then cauterize that with a cautery in the form of a circle according to this shape:
que prengua le cauteri sobre tota partida del spondilh engualment.	let the cautery cover all parts of the vertebra equally.
E si vols, cauteriza en le circuit del spondilh am le cauteri de punt dos linhas o tres.	And if you wish, cauterize around the vertebra with a pointed cautery two or three lines wide.
E sian les puntz propdas entre lor.	And let the points be close to each other.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat am aquo que havem dit.	Then place something warm in the area until it is healed as we have said.
Mays guarda que cauteri no sia administrat en gelbositat que sia fayta per spasme de nervi.	But beware that the cautery not be applied in inflammation caused by nerve spasm.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter XLIV.
De cauterizacio de podagra e de dolor de juncturas.	On the cautery treatment for gout and joint pain.
Quan dolor de juncturas son faytas per humors fregas les quals so enfundutz a quascun membre del cors, lahoras quan veno dolors en los pes, de costuma dels metges es que aquo apelen podragua propriament.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and when venous pains in the feet occur, doctors customarily call this gout.
E donc cum es curada podagra de causa frega am manieyra de cura e no so remaugudas las dolors, lahoras las remau cauteri.	And since gout caused by cold is treated with a method of treatment and not alleviated by remedies, it is usually treated with cautery.
E es que tu cauterizas aquel aprop evacuacio en le circuit de la junctura del pe am motz cauteris.	And you cauterize the area near the foot's joint with cautery to facilitate the evacuation in the circuit of the joint.
E sia cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the olive cautery, which is this its form:
E si es necessitat que puntz sia fayt sobre la fassia del pe, lahoras fay am cauteri de punt.	And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
E si las dolors pujan entro als denolhs o a las autras juncturas, e aquo motas vetz s’endeve, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre quascun donolh am tres cauteris o quatre de tota partida am aquest cauteri olivar.	And if the pains rise into the toes or other joints, and this method does not relieve them, then cauterize each toe with three or four cautery marks using this olive cautery.
E si motz cauteris que aquestz cauteris sian a tu necessaris, lahoras cauteriza aquel e no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri abans, sia tant solament enviro la specitut de la codena.	And if you need to use cautery irons for these cauteries, then cauterize that part and do not press your hand too much against the cautery before, just around the size of a cone.
E si las dolors pugan entro al donolh e·l dos, lahoras aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le sieu capitol.	And if the pains penetrate to the groin and testicles, then apply the cautery which we have said in our chapter.
E si las dolors so en las mas tant solament, e es apelada suagra, lahoras puncta en le circuit dels focils ayssi cum se revolvo, puncta en aquels dos linhas.	And if the pains are only in the thighs and it is called sciatica, then puncture along the course of the nerves as they run, puncturing in those two lines.
E si reman de las dolors en les ditz, lahoras puncta en le cercuit dels focils sobre quascun notz e sobre la pinche de la ma.	And if the pains remain in the fingers, then puncture along the course of the nerves over each finger and over the base of the hand.
E si las dolors pugan aprop alscus jorns als coydes o als muscles, lahoras cauteriza les quascus de tota part dels ajutoris.	And if the pains remain for several days in the elbows or muscles, then cauterize the areas around all parts of the elbows.
E no evacuas le malaute de bon regiment e de recepcio de medicinas, quar si es fayt bon regiment e flacma es evacuada am aquest cauteri sira sanat, Dieus ajudan.	And if you do not evacuate the illness according to good regimen and reception of medicines, for if it is done well and the inflammation is eliminated, this cautery will be healthy, God help us.
Capitol .xlv.	Capitol. XLV.
De cauterizacio de rompeduras.	Of cautery for ruptures.
Quan endeve rompedura en les angonars e diysendo les budels denant l’atela al genetiu, e aquo es comensan de aprop, lahoras cove que tu mandas al malaute layssar la sua comestio en le sieu dia e que use de causas leniens per so que la fenda deyssenda del sieu ventre.	When there is a rupture in the groin and the intestines are protruding through the opening in front of the skin, and this condition begins to worsen as you approach, then you should instruct the patient to fast on that day and use mild remedies so that the abdominal wound does not become worse.
E aprop segua le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e comanda a lu que tengua le sieu ale entro que sia foro getat o aparesca l’atela o·l budels.	And then place the patient's hand over their abdomen, and command them to keep it there until the skin is stretched or the skin and intestines appear.
E aprop retorna aquel am les tieus ditz e senha am tenta la ruptura sobre le os del pentenilh am senhal la extremitat del qual sia semblant a la maytat de cercle a las subiranas partidas del cors.	And then return those to the thighs and test the rupture over the bone of the shin, marking the extremity of which should resemble the size of a circle in the upper parts of the body.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then heat the cautery, the form of which is as follows:
entro que sia mot rog e gete cintilhas.	until it is heated red hot and begins to spark.
E aprop reduzeys le budel o l’atela a la sua conquavitat, e aprop pause la sua ma sobre le loc per so que le budel no yesqua.	Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
E tu ja has ubert entre las coyssas del malaute e dejos lu as pausat un coyssi, et autre servent sia sus las cambas de lu, e autre sus le pietz de lu, le qual tengua las suas mas.	You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
E aprop pausa le cauteri sobre aquel senhal am la tua ma am cauteri stan dreyt, e te aquel entro que am lu consieguas le os del pentenilh entro al mieg del duiduni; e itera am aquel autra veguada si a tu aquel no has conseguit en la primieyra veguada entro al os.	Then place the cautery over that mark with your hand holding the cautery straight, and keep it there until you can get to the bone of the ankle in the middle of the shin; and repeat with another pass if you have not reached the bone in the first pass.
E observa saviament del ysiment del budel en la hora de la tua cauterizacio, que no comburas aquel budel per so que sobre le malaute no vengua in mort o autre gran malicia.	Observe wisely the condition of the hernia during your cautery, that you do not burn the hernia too much, lest it lead to death or other great harm.
E sapias que quan tu am le cauteri no atenhas le os, no confereys la tua operacio.	Be aware that when you use the cautery, you should not touch the bone, as this does not complete your operation.
E cove que·l cauteri dels enfants sia subtil segon le gran e la mesura de lor.	Ensure that the cautery for children is fine according to their size and measurement.
E aprop cura le loc del cauteri per tres dias am boder entro que sia remauguda la scara del foc.	And then care for the area of the cautery for three days among other things until the wound from the fire is healed.
E aprop cura aquel am les autres enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then care for that as with other ointments until it is healed.
E le malaute sia jasent sobre le sieu dos per xl dias entro que sia sigillat le loc e la plagua.	And the patient lies on their back for 10 days until the area and wound are healed.
E cove que pauses le nutriment de lu segon la longitut del temps de la curacio de lu le qual le linesca le ventre de lu, e que le budel no yesca fora deves le esforsament de guerir.	And ensure that the nourishment is withheld according to the length of time for the healing of the wound which closes the abdomen, and that the intestine does not come out with great effort to heal.
E aprop quan se vol levar aprop xl dias, lahoras aministra liament decentment fayt, e tengua aquel per autres xl jorns.	And when it is time to lift after 10 days, then administer the poultice properly made, and keep it for another 10 days.
E sia mermat de trebalh e de replecio de vianda e de beure, e de votz vehementz, quar quan usa de aquest regiment de sanacio entiera sira sanat.	And let it rest from work and replenishment of food and drink, and of strong voices, for when it uses this regimen of healing entirely, it will be cured.
E yeu diyre la curacio de las rupturas en las autras partidas del ventre, e so al comensament, e vols que no treguan, lahoras cauterisa la ruptura d’aquel am cauteri redon segon la quantitat de lu, e sia aquo que es exhurit de la codena ayssi cum la tersa partida de lu; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit, e no es ajustat.	And I will say the healing of ruptures in other parts of the abdomen, and at the beginning, if they are not to tear, then cauterize the rupture with a round cautery according to its quantity. And what is drawn from the vein should be treated like the tender part of it; then care for that as we have said, and it is not stitched.
E ja diyssero alcus primiers que ruptura sia cauterizada am cauteri triangular segon aquesta forma, pus que es senhada am tenta:	And some have said that a rupture should be seared with a triangular cautery according to this form, rather than sewn with needle.
e es pausada linha que eys per la latitut en le latz pus sobira de la ruptura, e autra linha al desus; e depausa la tua ma am un cauteri clavilh, mays le primier cauteri es pus leugier e milhor.	And a line is placed there for the length in the slashes but above the rupture, and another line on top; then place your hand with a cruciform cautery, but the first cautery is lighter and better.
Capitol .xlvi.	Capitol. XLVI.
De cauterizacio de torcio.	Of the cautery treatment for a wound.
Quan endeve en alscus membres per cazement o per percussio dolor e persevera aquela dolor per lonc temps e no comfereys al u curacio am medicinas, lahoras cove que cauterizes am cauteri de punt.	When pain in some members persists due to embedding or percussion and does not respond to medicine or treatment, then you should cauterize with a pointed cautery.
E sia le cauteri de tot membre segon la magnitut e la parvitat de lu, e vertut e develitat de lu, e locacio de torcio e dolor de lu.	And the cautery should be of the size and proportion of the member, with its virtue and depth, and the location of the wound and its pain.
Donc si·s sanat per le primier cauteri, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera sobre lu le cauteri; quar de costuma de aquelas dolors es que sian punctatz de membre ad aquel membre le qual apropinque al u, per que cove que consieguas aquels am cauteri entro que·l malaute sia sanat.	Then if the wound is healed by the first cautery, that is good; otherwise, repeat the cautery on it. For customarily, such pains are punctured in a neighboring member to the affected one, so that you may achieve healing through the cautery before the illness is cured.
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter XLVII.
De cauterizacio de lepra.	Of the cautery treatment for leprosy.
Les lebros alcunas veguadas am cauteri per mot gran juvament, e magerment si la specia de lepra que es fayta per putrefaccio de flacma e de melencolia.	Lepers are sometimes treated with a large cautery, and moderately so if the type of leprosy is caused by the putrefaction of flame and melancholy.
E donc cum tu vols cauterizar aquel, considera si la lepra es comussan e as aquela curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no deysen, ni esta, e temes sobre le malaute que la corrupcio comprehenda tot le cors de lu e tota la compleccio de lu, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le cap am v cauteris: am un en le mieg loc del cap, e am le segon pus dejos de lu, eves le front a la fi dels cabels; e amdos sobre dos corns; e am un detras, sobre la nuca o servitz.	And so, if you want to cauterize that area, consider whether the leprosy is common and as cured as we said in the division, neither here nor there, and fear that the corruption may encompass his entire body and all its composition. Then cauterize that area on the head with five cauteries: one in the middle of the head, leave one space from it, shave the forehead to the end of the hair; two on the horns; and one behind, on the neck or servant.
E ultima la tua ma am le cauteri un pauc entro que emprema en le os una petita empressio, e de lu sian deslocadas las scorsas, per so que la expiracio de grossas vapors sia alleujada de lu; e cauteriza sobre la melsa segon que es precesit.	And finish your hand with a cautery a little inside where it makes a small impression in the mouth, so that the exhalation of thick vapors is alleviated; and cauterize on the tongue according to necessity.
E si la lepra es ja expanduda sobre le malaute e apar manifestament, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquel am aquels cauteris les quals havem ditz en le cap; e am cauteri sobre la extremitat del nas, e am dos cauteris sobre las doas maysselas, e am dos cauteris sobre dos spondils del col, e am vi cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e am un gran sobre les spondils prop de la coeta, e un sobre la cotea , e am dos sobre las anquas, e am un sobre quascuna anqua, e am dos sobre les donols e un sobre quascun donolh, e am dos sobre les coydes, e am dos sobre les muscles, e am dos las teneretutz del sieu pietz; e cauteriza aquel sobre totas las juncturas dels ditz de las mas e dels pes, e sobre quascun talon dels sieus pes, e sobre les foscils de las suas mas.	If leprosy is already spread over the patient and clearly manifest, then you must cauterize that area as well as those cauterizations which we have said in the head; on the tip of the nose, and two cauterizations on both shoulders, and two on two vertebrae of the neck, and six on the vertebrae of the back, and one large one near the shoulder blade, and one on the spine, and two on the armpits, and one on each armpit, and two on the hips and one on each hip, and two on the knees, and two on the muscles, and two on his foot tendons; cauterize that on all joints of his fingers and feet, and on every heel of his feet, and on his nails.
E guarda te dels nervis les quals so sobre le talo que no comburas aquels.	And guard the nerves which are over the heel that you do not burn those.
E alcunas veguadas es cauterizat am un cauteri sobre le os del pentenilh e am autre sobre la boca del stomac, e autre sobre le fietge.	And sometimes cauterization is done with one cauterization on the bone of the pelvis and another on the entrance of the stomach, and another on the liver.
E sapias que quant mays ajustas cauteris, tant es mays juvatiu e mays conferent; e sapias que le malaute no ha en le cauteri dolor, ayssi cum han les sas, per so quar le cors de lu ja es stupefayt.	And know that the more tightly you apply the cauterizations, the more beneficial and effective they are; and know that the patient does not feel pain from the cauterization as they do from others, because the body of the patient is already numbed.
E cove que les cauteris sian grans o paucs segon les membres e las juncturas segon que es precedit de las specias dels ferramentz.	And ensure that the cautery marks are large or small according to the parts and joints as specified by the type of instruments used.
E aprop cura le cauteri am farina de errs coyta am mel e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then cure the cautery with a mixture of errct powder and honey until it is healed.
Capitol .xlviii.	Capitol. liv.
De cauterizacio de stupor.	On the cautery for stupor.
Quan alcun membre es stabozit o adormit e es curat am medicinas, olis e emplastres, e no es sanat, lahoras tu cauteriza aquel membre stabozit am cauteris segon que merita la grandesa del membre o la parvitat de lu.	When any limb is numbed or paralyzed and is treated with medicines, ointments, and plasters, and does not heal, then you cautery that numb limb with cauteries according to the size of the limb or its smallness.
E sia lo tieu cauteri intrant la ispicitut de la codena un pauc.	And let your cautery penetrate the depth of the wound a little.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then treat that with ointment until it is healed.
E alscunas veguadas es cauterizada alcuna stupor le qual endeve a las mas e als pes, e als spondils del dos e ves le eysiment dels nervis les quals mavon aquel membre, e es remauguda la stupor.	And sometimes certain applications are cauterized for stupor which affects the head and the feet, and the spaces of the nerves through which those limbs pass, and thus the stupor is relieved.
Mays no prusuma sobre aquo sino aquel que es savi en la anotomia dels membre e de la egressio dels nervis tot le cors moventz.	But do not presume on this except he be wise in the anatomy of the members and of the exit of the nerves moving the whole body.
Capitol .xlix.	Capitol XLIX.
De cauterizacio de albaras que es morfea.	Of the cautery for albargues that are morphew.
Quan albaras es antiqua e no comfereys a lu alcu dels enguentz de medicina, lahoras tu cauteriza sobre aquela am cauteri preon un pauc segon la quantitat de la specitut de la codena entro que sia remauguda la blancor e la color de lu, e la color de lu sia mudada.	When albargues are old and do not respond to any of the ointments of medicine, then cauterize over that with a cautery previously heating a small amount according to the quantity of the coeden (a type of cautery) until the white color and the color of it change.
E aprop cura aquel am farina de errs e de lentilhas am oli rozat e am folhas de arnagrosa, e am sanc de colomba o am sanc de yronda, da cascuna sia una partida e totas sian mescladas, e aprop sia linit un drap e sus le loc sia pausat entro que sia sanat.	And then cure that by applying a paste of err (possibly a type of seed) and lentils in well-pressed oil and leaves of arnica, and either dove dung or swan dung, with one part of each, all mixed together. Then apply a cloth and place it over the area until it heals.
Capitol .l.	Capitol L.
De cauterizacio de cranc.	Of the cautery for cranc.
Quan canser es comensan e vols aquel ostar, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri de cercle en le circuit de lu ayssi cum es revolgut.	When cancer begins and you want to stop it, then cauterize it with a circular cautery along the circuit of the lesion as it is revolving.
E diysero les savis que sia cauterizat am lo derier cauteri en le mieg loc; mays a mi no es vist aquo, quar temi que sia ulcerat, e yeu ja e vist aquo alcunas veguadas.	And the wise will say that it should be cauterized with the last cautery in the best place; but to me this is not visible, for I fear it is ulcerated, and I have seen this several times.
E es pus dreyturier que sia cauterizat en le circuit de lu am cercle ayssi cum avem dit, o am motz cauteris.	And it is more proper to cauterize it along the circuit of the lesion in a circular manner as we have said, or with several cauteries.
Capitol .li.	Capitol.
De cauterizacio de adubilati.	Of the cauterization of tumors.
Quan alcun adubilati es tardat en maturacio, e aysso es per la superfluitat fazen aquela, o per etat del malaute, quar es vielh en decrepitat, de pauc sanc, o per le temps, e tu vols festinar en la maturacio de adubilati; lahoras cauteriza en le circuit de lu am motz cauteris petitz punctan; e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela fastinara en maturacio.	When some tumor is delayed in maturation, this happens either due to excess fluid causing it, or due to the state of the patient, who is old and decrepit, with little strength, or due to time, and you want to hasten its maturation; then cauterize along the circuit of the tumor with several small puncturing cauteries; and leave the one that will mature on its own.
Mays si tu vols la perforacio de lu am cauteri, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: e depausa aquel en le mieg loc de adubilati entro que penetre la codena.	If you want to make the puncture with a cautery, then heat the cautery of which this is the form: and place that in the middle of the affected area so that the hot iron penetrates.
E si le cauteri en aquel loc que es pus dejos, per so que le cors del brac sia alleujat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you place the cautery in that location, let it be, so that the wound on the arm is alleviated; and then cure that which has become healed.
Capitol .lii.	Capitol. lii.
De cauterizacio de corrodent.	Of the cautery for corroding.
Corrodent es corrupcio ambulant en le membre, la qual corrodeys aquel ayssi cum a foc comedent lenha secca.	Corroding is a wandering corruption in the member, which you corrosive as if fire consuming dry wood.
Donc si vezes aquel corrodent en loc le qual sufferte cauteri am foc, lahoras tu igneys cauteris clavils motz paucs, e grans segon que es convenent en aquel loc en le qual es corrodent.	Then if you find the corroding in a location where the cautery of fire is applied, then heat the cautery with many small and large coals as appropriate for that location where there is corroding.
E aprop cauteriza aquel de tota partida entro que erradiques tota la corrosio e no romangua alcuna causa de lu.	And then cauterize that completely as you remove all the corrosion and do not leave any cause of it.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres dias, e pausa sobre les locs cauterizats solpre trissat am oli mesclat entro que las scaras sian totas eradicadas e tota la corrupcio.	And for three days let it be, and place over the cauterized areas three times a day oil mixed until all the scars are completely eradicated and all the corruption is gone.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz carn engendrantz.	And for it cure that with ointment generating flesh.
Mays si aprop tres dias vezes que la carn nasca sana en la qual no es corrupcio, bo es; mays sino, lahoras itera le cauteri sobre aquo que es romas en les locs corrumputz.	But if for three days the flesh grows healthy in what is not corrupted, that is good; but if not, then iterate the cautery over what is rotten in the corrupt areas.
E corrodent es medicat alcunas vetz am medicina aguda, quar aquela es meza en loc de cauteri.	And if the wound is treated several times with acute medicine, which is half the use of cautery.
Mays empero cauteri am foc es de pus leugier juvament.	But nevertheless, a cautery with fire is good for slightly pus-filled wounds.
E yeu ja e dit la curacio de lu am medicina aguda en la divisio, e donc pren aquela quan de lu auras endegencia.	And I have already described the treatment with acute medicine in the division, so use that when you need it.
Capitol .liii.	Chapter XXXIII.
De cauterizacio de claus e dels autres semblants.	On the Cauterization of Wounds and Other Similar Conditions.
Motas veguadas endeve a las partidas dejos del pe malautia que s’apela clau, e es causa grossa, fentrada, la qual ladeys le pe; e cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, so es cauteri am foc e cauteri am aygua cauda.	Small stones placed at the outer part of the foot that is affected by gout; and this is a major cause, entered, which affects the foot; in these cases, cauterization is performed according to two methods, one with fire and one with water-based cauterization.
Mays cauteri am foc es que igniscas le cauteri concau semblant a pena de voltor, le qual sia feyt de ferr segon la quantitat la qual contengua le clau de tota partida, e sia de subtils marguas.	The cauterization with fire is done by heating the concave cautery resembling a half-round, which is made of iron according to the quantity it should contain the stone from the entire affected part, and it should have thin edges.
E aprop pausa aquel ignit sobre le clau, e aprop revolveys la tua ma am le cauteri en le circuit del clau entro que·l cauteri pervengua a la profunditat del clau.	Then place the heated cautery over the stone, and quickly move your hand around the cautery in the circle of the stone while the cautery reaches the depth of the stone.
E leyssa aquel per tres dias entro que comense getar brac.	Let it remain for three days until it begins to bleed.
E aprop emplastre aquel am malvas salvatges trissadas am sal, e leyssa le emplastre sobre aquel per una nuoyt, quar aquel sira eradicat de las suas razitz.	Then apply a poultice with wild thyme boiled in salt water, and let the poultice remain on it for one night, so that the stone is thoroughly expelled from its place.
E aprop cura le loc am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanat.	Then treat the area with a cream of generative flesh until it heals.
E si so no-convertitz, e motas veguadas accideysso en la superficia del cors, majorment en las mas e les pes, lahoras cove que tu aministres en aquels cauteri am aygua, e es que prenguas una quannula de eram o de ferr o de pena de voltor, e pausa aquela sobre le clau; e aprop geta en la quanula de aygua cauda pauca cantitat, e rete la tua ma, e tu revolveys aquela am compressio de la tua ma de tot, e sia enpremut le marge de la canula en la razit del clau, e atrobara la aygua cauda via al preon de la razit del cau; e espera le malaute un pauc la mordicacio de l’aygua cauda per una hora, e aprop remau aquela, quar le clau am las suas razitz sira erredicat.	If so non-convertible, and many blisters occur on the surface of the body, mainly on the thighs and feet, then when you administer in those cautery with water, take a quanna of elm or iron or pen of wood, place that over the nail; then put in the quanna of water a small quantity, raise your hand, and you revolve that with compression of your hand from all sides, and press the margin of the canula on the side of the nail, and you will find the water flow through the hole of the nail; wait for the patient an hour at the bite of the flowing water, then remove it, as the nail has its sides bored.
E ayssi fe am aquels la i aprop l’autre entro que venguas sobre totz les quals de lor so en le cors.	And do the same to them and then the other entering which you come over all of whom they are in the body.
E aprop cura aquels pus que las razitz dels claus so erradicadas am aquo dels enguentz les quals la carn ve engenran.	And then cure those boils where the nail's sides have been bored by applying ointments which cause the flesh to regenerate.
Capitol .liiii.	Capitol. liiii.
De cauterizacio de tremor.	Of the cautery for trembling.
Quan endeve ad alcu tremor per freg en le nervi o per febre de causa frega, o per autra causa semblant, lahoras cove que tu cauterises aquel am quatre cauteris o am v sobre les spondils del dos, entre quascun spondilh am un cauteri; e am cauteri en le pietz de lu, e sobre l‘estomac de lu, am cauteri olivar.	When an excessive tremor occurs due to irritation of the nerves or fever of a similar cause, or another similar cause, then you should apply four or five cautery marks on the spine, placing one cautery between each vertebra; and one on the foot, and one over his stomach.
E la tremor de lu se repausa e festina la sanetat de la malautia frega.	And the tremor subsides, and the health improves with the cure of the illness.
Capitol .lv.	Capitol.lv.
De cauterizacio de albati accidentz al cors.	Of the cautery for accidents in the body.
Quan en le cors so espellitz albati, e so pustulas fendas las quals so feytas de materias grossas corruptas; donc cove al comensament cum apareyso, que sia cauterizat sobre tot cap de la fistola am cauteri subtil am fustz de mirt, la extremitat del qual es estenduda am foc; o am razitz de erestologia longua; o am cauteri lentecular.	When in the body there are swollen abscesses with openings which are made of coarse corrupted materials; then at the beginning as they appear, they should be cauterized over the entire length of the fistula with a thin cautery stick made of myrtle, the end of which is extended over the fire; or with a reed from erestologia longua; or with a flat round cautery.
E alscunas veguadas es cauteri ademamil al comensament de la sua expulcio segon aquesta manieyra; e no so cregudas, e es disrumpuda la superfluitat fazens aquels, et sana de aquels.	And sometimes a cautery is applied additionally at the beginning of its expulsion according to this manner; and when the superfluity is broken, they heal from those.
Mays empero cove que aquo sia fayt aprop evacuacio am fleubotomia.	Moreover, I must ensure that this is done promptly with venesection.
Capitol lvi.	Capitol lvi.
De cauterizacio de fluex de sanc accident per incisio de arceria.	Of the cautery treatment for flux due to an accident from an arrow wound.
Tropas veguadas endeve fluex de arceria que es inciza deves la plagua la qual endeve deforo, o deves la incizio de apostemas o cauteri del membre, e alor semblantz, e es dificil remaura aquel.	Often times, flux from an arrow wound that is incised drains through the wound which has been made, or through the incision for apothecary or cautery of the limb, and then the swelling appears, and it is difficult to stop this.
Donc cum accideys ad alcu aquo, lahoras tu·t coyta am la tua ma a l’orrifici de la arceria, e pausa sobre aquel le tieu dit endic estrenh aquel motas veguadas entro que sia ostat le fluex del sanc dejos le tieu dit, e que non yesqua.	Then, when any of this occurs, you should hold your hand over the orifices of the arrow wound, and place it there to strengthen that part with your hand until the flux of the blood has stopped, then remove your hand so it does not swell.
E aprop pausa en le foc les cauteris olivars paucs e grantz, per nombre motz, e exsuffla sobre aquels entro que sian mot ignitz.	And then place the olive cautery sticks over the fire for a few moments, and blow on them until they are hot.
E aprop pren de aquels un petit o un gran segon le loc e la plagua en la qual es rompuda la arteria, sobre aquela vena festinantment pus que auras remaugut le tieu dit, e te le cauteri entro que sia abcindit e restreyt aquel sanc.	And then take a small or large one according to the place and wound where the artery is ruptured, over that vein press forcefully as you have already touched as I said, and keep the cautery so that it is cut and narrowed that blood remains.
E si le sanc es expellit de l’orrifici de la arteria quan tu remaues le tieu dit e extringeys le cauteri, lahoras pren la un autre cauteri coytadament dels cauteris les quals en le foc son preparatz, e donc no cesses fer aquo un aprop autre entro que le sanc sia restrengit.	And if the blood is expelled from the opening of the artery when you touch as I said and narrow the cautery, then take another cautery prepared among the cauteries that are in the fire, and therefore do not cease to do this one after another so that the blood is narrowed.
E guarda te que no comburas le nervi que aqui es, e que vengua sobre le malaute autra malicia.	And make sure you do not burn the nerves here, and that no other evil comes to the patient.
E sapias que quan de l’arteria flueys sanc, lahoras no es possible en aquels restrenge la sanc, e majorment quan l’arteria es gran, si no am una de quatre manieyras: o am cauteri ayssi quo dit havem, o am extraccio quan no es extrayta, quar quan es extrayta las extremitatz de lu miels son comburidas e es restreyt le sanc, o que sia liat am fiel o am liament per fort strectura, o que sian pausadas sobre lu medicinas de las quals la vertut es restringir la sanc; e sian strengudas am pulvinar am costriccio decent.	And know that when blood flows from the artery, it is not possible to narrow the blood flow in those places, especially when the artery is large, if not by one of four methods: either with a cautery as we have said, or by extraction when it is not extracted, or when it is extracted, its ends are burned and the blood flow is narrowed, or by tying with pitch or with resin for strong constriction, or by compressing with woolen cloth in a proper bandage.
Mays aquel que aministra restriccio decent de lu am liament e am strictura am draps o per posicio de causas comburentz e de semblantz, no comfereys sino tart.	May those who administer proper restriction to the patient with liniment and by stricture of cloths or by position due to burning causes and similar ones, not confide only on time.
Mays si aquo endeve ad alcu e no sia le metge present ni medicina, lahoras obre am pausament del dit indic sobre le orrifici de aquela vena ayssi cum havem dit, e entenda a la gran costreccio de lu entro que le sanc sia ostat de la sobirana partida de la plagua, e sobre la arceria le dit no sia remaugut; e de sobre la arceria sia aspergit am aygua frega de mot gran fregiditat entro que·l sanc sia congilat e engrossat; e mays cossire en que ha de cauteri o de medicina necessitat.	May it happen to someone and there be no doctor present or medicine, then open the finger gently over the orifices of that vein as we have said, and understand the great compression within which the abscess has remained from the upper part of the wound, and over the archery the finger should not be pressed; and over the archery let water fregated with a great deal of coldness be applied before the abscess is congealed and enlarged; and may it be burned with cauterization or necessity of medicine.
Comensa la segonda partida.	Begin the second part.
De incisio e perforacio e ventozas e de fleubotomia e de plaguas e de lor semblants.	Of incision and perforation and venesection and of bloodletting and of wounds and of their similarities.
Aquestas son paraulas de Albucazis.	These are the words of Albucazis.
Ja havem dit en le primier capitol tota malautia en la qual cauteri am foc es convenient e am medicina comburent, e las occasios e las causas de lu, e les instrumentz en aquels necessaris am las formas dels cauteris; e he ordenatz les capitols de la subiranetat del cap entro als pes.	We have already said in the first chapter all illness in which cauterization with fire is convenient and medicine burning, and the occasions and causes of it, and the instruments necessary for those cauterizations; and I have ordered the chapters of the subirenity of the head between the feet.
E yeu procesire en aquest capitol per aquela meteysa guisa, per que sia alliujat lo querent aquo, lahoras sobre aquo que aura demandat.	And we proceed in this chapter by that method, so that what is desired may be alleviated for him who has requested it.
E denant que yeu comense aquo, cove, fils, que aprenguatz que en aquest capitol es per terror aquo que es en le capitol primier de cauterizacio.	And before we begin this, learn, sons, that in this chapter what is treated comes from the first chapter on cautery.
E per aquo que cove que sia en lu gran cautela, quar en la operacio la qual es en aquest capitol motas veguadas catz evacuacio la qual es am sanc am le qual esta la vida deves la aspersio de la vena o incisio sobre l’apostema o apercio de exsitura o puracio de la plagua o extraccio de sageta o incizio de peyra e a lor semblantz.	And because this, be careful, for in the operation which is in this chapter, multiple evacuations are made necessary. You must either apply the aspersion of the vein or incise over the abscess or puncture it, or perform an excision or purgation of the wound or extract an arrow or make an incision for pus, and do so with caution.
E de totz aquels so acompanhatz temor e tremor e en le mas de lor catz la mort.	And all of these operations are accompanied by fear and trembling, and in the most severe cases, death.
E yeu amonesti vos que sobre vos no caia aquo en le qual es esitacio, quar alcunas veguadas cazo deves vos manieyras de homes am manieyras motas de malautias.	And I warn you that this applies to you in the position where it is situated, for at times you may find yourself handling matters related to patients' ailments.
E de lor es alcu que s’irays am la sua malautia e es leugiera deves lu la mort, e aysso per la vehemensia de aquo que troba de sa malautia, e per longuesa de la malautia de lu, e am la malautia es paor la qual significa mort.	And some of these operations require you to be close to the patient's ailment. If it is a mild case, you may find yourself dealing with their death, this due to the intensity of what you encounter in their illness, and from the prolonged nature of their illness, where fear of the illness signifies death.
E de aquels es le qual dona a tu son aver e ditta, tu esperant am aquel sanetat, e la sieua malautia es perniciosa.	And of those which give you their affection and say, you expect from that health, and their illness is dangerous.
E donc no cove que tu consentas en aquel que ve a vos del qual es aquesta manieyra; e la vostra cautela sia major que covesitat e la vostra rapacitat; e no presumatz alcuna causa sobre aquo sino aprop sciencia certa la qual virifica aquo deves vos, e al qual perve successio lausabla.	And so you must consent to only those who come to you, of whom this is the manner; and your caution should be greater than greed and your rapacity; and do not presume any cause over this but rather certain science which verifies what you must do, and by which success is praiseworthy.
E usatz en la curacio de totz vostres malautes de pronosticacio e indicacio de lu al qual es salut convertida, quar en aquel es a vos ajutori sobre adquisicio de fama e de memoria, de lausor e de gloria.	And use in the cure of all your patients according to their prognosis and indication of them, for in that is assistance given to you for the acquisition of fame and memory, praise and glory.
O, filhs, Dieus en vos spire le sieu entendement e no oste a vos direccio e proteccio, quar aquo es en la sua ma.	O, children, God infuses His understanding into you and does not deprive you of direction and protection, for this is in His hand.
E yeu e ordenat aquest capitol distingent per capitols segon que precedit en le capitol de cauteris, de la cura del cap entro als pes, per que sia a vos alleujat aquo que demandatz de aquo e del qual havetz necessitat.	And I have arranged this chapter separately into chapters as preceded in the chapter of cautery, concerning the cure from the head to the feet, that what you seek and need may be eased for you.
Capitol primier.	First chapter.
De la curacio de aygua la qual es contenguda en le cap dels enfantz.	Of the cure of water that is contained in the head of the child.
Sapias que aquesta malautia motas veguadas endeve als enfantz deves le enfantament e quan la noyrissa estrenh le cap del enfant ses livitat.	Know that this illness often appears in children during childbirth and when the mother strengthens the child's head.
E alcunas veguadas endeve per causa amaguada la qual no es saubuda.	And sometimes appears for hidden causes which are not known.
Mays yeu no vi aquesta malautia sino en les enfantz; e a totz aquels les quals yeu vi se coytec la mort, e per ayssi es a mi vist layssada obra en aquels.	But I have only seen this illness in children; and for all of them whom I have seen, it leads to death, and thus I have been left with no other choice but to work on those.
E yeu e vist que un enfant le cap del qual era d’aygua omplit, e·l cap de lu era totjorn ayssi magnificat entro que ceser no podia sobre si meteys per la grandesa del sieu cap, e mays que la humiditat fe aucmentada entro que foc mort.	And I have seen that a child's head was full of water, and its head remained constantly swollen until it could no longer bear the weight due to the size of its head, and more so because the humidity increased until death.
E aquesta humiditat o es agreguada entre la codena e l’os, o es agreguada dejos le os sobre le ciphac.	And this humidity is either added between the membrane and the bone, or added by placing something on top of the head.
Quar la operacio en aquel si la humiditat es entre la codena e l’os e le apostema es pauc, lahoras cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am una fissura en la latitut, e sia la longitut de la fissura cays dos notz entro que corra la humiditat, e aquesta es la forma del spatum:	When the operation in that place where the humidity is between the tendon and the bone and the abscess is small, then cut in the middle of the location making a fissure in the lateral direction, with the length of the fissure being two finger widths so that the humidity flows, and this is the form of the spatium:
E donc si la humiditat es mays augmentada e l’apostema es major, lahoras son aqui dos fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	And so, if the humidity is much increased and the abscess is larger, then make two fissures in this manner:
E si la humiditat es dejos le os, senhal de lu es que tu vezes la comissuras del cap ubertas de tota partida e l’aygua es spremuda quan tu compremes aquela am la tieua ma a las partidas dedintz e no es aquo a tu amaguat.	And if the humidity leaves the bone, the sign is that you feel the edges of the tendon open from all sides and the water oozes out when you press on it with your hand inside, and this is not what you expected.
Cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am tres fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	Cut in the middle of the location making three fissures in this manner:
e aprop la inscizio extratz ne tota la humiditat; e aprop strenh las fissuras am draps e plumassols; e aprop enbroca aquo de sobre am vi e oli entro al quint dia, e aprop deslia le liament e cura la plagua am tentas e enguentz, e strenh le cap am equalitat; e mange le malaute am vianda secca de pauca humiditat entro que·l membre sia confortat e sanat.	and drain all the humidity; and strengthen the fissures with bandages and feathers; and on the fifth day, pour oil over it, and remove the stitches and heal the wound with ointments, strengthening the tendon with equal parts; and let the patient eat dry food with little humidity until the limb is comfortable and healed.
E es autra manieyra de incisio, que consideras hon apar la magnitut del apostema e la colleccio de l’aygua, quar alcunas veguadas es mays en le occipicii, o en la partida denant, o en la destra, o en la sinistra; e donc aten am la incizio on appar le apostema e la replecio de l’aygua, e fen aquo segon que a tu es miels possible.	And there is another method of incision, which consideras regarding the size of the abscess and the collection of water; for in some cases it may be more in the occiput, or in the front part, or on the right side, or on the left; and therefore attend to the incision where the abscess and the filling with water appear, and do so as is most convenient for you.
Et observa que no inscindas la arteria e endevengua flueys de sanc e mora le malaute per aquel flux de sanc am evacuacio de humiditat.	And observe that you do not incise the artery and attempt to flow blood from the patient by that flow of blood for evacuation of moisture.
Capitol .ii.	Chapter II.
De inscisio de las arterias las quals so aprop las aurelhas, apeladas hilasseysse.	Of the incision of the arteries which are near the ears, called hilaseysse.
Capitol segon.	Chapter II.
Quan endeveno ad alcu catars o raumas als huelhs o al pietz, e es antiquat aquo, e no confereys en aquo la curacio de las medicinas, lahoras la deriera curacio en aquest es incizio de aquelas dos arterias.	When you encounter a clot or wound in the heel or foot, this is an ancient practice, and you should not rely on medical treatments for its cure; rather, the proper treatment involves incising those two arteries.
E donc cove quan tu vols inscidir aquelas que le malaute raza lo sieu cap, e aprop fregua le loc am drap aspre per so que aparan las arcerias, e aprop sia strengut le col del malaute am alcu drap; e aprop considera on polsa la vena; e les locs de quascuna sobre les locs les quals so aprop las aurelhas depremutz, e tant se occultan sino en alcus homes.	And therefore cover when you want to incise those that the malady root is its head, and then rub the place with rough cloth so that the arteries appear, and then strengthen the neck of the malady with some cloth; and then consider where to palpate the vein; and the places of each over the places which are near the ears pressed, and they are hidden in almost all men.
E aprop senha sobre la arceria am tenta, e aprop inscideys quascuna am le spatum de quascuna partida agut am inscizio pervenient entro al os, e sia aquo per la latitut del cap.	And then press over the artery with your hand, and then incise each with a sharp knife along the path of the vein leading into the mouth, and do this for the width of the head.
E si vols, entromet le spatum dejos la arteria e trenqua aquala a las inciden a las partidas desus.	And if you want, insert the knife leaving the artery and cut it at the points where the incisions are made above.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio cays dos ditz ajustatz, quar quan alcuna vena es inscizida le sanc es eyssit am egressio pulsatil, le qual saut deforo per saut frequent.	And let the length of the incision be two digits wide, for when any vein is incised, the bleeding occurs at the pulsating exit, which jumps frequently through that opening.
Mays si la arceria no apareys al cintiment, lahoras cove que tu mesures de la aurelha la quantitat del spazi de tres ditz, e aprop senha am tenta, e fen entro al os.	And if the artery does not appear at the incision, then measure from the ear the quantity of space for three digits, and then press with your hand, and make the incision into the mouth.
E aquo que cove getar del sanc es quantitat de vi unc., e fort leu ne geta de lu mays o mens, e tot aquo es segon la quantitat la qual appareys de la vertut del malaute e de la replecio de la arceria de lu.	And that which flows from the wound is a quantity of blood one pound, and more or less it flows more or less, and all this is according to the quantity which appears from the virtue of the malady and the filling of the artery of the leg.
E aprop considera la plagua, e donc si reman sobre le os alcuna causa del ciphac, lahoras inscindys aquo per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then consider the wound, and therefore if any cause of infection remains on the bone, cut this away so that no abscess forms.
E aprop strenh la plagua am plumassols e am liamentz de drap de li, e aprop cura aquela am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then strengthen the wound with down feathers and pieces of cloth, and then cure that with ointments until it heals.
Capitol .iii.	Chapter III.
De extraccio de las arcerias las quals so en las templas.	On the extraction of the arteries which are in the temples.
Quan ad alcu accideys emigranea antiqua o catertz agutz, per humiditatz agrimonials e per qualiditat en les lacertz des templas, o sodo antiqua vehement e semblantz ad aquels, e es medicat am las manieyras de curacio de medicina e aquo no comfereys, lahoras nos hem sproatz en aquestas malautias extraccio de las arcerias en les templas, o cauterizacio de aquelas ayssi cum havem mostrat.	When an old or acute migraine occurs due to harmful humidity and the quality of the vessels in the temples, or if it is a strong old one resembling those, and is treated according to the methods of medical cure, and since this does not work for you, then we have resorted to the extraction of the arteries in the temples, or cauterization of those as we have shown.
E la manieyra de la operacio e extracio de aquelas es que·l malaute raza les pels les quals son en les templas; e entenda a la arceria apparent en le templar quar ela es a tu mostrada per le sieu pols, e·s occultada sino en paucs homes per vehemencia de freg.	And the manner of the operation and extraction is that you raise the skins which are on the temples; and understand the apparent artery in the temple where it is shown to you by your own pulse, and is hidden in few men through the violence of cold.
E si a tu es occultada, lahoras le col del malaute sia strengut am alcun drap; e aprop fregua le loc am un drap aspre o evapora le loc am aygua cauda entro que aparesca a tu la arceria manifestament.	And if it is hidden to you, then lift the neck of the patient with some cloth; and then rub the area with a rough cloth or evaporate the place with water until the artery becomes clearly visible.
E lahoras tu pren le spatum del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then you take the spatium of which this is the form:
E aprop tu scorja la codena am aquel am facilitat entro que pervenguas a la arceria; e aprop geta en lu onti e extratz aquela a las partidas sobiranas entro que extraguas aquela de la codena e descobras aquela de las tunicas las quals so dejos aquela, de tota partida.	And then you inject the needle there with facilitation until you reach the artery; and then cut into it and extract that part above until you remove that from the needle and discover that of the tunics which you leave there, from all parts.
Mays si la arteria es subtil, lahoras envolveys aquela am la extremitat del oncii, e aprop inscindeys de aquela una partida segon la quantitat per la qual sian alonguadas las extremitatz de lu e sian contraytas, e no endevindra flux de sanc, quar si no so inscididas no pujara le sanc de tot.	But if the artery is fine, then wrap it at the extremity of the onion; and then divide a part of it according to the quantity for which the extremities of it are long and contracted, and will not allow the flux of blood, for if they are not divided, the blood will not rise up.
E aprop evacua del sanc de vi unc. entro a tres.	And then evacuate from the vein one. in three.
E si la arceria es gran, lahoras cove que tu lies aquela en dos locs am fiel dopble fort de ceda o am cordas a lonc, e no coyte a lu putrefaccio denant la consolidacio de la plagua e endevengua flux de sanc.	And if the artery is large, then you should divide it into two locations with a silver needle doubled very strong or with long cords, and do not allow it to putrefy before the consolidation of the wound and ensure a flow of blood.
E aprop incideys la superfluitat la qual es entre dos liamentz; e fay aquo en aquela hora o aprop autra ora.	And then incise the superfluity which is between two threads; and do this at that time or nearby another time.
E si vols, cauteriza aquela am cauteri entro al os am cauteri cutellar entro que sian incididas las extramitatz de lu, e stara en loc de aquela meteyssa obra.	And if you wish, cauterize it with a cautery inside the bone and with a surgical cautery where the threads are incised, and it will take the place of that metal work.
E es milhor obra sino que·l malaute aia febre o es de escalfada compleccio; quar cauteri es de aquelas causas que ajudan a las humiditatz finidoras, e donc es milhor en juvament.	And it is better to do so unless the patient has fever or is of hot complexity; for the cautery is one of those causes that help in resolving humidity, and therefore it is better in convalescence.
E cove aprop la extraccio de las arcerias que huomplas le loc de coto antic, e sian pausatz sobre lu polvils decentement fayt, e aprop sia curat am medicinas seccas fazen naysser la carn e am calguas entro que sia sanat.	And you should incise the extraction of the arteries that you have placed in the proper location, and they should be packed over with decently made powder, and it should be treated with dry medicines until it is healed.
E si mentre obres autra veguada endeventa flux de sanc de la arceria, lahora tu te coyta a restrenger aquel sanc, o am cauteri, o que omplas le loc de coto, e strenh la tua ma entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if while working another time you encounter flow of blood from the artery, then you should constrict that blood, or with a cautery, or what you fill the place with cloth, and strengthen your hand so that the blood is restrained.
E si deguna causa de aquelas no es a tu present, lahoras pausa le tieu dit sobre le loc entro que·l sanc sia congilat, e enbroca le loc am aygua de vehement fregiditat entro que la acuitat repausa, e sia strengut segon que cove.	And if for any reason it is not at your disposal, then place your finger on the spot between where the blood is constricted, and immerse the area in water of strong cooling until the inflammation subsides, and let it be strengthened accordingly.
E aquo que es pus leugier en extraccio de arceria es que tu cauterizes la vena am aquest cauteri haventz dos cotels, pus que tu has senhat les dos locs am tenta, e depausa quascus, mot ignitz, entro que pervenguan al os e inscindan la vena en dos locs, per so que sia elonguat aquo que es entre las extremitatz de lu, quar no son consolidadas de tot am aquest cauteri.	And what is lighter in arterial extraction is that you cauterize the vein with this cautery having two knives, after you have marked the two places with pins, and place hot irons over them until they reach the bone and cut the vein into two parts, so that what is between the extremities of the vein is elongated, which are not fully sealed by this cautery.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri:	And this is the form of the cautery:
E sia la acuitat dels dos cotels esemps.	And let the sharpness of the two knives be supreme.
Mays empero si so mendres acuitat que dos cotels es milhor, quar si so agudas cum dos cotels propera a quascuna freg, e no enscideysso la carn am velocitat.	But however, if the pain is sharp as two knives, it is better, for if acute like two knives near each part of the flesh, and not lessen so quickly.
Donc cum en aquels es alcuna grossitut, es tenguda la calor del foc en aquels e la carn es abscindida leugierament.	Therefore, when there is any swelling, hold the heat from the fire on those areas and the flesh is incised slightly.
E aquesta obra es milhor en tota obra e pus leugiera.	And this work is better in all works and more slight.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre dos cotels la quantitat de la grossesa del dit.	And let the space which is between two knives be the quantity of the swelling of the digit.
Capitol quart.	Capitol quart.
De la cura de cors de lagremas agudas e aciduas dels huels.	Of the cure for bodies affected by sharp and acidic tears of the eyes.
Quan so lagremas aciduas, e es le cors de aquelas venas las quals so sobre le test del cap deforo, e no comfereys en aquo alcuna causa de la curacio de medicina, e vezes la cara del malaute ja enrogesir e sent en le sieu front deambulacio ayssi cum si era deambulacio de formiguas, e·ls huels de aquel so extenuatz, humitz enayssi que ja les pels de lor son conodutz, e las parpelas so scalfadas per la acuitat de las lacrimas, les antics agro mesties en la curacio de aquelas de aquesta operacio, e nompnero aquela curacio am spassa.	When the tears are acidic, and the body is affected by those veins which lie over the temple of the head and do not respond to any cause of cure in medicine, and the face of the patient often turns red and feels a walking sensation on their forehead as if it were ants crawling, and the eyes become weak and moisten, as if the skins are known, and the eyelids are scalded by the sharpness of the tears, the ancients mixed in the cure for those from this operation, and they numbered that cure among the passing things.
E es que tu comandas al malaute rayre les pels les quals son en le sieu front, e aprop inscideys en le front tres fissuras engualment distans segon la longitut del front.	And you command the patient to stretch the skin on his forehead, and then incise the forehead with three equal distances according to the length of the forehead.
E si’ la longitut de la fissura cays dos ditz: la una fissura sia engualment distant a la longitut del nas en le mieg loc del front, e la segonda segon la longitut un petit del movement dels lacertz les quals so en le lacrimal, e la tersa del autre part.	And if the length of the incision is two fingers: the first incision should be equally distant from the length of the nose in the middle of the forehead, and the second according to the length of a small movement of the tears which are in the lacrimal, and the third on the other part.
E guarda te de la incizio de las arcerias las quals so en dos latz, e elongua la tua ma de la continuacio de amdos las mandibulas.	And beware of the beginning of the arteries which are in two branches, and keep your hand away from the continuation of both jaws.
E si’ l’espazi de quascuna inscizio la quantitat de tres ditz ajustatz.	And if the space of each incision the quantity of three fingers adjusted.
E si’ a tu una pessa d’espongua apparelhada o draps seccatz motz am les quals exsiccas le sanc.	And if you have a piece of sponge prepared or dry cloth, place them where the bleeding stops.
E aprop entremet le spatum de dos agudas extremitatz, del qual aquesta es la forma de la inscisio de lu:	And then insert the point of two sharp extremities, the form of which is the incision:
que es de la partida des templas entro a la segonda inscizio.	that is from the part between the temples into the second incision.
Exxcorja am aquel tota la codena la qual es entre dos incizios am le ciphac le qual es sobre le os, e aprop fay aquo de la inscizio migera entro a la segonda inscisio.	Excise all the tissue that is between two incisions near the cheek which is over the bone, and then do this of the middle incision into the second incision.
E aprop stratz ne aquest spatum e entromet en la primieyra inscizio autra vetz un autre instrument le qual es apelat cutellar, agut de una part e del autre no agut.	And then stab this flap and insert it into the first incision. Alternatively, use another instrument called a cuttle, sharp on one side and blunt on the other.
E pausa le latz de aquel agut deves la carn annexa deves la codena, e le latz de lu leon dintz le os, e empelley aquel entro que pervengua a la fissura migera, e abscindeys am aquel totz les vaysels que descendo del cap als huels.	And place the sharp edge to separate the adjacent flesh, and the blunt edge into the bone, and push it into the middle crack until it reaches there, and cut all the vessels that descend from the head to the heels.
Mays que sia continuada la inscizio ad aquo appar de la codena, e aprop fay aquo en la fissura migana entro al autra fissura.	More than that, continue the incision to where the tissue appears, and then do this in the middle crack between the other crack.
E pus que corr del sanc quantitat engual, exprem les locs de las pessas del sanc congilat.	And after the bleeding has equalized, squeeze the areas of the swollen feet with your hand.
E aprop pausa en quascuna fissura calgua de coto vielh, e pausa sobre aquels polvils enbegutz en vi e oli e vi agre, e vegas que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then place your hand over any gouty crack in the old skin, and place over those powders mixed in wine and oil and vinegar, and ensure that no abscess forms.
E en le tertz dia deslia le liament e aministra gran enfusio de aygua cauda o tebeza, e aprop cura aquo am enguent bazilicon am oli rozat e autres entro que las plaguas sian sanadas.	On the seventh day remove the bandage and administer a large fomentation of water cauda or thuja, and then cure this with an ointment of basilicon in olive oil and others until the sores are healed.
Capitol .v.	Chapter V.
De la cura de lagramas per catartz e als huels descendentz de las partidas dedintz del cap.	For the cure of tears due to catarrh and those drops descending from the inner parts of the head.
Quan ad alcu veno catartz agutz e continuantz, e vezes les huels del malaute extenuatz petitz, e ja le reguardament de lor es debelitat, e las palpebras ulceradas e de lor cazo les pels, e en le preon del cap es dolor aguda ledent e extrenutacio consequent, lahoras sapias per aquestz accidentz que las materias e catartz no veno sino de motas venas de las partidas dedintz procedent.	When there is an acute catarrh with continuous discharge, and the drops from the foot are small and exhausted, and their appearance shows debilitation, and the eyelids are ulcerated, and the skin of their head, in the preauricular region, has acute pain and subsequent extension, then you should know that these symptoms arise from the venous humors from the inner parts.
E la milhor curacio en aquels es aquesta: que comandes al malaute que raza lo sieu front, e aprop inscideys en aquel una fissura al mieg loc del front, un petit per la latitut (e comensa am la fissura del templar senestre entro al dextre templar; e sia inscisio entro al os; e eslongua la tua ma dels lacertz del templas lesquals son maugutz deves la mastigacio), entro que sia le os descubert.	And the best cure for these is this: command the patient to raise his forehead, and then incise a small crack in the middle of the forehead, about the width (starting from the left temple between the right temple; and within the bone; extend your hand towards the temples which are swollen you should grind them), until the bone is exposed.
Exsicca tot le sanc am espongua o am drap secc e aprop repleys entre las doas labias de la fissura am coto vielh o am draps de li.	Dry all the blood with sponge or dry cloth and then place something like a pledget of wool or a piece of cloth between the two lips of the crack.
E aprop estrenh desus am polvils enbegutz en vi e oli per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	Then strengthen above with powders mixed in wine and oil so that it does not develop into an abscess.
E quan deslias aquo e veses que l’apostema ja es diminuit, lahoras cove que fregua le os entro que comensa en lu nayser carn, e aprop cura aquel am regiment exsiccatiu le qual fassa neysser la carn, ayssi cum si tu prenes de farina de froment dos partidas e de colofania quatre partidas e mescla o, e de lor sia fayt emplastre e sia aministrat en aquestas plaguas a de la carn nativitat.	And when you uncover this and see that the abscess has already diminished, then wash the bone where it begins to grow flesh, and then cure it with a drying regimen which makes the flesh shrivel, as if you take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of colophony and mix them, and from them make a paste and administer it to these wounds of the flesh's nativity.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter VI.
De la cura de aquo que catz en las aurelhas.	Of the cure for that which catches in the ears.
Tota causa que catz en las aurelhas es una de quatre specias, quar o es peyra mineral o causa semblant a peyra, ayssi cum ferr e veyre, o es de planta ayssi cum ceze o fava, o es causa fluxtibla ayssi cum aygua e vi agre e a lor semblantz, o alcuna bestia.	All cause that catches in the ears is of four species: either it is mineral stone or a cause similar to stone, such as iron or flint, or it is from a plant such as cypress or bean, or it is a fluxible cause such as water or vinegar and things like them, or some beast.
E donc quan peyra catz en l’aurelha o autra causa semblant de aquelas causas que no ajustan ne creysso en l’aurelha, e pausa la aurelha al solelh, e si vezes la peyra, lahoras distilla en aquela alcuna causa de oli violat o sizami, e aprop aministra la extraccio de lu, e fay le stornudar am condizi, e oppila las nars deve le aveniment de stornutacio.	And when pyre burns in the ear or another cause resembling those causes that do not adjust or creeps into the ear, place the ear in the sun, and if you touch the pyre, then distills in that some cause of violet oil or sesame, then return the extraction of it, and make him sneeze under conditions, and plug the nostrils to prevent sneezing.
E aprop pausa en le circuit de la aurelha alscunas pessas de drap o lana, e dextendas la aurelha a las partidas desus, quar motas veguadas es foro-getada am aquestas causas.	And place some pieces of cloth or wool in the circuit of the ear, and extend the ear to the parts above, where motas (small particles) are often found due to these causes.
E si no n’es getada, lahoras aministra extraccio de lu am le instrument apelat gesti epicicarios subtil del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if it is not found, then perform the extraction of it with the instrument called gesti epicicarios subtil, the form of which is as follows:
E si es foro-getada am gesti, bo es; e sino, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am onci subtil de pauca duplicacio.	And if it is found with the gesti, well; otherwise, then perform the extraction of it with a fine, slightly duplicated hook.
E donc si no es foro-getada per aquo, lahoras fay una canula de aram e entromet la extremitat de la canula en le trauc de la aurelha e claus a l’enviro de la canula am cera e am oli mollificada per so que no sia ubert sino la canula.	And if it is not found by this, then make a catheter of wire and insert the end of the catheter into the meatus of the ear and close around the catheter with wax and with oil softened so that it does not open except the catheter.
E aprop extratz am le tieu vent am fort atraccio, quar tropas veguadas cum aquo que havem recontat.	And then extract the thigh muscle with strong traction, for too tightly bound as we have recounted.
Mays si no es foro-getada en aquesta manieyra, lahoras pren de halka alumbat o de vecz aparelhat am le qual son preses les ausels una patita quantitat, e pausa aquel en la extremitat de ray, e aprop envolopa sobre aquel coto decentment pausat.	If it is not loosened in this manner, then take a hot flax or a waxed thread on which the gashes are placed a quantity of lint, and place that at the extremity of the tear, and then wrap over that妥善包裹。
E aprop entromet aquel en le trauc de la aurelha am facilitat, e aprop excicca la aurelha de la humiditat.	And then insert that into the tract of the ear with facility, and then dry the ear of its humidity.
E donc si no es foro-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recontadas, lahoras tu coyta a talhar aquela denant que endevengua apostema caut o espasme.	And if it is not loosened by all the causes we have recounted, then you sew to cut that which will likely develop into an abscess or spasm.
E la manieyra de talhar aquela es que tu al comensament sancnes le malaute de la vena sephasica e extratz del sanc segon la mannieyra de la vertut de lu, e aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas e converteys l’aurelha a las partidas desus, e fen am petita fissura en la razit de la aurelha deves lo greys de lu en le loc be premegut de lu.	And the manner of cutting that is that at the beginning you mark the patient's thigh where the sciatic vein is located and extract it according to the virtue of the leg, and then make a cut between your fingers and turn the ear upwards, and make a small fissure in the rear part of the ear and place its cartilage in the well-packed location.
E sia la fissura de figura lunar entro que pervengua a la peyra, e, la peyra atrobada, osta aquela si podes am instrumentz apropriatz; e aprop cos la fissura en aquela hora am velocitat, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And let the crack be of lunar shape through which it reaches the heel, and, if the heel is damaged, block it if possible with appropriate instruments; then, near that crack at that time apply velocity, and cure it within the time that it heals.
E si la causa cazent en la aurelha es un dels gras que creysso e so inflatz, lahoras aministra la curacio e la extraccio de lu; mays si no obezeys a tu ad eyssiment, lahoras tu pren spatum teune subtil segon aquesta forma:	And if the cause lies in the ear, being one of the waxes that accumulate and are inflamed, then administer the cure and extraction of it; but if it does not yield to your attempts, then you take thin subtle spathae according to this form:
e aministra am aquel la abscizio de aquel gra lo qual es cazut en l’aurelha.	And administer to him the extraction of that wax which is lodged in the ear.
E no fassas aquo quan cogitas que aquel ja es humectat per la vapor del aurelha, e pausa aquel en motas pessas, e prop extratz ne aquelas am les oncis o am gesti subtil, o ab inscizio ayssi co dit havem, quar es alleujada la extraccio de lu.	And do not do this when you think that it is already moistened by the vapor of the ear, and place it on fine wicks, and prop the extraction in those with oil or with subtle gestures, or by incision as we have said, for this alleviates the extraction.
Mays en l’aygua la qual es intrada en l’aurelha cove que·l malaute use de sternutacio am condizi al comensament, e omple la sieua aurelha am alcu coto vielh, e jagua sobre aquela aurelha en la qual es l’aygua, e si per aquo es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, lahoras pren tropas peyras teunas e leons segon la longitut del dit, e calfa aquelas en le foc un pauc, e le pacient entrometa una de aquelas en le trauc de la sua aurelha e saute sobre la un pe sieu de aquela partida e percussia am una autra peyra sobre la peyra la qual es dintz la aurelha.	But in the water which has entered into the ear canal where the patient uses sternutation to facilitate the removal, and fills his ear with some old cloth, place that ear over the water in which it is, and if by this it is perforated, good; but if not, then take rough pieces of papyrus or leonine skin according to the length of your finger, heat those in the fire for a little, and have the patient insert one of those into the passage of his ear and jump over a piece of that material and strike it with another stone above the stone which is inside the ear.
Donc no cesse aquo am peyra entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada.	Do not stop applying heat until all the water has been expelled.
E ja l’aygua sira foro-getada enayssi que tu prenguas de papier o de gonc i, e met la una extremetat de lu en l’aurelha e estendas l’autre extremitat am foc entro que sia comburit le may de lu.	And once the water has been thoroughly expelled, take a paper or a wick, and place one end in the ear and extend the other end into the fire until the material is burning.
E prop met i autre gonc e fay aquo tantas veguadas entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada, e stratz aquel am canula ayssi co desus es dit de la peyra extrasadora.	And put another wick and do this as many times as necessary until all the water has been thoroughly expelled, and extract the canal with a canula as previously described.
Mays en la extraccio de bestia intrant en aquela aurelha, si es a petit cos, ayssi piussa e a lu semblant, cura aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio; mays si es de gran cos la qual causa apar al sen del vezement, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am gesti e oncis, e la causa de lu es pus leugiera de totas las autras causas que cazo en l’aurelha.	In the extraction of small objects entering that ear, proceed carefully and as seems fit. Care for it as we have said in the division. But if it is a large object causing immediate pain, then perform the extraction with speed and precision, as the cause is less severe than other causes found in the ear.
Mays en la extraccio de verm engendrat en la aurelha, quan tu curas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e en le tractat de distillacios e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu reguardes la aurelha al solelh.	In the extraction of worms generated in the ear, when you treat it as we have said in the division and in the treatise on distillations, and if your treatment does not seem effective, then you should look into the ear with the sun shining on it.
E donc si apar aqui alcuna causa dels verms, lahoras extratz aquel am gesti o am onci subtils, mays si no apar deguna causa, lahoras pren una canula dejos streyta e desus ampla de la qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And so if there appears any cause of worms, then extract that with forceps or fine tweezers, but if no cause appears, then take a cannula and stretch it open, this is its form:
E entromet la extremitat subtil en la aurelha segon la quantitat la qual suffertar puesca le malaute; e aprop sucgeys am aquela per succio fort, e fay aquo motas veguadas, entro que totz les verms sian foro-gitatz.	I insert the fine end into the ear according to the amount that the patient can bear; and then suck it with strong suction, performing this several times until all the worms are extracted.
Mays si no obezeysso a tu al ayssiment, lahoras tu opila e claus en le circuit de la canula am cera ayssi cum havem dit; lahoras aministre distillacios las quals han ja esproadas les antics en la curacio dels verms, e atrobaras aquo en le tractat de distillacios.	But if your attempt does not succeed, then you insert and close the circuit of the cannula with wax as we have said; then administer distillations which have already proven effective in the treatment of worms, and you will find this in the treatise on distillations.
E sia la tua efusio am la qual efundas les olis medicinas en la aurelha am aquest strument del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And let your application be with that which you pour medicinal oils into the ear with this instrument, whose form is as follows:
E fay aquela de argent o de eram, dejos streyt, en le qual sia un petit trauc, e am pla desus.	And make it of silver or copper, stretch it out, in which there is a small hole, and with a flat surface above.
E donc sia cum empellent a que es en la conquavitat de la canula de continent aqui on sira necessari.	And therefore they should push so that it is in the cavity of the cannula here where it will be necessary.
E si vols, pren le ray e envolveys en la extremitat de lu decentment coto, e aprop gieta oli en la concavitat del auziment, o suc de alcuna herba, o aquo que vols de aquestas medicinas en la canula — e aquela es en la aurelha —, e aprop entromet le ray am coto desus e exprem am la tua ma aquel am compressio temprada de lu entro que l’oli sia expellit en la concavitat del auziment e le malaute senta le oli dedintz.	And if you want, take the wick and wrap it properly around its end, then place oil in the cavity of the ear, or the juice of some herb, or any of these medicines into the cannula — that is in the ear —, and then insert the wick carefully above and squeeze your hand with a gentle compression so that the oil is expelled into the cavity of the ear and the disease feels the oil inside.
E aquo que sia enfundut en la aurelha sia ja scalfat am foc un petit.	And what is infused in the ear should already be heated over a fire for a little while.
E guarda te que la causa la qual distillaras en l’aurelha no sia trop frega, quar las medicinas de aurelha no suffertan aquo.	And make sure that the medicine you will distill in the ear is not too hot, for ear medicines cannot tolerate that.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter VII.
De curacio de opilacio de aurelhas.	On the Treatment of Ear Abscesses.
Alcunas veguadas alcus enfantz yeysso dels ventres de lors mayres no-perforatz, e aquo ja accideys en alcus homes, opilacio en le meat de la aurelha per plagua o per carn nada en aquela; e aquesta opilacio alcunas veguadas es fayta en le preon del trau de la aurelha la qual no consiec le vezement, e alcunas veguadas es en las partidas defora.	Sometimes children get abscesses in the flesh of their ears from their parents' unperforated ears, and this happens occasionally in some men as well, with an abscess forming in the ear flesh due to a wound or no obvious cause; in some cases, the abscess forms in the preauricular region which does not become visible immediately, and in other cases, it appears in the outer parts.
E aquela que accideys en le preon de lu, la qual no comprehen le vezement, es en las majors disposicios de dificil sanacio.	And that which occurs in the region of the belly, which does not respond to external treatment, is in the major dispositions for difficult recovery.
E en aquela en qual consegueys le vezement, cove que tu pauses la aurelha del malaute al solelh e reguarda en aquela.	And in that where you can apply treatment, make sure that you place the patient in the sun and look at it.
E donc si vezes oppulacio apparent, obre aquela am espatum subtil del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if you see an apparent swelling, open the small incision beneath which this swelling is located:
Si’ la extremitat de lu en la qual sia petita la latitut, del qual la una partida sia aguda e l’autra no; e le spatum sia de dos latz leon per so que no fassa lizio al aurelha.	If the extremity of the incision is narrow in width, with one part sharp and the other not; and the incision is two inches long to prevent it from irritating the ear.
E donc si la opilacio es per carn nascuda en la aurelha o en le meat de lu, lahoras te aquela am oncis subtils e incidiys aquela vehement facilitat entro que sia ostada tota la carn.	And if the obstruction is due to hidden flesh in the ear or in the meat of the ear, then make small incisions and cut deeply enough to remove all the flesh.
E si opilacio es en le preon de la aurelha, lahoras pren ray subtil leon e escalfa aquel am foc un pauc, e aprop met aquel en le meat de l’aurelha.	And if the obstruction is in the region of the ear, then take a thin needle and heat that incision slightly with fire, and then place it in the flesh of the ear.
E donc si as scentit oppulacio am aquo que le malaute atroba am facilitat, per gravetat de ausir, esforsa la oppressio de lu am facilitat; e guarda te que no plagues les nervis del aurelha.	And therefore if you sense an abundance of that which the patient finds with ease due to the weight of urination, relieve the oppression by facilitating it; and be sure not to damage the nerves of the ear.
E aprop pausa en l’aurelha drap de li segon la quantitat del ample del trauc lo qual tu as envolvutz en l’enguent egipciac; e fay aquo per alcus jorns entro que sias segur de la consolidacio de la plagua; o que prenguas qualgua e enfon aquela en ayguaros e pulveriza sobre lu segi trissat e usa de lu; e si vezes la aurelha ja esser apostemada, lahoras cove que tu estraguas la qualgua e permutes aquela am autra qualgua la qual tu envoloparas en cerot que sia fayt am oli rozat, entro que sia le apostema caut cedat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then place the cloth in the ear according to the size of the wound which you have covered with Egyptian ointment; and do this for several days until you are sure of the healing of the wound; or take some and apply it to water and powder it over the dry trisssat, using it; and if you see the ear already protruding, then clean that which you damaged and change it for another which you wrap in a cloth made of olive oil, until the abscess is discharged; and cure that once it is healed.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras submergeys esponga o drap en aygua frega e pausa sobre la aurelha, e usa del autra curacio la qual restrengeys le flux del sanc, la qual es dita en le tractat de distillacio.	But if a flow of blood occurs, then submerge a sponge or cloth in cold water and place it over the ear, and use the other treatment which constricts the flow of blood, which is said in the treatise on distillation.
Capitol .viii.	Capitol. viii.
De cura de athezil le qual endeveno a las palpebras.	For the care of an eyelid that has become inflamed.
Athezil les quals endeveno a las paupebras dels huels alcuna veguada so humitz, alscunas veguadas son secs.	Eyelids that occasionally become moist, at other times dry.
Donc cove que tu tenguas aquels am tenhalhas o am onci, e inscindas aquels am espatum de las suas razitz, e aprop pausa sobre les locs segi trissat.	Then take those flax or linen cloths, soak them in the foam of their juice, and place them over the areas after allowing them to dry.
Mays si dolor am flux de sanc veno, lahoras tu cauteriza aquels am cauteri lanticular subtil.	But if there is pain with a flow of venous fluid, then cauterize those areas with a thin pointed cautery.
E la milhor cauterizacio es aprop las inscizios e tropas veguadas retornam quan reman alcuna causa de sas razitz; e quan so cauterizadas am foc, aquelas razitz son comburidas e no retornan.	And the best cautery is near the incisions, and the wounds return when there remains any cause of their juice; and when they are cauterized with fire, those juices are burned and do not return.
Capitol .ix.	Capitulum ix.
Cura de grandeyssa que veno a las palpebras dels huels.	Care for an inflammation of the eyelids due to venous fluid.
Motas veguadas endeve en las palpebras dels huels alcuna causa la qual es asemblada a grandissa en sa fortalicia e duricia, e per so grandissia es apelada.	Spots occasionally appear on the eyelids due to some cause which resembles inflammation in its strength and hardness, and for this reason it is called inflammation.
E es agreguacio de humiditat grossa en la palpebra dejos e desus.	And it is an addition of thick humidity in the eyelid above and below.
Donc la opperacio en lor es que consideras lahoras si la grandissia es procedent en lu en aquo que apar de la palpebra e es mauguda a tota partida; e la causa de lu es leugiera.	And the operation in them is that you consider whether the enlargement is present in them at what appears from the eyelid and is swollen in all parts; and the cause of it is slight.
Donc fen sobre aquela am fissura per la latitut, e aprop escorga aquela de tota partida am facilitat entro que evasesca, e aprop suspen aquela am onci e abscindeys aquela.	And make a slit there for the width, and then probe that part with ease so that it drains, and suspend that part and cut it off.
Mays si a tu no es apparelhada la incizio de lu si no pus que penetras la palpebra am inscizio pauc a pauc, lahoras aquo no notz en deguna causa.	But if you do not have access to the beginning of it and must penetrate the eyelid with a small incision little by little, then this is noted for no apparent reason.
E si la figura es gran, lahoras tu l’ajusta am sutura; e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the figure is large, then you adjust it with sutures; and care for that until it is healed.
E si es pauca, a tu no sobrevindra mal per aquela quar l’anguent de lu restaura aquela e encarna.	And if it is small, you will not suffer ill from it because the salve restores and heals that area.
E si la grandissia es declinant a las partidas dedintz de la palpebra deves la superficia dedintz, lahoras evesa la palpebra e suspen la grandissia am onci, otra que tu indigescas de incizio, e prem aquela de tota part, e si la palpebra per inscizio es alonguada, aquo no notz en deguna causa.	And if the enlargement is decreasing in parts inside the eyelid, you adjust the internal surface, then drain the eyelid and suspend the enlargement with a clamp, another that you choose for incision, and press it from all sides. If the eyelid by incision is lengthened, this is noted for no apparent reason.
E aprop la incizio, lava le huel am aygua salada; e cura le loc am aquo que encarna entro que sia sanat.	And at the beginning, wash the area with salt water; and cover the place with water until it is healed.
Capitol .x.	Capitol.
De la cura axcirnah en la palpebra desus del huel.	For the cure of excision in the upper eyelid.
Axcirnath es grays le qual es engendrat en las tunicas de la palpebra desus, e majorment endeve als enfantz, agrava les huels de aquels et accideyso a lor catartz le mayti; e no podon reguardar la claror del solelh per aquo quar lagremas se coytan ad aquels.	Excision is when foreign bodies are generated in the tunic of the upper eyelid, and especially in children, it aggravates their ailments and causes death through their catarrh; they cannot look at the clarity of the sun due to this, and tears flow abundantly.
E per so tu vezes aquels jaser sobre les lors caras tot temps, e sobre les lors caras dormen; e so a las palpebras de lor dejos les sobrecils humidas, las quals ja ha cuberta imflacio, e iminencia de accernac apparent es en l’uelh; e que quant tu premes le loc am les tieus ditz, tu centes accernac entro aquels.	And for this, you often see them weep on their cheeks all the time, and they sleep with tears on their cheeks. The upper eyelids of their eyes are wet, which are already covered by inflammation, and the imminent appearance of excision is in the eye; and when you press the area with hot objects, you feel the excision within them.
E alcuna manieyra de opperacio es en aquel que le malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop pausa drap de li e de lu fay calgua, e fay de lu cercle segon la quantitat la qual contena arthernach de tota partida, e aprop pausa aquel sobre aquela e prem am les tieus ditz de tota per que sia agreguat arcernac en le mieg del cercle, e aprop fen en le mieg de aquela humiditat am spatum inscident am fissura per la latitut, e la fissura no sia major que la fissura que es fayta en flaubotomia.	And one method of operation is when the patient rests his head on a hot object, then places a cloth around him and her, and makes a cut according to the quantity that contains all parts, then places this over it and presses with hot objects so that excision is added in the middle of the circle. Then in the middle of that wetness, makes an incision through the width, and the incision should not be larger than the incision made in a flaubotomy.
Mays en le preon cove que tu fendas la codena tota entro que pervenguas ad arcernach, quar en las mays desposicios proceseys arcernach per fissura segon la forma de grayseza blanca.	More in the preceding condition that you cut the cord entirely until you reach the arceran, for in the more severe cases you proceed with a fissure according to the form of whiteness.
Donc extratz aquela am draps los quals tu as envolopatz entre les tieus ditz a las partidas deforo e revolv entre la ma dextra e sinistre entro que sia dispargut.	Therefore, remove those from the cloths which you have wrapped around your thighs and revolve between your right and left hand until they are dispersed.
E guarda te que no ajustes en la fissura per so que am le spatum no pervenguas al huel e ladescas aquel.	And be sure that you do not press too hard on the fissure, lest the pus not drain and you seal it up.
Mays si no apar a tu arternach en le comensament de la fissura, mays que tu ajustes en la fissura un petit am fecilitat entro que procesisca arternach; e aprop extratz aquela ayssi quo havem dit; e aprop submargeys draps de li en aygua e vi agre e pausa les sobre le loc e estrenh aquels am polvils.	More if no alternative appears at the beginning of the fissure, rather than pressing on the fissure, use a small piece of flannel between your fingers; then remove those as we have said; and place cloths in water and vinegar over the area and strengthen them with powders.
E so alcus que trissan sal e pausan aquel en la conquavitat de la fissura per so que aquo que es remas de aquela humiditat.	And use salt to dress the area in the cavity of the fissure so that what remains of that humidity is absorbed.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And cure it until it is healed.
Mays si accideys en le loc apostema caut, lahoras cura aquel am emplastres cedatils entro que sia sanat.	And if an abscess occurs in that place, then cure it by applying flaxen plasters until it is healed.
Capitol .xi.	Capitol.
De manieyras de tactimi del huel.	Methods of palpation of the whole body.
Quan en las palpebras dels huels so natz pels ajustatz dejos les pels naturals e so antiquatz, lahoras aquels noso al huel e fan endevenir manieras de malautias ayssi cum lacrimas assiduas e mollificacio de palpebras e tela entro que aquo sia causa de destruccio del huel que s’apela tactinir del huel, e cura se en quatre manieyras: o per cauteri am foc; o am medicina acuta segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri; o es fayt atactini per inscizio e sutura; o per cannas segon que yeu diyre.	When in the eyelids of the eye, small sores adjust themselves and heal naturally, then those who experience such symptoms may develop illnesses such as constant tears and softening of the eyelids and tissue. This can be a cause of destruction of the eye, which is called tactinir del huel. It is cured in four ways: by cautery with fire; by acute medicine as previously described in the Capitol on cautery; by surgical excision and suturing; or by cauterization with needles as I will explain later.
E donc cove que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se; aprop converteys la palpebra del uelh am la tua ma sinistra, e si es convertida, bo es; e sino, entromet agulha en aquela en la qual sia fiel de la partida pus dejos de la palpebra, e fay penetrar la agulha am fiel desus, e aquo sia — prop del marge de la palpebra en le qual naysso les pels — prop dels pels, e tira le fiel a las partidas desus am la palpebra, e converteys aquela am le ray.	And thus make sure that you hold the patient's head steady with your right hand; then place the eyelid under your left hand. If it can be easily moved, it is good. Otherwise, insert a needle into the spot where the eyelid tissue was cut out, and push the needle with thread upward, positioning it near the margin of the eyelid where the skin meets. Pull the thread through the upper parts of the eyelid tissue and move the lid back into place.
E aprop fen en la partida dedintz de la palpebra dejos les pels ajustatz am spatum inscidentz del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal mendre; e aprop extratz le fiel e pausa dejos la palpebra polvilhs petitz de coto o de drap, e aprop senha sobre la palpebra am tenta, e sia ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirt.	And then in the inner part of the eyelid, place the skins tightly against the tear fluid from the major lacrimal gland into the minor lacrimal gland; and extract the bile and place dust of wool or cloth over the eyelid with a probe, and thus as the figure of a leaf of myrtle.
Mays empero cove que sia la figura segon la quantitat de helevacio de la palpebra, quar aquo ja es diversificat en les homes, quar de aquels es le quals indigeys que sia inscidit de la palpebra gran quantitat segon la quantitat per la qual la palpebra es mollificada.	But I must observe that the figure should be according to the degree of swelling of the eyelid, for this already varies in women, for those in whom a large quantity of fluid is excreted from the eyelid should have it incised to a greater extent according to the degree by which the eyelid becomes softened.
E aprop fen am le spatum sobre las doas linhas las quals has senhadas, e comensa del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal menor.	And then place the tear fluid along the two lines you have marked, and start from the major lacrimal gland into the minor lacrimal gland.
E si’ la tua fissura prop dels pels naturals ayssi cum es la grossetut del rey.	And if your incision near the natural skin is as thick as the king's thumb.
E aprop met le onci en un dels dos angles de la codena, e aprop excoria aquela tota, e aprop ajusta am la scitura las doas labias am gula o fiel de lana subtil, e abstergeys le sanc, e fay adherir aquo que superflueys dels fiels sobre dos sobrecils am alcunas causas enviscans, si voles far aquo, e sino, non cures.	And then place the needle in one of the angles of the wound, and incise it completely, and then suture the two edges with a needle or piece of fine wool thread, and clean the exudate, and apply what is superfluous from the threads on two forehead wrinkles for some viscous causes, if you want to do this, and otherwise, you do not treat.
E aprop leyssa la sutura dels fiels entro a tres dias o quatre, e aprop cura aquo.	And after that, let the suture of the veins between three and four days, and then cure this.
E si vols, layssa la plagua ses sutura, e cura aquela am aquo que exsicca e constrenh, quar la palpebra es alevada deves la sigillacio de la plagua e la agreguacio de lu; mays sutura es milor E donc aysso diysso les antics de taxanir.	And if you wish, let the wound heal without suturing, and cure it by what dries and constricts, for when the eyelid is swollen you should apply the poultice to the wound and its addition; more suturing is better. Therefore, so say the ancient taxanir.
Mays empero en lu sia sollicitut sobre le malaute, e es de bona operacio, e no es en lu temor.	But more importantly in it be vigilant about the patient, and it is of good operation, and not in its fear.
E es autra manieyra en taxmir, e es que senhes sobre la palpebra figura ayssi cum fuelha de mirt, e aprop eleva la palpebra am tres uncis segreguatz e congreguatz segon aquesta forma:	And another method of applying it, and that is to figure the poultice like a leaf of myrtle, and then elevate the eyelid by three inches, securing and gathering it according to this form:
Mays si no es possible aquo, tener les uncis, e aquo no es engualhat, lahoras pren una agula en la qual haia fil e met aquela en le mieg de la figura, e entromet le autre fiel prop le lacrimal major, e·l fiel segon prop le lacrimal mendre, e ajusta entre les tieus ditz les fiels am equalitat, e aprop am aquels eleva la tua ma am elevacio engual, eleva tota la codena sobre la qual es senhat ayssi cum havem recomtat.	But if this is not possible, hold the pins, and this is not exact. Then take a needle with thread and put that in the middle of the figure, and insert the other thread near the major lacrimal gland, and the other thread near the minor lacrimal gland, and adjust the threads between the ties equally, and then raise your hand for elevation equally, raising the entire codena over which it is placed as we have advised.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then adjust the two edges of the wound with stitches, and cure that within which is healed.
Mays si accideys apostema deves la tua inscizio o la tua fissura, seda aquel apostema am cerot e a lu semblantz, e am enguentz.	And if you make an incision or a slit, treat that abscess with a plaster and in appearance, apply ointment.
E alcunas veguadas endeve a la palpebra que·ls sieus pels sian convertitz, adonc cove que tu uses en aquela de aquo que havem dit de inscizio; mays sutura en quascus es mays artificial.	And in some cases on the eyelid, if its edges need to be converted, then use what we have said about making an incision; but stitch only where it is more artificial.
Ataxinir am cannas es segon aquesta forma:	To treat cankers according to this form:
e es que tu convertas la palpebra e scindas la figura qu’es dedintz segon que he recontat; e aprop per art fay doas cannas o doas astelas subtils de las quals longitut sia segon la longitut de la palpebra e la latitut de lor sia mendra de la latitut del spatum.	And you convert the eyelid and split the figure that is inside according to what I have recounted; and then, by art, make two cankers or two thin astelas whose length shall be according to the length of the eyelid and the width of theirs shall be a third of the width of the space.
E tu ja has inscidit en las extremitatz de quascunas partidas, la on tenes les fils.	And you have incised at the extremities of each part where you have the threads.
Aprop agregua quascuna am subtilitat subre aquo que superflueys de la palpebra del huel, e constres las cannas de quascunas partidas am fort strictura, e layssa aquela per alcus jorns, quar la codena per la strictura morira e sira denegada e se poyrira entro que per si meteyssa cayra.	And place a thin layer over what you have excised from the eyelid, and tighten the cankers of each part with strong tension, and leave it for some days; as the knot will die due to the tension and become rejected, and will fall off when it falls by itself.
Mays si es tardat, lahoras trenca la am las toroyras, e aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanat.	And if it is delayed, then cut the thread of the cord, and soon cure the wound while it is healing.
Donc cum es solidada, la palpebra es elevada e les pels no pungo.	Therefore, when it is reduced, the eyelid is elevated and the skin does not pinch.
E aquesta es la forma de doas cannas las quals faras segon aquesta forma:	And this is the way of two canes which you will make according to this form:
e haia la quantitat de la longitut e de la latitut ni mays ni mens.	and has the quantity of length and width neither more nor less.
Capitol .xii.	Capitol.xii.
De elevacio de pels pungentz en le huel am agula quan le pel es dur.	For the elevation of painful skin, prick the area with an awl when the skin is taut.
Quan son pels no-naturals, durs e aspres e pungentz les huels, lahoras la operacio en lu es que tu prenguas agula subtil e pauses en aquela fiel de ceda subtil e leon, e aprop que tu ajustes las extremitatz de lu e nozes quascu en manieyra mot subtil.	When they are unnatural, hard, rough, and painful skins, the operation in this case is that you should use a thin awl and pierce at the fine thread of each skin, and soon adjust the ends of the thread very subtly with tiny clamps.
E sia la longitut dels fiels de quantitat de una palma.	And let the length of the threads be the width of one palm.
E aprop tu compon2 autre fiel subtil dejos lu en breu, e nuza las extremitatz de aquel si tu·t vols.	And then you prepare another fine substance and place it briefly, using the ends of that.
E aprop pause le malaute le sieu cap en le tieu se, e sia prop del solelh per que la tua obra sia declarada, quar es operacio subtil e menuda.	And then place the patient's head in a tub of water, and expose it to the sun so that your work is effective, for it is a subtle and delicate operation.
E aprop intromet la agulha en la razit del pel ajustat la qual ha necessitat de engen, e fay aquela penetrar en la palpebra festinantment entro que extraguas aquela desus le pel natural.	And then insert the needle into the groove of the tightly adjusted skin, which has been prepared with a tool, and make that penetrate deeply into the eyelid, while pulling it out above the natural skin.
E aprop tire le pel entro desus e intromet aquel en alixati, e sian les pels un o dos o tres e no mays.	And then pull the skin upwards and insert the needle into the incision, with one or two or three skins and not more.
E aprop tira la tua ma am aquel entro que·l pel sia fora-gitat am alixolati en la palpebra am le pel natural.	And then pull your hand there so that the skin is thoroughly soaked with the ointment in the eyelid with the natural skin.
Mays si es atirat alixalati e non es gitat le pel, atiraras alixati a las partidas dejos am le fiel le qual tu has compost am aquela, entro qu’en sia gitat alixalati del trau sobira.	More if the ointment is applied and the skin is not soaked, pull the ointment to the edges by placing it on the needle which you have prepared there, so that after being applied the ointment from the wound remains.
E vegas aquela am la visio del huel, quar lahoras tu gitaras alixati e lo fiel, e grotan quascu e clautz le huel, e laysse le claus per dos dias o tres, entro que·l pel adheresca al sieu loc e nasque sobre aquel bona carn.	And with that, at the sight of the wound, you will stitch it up, and tie each thread tightly, and close the wound, and leave it open for two or three days until the hair adheres to its place and grows over that good flesh.
E si es mays breu le pel, lahoras tu ajusta un pel lonc dels pels naturals, e es elevat am aquel, o que·l leysses entro que sia alonguat aprop alcu spazi, e lehoras tu eleva aquel.	And if the hair is shorter, you will adjust a longer piece of natural hair, and elevate it at that place, or you may leave it to grow until it lengthens somewhat in that space, and then you elevate it.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter XIII.
De la cura de ehacratir la qual ve en la palpebra desus.	For the cure of eyelid swelling that occurs above.
Quan ve en le huel ehacratir, e es contraccio de la palpebra quan es contrayta en sus, o a dextra o a sinistra partida, per mala consolidacio de plagua o de seccio o de cauteri, e es apelada leporina, e aquesta ahercrati o es natural o accidental, e es fayta per consolidacio de plagua o de seccios o de cauteri, o per semblantz a lor malcuratz.	When there is eyelid swelling, and it is due to a contraction of the eyelid that contracts towards the inside, outside, or on one side, due to poor healing of a wound or a burn, it is called leporine. This kind of swelling can be natural or accidental, caused by the healing of a wound or burns, or by something similar to them.
May la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que tu fendas aquela consolidacio e que separes las labias de lu, e pauses en lu en aquo que es entre aquelas una meca de drap de li, e ligues aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	May the manner of the operation on him be that you make that consolidation and separate the labia from him, and place in him at what is between those a mechanical piece of cloth, and tie those together until they are healed.
E no cove que tu uses de curacio de lu de las causas las quals exsiccan, constrenho; quar si tu fas aquo retorna alixacratir pus mal que nulh temps no foc habantz.	And you must use the cure for those causes which dry up, constrain; for if you do this it will return to worsen more than at any time not being there.
Usa en aquela de causas que mollifico ayssi cum es fenugrec, e embroca am la aygua en la qual son coytz altea e semensa de li, o enguent dyaquilon, le qual sia liquefayt am alcu dels olis, e submergeys en aquel la meca, e cura am aquel.	Use for those causes that mollify thus as fenugreek, and apply it wet in the water in which it is cooked with its seed, or ointment of lard, which be liquefied by one of the oils, submerge the cloth in that, and apply it there.
E lo tesaur de la tua curacio es que tu perforsses am tot engen que no sia consolidat segon la forma que foc al comensament.	And the treasure of your cure is that you perforate with anything that is not consolidated according to the form that it was at the beginning.
E aquesta operacio la qual havem dita, no es sino alcuna rectificacio de ehalixacrati que no retorna la forma del loc segon que foc denant.	And this operation which we have said is nothing but some correction of hernias that do not return the form of the area as it was before.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter XIV.
De la cura de ehacrati le qual es fayt en la palpebra dejos.	For the treatment of ahcration which is done on the eyelid, proceed as follows.
Aquesta alxacrati la qual es fayta en la palpebra dejos, la qual es nompnada vertadierament alxacrati; e es de lu alcuna natural, autra accidental.	This ahcration which is done on the eyelid, which is called ahcration properly; and it can be either from some natural cause or an accidental one.
Mays accidental es fayta per plagua o per scissura o per cauteri o per autres semblantz.	More accidental ahcration is caused by a wound, or a cut, or a cautery, or other similar causes.
E la via de la operacio de lu es que tu prenguas una agula en la qual haga fil doble, e fiques aquela en la carn, e que la fassas passar del lacrimal de senestre entro al lacrimal dextre, entro que·l fil pervengua en las doas extremitatz de la carn.	For the operation of this, you should take a needle on which you make a double thread, and place that needle in the flesh, making it pass from the left lacrimal into the right lacrimal so that the thread reaches the two ends of the flesh.
E aprop exten la carn a las partidas desus am la agula e cus aquela am la agula, e inscideys am spatum ample.	Then extend the flesh at the upper parts above the needle and stitch that above the needle, and incise with a wide blade.
E donc si retorne la figura de la palpebre segon que cove, bo es; e sino, pren le ray e pausa aquel en la figura fenduda, e am aquel converteys la palpebra, e fen las doas fissuras en le latz de la palpebra dejos.	And so, if you return the figure of the eyelid as it should be, that is good; otherwise, take the ray and place it in the split figure, and with that, convert the eyelid, and make the two fissures in the side of the eyelid.
E sian las extremitatz de las doas fissuras de dos angles de la inscizio, la qual has fayta entro que concurren, e sia de lor fayt angle entro que quan se congreguan sia fayta figura de lor.	And if the ends of the two cracks at the angles of the incision, which you have made where they converge, and from them an angle is made such that when they come together it forms a figure of them.
E aquesta figura es letra greca: la landa.	And this figure is the Greek letter: lambda.
E aprop osta la carn aquela per la quantitat que es le latz de lu agut dejos de lu, aquo que siec la palpebra.	And then place the flesh there for the quantity that is the length of the sharp end left from it, what remains of the flap.
E aprop ajusta las partz seperadas e cos aquelas am le fil de lana; e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit de las medicinas mollificativas e de las calguas entro que sia sanat.	And then adjust the separated parts with the linen thread; and dress those areas with the medicines we have mentioned for softening and with plasters until it is healed.
E si alxacrati endeve per fissura o sutura o cauteri, lahoras cove que tu fendas am fissura plana sobre les pels de la palpebra segon que es precedit.	And if you incise further for a crack or suture or cautery, then make the incision a flat one on the skin of the eyelid as described previously.
E aprop separa am la calgua entre doas labias segon que havem dit.	And then separate with the plaster between two lips as we have said.
En la suma del sermo de la cura de alxacrati quan es desus o dejos, que corra en lu operacio, segon que es preparat de la forma de alxacrati, e aquela es en forma de motas diversitatz.	In the sum of the discourse on the incision when above or left behind, let it run in the operation according to how it is prepared in the form of the incision, and that is in the form of various spots.
E le artifexs savi totz temps prepara engen en quascuna manieyra la qual es possibla a lu entro que fassa retornar la figura a la forma natural, o prop de aquela, e aquel malaute segon que a lu conveneys de la operacio e dels strumentz en las majors disposicios.	And the wise artisans at all times prepare means in every manner which is possible for him to return the figure to its natural form or near it, and that malady according to what suits him from the operation and the instruments in major dispositions.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter XV.
De la adherencia de la palpebra am la conjunctiva o am la cornea.	On the adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea.
Quan accideys aquesta consolidacio a motz homes enayssi que sia solidada la palpebra pus desus am le album del huel, e sia prohibida de la facilitat del movement e de las suas obras naturals, donc cove que tu entrometas la extramitat del ray dejos la palpebra, e eleva en sus aquela, o exten aquela am le unci.	When this consolidation occurs in men, one tries to solidify the eyelid above on the white of the eye, and to prohibit its ease of movement and its natural actions. Therefore, you should insert a probe between the eyelid and the eyeball, lift it up, or extend it towards the outside.
E aprop tu inscideys la adherencia am spatum subtil, le qual no sia am acuitat de las inscisios, habantz obtus un petit per so que·l malaute no sia inquietat deves la operacio, e remau le spatum que no ledesca le huel am la sua acuitat.	And then you incise the adhesion with a fine blade, which should not be of great sharpness, having an obtuse small edge so that the malady is not disturbed. You should leave the fluid to prevent it from becoming acrid and affecting the eye's sharpness.
E sia la tua inscizio quays excorjan aquela adherencia am facilitat entro que sia retornada la palpebra segon la sua forma natural e que sia sanada tota la adherencia.	And let your incision be such that it facilitates the separation of the adherence so that the eyelid returns according to its natural form and all the adherence is healed.
E aprop tu met en le huel aygua salada am la qual tu laves; o distilla en lu de zunia dissolvut en l’aygua.	And then put in the wound enough salt water to wash with; or use distilled water dissolved in salt.
E aprop separa entre la palpebra e l’huel am calgua de li, e pausa sobre le huel lana infuza en album de huou, e aprop le tertz jorn usa de causas consolidativas entro que sia sanat.	And then separate between the eyelid and the wound with salt water, and place over the wound infused wool in honey album, and for several days use conservative remedies until it is healed.
Capitol .xvi.	 Chapter XVI.
De inscizio de ungla e de eminencia de carn dels lacrimals.	On the incision of the eyelid and the prominence of the orbital flesh.
Sapias que ungla es segon dos manieyras, quar o es nervosa, e es semblant a ciphac dur subtil; o es no-nervosa, semblant a humiditat blanca congilada, la qual quan ferr la toca, o es forsat aquela prendre am onci, es abscindida e le onci no es ficat en lu.	Know that the eyelid is divided into two ways: one is nervosa, resembling a thin hard chord; the other is non-nervosa, resembling a white congealed moisture. When you touch it, if it must be cut, it is easily divided and no ointment should be applied in it.
E amdos las specias no comensan sino del lacrimal major entro que va petit a petit que cobre la vista e prohibeys le lum e·l movement de huel.	And both species do not begin until the major lacrimal gland, which gradually covers the eye and prohibits light and the movement of water.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en la inscizio de lu es que·l malaute pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop obre les huels de lu, e eleva la palpebra am la tua ma, e aprop colligeys la ungla am onci de pauca duplicacio e exten aquela a las partidas desus.	The manner of acting in the incision is that the patient places his head in your lap, then opens his eyes, and raises his eyelid with your hand, then you collect the thumb with one finger and extend it to the upper parts.
E aprop pren una agula e entromet en aquela un pel de cavalh o de buou o de vaqua, o de semblantz, o de fiel fort, o duplica la extremitat de la agulha petit a petit e fica aquela en le mieg de la ungla, e penetra aquela am la agulha, e lia am fiel la ungla; e exten aquela a las partidas desus, e excorja am le pel le latz de la ungla lo qual siec la pupilla.	And then take a needle and insert into it a hair from a horse or a bull or a cow, or from something similar, or a strong thread, or gradually double the tip of the needle little by little and place it in the middle of the thumb, and penetrate it with the needle, and bind the thumb with thread; and extend it to the upper parts, and scrape the skin away from the thumb which seals the pupil.
E ayssi tu sieguas aquela am le pel entro al derier de lu.	And thus you follow it under the skin to the back of his hand.
E aprop tu inscideys le romanent en la razitz del lacrimal am spatum subtil o am petitas forfexs, e leysa la carn del lacrimal natural per so que per inscizio de aquela no endevengua fluxs de lagremas continuabla.	And then you make an incision in the fornix of the eyelid with a fine spatum or small forceps, and leave the natural flesh of the eyelid so that by this incision it does not become a continuous flow of tears.
E alscunas vetz la ungla am le sol onci estenduda o am fiel, ayssi co havem dit, e aprop sia excurjat am spatum leon del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And sometimes the thumb is placed on the sole of the stretched foot or on vinegar, as we have said, and then it is extracted with lion's dung from which this is its form:
E guarda te que am le spatum no toques la tunica cornea e que avengua en lu ruptura, e que la pupilla sia perforada.	And beware that with the lion's dung you do not touch the cornual membrane and even if there is a rupture in it, and that the pupil is perforated.
Aprop la inscizio geta en le huel un pauc de sal trissa o di cief fayt de siniar, e leyssa aquel entro al autre dia; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	Then apply a little salted honey or of vinegar made from wine to the wound, and leave it in for another day; and take care that what comes between it heals.
E si la ungla no es nervoza e no podes metre la agulha, ni es ficada en aquela le onci, lahoras motas veguadas aquesta specia de ungla es curada am medicinas, e es sanada ayssi cum yeu e recomtat en la divisio.	And if the thumb is not nerve-racking and you cannot put the needle in it, then treat this kind of thumb with medicines, and it is healed as I and recommended in the division.
E si tu vols inscindir aquela, lahoras tu obre le huel del malaute e pren spatum subtil leon de freul acuitat segon aquesta forma:	And if you want to incise it, then open the space in the thigh and take lion's dung of ripe fruit according to this form:
am subtilitat.	of fine consistency.
E si vezes que aquela es rarificada e es confugida e empren en aquela razit, lahoras distilla de la tua ora en le huel de cief fayt de siniar o am cief rog o am sal trissat, e opila le huel entro a l’autre dia.	And if you find that it is rarified and contracted into the narrow space, then spit in the hollow of your hand made of your little finger or thumb or salt moistened, and pour this liquid into the other nostril.
E aprop itera sobre aquela la operacio entro que sia remaugut tot aquo que es de lu, sino que·l contrari apostema caut sia en le huel, quar lahoras tu leyssa aquela, e cura al comensament la apostema entro que sia sanat.	And then repeat the operation inside until all of it is removed, but if a counterabscess forms in the hollow, then leave that and cure the beginning of the abscess until it is healed.
E aprop itera la tua operacio sobre aquela am razo entro que sia sanat.	And then repeat your operation on that until it is healed.
La emenencia de la carn lacrimal, si notz en le huel per gran nocument, sia suspendut am onci; e inscideys aquela de aquela una partida, e no ultimes la inscizio per so que no inscidesqua fluxs de lagremas.	The eminence of the tear gland, if noted in the hollow causing great discomfort, should be suspended with a needle; and incise part of that, but do not complete the incision so as not to cut off the flow of tears.
E aprop distilla en le lacrimal cief rog e fayt de siniar entro que sia sanat.	And then spit in the tear gland with a thumb or finger moistened, and do this until it is healed.
Capitol .xvii.	Capitol xvii.
De inscizio de alguazardenic e de aquo que es nascut de carn ajustada en le huel.	Of the incision of algazardenic and what is born of flesh pressed in the whole.
Alcunas veguadas en les huels de alcus es nascuda carn roga, e es sobre-pausada entro que cobre la pupilla, o apropinqua o estrenh sobre las palpebras e fort leu comprem las palpebras a las partidas deforo e es assemblada a roza de balaustra.	In the heels of some feet, flesh has grown raw and is pressed over the pupil, or it approaches or strengthens on the eyelids and lightly compresses the eyelids at the outer parts and is joined to the edge of the balcony.
Mays la operacio en lu es que·l malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se; e aprop obre les huels de aquel e colligeys tota aquela carn am oncis convenientz ad aquo, e te aquo am una forcep o am cesti; e aprop inscindiys la carn el comensament entro que tot sia finit am le encisori, e guarda te del huel que no ledescas aquel deves la tua operacio.	The operation in such cases is to place the patient's head on a pillow; then open the feet and collect all that flesh with convenient incisions using forceps or tongs; next, cut the flesh from its beginning until everything is finished with the scalpel, and keep watch over the wound so as not to let any part of it slip during your operation.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscides aquelas o am espatum le qual nos havem recomtat en la inscizio de la ungla, o am petitas forfexs am las quals es colligit ascebel segon que vindra la forma de lu aprop aquest capitol.	And let your incision be either along the line where you incised previously on the ankle, or with small pincers with which you collect the ascitic fluid according to the form it takes in this chapter.
Donc cum es complida la tua inscizio e es remauguda tota aquela carn, lahoras omple le huel de sal trissa, o destilla en lu polvera roga e semblantz a lu de las medicinas corrossivas, e pausa sobre le huel deforo coto am album de huou entro que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	Then, when your incision is completed and the entire flesh is remoistened, fill the wound with salted water, or sprinkle it with raw flesh powder similar to that of corrosive medicines, and place something over the wound externally like a piece of cloth until the abscess is secured.
E si roman alcuna causa de alguardenici e es senhoragat sanc caut, e temes apostema caut, lahoras leyssa le huel e cura aquela apostema am aquo que ceda aquela apostema, e aprop itera sobre aquel am operacio entro que sia sanat, e semblantment fay en la carn ajustada la qual accideys en le huel de aquesta especia.	And if any cause requires guarding and is seared by fire, fear an abscess from the fire, then let the whole and cure that abscess with what yields that abscess, and place it over that again in operation until it is healed, and similarly do in the flesh adjusted which you happen upon in the healing of this kind.
Mays empero tu cove que alienes tota curacio del huel freul per via natural o per via accidental, obran am ferr, e no metas la tua ma en alcuna de aquestas operacios entro que veges que aquel membre sia suffertant aquela operacio.	Moreover, you must know that all healing of the wound from cold should be through natural means or accidental means, use iron, and do not place your hand in any of these operations until you see that that member is suffering from that operation.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter XVIII.
De colleccio de sabel en le huel.	On the collection of knowledge in the wound.
Sabel so venas rogas las quals son testudas sobre le huel e prohibeysso al vesement la sua operacio, e develican le huel am longitut de dias.	Knowledge of veins is needed, which are rough on the wound and you prohibit their operation, and they expand the wound over a long period of days.
Donc necessari es al comensament que tu consideres si le huel en le qual es sabel es fort e en lu no es autra malautia que sabel, lahoras tu colligeys aquel sabel.	Therefore, at the beginning, you must consider whether the wound in which knowledge is needed is strong and contains only another vein-related issue. Then, you collect that knowledge.
E es que tu comandes al malaute que pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop suspen aquelas venas am un onci o am dos segon la tua prudencia; e sia aquel onci de subtil duplicacio segon aquesta forma:	And you command the patient to place their head in your lap, and then suspend those veins at one or two inches according to your prudence; and that inch should be of subtle doubling according to this form:
o so dos oncis gradantment en un cos segon aquesta forma:	or two inches gradually in one space according to this form:
E aprop sian colligidas aquelas venas am forses subtils, am subtilitat, e abstergeys le sanc hora aprop hora, entro que vegas aquelas venas esser remaugudas del huel e sian revolgudas.	And then gather those veins with fine threads, in subtlety, and cleanse the wound bit by bit, meanwhile encouraging those veins to swell and be rotated.
E guarda te que tu no ledes le huel am las extremitatz del spatum; e si’ la tua operacio en le miegjorn denant le solelh, e sias mot ferm en la tua operacio que no inscidas sino aquelas venas.	And make sure you do not cauterize at the extremities of the wound; and if your operation is in the middle of the day before the sun, remain firm in your operation so as to not enter anything but those veins.
E quan tu auras complitz, lahoras tu distilla en le huel cief vert o rog per que am sa acuitat corrodesca aquo que es remaugut del sabel.	And when you have completed, then distill into the wound green vitriol or quicksilver so that by its acuity it may corrode what is swollen in the joint.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible colligeys tot en aquela hora, e lahoras tu emplastra tot am aquo que cede la dolor de lu, e leyssa lu per alcus dias entro que sia sedada la dolor de lu e que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	But if this is not possible at that time, then plaster the entire area with what relieves its pain, and leave it for a few days until its pain subsides and an abscess is secured by cauterization.
E aprop itera sobre lu segon que la mateyssa manieyra entro que sia sanat.	And then iterate over it according to how the patient handles it as it is being healed.
E aquesta es la forma de las forfexs:	This is the form of the forceps:
Capitol .xix.	Capitol XIX.
De reduccio de arizati al nas.	For the reduction of dislocated bones in the nose.
Quan tu curas arisati am cauteri o am medicina aguda comburent segon que es precedida la narracio de lu e no es sanat, lahoras no es engen en lu sino que fendas sobre le apostema deves la maturitat de lu, e que extraguas tota la humiditat la qual es en lu e·l poyre entro que sia descubert le os.	When you treat dislocated bones with a cautery or with sharp burning medicine, according to whether the narration of the case precedes and it is not healed, then do not engage in it but instead cut into the abscess to bring about its maturity, and extract all the moisture which is within it until the bone is revealed.
E donc cum es descubert le os e vezes en lu corrupcio o negror, lahoras tu ratz lu am un sturment del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then, when the bone is revealed and corruption or blackness is found within it, you must treat it with an instrument of which this is the form:
E es nompnat de aspre cap, e sia feyt de fer indi, e sia le cap redon ayssi cum asir le qual sia fayt punctat per punctacio de lima o aliskalfati per punctacio subtil (ayssi cum es en la forma seguent).	And it is named the sharp point, and it is made of iron, and its head is round like holding such a thing, which is made punctured by hammering or refined by subtle puncturing (as in the following form).
E pausa aquel sobre le loc corrumput del os, e aprop revolveys aquel entre les tieus ditz, e prem la tua ma petit a petit entro que sapias que aquela corropcio es rasa.	And place him over the corrupt part of the bone, and then carefully rotate it between your fingers, and gently press your hand little by little so that you know that this corruption is superficial.
E aquo sia fayt alcunas veguadas, e aprop restaura le loc am causas exsiccativas e stipticas.	And do this several times, and then restore the area caused by drying and constricting agents.
Donc si·l loc es consolidat e es en lu nascuda bona carn e es abscindit le cors de la sania e roman per xl dias, e no es renovat e no es apostemat e no accideys en lu accident, lahoras tu sapias que es sanat.	So if the area is consolidated and there is good hidden flesh and the healthy tissue is separated from the diseased and lasts for 40 days without being renewed or becoming gangrenous and no accident occurs, then you know that it is healed.
E sino, lahoras no es en lu engen sino reduzir la fissura a la forma del nas, e segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu descuebras de segon os am ferr o am medicina acuta, e cum sira descubert le os, lahoras tu pren tribo segon aquesta forma:	And if not, then reduce the fracture to the form of the nose, and according to this manner: first uncover the bone with forceps or a sharp instrument, once the bone is uncovered, then take hold of it according to this form:
Sia la extramitat de lu ferr triangulada, e·l fust de lu sia prim extenuat entro a la extremitat ayssi cum vezes assi.	Let the tip of the forceps be triangular, and the shaft be slightly flattened at the tip as you can see.
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le os, e sia aquel prop del lacrimal; e alongua la tua ma un pauc del huel, e aprop revol la tua ma am le tribo entro que penetre tot le os, e aquel sente le malaute per asso que atroba vent yssir per so quan te la sua ma.	And place it over the bone, which is near the lacrimal bone; then extend your hand a little and carefully rotate your hand with the forceps so that it penetrates the entire bone, and the pain felt by the forceps indicates that air is escaping, when you feel this with your hand.
Donc lahoras restaura le loc am medicinas stipticas exsiccantz ayssi cum t’e eyssenhat.	Then restore the area with medicinal powders drying as they are accustomed.
Donc cum nays la carn e·l loc es endurazit, lahoras la materia la qual effundia a las partidas deforo retorna al nas, donc aquo es pus leugier sobre le malaute.	Then when the flesh and area are hardened, the matter which it exuded to the surroundings returns to its place, so this is easier over the patient.
Capitol .xx.	Capitol.xx.
De reduccio de la eminencia del huel.	For the reduction of the prominence of the heel.
Quan le huel emineys am la sua totalitat e no accideys en le vezement nocument ni diminuacio, lahoras cove que laxas le malaute, e aprop que·l segues, e aprop que pausas ventozas en le cervitz ses scarificacio e succa per bona succaccio; e aprop pausa sobre le huel liniment le qual sia fayt de acatra e aloe e enses e sarcocolla, e aprop strenh le emplaustre sobre le huel am motz polvils.	When the heel protrudes completely and there is no damage or diminution of the clothing, then loosen the patient, subsequently follow, and place fomentations on the neck for scarification and suck out the blood with good suction; afterwards place liniment on the heel made of acacia, aloe, enses, and sarcolle, and strongly apply the plaster to the heel with motz powder.
E la manieyra dels polvils es que prenguas draps de li leons motz, e quascun drap sia duplicat en quatre plecs; e fay de aquels motz.	The method of the powders is that you take cloths soaked in motz (a type of ointment or powder), and each cloth should be folded into four parts; then use those powders.
E aprop pausa aquels la un sobre le autre segon la quantitat de la qual ha le huel necessitat.	And then place those one over the other according to the quantity that it has of them.
E aprop strenh sobre aquels am drap dur am fort strictura; e itera las ventosas am succio ses scarificacio; e aprop osta las ventosas e leyssa le huel streyt le dia e la nueyt.	And then strengthen those with a hard cloth bandage; and repeat the cups with suction six times; and leave the cups there for the day and the night.
Mays si entretant le liguament es mollificat, lahoras cove que sia mot streyt.	But if in the meantime the ligament becomes softened, then leave it strongly tied.
E aprop osta le liament aprop le dia e la nueyt ayssi cum havem dit.	And leave the ligament for the day and the night as we have said.
E si vezes le huel ja esser redusit, bo es, e sino, lahoras itera le emplastre am les polvils e la strictura e las ventosas entro que sia sanat.	And if the swelling has already been reduced, that is good. Otherwise, then repeat the plaster with the powders and the bandage and the cups until it is healed.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI.
De la inscizio de la eminencia de la tunica uvea.	On the incision of the elevation of the uveal tunic.
Quan endeve disrupcio en la tunica uvea, e aprop es eminent e procezeys fora las palpebras ayssi cum un gra de rasim, e es orrazada la forma de home per aquo, e vols aquo inscidir, lahoras la operacio en lu es ayssi cum havem recomtat, que tu entrometas la agula en la razitz de la uvea de la partida dejos en la partida desus, e aprop met la agula autra en la qual sia fil doble de la part del lacrimal, e fay aquela penetrar e leyssa la primieyra agula segon la sua disposicio; e aprop inscideys le loc del fiel doble e leva am aquel la partida de la uvea en le circuit de la agula, e strenh aquela mot.	When there is disruption in the uveal tunic, and it forms an elevation, proceed to incise the eyelid as if for a third degree burn. This forms the shape of a man through this. If you wish to incise here, then perform the operation as we have recommended. You insert the needle into the edge of the uveal tunic from one side and above, and then insert another needle on the other side which is double the size of the lacrimal duct. Make the latter needle penetrate and leave the first needle in its place. Then incise the area where the double thread is located and lift the part of the uveal tunic in the circuit of the needle, and strengthen it.
E aprop extratz la agula e pausa sobre le huel lana infusa en album de huou e leyssa entro que cayha le fil am la uva.	And then extract the needle and place yourself over the wool infused with honey and let there be the thread in the needle.
E aprop cura le huel am aquo que conforte aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And then care for the wool that comforts him while the wound is healing.
E alcunas veguadas aduna de tota partida am cercle de drap entro le huel ajuste eminencia gran, e aprop sia perforat am le spatum subtil que vengua al preon del huel, e corra la humiditat albuginea, e descen le huel e intra tantost.	And sometimes gather all the parts in a circle of cloth over the wool, then adjust the prominence greatly, and then perforate with a fine needle that comes to the core of the wool, allowing the humidity albuminous to drain, and lower the wool quickly.
E aprop strenh entro que sia sanat.	And then strengthen him while he is healing.
Capitol .xxii.	Capitol.xxii.
De curacio de alconati.	On the cure of ulcers.
Aquesta malautia que es apelada alconati no es sino sania la qual es ajustada en le huel semblant a aygua dessendent e no es aquela.	This illness called alconati is nothing but carbuncle, which is located in the wound resembling water dripping and is not that one.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en ela es que fasses le malaute sezer sobre la sela aparelada e dreyta, e aprop pren le cap sieu en las tuas mas de doas partz e mau aquel entro que veias la sania pervenir a las partidas dejos, e aprop sia siccada e no descenda, e sia ostat le lum, e·l malaute veia las causas ayssi cum vezia.	The method of treating it is to place the patient on a prepared and straight bench, then take the head in your hands at two parts and bring it so that you can see the carbuncle clearly, ensuring that it dries up without descending further, and keep the light nearby, allowing the patient to see the causes as if they were visible.
E si no descendra en jos, sapias que es aygua.	And if it does not come down below, know that it is water.
Mays si no es preparat le descendement a la sania am aquo que havem dit, lahoras fay le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e aprop pren spatum subtil e fen am aquel sobre le pannicol cernent un petit deves la continuacio de la conjunctiva am la tunica cornea en la corona (entro al loc vuet), entro que sia fora-getada la sania.	And if the descent to the wound is not prepared as we have said, then make the surgeon sit between your hands and approach taking a thin spatula and apply it over the gauze, carefully covering a little of the continuation of the conjunctiva with the cornea in the corona (into the place voided), so that the wound is forgotten.
Donc cum es fora-getada, lahoras tu distilla en le huel aygua cauda en la qual has mesclat mel o aygua en la qual ja has bulit fenugrec e mel.	And since it is forgotten, then you drip in the urine that you have mixed with honey or urine in which you have already boiled fenugreek and honey.
E aprop sia curat am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And then treat the other causes once it is healed.
Capitol .xxii.	Capitol.xxii.
De la curacio de la aygua descendent del huel.	Of the cure for water descending in urine.
Ja havem dit las specias de la aygua en la divisio e qual conveneys a perforar am sermo declarant, lahoras aquel segon la sanetat.	We have already mentioned the species of water in the division and which one is appropriate to puncture when speaking, according to its condition.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre un cayrat e lia le sieu huel sa, lu mot stringent.	When you must separate the patient's thighs on your knees over a basin and keep his/her heat intact, use a strong cloth.
E aprop pausa prop de la palpebra del sieu huel la tua ma senestra, si le huel en le qual es l’aygua es le huel senestra; o am la tua ma dreyta, si le huel es le dextre.	Then place your left hand near the upper eyelid of his/her affected side; or with your right hand if the affected side is the right.
E aprop am la tua ma dextra pren almagda, si le huel es senestre; o am la tua ma senestra, si le huel es de dreyt.	Then with your right hand take the pincers, if the affected side is left; or with your left hand, if the affected side is right.
E aprop pausa la extremitat de almagda prop de la corona per la grossesa del ray en le album del huel de part del mendre lacrimal, e aprop enpelleys almagda am vertut e revol la tua ma am aquel.	Then place the extremity of the pincers near the cornea for the thickness of the vein in the white of the affected eye from the inner lacrimal corner, and then pull the pincers with force and rotate your hand around it.
E aprop penetre en le album del huel e sentas que almagda ja es pervenguda a causa vueda.	Then penetrate into the white of the eye and feel that the pincers have already reached the vein due to their thickness.
E cove que sia la masura del cami de almagda al preon la mesura del spazi le qual es de la pupilla entro a la fi de la negror, e es la corona del huel; quar tu veyras am aquel pupilla am la visio de l’huel per la clartat de la tunica cornea.	You must ensure that the size of the pincers is appropriate when opening the space, which is the distance between the pupil and the edge of the dark part, i.e., the cornea; for you will see the pupil clearly through this with the help of the clarity of the corneal layer.
E aprop pausa almagda entro al loc en le qual es l’aygua, e aprop tu la atira en jos una veguada aprop autra, e donc si la aygua descen tantost, lahoras vetz le malaute aquo sobre le qual huebre la sua vista tantost, e almagda en le sieu huel.	And then place your hand in the location where the water is, and then you lower it down one time or another, and therefore when the water descends quickly, then see the patient here where his vision falls quickly, and your hand in his hue.
E aprop repausa se un pauc; donc si la aygua es descenduda, lahoras tu depausa aquela autre veguada abantz que almagda ne sia getada.	And then rest for a moment; therefore if the water has descended, then you lower it another time in front that your hand not be gotten.
E donc quan es sicada e no descen, lahoras tu extrat almagda am facilitat, e revol am aquel la tua ma pauc a pauc, e aprop dissolveys en l’aygua un petit de sal clara de gemma e am aquela lava le huel dedintz; e aprop pausa fora le huel coto o stopa o lana infusa en oli rozat e album de huou e ligua am aquo le huel sa.	And when it is drawn out and does not descend, then you withdraw your hand with ease, and rotate your hand little by little, and then dissolve a bit of clear gemstone salt in the water and use that to wash the wound inside; then place a cloth, stop, or infused wool in olive oil and album of eggs over it, and tie it with that.
Mays nos e aquels que so de nostre temps pause sobre aquel comi trissat am album de huou.	More now and those of our times cover that with egg white.
E si no obezeys a tu almagda al intrament de l’huel per la sua duricia — quar es alcu dels homes del qual le huel es dur mot —, lahoras cove que prenguas le spatum le qual es nompnat alberid del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if your hand does not fit into the wound due to its hardness — which is sometimes the case with men whose skin is very hard — then you should take the spume which is called alberid, and this is its form:
E donc perfora am aquel aquela conjunctura, e no ultimes la tua ma en le trauc, e no es si no que fassas via ad almagda loc subtil.	And therefore perforate there that joint, and do not withdraw your hand from the tract, but rather make a small opening in a suitable location below.
E aprop entromet almagda segon que havem dit.	And then introduce the needle as we have said.
E deves le compliment de la tua obra, sia preparat al malaute dormitori descentment fayt en le qual dorma sobre le sieu dos en mayson tenebrosa, e sia prohibit de totz movementz .	And you should complete your work by preparing the patient to sleep in a properly made bed in a dark room, and prohibiting all movements.
E pausa en la natura de lu aquo per que sia linida la sua natura, e no maugua le sieu cap a la partida dreyta ni senestra de tot.	And pause at the nature of the patient to let his nature settle, and do not shift his head to the right or left side.
E sia le liament segon la sua disposicio entro al tertz dia.	And apply the bandage according to the patient's disposition on the third day.
E aprop deslia aquel en aquela maysso tenebrosa e exproha la freol vista, e fay li vezer alcunas causas, e aprop retorna le liament entro al dia .vii.	And then leave that patient in the dark room and expose him to fresh air, and perform some incisions, and then return the bandage on the seventh day.
E no cove que fassas aquo en la hora de las curacios o tantost aprop la infusio.	And do not perform this during the hour of the cure or shortly after the infusion.
Habantz cove que tu alienes aquo per so quar la aygua puega leugierament per gran e vehement de reguardament.	Having a cavity that you open through which water may pass more readily by great and violent effort.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que deslias le huel denant le vii dia, e rectifica aquel am aquo que ceda apostema.	But if it happens that an abscess forms, then having a cavity that you open on the seventh day, and correct that which yields to become the abscess.
Lahoras tu absol la vista de lu e pausa sobre la cara de lu oral per le qual sia regit le vezement de lu dejos lu per alcus dias, lu existent en la mayszo tenebrosa.	When you close the wound and place your hand over the face of the patient's mouth so that it may heal properly, let the patient remain in the darkest room for a few days.
E aprop sia gitat de aquela mayzo gradantment e conversa8 en las suas causas.	And gradually let it heal and talk to the patient about its causes.
E sapias que in alchatea no es excusat le discipol de visio alcunas veguadas, e lahoras tu sias ardit sobre la operacio.	And know that in alcohol one may excuse the apprentice from vision for some days, and then you must be attentive to the operation.
E ja es pervengut a nos de alcu de aquels les quals so al Artach , e alcu disse que fayt foc en al Ayrac magdaam perforat am le qual es succada la aygua.	And we have learned from some of those who are skilled in the Artach, and some say to make fire under the Ayrac magdaam perforated, through which water is drawn.
Mays empero yeu non e vist degu en la nostra terra le qual haia perfeyt aquo, ni e aquo legit en alcu dels libres dels antics; e es possible que aquo sia novel.	But, however, we have not seen anyone in our land who is perfect at this, nor is it mentioned in any of the books of the ancients; and it is possible that this is new.
E aquestas so las formas de las specias de magdaan per que sia sobre aquelas aquel le qual ignora aquelas:	And these are the forms of the species of magdaan that should be known among them those who ignore them:
E sian faytas de eram o de ferr propriament, e sian las extramitatz de lor am aquesta subtilitat triangulada, la extremitat aguda ayssi cum aquela es la forma.	And they are made of iron or copper precisely, and their ends are to this subtlety triangular, the acute end thus being the form.
Capitol .xxiv.	 Chapter XXIV.
De la curacio de carn nada en le nas.	For the treatment of flesh wounds in the nose.
Quan en le nas so nascudas carns diversas ajustadas de las quals es alcuna causa la qual es assemblada a scorpio de motz pes, o a polip peys; e aquesta malautia es apelada polipus quar es a semblansa de aquel peys representat.	When in the nose there arise different flesh masses closely set together of which some cause is gathered to scorpion of metal (or) to polypus of fire; and this illness is called polypus, which is like that fire represented.
E de lu es carn cancrosa, lapadea, de fusca color; e de lu es que es carn leon no de color fusca.	And of it is cancerous flesh, dark in color; and from it is flesh like a lion not of dark color.
Donc en aquela que es en aquestas carns leon no fraudulenta ni cancroza, cove que fassas le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e posat al solelh, e huebre las nars de lu, e picoys le tieu onci en aquelas carns.	Therefore, in that which is in these lion-like flesh not fraudulent nor cancerous, make the patient lie between your legs and expose them to the sun, and rub their nostrils, and prick the thigh in those flesh.
E aprop extrat aquela a las partidas deforo, e aprop inscindeys aquo que has comprehendut de aquelas am spatum agut subtil de la una partida entro que sapias que tota la carn ja es ostada; que si roman de lu deguna causa de la qual la abscisio es possibla, lahoras tu ratz aquo am la un dels estrumentz subtils am facilitat entro que de lu romangua denguna causa.	And then extract it from the perforated parts, and subsequently divide what you have grasped with a sharp thin blade between which you know all the flesh has been cut away; if any remains due to some reason for which the cutting is possible, then quickly use one of the fine instruments to facilitate its breaking open for any cause.
Mays si senhoreja am sanc o accida apostema caut, lahoras tu pausa a lu aquo que cove; o es dels apostemas malignes, lahoras tu coyta e cauteriza aquel entro que sia abscindit sanc e sian ostadas las cavas totas.	And if the wound suppurates or an abscess forms, then pause at it with what fits; if it is a malignant abscess, then incise and cauterize it thoroughly, ensuring that the pus is drained completely.
E aprop sia getatz en le nas aprop la inscizio vi agre e aygua o vi.	And then insert something in the nose after the incision, either a cloth or a piece of wood.
Mays si le nas es ubert e de lu procezeys humiditat entro al palat, lahoras sapias que ja es sanat.	And if the nose is already opened and from it proceeds moisture to the palate, then you know that it is already healed.
Mays si la humiditat no penetra segon que cove, lahoras tu sapias que dedintz lu es carn nada en los pus sobiras osses de las nars als quals non es pervengut abscizio.	And if the moisture does not penetrate as expected, then you know that inside it is flesh rather than pus, and there will be bones of the nose to which no incision has been made.
Donc lahoras cove que entromitas fiel de li al qual sia alcuna grosseza, e nuza en lu motz nuzes, e pausa entre quascun nutz la quantitat del dit o mens, e engene le malaute e entromet una extremitat del fiel en le nars am lo ray o am autra causa la qual es a lu possibla.	When you find that there is a lump in the place where there is any swelling, use fingers for probing, and between each finger place the quantity of a digit or less, and ascertain the defect and insert an extremity of the probe into the nostril along the vein or by some other cause which is possible to him.
E pus que aquo aura fayt, que atire le sieu odorament entro que pervengua a las canals de las nars, e sia eyssit sobre le sieu golayro, quar tropas veguadas le semblant ad aquesta accio fan les enfantz a las scolas, e es leugiera causa ad aquel que ho vol far.	And when this has been done, let it exhale its odor into that which reaches the canals of the nostrils, and sit above his pillow, for too many gestures during this action make children at school laugh, and it is a light cause for those who want to do so.
E aprop pausa las dos extramitatz del fiel, una extremitat que iesca sobre le nas et l’autra que romangua en le nas, e aprop aministra serratura de carn am les nuzes que so en le fiel, e fay aquo entro que sapias que las carn ja so am les nuzes del fiel.	Then return the two extremities of the probe, one that closes over the nose and the other that enters into the nose, and then administer a ligature of flesh around the fingers that are in the probe, and do this before you can sense that the flesh is against the bones of the nose.
E aprop extratz le fiel, e pausa en le nas aprop la abstraccio del sanc una calgua , e fay aquo per tres dias o mays entro que l’enguent corrodo tot aquo que es romas de las carns.	Then remove the probe, and place a catgut in the nose near the exit of the blood for three days or more until the ointment dissolves all that is retracted from the flesh.
E aprop en la fi de la causa, pausa en le nas una canula de plom per alscus jorns entro que sia sanat.	And at the end of the cause, place in the nose a lead cannula for several days until it is healed.
Mays si endigeys de curacio que exsique, usa de aquela.	If you need a cure that requires drinking, use that one.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument a capipurge fazedor am le qual son distillatz olis e medicinas en le nars:	And this is the form of the instrument for making nose drops, in which oils and medicines are distilled in the nose:
E fay aquo de argent o de eram, la qual sia semblant a una petita lampesa uberta, ayssi cum petita conqua, e le meat semblantment.	And make it of silver or gold, which should resemble a small open lamp, like a small basin, and the spout resembling a pipe.
E si vols, fay una canula clausa ayssi cum cana, e la cancula del estrument a capipurge fazedor e sia plana, descuberta; a la qual sia manubre en lo derier de lu, am le qual tenguas aquela quan escaufas en lu oli o aquo que tu vols dels sucs e de las causas suctiblas.	And if you want, make a closed cannula like a reed, and the spout of the instrument for making nose drops should be flat and open; place a tube at the rear end of it, with which you can put oils or whatever liquid you want from the secretions and causifiable substances into it when you heat them up.
E aquestz capipurgi es precios: recipe de enforbi de castor, de balayra blanc, de giengiebre, e piletre de safra, de pebre lonc, de escafragia, de epetum de spic ana unc. vi cumfizeys am suc de bleda e de caul, e sian faytas pillulas, e sia destemprada una pillula am aygua tebeza, e sia gitat en las nars del malaute jasent envers.	And these nose drops are precious: take a powder of castor, white alum, cinnamon, yellow wax, long pepper, fragrant resin, and one uncia of spikenard. Mix them with wheat juice and calamus juice, and make pills from this mixture. Then temper one pill with clear water, and administer it to the patient through the nose, having him tilt his head back.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter XXV.
De theyls natz en las extramitatz del nas.	From the teeth to the extremities of the nose.
Motas veguadas es nat theyl en las extramitatz del nas, e es magnificat e omentat en alscus dias entro en que mot es leg le reguardament de lu.	Small spots appear on the teeth at the extremities of the nose, and are enlarged and swollen over several days as the spot becomes more noticeable upon examination.
E per aquo cove que tu inscidas aquel en le comensament de la apparissio de lu, e erediques tot aquel.	And because of this, you should examine that person at the beginning of the appearance of the spot, and isolate them completely.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc o cauteri o medicina comburent la qual estia en loc de lu.	Then place yourself over the area with the cautery or burning medicine which was on that spot.
Mays si es tardada la sua inscizio entro que sia magnificat, lahoras considera si es lapificat, dur, de fusca color e de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr quar es apostema crancos; quar motas veguadas ad aquel que inscideys aquesta apostema endeve per lu granda malicia sobre aquel le qual aquel havia.	But if the isolation is delayed until after it has enlarged, consider whether it is hard, dark in color, and with little sensation; then do not touch that with iron as it is a dangerous abscess. For small spots should be treated by the one who isolates this abscess to avoid great harm to that person.
E si le apostema es de leon tocament e no es de fosca color, e vezes que inscizio es possibla en tot aquel, lahoras evacua le malaute e inscideys aquel senes temor, e cura le loc am aquo que exsique e costrenh entro que sia sanat.	And if the abscess is due to a blow and not dark in color, and isolation can be performed throughout that area, then drain the poison, isolate it without fear, and treat the area with what dries and constricts until it is healed.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter 26.
De sutura del nas e de las labias e de la aurelha quan la continuitat es dissolvuda per plagua o per semblantz.	For the suturing of the nose and lips when the continuity is dissolved by wound or similar injury.
Sapias que quan accideys solucio de continuitat en una de aquestas cartillages, pauc confereys en aquela operacio sino en alcus homes.	Know that when there is a dissolution of continuity in one of these cartilages, you should not much concern yourself with that operation but rather with several men.
Donc cove, quan endeve ad alcu alcuna causa de aquelas, que consideres si es plagua fresca am le sieu sanc, e lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Then probe, when it happens that any of these causes are present, whether it is a fresh wound with its exudate, and then you adjust the two edges of the wound with sutures, and proceed to cure that which is within until it is healed.
E si las labias de solucio de continuitat so ja separadas, e quascuna es fayta sana, lahoras cove que tu excorjes quascuna partida de la sua codena apparent entro que n’iesca sanc.	And if the edges of the dissolution of continuity are already separated, and any one is made to be healthy, then you must excise each part of its base apparent until it exudes pus.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias am sutura e strenh aquelas, e sobre aquelas pulveriza sanc de drago e enses trissat, e pausa sobre la polvera una pessa de emplaustra diafinicon, o de alcu autre dels emplastres consolidatius, e leyssa aquel liat per dos jorns o per tres, e aprop deslia aquel e permuta aquel emplaustre e leyssa aquel entro que·ls fiels per si sian abscinditz, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Then adjust the two edges with sutures and strengthen them, and over them sprinkle wound exudate of dragon's blood and three times distilled, and place on the powder a piece of dressed linen diafinicon, or some other of the consolidating plasters, and leave that paste for two or three days, then remove it and replace it with another plaster, and proceed to cure until the fibers dissolve.
Mays la manieyra de la sutura es que tu agregues la solucio de continuitat o am agulhas ayssi cum havem recomtat en la sutura del ventre, o agregua la solucio de continuitat am fiel ayssi cum a tu e fayt saber.	The method of suturing is that you add the solution of continuity or use needles as we have recommended in the belly suture, or add the solution of continuity with thread as you are made to know.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter XXVII.
De extraccio de aquela causas que veno en las doas labias en las partidas dedintz.	Of the extraction of those causes that blood in the two lips in the parts inside.
Motas veguadas endeve a motz homes en las partidas dedintz de las suas labias alcus apostemas durs semblantz a gras de errs, e alscunas de lors son mendres e alcunas son majors.	Spots seen in the parts inside the lips that turn into hard abscesses resembling lard; some are small and others are larger.
Donc cove que tu convertas las labias e fendas quascuna de aquelas duricias de tota part, e aprop la abscizio umpliscas le loc de sagi trissat entro que·l sanc sia restrengut, e aprop sia lavat am vi agre e sia curat le loc am aquo que es stipticitat, entro que sia sanat.	Then incise the lips and the edges of each of those hard areas from all sides, and after the incision, fill the place with three layers of cloth to strengthen the wound, and then wash it with vinegar and treat the area with water that is astringent until it heals.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter XXVIII.
De inscizio de la carn ajustada en las gengivas.	Of the incision of the flesh pressed into the gums.
Granre de veguadas nays sobre la gengiva carn ajustada la qual les antics apelero albulus, adonc cove que tu suspendas aquela am onci o que tenguas aquela am las forfecs e inscidas aquela deves la sua razit, e leyssas la sania correr o le sanc.	Great care should be taken over the gum close to the flesh which the ancients called albulus; then you must suspend that part by a string or hold it with forceps and incise it slightly, and let the healthy blood flow or the pus.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc sagi trissat o autra polveras stipticas o excicativas.	Then place something warm on the area for three days or another styptic or stimulating powder.
E si aquela carn retorna, lahoras inscideys aquela segundariament, e cauterisa aquela, quar aprop le cauteri no retornara.	And if that flesh returns, then incise it again, and cauterize it, for after the cauterization, it will not return.
Capitol .xxix.	Capitol.xxix.
De razo de dentz am ferr.	On the reason for teeth pain.
Quan en la superficia de las dentz de las partidas dedintz e de las de foro e entre las gingivas so ajustadas escorsas aspras, legas, e alcunas veguadas son de nigradas e son faytas citrinas o vertz entro que a la gingiva ve per aquo corrupcio e son faytas las dentz legas.	When on the surface of the upper and lower teeth, as well as between the gums, there are sharp, rough edges, some times they are black and caused by yellow or green substances that affect the gums through corruption, causing the teeth to become loose.
E donc cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas e pausar le cap de lu en le tieu se, e ratz las dents en las quals apareysso aquelas escorsas e causas semblantz arena entro que de lor no romangua deguna causa, e aquo fay de la negror e de la citrinitat e de las autras entro que sian mondificadas.	And so you must cut the patient's thigh between your thighs and place the patient's head in a basin of water, brush the teeth where these edges and similar causes appear to prevent any loosening from happening, and do this to remove the blackness and the yellowing as well as other changes that have occurred.
Donc si es ostat aquo que es en aquelas del comensament de la razio, bo es; e sino, lahoras tu itera la razio sobre aquelas al autra dia e al segon e al tertz entro que vengua al derier stament en aquo que tu vols.	So if what remains of the matter at hand is in those at the beginning of the reasoning, that is good; and otherwise, then you iterate the reasoning on those another day and the second and the third until it comes to the final statement in what you want.
E sapias que las dentz han necessitat de motz rezoris de diversas formas e de motas figuras segon que es preparat a la tua operacio.	And know that the teeth have required various forms of extraction and different shapes according to how your operation is prepared.
E per so quar le razori am le qual la dent es raza de la partida dedintz es autre del razori am le qual es ras entre las dentz segon autras formas, e aquestas formas de razoris sian deves tu preparadas las quals veyras tantost:	And so, some razors for extracting teeth are such that the tooth is extracted from the inside, while others are such that it is extracted between the teeth according to other forms. These forms of razors you should prepare, and you will see them often.
Capitol .xxx.	Capitol.xxx.
D’eradicacio de dentz.	For the extraction of teeth.
Cove que tu cures la dent de la sua dolor am tot engen e tardes en tota eradicacio de lu, quar no es denguna causa que suplisqua la veguada de lu quan es eradicada, quar es sustancia sublima entro que es excusacio en la eradicacio de lu.	Cure the tooth thoroughly with skill and take your time in its extraction, for no cause can make up for the loss of a tooth when it is extracted, as its substance is refined during the process of extraction.
Mays cove quan le malaute es forsat aquela dent eradicar, que fermament deves tu sia certificat quala es la dent dolent, quar motas veguadas la dolor descep le malaute e cuga que sia en dent sana, e tu eradicas aquela e aprop la dolor no cessa entro que la dent malauta e dolent sia eradicada, quar nos ja havem vist aquo per operacio dels barbies.	When the patient is forced to open that tooth, you must be certain which tooth is painful, for many times the pain descends from above and is in a healthy tooth, and you extract that one and soon the pain ceases once the diseased and painful tooth is removed, for we have seen this through the operations of barbers.
Donc cum deves tu es sertificat qual es la dent dolent, e que o sabes be, lahoras cove que tu scarifiques en le circuit de la dent am spatum en le qual sia alcuna vertut, entro que sia dissolvut de la dent de la gingiva de tota partida, e aprop mau aquel am les tieus ditz, o am forfexs subtils al comensament petit a petit entro que aquela concucesquas.	Therefore, you must be certain which is the painful tooth, and knowing this well, when you incise along the circuit of the tooth from which any virtue arises, until it dissolves from the tooth in the gum of all parts, then apply those ties, or fine scissors gradually at the beginning, as the swelling subsides.
E aprop alogua en lu fortz tenalhas grans per bona loquacio o estuptura fort, e pausa le cap del malaute entre les tieus denolhs que be le tengues que no·s maugua, e aprop tratz la dent segon rectitut en manieyra que no trenques aquela, ni al malaute major dolor no dones.	Therefore, apply water to the mouth for good speech or strong fracture, and place the head of the patient between the ties below that you must hold well, and then extract the tooth according to the right manner so as not to break it, nor give greater pain to the patient.
E donc si no es foro-getat, lahoras pren un de aquels instrumentz, e met aquel dejos lu de tota part am facilitat e esforsa la remocio de lu ayssi que es feyt al comensament.	Therefore, if it is not forced open, then take one of those instruments, and place it on the patient from all parts with ease and effort in removing it as is done at the beginning.
Mays si la dent es trauquada o corrosa, lahoras cove que tu comples de drap aquel trauc e estrenguas aquel am la extremitat de ray subtil per so que no sia trinquada en la hora de la tua constriccio sobre aquela am tenalas.	If the tooth is broken or decayed, then you should cover it with cloth and tie it at the end of a fine thread to prevent it from breaking during your operation on that part.
E cove que tu obres exquesitament am scarificacio en le circuit de tota part de la gingiva e guarda mot la tua fortaleza que no trenques aquela e romangua partida de lu, e retorne sobre le malaute per la malicia que sia majo que la primieyra dolor de lu.	And you should incise meticulously in the circuit of all parts of the gum and preserve its strength so that you do not break that part of it, and return to the illness because its malignity is greater than the first pain.
E guarda te que no fassas aquo que fan alscus ignorantz barbiers en lor fistinacio e audacia sobre la eradicacio de lor, ses que no aministran aquo que nos havem recomtat; quar motas veguadas fan venir sobre les homes malautias grans las quals son pus dificils que sian trinquadas, e las razitz de lor remaugudas totas, o alcunas de aquelas, o que extrayguas aquela am alcus osses de la mandigula ayssi cum motas veguadas havem testificat.	And beware that you do not do what some ignorant barbers do in their incisions and audacity regarding the removal of boils; for they do not administer what we have advised; which causes great illnesses to come upon men, which are more difficult to break than boils, and the reasons for their failures all, or some of those, or that you extract from certain bones of the jaw as we have testified with many ailments.
E aprop la eradicacio de lu sia lavada la boca am vi caut o vi agre am sal.	And after the removal of the boil, wash the mouth with vinegar or water mixed with salt.
E si endeve fluxs de sanc per aysso, ayssi cum motas veguadas endeve, lahoras trissa alcuna quantitat de zegi e aspergeys sobre la plagua, e si no confereys aquel zegi, cauteriza.	And if there are discharge of pus, as often happens, then take some vinegar and sprinkle it on the wound. If this does not work, cauterize.
La forma de las forceps e tenalas subtils am las quals es mauguda la dent al comensament sia de longua extramitat, de breu manubre e gros, per so que no sian doblatz quan am aquels deves obrar.	The form of the forceps and thin tongs with which the tooth is extracted should be long at the beginning, short and thick, so that they do not bend when those you must work on them.
E sian ayssi cum vezes de gros manubre entro que quan estrenhas am aquelas no sian dobladas, sian breus extramitatz.	And they should be thus: when thick and long at the beginning, then when narrowed, they should not bend, being short and extended.
E sian faytas de ferr de India descentment faytas de dreytas extramitatz, e en las extramitatz de aquelas sian dentz de las quals las unas intron en las autras e estrenhan per constriccio descent fort, e alscunas veguadas las extramitatz de aquelas sian la forma del bec d’un auzel le qual ha nom ciconia, so es guanta, e son de fort constriccio.	And they should be made of Indian iron, straight at the beginning and long at the end. At the ends of these, there should be teeth such that one enters the other and tighten strongly by their descending construction. Sometimes, the ends of these should be in the shape of a cuckoo's bill, which is called a ciconia, and they are of strong construction.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter XXXI.
De erradicacio de dentz e d‘estraccio dels osses de las mandibulas trincadas.	On the extraction of teeth and the bones of broken jaws.
Quan deves la eradicacio de dent le qual es trinquat roman alcuna causa, lahoras cove que tu pauses sobre le loc coto am boder per un jorn o per dos entro que·l loc sia mollificat; e aprop entromet algesti o tenalhas las extramitatz de las quals so asembladas al bec de un auzel apelat ciconia o guanta, la forma de las forceps:	When you need to extract a tooth that is broken due to some cause, first ensure that you pause over the area firmly for one or two days until the location becomes softened; then insert forceps or tongs at the ends of which are assembled in the shape of a cuckoo's bill (called ciconia or guanta), the form of the forceps:
Las extramitatz de lor sian faytas dedintz ayssi cum lima o alfagi.	The extremities of their pain are felt inside thus as if by hammer or needle.
E si no obediys a tu a eyssiment am aquestas forceps o tenalas, lahoras cove que tu caves sobre la razit e descrobas tota la carn e entrometas le instrument le qual ha nom atali, so es palanca petita del qual la forma es aquesta:	And if it does not obey to your attempt with these forceps or tongs, then cover the area with lint and open all the flesh, and insert the instrument which is called a catheter, so it is a small lever of which the shape is this:
E sia de breu extremitat grossa un petit, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	And briefly, the extremity is large on the outside and small inside, so that it is not obstructed.
Donc si per aquo la razit es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, ajuda te am aquestz autres instrument dels quals aquestas son las formas: la forma del primier instrument es de triangulada extramitat en la qual sia alcuna grossesa:	So if the hole is properly made, that is good; and if not, help me with these other instruments of which these are the forms: the form of the first instrument is triangular in extremity, in which there is some thickness:
La forma del segon instrument es que sia de triangulada e de pus subtil extremitat.	The form of the second instrument is triangular with a finer extremity.
E ja so ajudatz am aquest instrument havent dos ramps del qual aquesta es la forma aprop la seguent:	And now help me with this instrument having two ramps, of which this is the form in the next line:
e am autres instrumentz les quals precidero en rasura de dentz; quar juvament es fayt am aquest instrument le qual es asemblat a onci gran, e aquesta es la forma:	And with other instruments which are used for the rasuration of teeth; for youth is made with this instrument which is like a large spoon, and this is the form:
de la triangulada extremitat torta o curta, la qual sia alcuna grossesa, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	From the triangular extremity that is twisted or short, which is some kind of swelling, and not engulfed so that it is not tied.
E otra sapias que·ls instrumentz de las dentz motz so e semblantment les autres instruments.	And another note that the tooth extraction tools resemble other instruments.
Mays le artifexs savi e subtil en l’art, atroba per si mateys segon aquo que a lu significa la operacio e las malautias diversas; quar son de las malautias a las quals les antics no diysero ni pausero propri instrument, per las formas de diversas specias.	But the wise and subtle craftsmen find suitable tools for themselves according to what the operation signifies and the various diseases; which are the diseases to which the ancients would neither refer nor pause with their own instruments due to their diverse forms.
Mays si es trinquat l’os de la mandibula o dels autres osses de la boca, o si poyreys, lahoras sia pes curat sobre aquel en son loc am aquo que es a lu convenient dels instrumentz e de las forceps las quals havem dit en la extraccio de las razitz de las dentz, e ajuda te am gesti del qual aquesta es la forma:	But if the bone of the mandible or other bones in the mouth is tied up, or if you need to cure it at that place, then use the appropriate tools and forceps as we have said in the extraction of the roots of the teeth, and aid with the gesture of which this is the form:
E sia en lu alcuna grosseza petit a petit, e sia instringida o tenguda am la boca per que no evasesca o fuga entro que l’os de tot sia foro-getat; e aprop restaura le loc am medicinas convenientz ad aquo.	And there is some small swelling, gradually and tightly held in the mouth so that it does not escape or flee while all of the bone is being thoroughly drilled; then restore the area with appropriate medicines.
Mays si en l’os es petita poyredura, lahoras ratz aquel de aquela poyredura e de la sua negror, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If in the bone there is a small suppuration, first drain that suppurated area and its blackness, and cure it while it is healing.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter XXXII.
De la cura de las dentz eminentz sobre las autras.	Of the treatment of prominent teeth over others.
Quan las dentz so eminentz no segon lor cors natural per aquelas la forma es laga, e majorment quan endeve a las femnas, e majorment a las piuselas venerablas; donc cove que tu consideras: si dent es nada aprop autra dent, e no es possibla sarradura ni linament de lu, lahoras radica aquela; mays que no sia annexa am autra dent, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am aquest instrument del qual aquesta es la forma; e es semblant a morr de porc, e sia feyt de ferr de India de extramitat mot aguda.	When the teeth are prominent not according to their natural form, and especially when they protrude in women, particularly in venerable old women; therefore consider this: if a tooth is close to another tooth and it cannot be removed by filing or with any tool, then extract that tooth; but if it is not attached to another tooth, then use this instrument, which has the shape of a pig's snout, made of very sharp Indian iron, to extract it.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscideyses aquela en trops dias per la duricia de la dent, e que no sia comauguda autra de las dentz.	And make your incision with the instrument you will use to extract that tooth due to its hardness, and ensure it is not too close to any other teeth.
E si es dent eminent expausat a limadura, lahoras lima aquel am lima de ferr de India del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if the tooth is prominent and needs filing, then file it with a file made of Indian iron, which has this shape:
E sia tot de ferr de India e·l margua eysament; e sia de motz menutz puntz ayssi cum lima am la qual son faytas agulhas, am la qual la dent sia limada pauc a pauc en motz dias am fecilitat, per so que no sia autra dent comauguda e caga.	And let it be all of iron and the margin tempered; and made of small points like those of a file, on which the teeth are filed little by little over days for convenience, so that there is not another toothed instrument.
E aprop lineys aquela en la fi, e ratz aquela am alscus razoris.	And draw one there at the end, and cut another with a few razor strokes.
E si es dent del qual una partida es trinquada e lideys la lengua, lahoras cove que tu limescas aquel entro que l’aspretat de aquela fraccio sia ostada e engualhada, e sia aplenada per so que la lengua no ledesca ni la paraula no corrumpa.	And if a tooth is broken and the tongue lies on it, then cut that area where the sharpness of that fragment may be obstructed and equalized, so that the tongue does not slip nor the word be corrupted.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter XXXIII.
De restauracio de dentz maugudas am fiel de aur o de argent.	On the restoration of decayed teeth with gold or silver foil.
Quan accideys a las dentz devant concussio e remossio per percussio o per cazament, e le malaute no pot strenher sobre aquo que manga, e tu has curat aquel am medicinas stipticas, e no ha valgut la tua curacio, lahoras per so que no cagan es engen en aquelas que sian strengudas am fiel de aur e no de argent, quar argent se fa vert e aprop se poyreys aprop alscus dias, mays aur nul temps no es mudat.	When the front teeth are damaged by concussion or extraction due to percussion or hunting, and the patient cannot strengthen themselves sufficiently from what remains, and you have treated this with styptic medicines but your treatment has not been effective, then for those that can be strengthened use gold foil and not silver, for silver turns green and in a few days may fall out, while gold does not change at all.
E sia le fiel en tal subtilitat e grocesa segon la quantitat que puesca entrar entre las dentz; e la forma de la reccio es que prenguas le fiel e pren lo doble de lu entre doas dentz sanas, e aprop que cresques am doas tortuositatz del fiel entre doas maugudas, o si’ una o motas, entro que pervengua la tela a la dent sana del autra partida.	And the bile should be in such subtlety and coarseness according to the quantity that can enter between the teeth; and the form of the session is that you take the bile and put twice its amount between two healthy teeth, and soon there will be two tortuosities of the bile between two molar teeth, or one or spots, until the tissue reaches the healthy tooth from the other side.
E aprop itera le teyssiment entro a la partida de la qual comenciest, e strenh la tua ma am facilitat e savieza entro que no sia mauguda.	And then push the tissue into the part from which you began, and strengthen your hand with ease and skill until it is not molar.
E sia la tua striccio am la qual strenhas le fiel deves las razitz de las dentz que no evasesca.	And let your grip be such that when you extract the bile, it does not escape from the roots of the teeth.
E aprop inscindeys las extramitatz del fiel superfluens am las forceps o tosoyras, e agregua aquelas en quascun loc am gesti, e converteys aquelas e las occulta entre la dent sana e la dent mauguda, per so que no fassa lesio a la lengua.	And then divide the excess bile ducts with forceps or scissors, and add them to any location with your hand, and convert those and the hidden ones between the healthy tooth and the molar tooth, so as not to injure the tongue.
E aprop leyssa aquela ayssi streyta cum roman.	And let it be thus strewn like a Roman.
Mays si es desliada o rumpuda, strenh aquela o aquelas am autra fiel en tal manieyra en tot son temps.	If it is slipped or broken, strengthen it or them in such manner throughout its time.
E aquesta es la forma de las dentz e la figura de la rectacio de doas dentz sanas e de doas maugudas, ayssi cum vezes aquestas liadas:	This is the form of the teeth and the figure of the alignment of two healthy teeth and two molars, as you see these tied:
E quan se fa que retorno una dent o doas aprop le cazement de quascuna en lors locs, e sian recrescutz ayssi cum havem recomtat, e que remauguan.	When returning one or two teeth to their proper places in the socket, and they have grown back as we have described, and when they erupt.
E no fa aquo sino bo artifexs e savi.	And it is not done by any but skilled artisans.
E alcunas veguadas es aptat alcuna causa dels osses de vaca, e es fayt de lor ayssi cum forma de dent, e es pausada en loc en le qual defayl la dent, e es strengit ayssi cum havem dit, e reman e serveys am aquel per lonc temps.	And sometimes it is appropriate for certain causes of the bones of a cow, and it is made from them as the form of a tooth, and is placed in the place where the tooth was lost, and is strengthened as we have said, and remains and serves for a long time.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Chapter XXXIV.
De inscizio del liament le qual ve en la lengua e prohibeys loquela.	On the incision of the ligament which is in the tongue and prohibiting speech.
Aquest liguament le qual ve dejos la lengua alcunas veguadas o es natural am le qual hom nays, o accidental e accideys per plagua la qual ja es consolidada.	This ligament which leaves the tongue in some cases or is natural to which man is born, or accidental and due to a wound which has already healed.
E la operacio en lu es que huobres la boca del malaute, le sieu cap existent en le tieu se; e eleva la sieua lengua, e aprop inscideys aquel liament nervos segon la latitut entro que sia solvuda la lengua de la sua recencio.	The operation for this is to open the mouth of the patient, whose existing head is in the sick position; elevate the patient's tongue, and then incise that ligament nerve according to the width between which the tongue can be freed from its attachment.
Mays si en aquela es alcuna duricia o denodacio, e aquo es stat per consolidacio de plagua, lahoras tu gieta unci e scindeys aquel per la latitut entro que aias inscindit le liament e sia dissolvuda la nodacio.	But if there is any hardness or induration in that area, and this is due to the healing of a wound, then you cut once and incise that ligament according to the width at which you have already incised the ligament and dissolved the induration.
E guarda te que no sia fayta fissura en le preon de la carn e que scindas aqui arceria e vengua flux de sanc.	And make sure that no fracture is made in the periosteum of the bone and that you incise here to allow a flow of blood.
E aprop sia lavat le vestigi de la inscisio am ayguaros o am vi agre o am aygua frega; e aprop pausa dejos la lengua licini; so es meca la qual tengua le malaute dejos la lengua en quascuna nuoyt per so que no sia consolidat autra veguada.	And then wash the incision tracts with vinegar or with wine or with hot water; and then place the tongue to dry. If it is necessary, let the patient keep the tongue out at night so that it does not heal again.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, pausa sobre le loc vetriol trissat; mays si le sanc ventz, lahoras cauteriza le loc am cauteri lantiginos le qual conveneys ad aquo.	If there is a flow of blood, place a glass vessel over the area; if the blood flows, then sear the area with a cautery long enough to fit the wound.
E aprop aquel cura am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And then proceed with other treatments as it heals.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter XXXV.
De extraccio de ranula dejos la lengua.	For the extraction of a ranula, use the tongue.
Alcunas veguadas accideys dejos la lengua apostema asemblant a nomla petita prohibent la lengua de la sua operacio natural; e fort leu es magnificada entro que huempla la boca.	At times, an abscess forms on the tongue, resembling a small boil, and it is forbidden to perform any operation on the tongue. Yet, when it fills the mouth, it is greatly magnified.
E la operacio en lu es que huebras la boca del malaute sesent devant le solel e considera le apostema.	And the operation for this is to open the patient's mouth wide and examine the abscess.
E si tu le vezes de fusca color o de negra, dur, al qual le malaute no atroba sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel quar es cranc.	And if you see it is of a brown or black color, hard, and the patient does not feel any pain in it, then do not touch that area.
E si es declinat a blancor, en le qual es humiditat, lahoras tu met le onci en lu, e inscideys aquel am spatum subtil, e inscindeys le de tota partida; e si sanc te ventz en la hora de la tua operacio, lahoras tu pausa desus zegi trissat, so es vetriol, entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if it is turning white, which indicates moisture, then insert a lancet into it, incise that with a sharp blade, and incise all parts. And if blood comes out during the time of your operation, then place a glass vessel above it, so it is constrained by the blood.
E aprop retorna a la obra tua entro que lo haias trayt am compliment de lu, entro que sia lavat am vi agre e sal; e cura aquel am l’autra curacio ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And then return to your work when you have brought him to completion, when he has been washed with vinegar and salt; and care for that with the other cure after it is healed.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Capitol.xxxvi.
De extraccio de apostema de doas aurelhas e de aquel que es nada en le golayro e de las autras apostemas.	Of the extraction of pus from both ears and from that which is in the wound, and of other abscesses.
Quan endeveno en le golayro godat, so son glandulas las quals son asembladas algodat, las quals accideysso deforas e son nompnadas doas aurelhas, las quals quan tu las curas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no es sanat, lahoras tu considera si le apostema es dur, de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr.	When I find a wound godet (boil), these are glands which are gathered together like a godet, which swell outward and are named the two ears. When you cure them as we have said in the division and they do not heal, then consider if the abscess is hard, of dark color, of little sensation, then do not touch it with iron.
E si es de roga color e la razic es grossa, lahoras no toques aquela am ferr per le flux del sanc; abantz layssa aquel entro sia madurat, e lahoras o tu trauqueras aquel, o sira romput per si.	And if it is of red color and the root is large, then do not touch that with iron for the flow of blood; first let that mature, and then either you will incise it, or it will break on its own.
E si es de blanqua color, radon, e la razit de lu es subtil, lahoras aquel es que cove esser inscidit.	And if it is of white color, rotten, and the root of it is fine, then that is to be incised.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras, denant la tua operacio, si ja ha repausat le apostema de lu caut am repaus complit o si es deminuit am alcuna deminucio; e lahoras fay sezer le malaute denant le soleyl, e·l cap de lu sia en le tieu se, e huebre la boca de lu, e le servidor prenent entre las suas mas prema la lengua de lu dejos am instrument mot noble del qual aquesta es la forma:	And the operation for him is that you consider, before your operation, if he has already rested the abscess of his foot sufficiently or if it has decreased somewhat; then cut the wound facing the sun, his head be in your lap, and hold his mouth open, and a servant holding between his hands the tongue, lets use the noblest instrument of which this is the form:
E sia fayt de argent o de aram, e sia subtil cum cotel.	And let it be made of silver or steel, and be thin like a knife.
Donc cum tu premes am aquel la lengua e es mostrat a tu la apostema, e catz sobre aquel le tieu vezement, lahoras pren onci e fica aquel en l’amenla, e tira aquel a las partidas defora tant quant podes.	So when you press at that tongue and the abscess is shown to you, and cut over that with your sharp instrument, then take one and put it in the wick, and throw that away as far as you can.
Otra aquo que tiras alcuna causa de las tunicas, e aprop incideys aquela am instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	Another thing that you throw some cause of the tunics, and then incise that with the instrument of which this is the form:
e es asemblat a forceps, empero las extramitatz de lu son corvadas, ayssi que l’orrifici de quascuna de aquelas es en le endreyt del autra, mot agudas, le qual sia de ferr indi enbegut.	and it is similar to forceps, although the ends of it are curved, so that the orifice of each of those is in the straight part of the other, sharp, which is made of iron and bent.
Mays si aquest instrument no es a tu present, lahoras inscideys aquel am spatum del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: E sia agut de la una part, no agut del autra part.	If this instrument is not at hand, then incise that space from which this comes, and make it sharp on one side but not the other.
E pus que has inscidit una mella, inscideys l’autra segon aquesta meteyssa manieyra de inscizio, e aprop la inscizio le malaute guarguarise de aygua frega	And since you have incised one wound, incise the other according to this method of incision, and near the incision let the illness be cured by water.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, guarguarise aygua de decoccio de scorsa de milgrana o de fuelha de mirtra e semblantz ad aquel de las causas stiptiquas entro que·l flux del sanc sia restreyt, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If there is a flow of blood, cure it with water from the decoction of vetch seeds or of hollyhock leaves, and let it resemble that of the causes that restrict the flow of blood, and near its cure let it be healed.
E alcunas veguadas naysso en le guolayro autras apostemas otra aquelas doas aurelhas, e inscideys aquelas segon que yeu e dit en la inscizio de doas mellas engualment.	And sometimes sores appear on the cheek or other abscesses besides those two ears, and incise them as you and it is said in the incision of two wounds equally.
E yeu ja fu medicat una femna de apostema le qual era nat en le golayro de lu, le qual apostema tendia a color fusca, de pauc sentiment, le qual ja havia claus le golayro de lu, e la femna respirava am meat streyt, e ja havia prohibit a lu comestio e beure de aygua, e ja era pervenguda a la mort si mays agues stat per un dia o per dos.	And I have already treated a woman with an abscess which was located on her cheek, which abscess had a dark brown color, little sensation, and had already closed her cheek. The woman breathed freely, and had been prohibited from eating and drinking water, and she was near death if more days passed without water.
E l’apostema ja tant havia pugat que havia mezes dos ramps entro que eyssiro per dos traucs.	And the abscess had swollen so much that there were already two handbreadths between where it would exit through two cuts.
Donc yeu me cuytegui fisturalment e fiquegui en un de lor onci, e tiregui aquel, e atirada es de lu gran porcio, e aprop yeu incidigui aquela de on comprendegui del autre trau, e aprop yeu obrigui la boca de lu, e compremegui la sua lengua, e aprop yeu fiquegui le onci en aquela apostema.	Then I cut it incisively and grasped one of its parts, and pulled it, the larger part coming out. Then I held that from which the other cut originated, and forced the opening closed, compressed its tongue, and grasped the part in the abscess.
E aprop yeu abscizi gran partida de lu, e no corria de lu sino un pauc de sanc.	Then I cut away a large part of it, and from it only a little blood was flowing.
Donc absolut es le guolayro de aquela femna, e comensec tantost beure aygua, e aprop presec vianda, donc yeu no cessegui inscidir de aquela apostema motas vetz per lonc temps, e succesia apostema en loc de aquel, le qual inscizia entro que es prolonguat aquel.	Thus the swelling of that woman subsided, and she soon began to drink water and eat food. Then I continued to incise the abscess for a long time, and instead of resolving, it kept recurring, occurring where the swelling had been prolonged.
Donc yeu engen agui e cauterizegui le guolayro de lu, donc astec de addicio; e aprop yeu perambulegui e no saubi que fec Dieus de aquela aprop mi.	Then I applied an ointment and cauterized the swelling, according to the method; then I walked around and did not know what God had done to that near me.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Chapter XXXV.
De inscizio de huvela quan es apostemada.	Of the operation when it is slipped.
Quan catarr deysen a la huvula, e es apostemada e es longa, lahoras ela es nompnada perpendicular; e si es en la partida dejos grossa e redonda, e lahoras ela es apelada buba.	When catarrh affects the uvula, and it is slipped and long, then it is named perpendicular; if it is in the part thick and round, then it is called a bubble.
Mays quan es curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio, e no comfereys la tua curacio, e eyssament ja vezes que apostema caut ja es ostat de lu e es subtil, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquela que es agreguadas redonda; e si es ad aquela longitut, e es sanguina, de fusca color o de negre, e no es a lu centiment, lahoras cove que tu temtes la inscizio de lu, quar en aquela es temor sobre le malaute.	When it is cured as we have said in the division, and you do not find your cure, then observe that the abscess caut has already gone and become subtle. You should incise the area that is added and round; if it is at that length, and it bleeds with a dark or black color, and is not more than a centimeter, then you must fear the incision of it, for there is fear of disease in that area.
E quan tu vezes aquela segon la manieyra que yeu he dita de la sua blancor e longuesa, que tu fassas sezer le malaute e premas la lengua de lu am instrument del qual procesic la sua forma e aprop fica le onci en la nuva, e tira aquela en jos e inscideys aquela am un de dos instrumentz les quals e ditz en la inscizio de dos mellas.	And when you observe it according to the manner that I have said of its whiteness and length, you must extract the disease and press the tongue of the patient with an instrument of which you determine its form and then fix the thumb in the new opening, and pull that down and incise that with one of the two instruments, which are called in the incision of two bellies.
E cove que no inscidas aquela sino aquo que es ajustat sobre le terme natural ses addicio, quar si tu inscides de lu mays, lediyras le sieu parlar.	And cover that not less than what is adjusted over the natural term of addition, for if you cover too much, you will speak out of turn.
E aprop la inscizio, usa de aquo le qual havem recomtat en la inscizio de dos mellas, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And nearby the cover, use that which we have mentioned in the operation of two layers, and cure that within which is healed.
Mays si era le malaute espaventat per la inscizio de lu, cove que use de engen en la cauterizacio de lu ses temor, e la manieyra del cauteri en lu no es sino am aygua aguda, e es que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop prem la lengua de lu am le instrument le qual havem dit, e aprop pren de l’aygua la qual havem dita en le capitol de cauterizacio, e comfeys am aquela caus viva, e pausa aquela no spessa ni subtil, e de aquela omple la concavitat de l’estrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	If the patient was frightened by the operation, cover that you use in the cautery of him with some soothing, and the manner of the cautery on him is nothing but with sharp water, for you place the head of the patient in your hand, and then press the tongue of him with the instrument which we have mentioned, and then take from the water which we have said in the chapter of cautery, and warm it to a living heat, and pause it not thick nor thin, and from it fill the cavity of the instrument of which this is the form:
Sia la extramitat de lu conquavitat en la qual sia pausada la medicina ayssi cum la conquavitat de culher de ray, e pausa le strument am la medicina sobre la vula, e·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu latz per so que corro saliva o musellage de la boca de aquel per la intrinscequa medicina, per so que no deyssenda de aquela deguna causa sobre le golayro de lu e que ledesca aquel.	Let the external part of his cavity in which the medicine is paused be as the cavity of a cow's hoof, and pause the instrument on the medicine over the vagina, and the patient contract his lips for so that saliva or mucus from his mouth flows through the internal medicine, for that he does not fall away from that for any cause upon his genitals and it descends.
E aprop te la tua ma am la medicina, e exprem aquela sobre la uvula per l’espazi de miega hora entro que vegas aquela esser denegrada e sedada per la mordicacio de la medicina.	And then place your hand on the medicine, and express it over the uvula for half an hour between each time you let it darken due to the bite of the medicine.
E si vols, prengues coto e envolopes aquel sobre la extremitat del ray, e submergeys le coto en la medicina, e entrometas le ray am le coto en una canula de sobre entro que·l coto adheresca en aquela canula, e fay aquo tantas vetz entro que consiegues aquo que vols de la cauterizacio de la uva, e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela se seccara e cayra aprop tres dias o quatre.	And if you wish, take some cloth and wrap it around the end of the ray, submerge the cloth in the medicine, and insert the ray with the cloth into a tube so that the cloth adheres inside the tube. Do this as many times as needed to achieve the desired cauterization of the uvula, then let it dry and fall off in about three or four days.
E si indigeysses que iteras la medicina, itera aquela, e aprop la cauterizacio abstergeys en le circuit de la uva am coto enbegut en boder, e mondifica am aquel aquo que es en le circuit de lu de la medicina, e sia lavat am aygua frega, e sia curat deforo am embrocacio, e dedintz am guarguarismes entro que sia sanat.	And if you need to apply the medicine again, apply it, and after cauterization, clean around the uvula with a cloth soaked in vinegar, modify what is in the circuit of the uvula from the medicine, and wash it with water, then treat externally with ointment and internally with powders until it heals.
E aquesta especia de curacio es pus salva que inscizio e pus long de temor.	And this method of treatment is both safe and lasting, free from fear.
Alcunas veguadas es curada la uvuola am aquo que es pus subtil que cauteri e inscizio, quar es curat am subfumigacio en aquesta manieyra: recipe calament, ysop, origua, ruda, scicados arabic, camamilla, broyda e semblant ad aquels de las erbas, e ajusta totas aquelas causas, o alcunas de lor, en una ola, e sian submergidas am vi agre, e bulhan; e la ola sia be lutada am lut decentment, e sia en le mieg loc de la ola un trauc, sobre le qual sia pausat un instrument conquau de aram segon aquesta manieyra; sia fayt de argent o de aram.	Sometimes the uvula is cured with what is finer than a cautery and incision, which is treated by inhalation in this manner: take calamus, hyssop, origanum, rue, scikadis arabicus, camomile, powder them like the herbs, and adjust all those causes or some of them into one ointment, and be immersed in vinegar and boil; and let the ointment be well mixed with good plaster, and in the middle of the ointment a wick, over which an iron implement is placed according to this manner; it should be made of silver or iron.
E sia entromesa la extremitat en la boca del malaute entro que la vapor poge a la uvula sobre la quanula, entro que la uvula sia mot ofuscada.	And place the extremity in the mouth of the patient so that the vapor rises to the uvula over the quulka, so that the uvula is moderately affected.
E aprop itera sobre aquela motas veguadas entro qu’es secca, e guarda te que no fassas aquesta curacio al comesament de l’aveniment de apostemas, quar trop ajustaria en le apostema, e no cove que tu fassas aquo, sino deves la declaracio de apostema de lu caut.	And then repeat over those several times until it is dry, and guard that you do not perform this cure at the beginning of the formation of carbuncles, for it would too strongly affect the carbuncle. You should not do this, but rather declare the presence of a carbuncle with a cautery.
Mays si no es a tu present aquest instrument, lahoras pren una cana e compon en la extramitat de lu un clos de huou, per so que la boca del malaute sia comborida, quar le closc del huou prohibeys la vapor comburir la boca.	But if you do not have this instrument at hand, then take a cane and put a clove of garlic at its end, so that the opening of the patient's anus is narrowed, for the garlic prevents the vapor from burning the opening.
E aquesta curacio es bona am salut.	And this cure is good for health.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter XXXVIII.
De extraccio d’espinas e de aquo que adhereys en le golayro e de las autras causas.	On the extraction of thorns and what adheres in the wound and other causes.
Motas veguadas adhereys en le guolayro o spina de peys o alcuna autra causa.	Spots or thorns adhering in the wound or from a thorny plant or some other cause.
Adonc cove que tu extraguas aquo que de aquels es apparent, sobre le qual catz la vista, pus que tu premes la lengua am instrument denant solelh, per so que a tu sia declarat aquo que es en la guola.	Then carefully extract what is obvious and visible, by which you can see it. But first press the tongue with an instrument facing the sun, so that you may be able to determine what is in the wound.
E aquo que no apar e es a tu occultat en le guolayro, cove que tu fassas vomir le malaute denant que la vianda sia degerida en l’estomac, quar fort leu la causa annexsa le golayro sira foro-getada per vomit; o que deglusia le malaute una pessa de nap o de razit de laytuga o un boci de pa sec; o prengua una pessa de sponga marina sequa leon, e lia aquela fortment am fiel, e aprop le malaute transglussia aquela, quar cum perve al loc en le qual so spinas e es extrahuda, lahoras so foro-getatz.	And what is not obvious and hidden in the wound, carefully make the patient vomit before the food is digested in the stomach, because if the cause attached to the wound is strong, it will be expelled through vomiting; or have the patient swallow a piece of nap or ragwort seed or a bit of dry bread; or take a piece of sea sponge well soaked in wine and tie it tightly with a thread, and make the patient swallow that, for it will reach the place where the thorns are and will be expelled.
E mays pren una anguila e be am fiel liada, e sia dedintz mesa e soptament sia extrayta; o pren un porr e soptament le metas e soptament l’en tratz.	And take an eel and bind it with honey, place it inside and gently extract it; or take a pepper and gently put it in and remove it gently.
Mays si no so foro-getatz am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas, lahoras husa de un instrument de plom segon aquesta forma:	And if none of these methods work as we have said, then use a lead instrument in this form:
E sia pus gros que ray un petit, e en la extramitat de lu sia conquavitat la qual tu entrometas en la sua guola am facilitat.	And let it be as large as a small pea, and at the end of it, have its cavity where you will insert it into his throat with ease.
E el aga le sieu cap elevat en sus, e guarda te que·l tocament del sieu os de la gola, per so que endevengua a lu cos e am aquela que enpellesca le os o la spina, o que aquel le metge am la sua ma.	And apply its head upwards, and make sure that the touch of its bone at the throat reaches his body, so that it can either peel off the bone or the spine, or that the doctor places his hand on it.
Mays empero que·l malaute aquel entrometa es miels, per la sua sciencia del loc de la causa annexa e enpellisca en jos, e tira la sua ma am le instrument en sus, tot aquo segon la quantitat la qual es a lu preparada entro que sia foro-getada.	And instead, let the patient himself insert the object, by his knowledge of the location of the cause, peel it off downward, and pull his hand toward the instrument, doing all this according to the quantity prepared before it is ineffective.
Capitol .xxxix.	Capitol.xxxix.
De extraccio de sancguisugua annexsa al golayro.	From the extraction of gouty fluid attached to the kidney.
Quan es medicada sanguisugua am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la curacio am medicinas e no comfereys, considera lahoras en le guolayro del malaute al solelh, pus que tu aias compremuda la lengua de lu am instrument le qual a tu havem recomtat.	When gouty fluid is treated according to what we have said in the division of the treatment with medicines and you do not find relief, consider at the site of the kidney in the patient's body, as you may need to use an instrument that we have recommended.
Donc si tu vezes la sancguisugua, extratz aquela am onci petit o am gesti subtils decentment.	So if you see the gouty fluid, extract it either with a small needle or with fine, gentle means.
E si no es a tu possible estrayre am aquel, lahoras pren una canula concava e entromet aquela en lo guolayro del malaute, e aprop pausa en la concavitat de la canula un ferr ignit, e fay aquo tantas vetz (entro que la sancguisugua sia morta e se osta del guolayro) e abstengua se le malaute tot lo jorn de aygua.	And if it is not possible to extract it there, then take a concave cannula and insert it into the site of the kidney. Then place a burning iron in the concavity of the cannula, and do this as many times as necessary (until the gouty fluid is dead and separates from the kidney). Let the patient abstain from water for the entire day.
E aprop prengua una veyria plena de aygua frega, e obra la boca de lu en aquela, e lava la boca am aquela; e no trasglucia de aquela alcuna causa e maugua l’aygua una hora aprop autra am la sua ma, quar la sancguisugua tantost cum sent l’aygua catz.	And then take a sponge full of water, open its mouth at that place, and wash the area with it; do not swallow any of it, and let the water remain on the area for about an hour with your hand, as the gouty fluid will quickly come out upon feeling the water.
Mays si no es foro-getada am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras subfumigua le malaute am cimetz o am assafetida per le instrument le qual havem recomtat en la sufumiguacio de uvula.	If it is not forcefully opened, then fumigate the patient with cyme or asafetida through the instrument we have recommended in the fumigation of the uvula.
Fay aquo, so en quar cayra.	Do this, so that it may take effect.
E es un’autra manieyra de operacio en sufumiguacio de aquela, es que tu prenguas una ola en la qual sian carbos ignitz e la ola sia cuberta am una cobertora en le mieg de la qual sia un trauc, e sia compausat en aquel trauc la extremitat del instrument; e aprop dega desus la subfumigacio; e pause le malaute la sua boca en la extremitat de la canula, e claugua la sua boca per que la subfumiguacio no sia foro-getada entro que sapias que la subfumigacio es pervenguda a la sancguisugua, quar la sancguisugua tantost cayra.	And another way of performing the fumigation is this: you take a hollow reed in which ignited carbons are placed and cover it with a cloth in the middle of which there is a hole. Place the end of the instrument at the hole; then proceed with the subfumigation. Have the patient place their mouth over the end of the cannula, and close their mouth so that the subfumigation does not stop until you can see that the fumigation has reached the uvula, for the saliva will begin to flow soon.
E si no catz, lahoras tu itera la subfumiguacio motas vetz, e abstengua le malaute de beure, e mange causas saladas e alhs, e no begua aygua, e ayssi necessari es que am aquest regiment sia fora-getada.	And if it does not stop, then you repeat the subfumigation several times, and forbid the patient to drink or eat salty foods, and do not let them drink water either; thus, this regimen must be followed.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument am le qual es trayta sancguisugua del guolayro quan es vista; e es semblant a forceps ayssi cum vezes, sino quar es en lu alcuna curvitat:	And this is the form of the instrument with which gouty rheum is treated when seen; and it is similar to forceps as you see, except that there is some curvature in it.
le qual sia mesa al guolayro, e la extremitat de lu es semblant a bec de ciconia, que es guanta, en la qual es aspretat de lima, per so quar, quan comprem alcuna causa, aquela no leyssa.	And it is placed on the gouty area, and the extremity of it is similar to a stork's bill, which is curved, and is filed with a file, so that when any cause is grasped, it does not slip.
Capitol .xl.	Capitol.xl.
En le qual es la suma del sermo en apercio de apostemas e en seccio de lor.	In which the full discourse on carbuncles and sections thereof is presented.
Les apostemas so motas specias, de motas manieyras, segon que ve rememoracio de lor, de quascuna en aquest libre.	The carbuncles are species of boils, of various types, according to the memory of them, for each one in this treatise.
E so diversas en perforacio e seccio de lor per doas manieyras, de las quals la una es per la specia de apostemas en si meteys; e per aquo que comprem de las humiditatz.	And they are diverse in their perforation and section through two methods. Of these, one is by the species of carbuncles themselves; and by this, we grasp the humidity.
E la segonda manieyra es prop les locs en les quals accideys del cos, quar le apostema accident en le cap es autra de la apostema accident en le cul; e le apostema en le loc carnos accident es autra del apostema accident en junctura; e a quascun de lor es son juguament per operacio.	And the second method is by the places where bodily accidents occur, for a carbuncle that occurs on the head is different from one that occurs on the buttocks; and a carbuncle that occurs in muscle tissue is different from one that occurs at a joint; and each has its own judgment through operation.
E mays de apostemas so alcunas las quals cove que no sian perforadas sino aprop maturacio de la sania en aquels o compliment de lor.	And more of abscesses some of which cover that they not be perforated but rather at maturity of the healing in those or complement of their.
So autras apostemas les quals cove que sian traucatz quan son cruzes, e no son maturatz segon lor compliment, ayssi cum apostemas que son propdas a las juncturas, quar apostema quan ve prop junctura, lo esser de lu es prolonguat entro que·s poyreys aquo que es en le circuit de lu, e fort leu son corromputz les liamentz o les nervis de aquela junctura, per que es fayta causa de contraccio de aquel membre; o es apostema prop de membre principal, e si tu tardas la perforacio de lu entro sia madurat nosira al membre principal; o es prop le cul, donc perfora aque no-madurat; e no cove que·l perforas cru, de no-complida degestio, sino aquel que es prop del cul, per so que no poyresca le preon de lu e sia elonguat a las partidas dedintz del cul, e sia fayta fistula, o que sia fayt en le terme de lu que no sia sanat.	And other abscesses some of which cover that they be drawn out when they are ripe, and not matured according to their complement, thus as abscesses that are close to joints, for an abscess that is near a joint, the nature of it is prolonged into where you will be at what is in the circuit of it, and strongly corrupts the ligaments or nerves of that joint, making cause of contraction of that limb; or it is an abscess near the main member, and if you delay the perforation of it until its maturation then it affects the main member; or it is near the anus, therefore pierce that which is not ripe; and do not draw it out raw, but one near the anus, so that no poison from it can extend inward to the parts inside the anus, making a fistula, or something done in the term of it that is not healed.
Mays cove que tu sapias la hora de la perforacio de la apostema, e aysso es quan es maturat.	And you must know the time for the perforation of the abscess, and this is when it is ripe.
E sapias que es madurat quan es la cedacio de la dolor e la cessacio de la febre, e aprop la diminucio de la rogor e de la pulsacio, e la acuitat del cap del apostema, e les autres senhals.	And know that it is matured when there is the cessation of pain and the end of fever, and then the reduction of redness and pulse, and the decrease in the head's acuteness of the abscess, and other signs.
E quar cove que sapias la perforacio cazer en le loc pus dejos del apostema e de pus venient de curacio de la eminencia.	And know when to puncture the abscess at the location where pus is coming from after the swelling has subsided.
E perforacio tostemps sia per le lonc de la carn o del cors, si las apostemas son en las partidas de las mas o dels pes, e en loc dels lacertz, de las cordas dels nervis, de las arcerias; e, al derier, en totz locs enguals en les quals no es reflecio; quar en aquels que so reflectitz, usa de perforacio segon aquel membre.	And the puncturing of abscesses should be done along the length of the flesh or body, if the abscesses are in the upper parts or the feet, and at the location of the lacertae, the cords of the nerves, the arches; and, in general, in all locations where there is no reflection; for in those that do reflect, use puncturing according to that member.
Mays quan le apostema es en loc carnos, lahoras miels es que leysses la perforacio de lu entro que sia confermada la digestio de lu segon compliment, ayssi quo havem dit; quar si tu perforas aquel denant aquo, es prolonguat le cors del poyre de lu e de mota sordicia, e fort leu las labias de lu so enduradas e la profunditat de lu.	When the abscess is in a fleshy location, it is better to wait until the digestion of the pus is confirmed according to its course, as we have said; for if you puncture it too early, it will prolong the duration of the purulent discharge and increase the hardness and depth of the lesion.
Mays alcus apostemas so perforatz segon la latitut de la carn o del cos deves la necessitat, o segon aquo del qual lo membre indigeys.	More abscesses should be perforated according to the width of the flesh or body as the necessity demands, or according to that from which the member suffers.
E cove que administres petita perforacio , e·n les apostemas grans gran perforacio e ampla o motas seccios segon la diversitat de la grandesa dels apostemas.	And ensure that you administer a small perforation in large abscesses, and a large perforation or multiple sections according to the diversity of the size of the abscesses.
E autras so dels apostemas en les quals cove que la codena sia conquavada e sia encidida, quan es fayta ayssi quo pan e fayta es en terme que ja stigua, ayssi cum aquel que accideys en trops de dubelec e de bubos.	And in other abscesses, ensure that the cord is returned to its cavity and tied, when it is done thus as with bread, it is done in a term that already stands, as is done in cases of crops of dodlet and buboes.
E de aquels so que so insciditz am seccio havent tres angles; e de aquels es en le qual es inscidit ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirtra, ayssi cum las apostemas dels angonars.	And of those that are incised by section having three angles; and of those in which it is incised thus as the figure of a leaf of hawthorn, as with abscesses of anginas.
E de lor so en les quals es administrada seccio redonda e seccio lunar, e semblantz ad aquels.	And of them, those in which a round section and a crescent section are administered, and similar to those.
Mays aquel al qual no es cap ayssi cum son apostemas leons superficials, cove que tu perforas aquel am perforacio superficial, o plana tant solament.	More for those in which none is thus, as with superficial abscesses, you should perforate them with a superficial perforation, or flat one only.
E cove quant le apostema es gros e ya ha colligit mota sania, que perfores aquel e no te coytes que extraguas tot le poyre en aquela hora; habantz extratz de aquel una partida, e aprop opila le apostema entro al autre dia, e aprop extratz una partida major, e aprop fa aquo motas veguadas segon graduacio entro que sia foro-getat.	And when the abscess is large and has already collected some healthy pus, that you perforate it and do not hesitate to extract all the pus at that time; having extracted one part, then raise the abscess on another day, and extracting a larger part, and repeatedly perform this by degrees until it is completely drained.
E majorment si·l malaute es de freol vertut, o femna prens, o enfant petit, o viel en decrepitut, quar l’esperit animal motas vetz es resolvut am la egressio de la sania, e fort leu mor le malaute, e tu operte les.	And especially if the patient is a male with green fever, or a woman in labor, or a small child, or an old person in decline, for the animal spirit resolves into the exit of the healthy pus, and greatly alleviates the illness, and you may openly perform.
Don guarda aquest capitol am gran cautela, e aprop la tua perforacio en la qual perforas aquestz apostemas, cove que abstergescas las plagues e consideras donc si la plagua del apostema es pauca, o es una seccio plana, lahoras tu aministra las qualguas de li o de coto antic; e si le apostema es gran, e las fissuras de la perforacio son motas, lahoras cove que tu pauses meca en quascun trauc entro que pervenguan ensemps.	Take great care with this chapter, and when you make your perforation in which you pierce these abscesses, ensure that you clean the wounds and consider whether the wound from the abscess is small, or a flat section, then administer the appropriate quantities of li or coto antico; if the abscess is large, and the fissures of the perforation are significant, then place your hand in each to ensure they heal together.
E si en le apostema es abscindit una partida de la codena o has concavada aquela en le circuit, lahoras cove que tu la complescas de coto viel o de fil fayt de drap de li, ayssi cum quan has traytz pans o razizos, ses humiditat; e strenh aquel entro al tertz dia; e aprop proceseys aquel e cura le am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if in the abscess a part of the cord is divided or you have concaved it in the circuit, then you should suture it with old thread or a needle made of linen cloth, just as when you have drawn out bandages or roots, their humidity; strengthen it on the third day; and proceed with it and cure it according to what is appropriate from ointments until it is healed.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc en la hora de la operacio tua, lahoras tu aministra aygua frega e vi agre en les quals mules un drap de li, e pausa aquel sobre le loc del fluxs del sanc motas veguadas.	But if you happen to have a flow of blood during the time of your operation, then administer water mixed with wine in which you soak a cloth, and place that over the location of the blood flow for several minutes.
Mays si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras cove que tu aministres regiment e curacio e polveras las quals he recomtadas en motz locs de aquest nostre libre e de divisio.	But if the flow of blood persists, then you must administer treatment and care, as well as powders which I have recommended in various places of this our free and divided text.
Mays si es en temps de hivern, e·l loc de la apostema es loc de motz nervis, lahoras cove que tu enfundas pulvils en vi e oli caut, e pauses aquels sobre les locs.	But if it is in the time of winter, and the location of the abscess is near major nerves, then you must apply powders mixed with wine and oil with a cautery, and place those over the locations.
E si es en estiu, e les locs son carnoses, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils enbeguts am aygua e oli o am vi e oli, e tot aquo sia freg entro que sia le ters dia, ayssi cum havem dit, e lahoras cove que tu deslies le apostema e abstergescas aquel e aministres en la curacio de lu aquo que a lu conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if it is in the summer, and the locations are fleshy, then you must place powders soaked in water and oil or in wine and oil, and all of this should be applied by the third day, as we have said, and then you must incise the abscess, cleanse it, and administer to it what is suitable for it until it heals.
E aysso es aquo que es necessari de la cognicio de la curacio de apostemas universalment, mays segon la via de distinccio ja he dit de tot apostema en qual manieyra es via de la cura de lu per capitols singularment.	And this is what is necessary for the knowledge of the treatment of abscesses universally, but according to the division I have already said about all abscesses, in what manner is the path of its cure treated separately by chapters.
Capitol .xli.	Capitol forty.
De seccio de apostemas les quals veno en la codena del cap.	Of abscesses whose vein is in the vein of the head.
En la codena del cap petitz apostemas, e so de specias de nodes les quals conteno tunicas que so a lor factz ; e las specias de lor so motas.	In the vein of the head, small abscesses, and their contents which contain tissues that are formed; the substances within them are spots.
E de lor son pingas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditat semblant a lima.	And they have contents, and those that contain humidity resembling lime.
E de aquelas so las quals conteno humiditat semblant a pols, et asemblantz a lor; e de aquelas so que son lapideas, durs.	And those that contain humidity resembling dust, similar to it; and those that are hard, calcified.
E en la seccio de totz, e en la extraccio de aquels no es temor, cum deves la exteccio de aquels no fa contrariat arceria.	And in the section of all, and in the extraction of those, there is no fear, just as you should perform the extraction without causing resistance.
E la operacio en seccio de aquels es que tu esproes aquels am instrument la forma del qual ve aprop aysso, le qual es apelat entromes, entro que sapias que contengua.	And the operation for extracting those is that you express them using an instrument of the form described nearby, which is called a lancet until you know it contains.
Quar si aquo que conte es humiditat, lahoras scindeys aquel am seccio segon la longitut per seccio superficial segon aquesta forma:	And if what it contains is humidity, then divide that by section along its length using a superficial section according to this form:
E comensa en la seccio de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G. Donc cum la humiditat es evacuada, lahoras tu excoria aquela pel que conte aquela humiditat, e no leysses de aquela alcuna causa de tot, quar tropas veguadas retorna, si roman de aquela alcuna causa.	And begin at the section of line B between line G. As the humidity is evacuated, then you scrape that skin which contains that humidity, and do not leave any cause of it all, for too many times it returns if left from any cause.
E aprop submergeys coto en enguent egipciach, si es present, e sino, en aygua e sal; e umpleys am aquel la plagua e layssa aquel entro ad autra dia, quar am aquo corrodeys tot so que es romas de aquela pellicula.	And then immerse it in Egyptian ointment, if present, and otherwise in water and salt; then fill it and leave it for another day, for in this it dissolves everything that is rotten of that skin.
E aprop itera sobre aquel coto am enguent egipciach segondament e tersament si indigeyses de lu, entro que·t comfides que no y haia romas alcuna causa de aquela pellicula; lahoras cura la plagua am enguent entro que sia sanada.	And then repeatedly treat that part with Egyptian ointment gently if you need it, until you are confident that there is no rot causing any issue to that skin; then cure the wound with ointment once it is healed.
E si apostema conte nodi gras, lahoras tu inscideys aquel segon aquesta forma:	And if an abscess contains fatty nodes, then you incise it according to this form:
am seccio havent forma de crotz, e geta oncis entre doas labias de la seccio e scorsa aquel de tota partida, e esforsa la tua vertut en extraccio de la tunica la qual conte aquel.	In the section having a cross-like form, and make an incision between the two sides of the section and pull out all parts of it, exerting your virtue in extracting the tunica which contains it.
Mays si a tu arceria fa contrarieta, lahoras fay aquo que yeu t’e recontat primieyrament.	If your artery resists, then do what I have recounted to you first.
E semblantment fay en le apostema lapificat de seccio e de curacio segon que a tu havem dit; e seccio sobre apostema lapificat es pus leugiera, quar es de pauc sanc e de pauca humiditat.	And similarly treat the abscessed lump for sectioning and curing as we have told you before; the sectioning over an abscessed lump is lighter, because it involves little bleeding and little moisture.
E alcunas vetz so alcus de aquestz apostemas les quals so en le cap en alcus homes am los quals de tot no es humiditat; la qual causa es quar yeu inscindigui sobre un apostema en le cap de una femna vielha e atrobegui le apostema ayssi cum peyra sorda, aspra, blanqua, la qual no podia esser trinquada, e si a alcu fos am aquela percussit, plaguera aquel.	And sometimes some of these abscesses, which are on the head, in some people do not have much moisture; the cause is that it cannot be easily sectioned over an abscess on a old woman's head. One should treat the abscess like a hard, rough, white stone, which could not be broken, and if any were struck with percussion, it would heal by itself.
Mays en les autres apostemas accidentz en le cap otra aquest no es aquest capitol, ayssi cum les apostemas que veno als caps dels enfantz e deves las razitz de las aurelhas, mays la seccio de aquestz totz sia seccio superficial.	And in other abscesses on the head, this is not covered in this chapter. As with abscesses that occur in children's heads, you should treat the causes of the earaches; however, the sectioning of all these should be superficial.
E pausa la perforacio de aquels de la partida pus bassa de lor per so que sia alleujat le cos de la sania a las partidas pus bassas.	And place the perforation of those lower parts such that it alleviates the disease in the lower regions.
E aprop cura aquelas am aquo que conveneys ad aquel de curacio.	And then attend to those things that are necessary for the cure.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter 42.
De seccio de scrophulas las quals accideyso en le col.	Of the section on scrofulas which occur in the neck.
Motas veguadas endeveno aquestas apostemas en le colh e en las aysselhas e en les angonars; e alcunas veguadas accideyso en las autras partidas del cos.	Black spots often cause abscesses in the neck, in the armpits, and in the groin; and sometimes they occur in other parts of the body.
E so aquelas que accideysso en le colh, e so motas que so engendradas entre lor, e tota scrofula de aquelas es dintz la sua tunica propria, e ayssi cum en les nodis e apostema del cap, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And those that occur in the neck, and the spots that are generated within them, and all scrofula of these is inflamed with its own tunica, just as in the nodes and abscesses of the head, as we have recounted.
E las specias de aquestas scrophulas son motas, quar de aquelas so alcunas lapideas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditatz, e de aquelas so malignas las quals no obeseysso a curacio.	And the species of these scrofulas are spots. Some of them are pale, and some contain moisture, and some are malignant, which do not respond to cure.
Donc en aquela la qual tu vezes de bona disposicio en le Tocament, de la qual la color de aquo que es manifest es propda a la color de la codena, e es mauguda a tota partida, e no es annexsa am le nervi del colh, ni am las venas, ni am la arceria, e no es preonda, cove que tu inscidiscas aquela am siccio superficial de la partida desus a la partida dejos del cos de la linha de .G. entro la linha de .B., e scorja aquela de tota partida, e exten dos labias de la codena am onci, o am motz oncis si has necessitat de aquels, ayssi cum havem dit en las apostemas del cap, e extratz aquela petit a petit.	Therefore, in that one where you perceive good disposition in the Touchement, where the color of what is manifest is similar to the color of the skin, and is spread throughout the body, and is not attached to the nerves of the neck, nor to the veins, nor to the artery, and is not phlegmatic, cut it away with a superficial incision from above to below the line of G. to the line of B., and excise it completely, extending the edges of the skin around the wound with wax or small strips of wax if you need them, as we have said in the abscesses of the head, and remove it little by little.
E es mays cautela que no sia inscidida la vena o nervi.	And it is more careful that the vein or nerve not be cut.
E sia le spatum no mot agut, que no ajuste a tu la tua ma am inscizio, o que enquiete le malaute, e que inscidas aquo que no es necessari inscidir; quar si inscideysses vena o arceria e prohibeys tu de la tua operacio, lahoras pausa en la plagua vetriol trissat o autras polveras las quals ostan fluxs de sanc, e estrenh la plagua, e layssa aquel entro que·s repausa la acuitat de la apostema e sia mollificada la plagua e comense esser poyrida.	And let the incision not be too deep, that it does not reach your hand in cutting, or relieve the patient, and cut only what is necessary to cut; for if you cut a vein or artery and stop your operation, then apply a glass blistering salve or other powders which are fluxes of mercury, strengthen the wound, and leave there what causes the heat of the abscess to subside and the wound to become softened and begin to suppurate.
Quan le sanc es abscindit.	When the blood is cut off.
Donc retorna a la tua operacio entro que l’aias complida.	Then return to your operation until it is completed.
E aprop inquireys am le tieu dit indic si es romas alcuna causa de las autras petitas scrophulas, donc inscideys aquelas e munda aquelas.	And then inquire again as you did before for any other causes of the small scrofulous swellings, and then cut those and clean them.
E si es en la razit de la scrophula gran vena, cove lahoras que no inscidas aquela scrophula de la sua razitz.	And if it is near the root of the scrofulous swelling and there is a large vein, avoid cutting that scrofulous swelling at its root.
Abantz cove que lies aquela am fiel doblat fort e que leysses aquela entro que caia per si ses nocument.	Before you place there a piece of cloth folded strongly, let that remain to fall by itself.
E aprop omple la plagua de coto vielh le qual tu has ja submirgit en enguent egipciac, e aprop cura aquel.	And then fill the wound with old cloth which you have already soaked in Egyptian ointment, and then dress it.
E si inscides aquela scrophula tota, lahoras cove que tu ajustes las doas labias de la plagua e cuzas2 tantost pus que no y ha romasa deguna superfluitat.	And if you incise the scrofula completely, then you must adjust the two edges of the wound and stitch it tightly so that no excess tissue remains.
Mays si tu vezes que haia romasa superfluitat per la grandeza de la scrofula, cove que tu entendas a inscidir la razit de aquela, e astrayra aquela e aministra sutura e aquo que es dit.	But if you see that there is excess tissue due to the size of the scrofula, then you must incise the edge of it, remove that part, and administer stitches as prescribed.
E aquela de las scrophulas que conteno humiditatz, perfora aquela am perforacio superficial aqui la on appar a tu le loc de maturacio de lu, e pausa perforacio de aquo que siec le pus bas del cos, ayssi cum havem dit.	And for the scrofulas containing moisture, make a superficial puncture at the place where it appears, and stop the puncturing when you reach the pus beneath the skin, as we have said.
E aprop aministra perforacio, calguas am enguent e semblantz ad aquels, per so que corroda aquo que es romas de la corropcio.	And then administer the puncture, apply ointment and similar substances to it, so that it dissolves what is rotten from the corruption.
E aprop quan tu vezes la plagua ja esser mundada, lahoras tu cura aquela am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanada.	And when you see that the wound is already clean, then cure that with a salve of flesh-generating ointment until it is healed.
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter XLIII.
De seccio del pilhot del apostema accident dintz le guolayro.	Of the section of the boil affected by the cord.
Diyssero les antics aquesta seccio en le epilhot, e no vist alcu hom en nostra terra que aquela aia fayta.	The ancients performed this section in the epilhom, and no one in our land has ever seen it done.
E aquesta es la inscriptura del sermo de aquels.	And this is the inscription of the speech of those.
Mays en les homes haventz esquinencia, cove que sia esquivada la extraccio del epilhot, cum per aquo no sia fayt juvament per so quar totas las venas e las majors del malaute so aqui.	More in men with curvature, a cavity that should be avoided during the extraction of the epilhom, as otherwise it would not be done properly since all the veins and major vessels of the groin are here.
Mays en aquels que han apostemas cautz en la boca o guolayro o dos aurelhas, quan la malautia no es en la cana, cove husar de la seccio de epilhot a fugir la perdicio la qual es fayta per perfocacio.	More in those who have boils cauterized on the mouth or cord or ears, when the illness is not in the vein, it is advisable to use the section of the epilhom to avoid the damage caused by perforation.
Donc cove quan volem aquo, que inscidam le epilhot dejos tres cercles dels cercles del epilhot, o quatre am petita seccio per la latitut en aquel que es entre dos cercles per quantitat, que la seccio sia en ciphac, no en la cartillage, e aquest loc es convenent a seccio, quar es privat de carn e les vayselhs de sanc de lu son luhen.	When we want to do this, incise the epilophon and leave three or four small circles in the space between two rings for size, so that the section is on cartilage, not in it, and this place is appropriate for a section, which is devoid of flesh and the vessels of its blood are loose.
E si le metge es pauruc, cove lahoras que extenda la codena del golayro am onci, e aprop fenda la codena entro que pervengua a la canal, mays evite les vaysels de sanc si vetz de aquelas alcuna causa.	If the doctor fears this, do it when he extends the thread of the needle, and then cut the thread before it reaches the channel, but more avoid the vessels of blood if you see any cause.
E aprop inscida li ciplach segon que havem recomtat; e es significat sobre la seccio de la canal per le flacma le qual es de aquela eyssit am aquo que es de lu disromput e per la abscizio de la votz.	Then incise the flesh as we have recounted; and it is significant on the section of the channel by the flame which is of that essence and of its discontinuity and by the absence of voice.
E layssa la plagua uberta per alcun temps.	Leave the wound open for some time.
Donc cum la hora es remauguda en la qual perforacio es temuda, agregua doas labias de la codena de la plagua, e cus aquela sola ses la cartillage.	When the time is prolonged in which the perforation is feared, add two loops of the thread of the wound, and sew that one to the cartilage.
E aprop administra medicinas que fan naysser la carn entro que sia sanat.	And then administer medicines that cause flesh to grow where it is healed.
E diyssec Albucasis que la summa del sermo le qual havem recomtat, exposicio no es sino que veias que alcus de aquetz apostemas ja han opilat lo guolayro del malaute, e le malaute es vengut entro a mort, e le ale de lu es entresecat, e alcus van a inscidir le epiglos per so que respire le malaute sobre le loc de la plagua per alcuna respiracio, e sia salvat de mort.	And I say as Alcucasis states that the main point of the discourse which we have recounted is simply that you see some of those abscesses have already opened the wound of the thigh, and the thigh has come into death, and its artery has been severed, and some go on to incise the epiglottis so that the thigh may breathe over the site of the injury through some respiration, and thus be saved from death.
E per aquo comandero layssar la plagua uberta entro que sia consumida la malicia de la malautia; e es la malicia de lu per tres dias; e donc lahoras comandero cosi la plagua, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And for this command that the wound remain open until the malignity of the disease is consumed; and the malignity of the disease lasts for three days; and then when those three days are over, I command to treat the wound until it is healed.
E aquo que yeu he vist per mi meteys, es que una sirventa pres un cotel e mesec le en le sieu golayro e inscidic am aquel una partida de la cana del pulmo, e yeu fu apelat a la curacio de lu, e atrobegui la mugen ayssi cum es mugit del moridos, e descubrigui la plagua e atrobegui le sanc le qual era yssit de la plagua petit.	And what I have seen through my method is that a servant took a knife and placed it in the thigh wound and incised there a part of the root of the lung, and I was called to treat this case, and I gathered the pus as it gushes from the dead, and uncovered the wound and applied the salve which was sitting around the wound.
Donc yeu fo confessat que aquela no havia inscidit vena ni guidegi, e le vent yssia de la plagua, e curegui aquela entro que foc sanada.	Therefore I must confess that there was no rupture of vein or artery, and the wind from the wound, and healed her with gentle care.
E no accidic a la sirventa si no rauquiera en la votz, e aprop alcus dias retornec ad miloracio de las suas dispozicios.	And she did not suffer any injury nor even hoarseness, and soon recovered from her discomfort.
E ara dic yeu que en la seccio del epilhot no ha temor.	And now I say that in the case of the circumcised penis there is no fear.
Capitol .xliv.	Capitol. XLIV.
De seccio sobre apostema le qual accideys en le golayro defora, e es apelat hernia del golayro.	On the section about an abscess that occurs on the side of the neck, and is called a neck hernia.
Aquest apostema nompnat hernia del golayro es apostema gran segon la color del cors, e es mot en las femnas.	This unnamed neck abscess is a large abscess according to the color of the body, and it is common in women.
E es segon dos manieyras, quar o es natural o accidental.	And it can be classified into two ways: one natural and the other accidental.
E en le natural no es engen de curar.	And in the natural case, it is not easy to cure.
E l’accidental es segon dos manieyras del qual la un es semblant a nodes grasses, e l’autra manieyra es semblant apostema le qual es fayt per nodacio de arteria, e en aquel es temor.	And the accidental can be classified into two ways: one resembling fatty nodes, and the other resembling an abscess formed by the obstruction of an artery, in which case there is fear.
E no cove que·s fassa presumpcio a lu cum ferr sino en aquel que es petit.	And do not make presumptions about him as if he were iron, but in one who is small.
E tu proha aquel e investigua aquel am le dit, e si atrobas lu semblant a nodi gras, e no es suspendut am alcuna de las venas, lahoras tu inscideys aquel ayssi cum les nodes, e extratz aquel am aquo que conte lu de la pel e bursiclam; e sino, lahoras es perscrutat tot le sieu esser, e aprop cura le loc am aquo que cove de curacio entro que sia sanat.	And thou probe that part and investigate that which is said, and if thou findest a semblance of a fatty node, and it is not suspended from any of the veins, then thou incisest that part as the nodes, and extract it from the skin and bursicle it; and if not, then thoroughly examine his entire being, and place the wound in such a way as to facilitate healing until it is healed.
Capitol .xlv.	Capitol. xlv.
De seccio de las specias de nodes.	Of the section on types of nodes.
Dels nodes so motas specias e yeu ja he dit totas las specias de lor en la divisio.	Of the nodes, there are various types, and I have already mentioned all the types of nodes in the division.
E cove que yeu recomte assi la diferencia entre node e exitura cum fassa dubitacio.	And note that I recount thus the difference between a node and an abscess so as to avoid any doubt.
Donc yeu dic que am exitura es caliditat e febre e dolors vehementz entro que es sedada la ebullicio de la superfluitat; e es complida putrefaccio que lahora cessa la febre, la dolor e la calor.	Therefore, I say that in an abscess there is a quality of heat and fever and intense pains until the boiling of the superfluity is sedated; and once the putrefaction is complete, then the fever, pain, and heat cease.
Mays am node no es caliditat ni febre ni dolor, e conte aquel ciphac leon le qual es al u sac propri.	More than that there is neither heat nor fever nor pain, and concerning that mark of the lion which is on his flank.
E es segon la color del cors, e le comensament de lu es cum un ceze e es fayt ayssi cum vace, sia major o minor, e son segon dos specias, quar o so grassas e conteno humiditat, e las colors de la humiditat son motas, segon que yeu diyssi en la divisio.	And it is according to the color of the body, and its beginning is like a spot and is made thus, either larger or smaller, and they are according to two species, either fatty and contain humidity, and the colors of the humidity are spots, as I said in the division.
Donc cove, quan pervenas a la curacio de node, que exprohes aquel e inquiras aquel al comensament am sturment le qual es apelat intromes, segon que vindra la sua forma en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	Therefore, when you arrive at the treatment of nodes, express that and inquire about it from its beginning in the flesh which is called intumescent, according to what its form will be in the chapter which is nearby.
E es manieyra de inquisicio de apostemas e de totz nodes, e es que tu prenguas aquest sturment e entromet aquel en le loc pus humit le qual atrobas en le apostema, e tu revolveras les tieus ditz am aquel petit a petit entro que sapias que·l sturment ja ha penetrat la codena.	And this is the manner of inquiry for carbuncles and all nodes, and it is that you take this flesh and insert it in the place most humid which you find in the carbuncle, and you will mix the threads little by little into it until you know that the flesh has penetrated the core.
E aprop ultima la tua ma segon la mesura de la grandeza del apostema, e aprop extratz le entromes e considera aquo que es yssit en le vestigi de lu.	Then place your hand near the measure of the size of the carbuncle, and then extract the inserted flesh and consider what is set in the cavity of it.
E si es fora-getada la humiditat corrent, de qualque color sia, lahoras tu le inscideys am seccio superficial segon que he dit en les autres apostemas.	And if the running moisture of any color is overlooked, then you incise according to a superficial section as I said in the other abscesses.
E si del vestigi de l’intromes no hieys humiditat, lahoras sapias que es gras.	And if there is no moisture from the intrusion, then you know it is fatty.
E secca sobre lu am seccio havent forma de crotz segon aquesta forma:	And if it is dry on the surface and has a form like a cross according to this form:
ayssi cum t’e ensenhat, e suspen aquel am oncis, e excorja la codena de tota part am facilitat, e guarda la pel o sac, si podes, sobre aquel e extraguas aquela sania am le node.	As I have taught you, suspend it with a cord, and completely remove the cord from all parts with ease, and keep the skin or bag above it, if possible, and extract the clean part at the node.
Mays si es romput en la operacio, no es possible extrayre aquela sana, e motas veguadas endeve aquo, e lahoras tu la extratz a pessas entro que de lu no romangua denguna causa.	But if it breaks during the operation, it is not possible to extract the clean part. Instead, you place pieces of it down, and then extract them piece by piece so that it does not break for any reason.
Quar si de lu roman denguna causa, pauc o trop, le node retorne segon le mays.	But if it breaks for any reason, either little or much, the node returns according to what is best.
E si tu vezes que de lu roman alcuna part petita, lahoras comple la plagua de alcunas polveras corrosivas agudas e strenh la plagua, e pausa sobre aquela que sede apostema caut, e cura aquel del autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And if you see that any part of it has broken slightly, then fill the wound with some sharp and strong powders, strengthen the wound, place your hand over the area that is to be an abscess, and cure the rest with another treatment until it is healed.
E si es node gran, lahoras tu cus las doas labias de lu e cura aquel am aquo que encarna.	And if it is not large, then you close its two lips and treat that which is within.
Mays si vena pulsatil es a lu contraria, o no-pulsatil, lahoras tu coyta e huemple le loc de zegi trissat que es vetriol e leyssa aquel streyt per dos dias o per tres entro que·s poyresca la plagua e que repause la ebullicio del sanc; e aprop retorna a inscindir aquo que es romas del node.	And if the vein is pulsatile on the opposite side, or non-pulsatile, then you incise and fill the area with one-third salt that is vitriol and let it stand for two days or three until the swelling subsides and the boiling of the blood calms; and then return to cutting what is ruptured from the node.
Capitol .xlvi.	Capitol XLVI.
De las formas del sturmentz necessaris en seccio e perforacio.	Of the forms of instruments necessary for section and perforation.
De aquels so las formas dels intromesas, e so de tres specias, que de aquels es alcu gran, e de lor es migier, e de lor es petit.	Of those, these are the forms of the instruments, and they are of three species: some are large, and others are medium, and others are small.
La forma de intromes gran es aquesta:	The form of the large instrument is this:
La forma de intromes migier es aquesta:	The form of the medium instrument is this:
La forma de intromes petit es aquesta:	The form of the small instrument is this:
Sian faytz de ferr, de alfulud, de extremitatz cayradas decentment, per so que festino le intrament en les apostemas.	Make them of iron, of aluminum, of fallen edges properly, so that the instrument enters the abscesses.
E aquestas so las formas dels experientz, e son nompnatz albered, e un de aquels es apelat berid.	These are the forms of the experienced ones, and they are called albered, and one of them is called berid.
E so de tres especias, quar de lor es gran, migier e pauc.	These are made of three spices, one of which is major, another medium, and the least.
La forma de experient gran, forma de lu:	The form of the experienced one is large, its form:
La forma de experient migier, forma de lu:	The form of the experienced one is medium, its form:
La forma de experient pauc, forma de lu:	The form of the experienced one is small, its form:
Conveneysso que sian per aquels apostemas e exituras e fistulas e bubos per so que entre aquelas so dels osses e de autras causas.	It is advisable that they be used for those abscesses, discharges, fistulas, and swellings so that they are located between the bones and other causes.
E so faytz redontz, grosses, leons, ayssi cum grans agulhas am las quals son cosidas las selhas, e son faytas de eram citri, o de eram o de ferr, o de argent, E las milhors so quan so faytas de eram citri.	And they are made round, large, like large needles to which ligatures are sewn, and they are made of iron, or steel, or silver. The best are those made of steel.
E son faytz les experient de plum negre, les quals se acordan que per aquels sian ubertas las fistulas en la conquavitat de las quals so reflexios, que sian reflectidas am la sua levitat am aquelas refleccios.	And they make the experiences with blackbird feathers, which are said to work because those reflect light due to their levity compared to those reflections.
E so de tres specias, quar alcus de lor so loncs, e dels autres migiers, e dels autres breus, segon la quantitat del ample de la fistula e de la strictura de lu.	And so of three species, some are long, and others are medium, and others are short, according to the width of the fistula and its stricture.
Forma del experient gran de plom:	Forma dell'esperienza grande di piombo:
Forma del experient migier de plom:	Forma dell'esperienza mediana di piombo:
Forma del experient petit de plom:	Forma dell'esperienza piccola di piombo:
Las formas dels oncis so de motas specias, quar de aquels so alcus simples, als quals es una curvitat solament, e so de tres specias: grans, paucs e migiers.	The forms of the feathers are of three species. Some are simple, having only a single curvature, and are of three kinds: long, few, and medium.
E de lor so uncis orps, e so de tres specias.	And some are feathers with bodies, and they are of three species.
E de aquels so uncis haventz doas curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And some of those feathers have two curvatures, and they are of three species.
E de lor so haventz tres curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And from them you have three curves, and they are of three species.
E totz aquetz so necessaris en lor loc.	And all these are necessary in their place.
Forma de unci simple gran, forma de lu:	Shape of a single great curve, its shape:
Forma de unci simple migier:	Shape of a single moderate curve:
Forma de unci simple pauc, forma de lu:	Shape of a single slight curve, its shape:
Forma de unci orp gran:	Shape of a great double curve:
Forma de unci orp migier, forma de lu:	Shape of a moderate double curve, its shape:
Forma de unci orp pauc, forma de lu:	Shape of a slight double curve, its shape:
Forma de unci gran havent dos curvaturas:	Shape of a great single curve having two curves:
Forma de unci migier havent dos curvatas:	Shape of a moderate single curve having two curves:
Forma de unci pauc havent dos curvaturas:	Shape of a slight single curve having two curves:
Forma de unci gran havent tres curvaturas:	Shape of a great single curve having three curves:
Forma de unci migier havent tres curvaturas:	Forma of a woman having three curvatures:
Forma de unci pauc havent tres curvaturas:	Forma of a woman having three curvatures:
E aquestas so las formas dels scalpels am les quals son seccatz e scorjatz les nodes e le apostemas, e so de tres specias, quar de aquels es gran, migier, e pauc.	And these are the forms of the scalpels which are sharpened and filed for nodes and abscesses, and there are three species, one of them is great, woman, and pauc.
Forma de scapel gran:	Forma of scapel gran:
Forma del scapel migier:	Forma of scapel woman:
Forma de scapel pauc:	Forma of scapel pauc:
Las extramitatz de aquels am les quals es fayta seccio so agudas e las autres extramitatz so no-agudas, e no so pausadas en tal manieyra, sino per que sia fayt juvament en la excorjacio dels nodes la temor de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e per aquels sia sanat le malaute e atrobe tranquilitat un petit per la adustio la qual atroba deves la excoriacio del apostema.	The extremities of those which are to be cut are acute, while the others are blunt. They are not so made in this manner, but rather to prevent the danger of incision into a vein or nerve when making the incision in the opening of the nodes, and for these, healing is promoted and there is some relief from the heat which causes the excoriation of the abscess.
E aquestas son las formas de almagidas, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc, ayssi cum veyras.	And these are the forms of the amagidas, and there are three species: great, woman, and pauc, as you will see.
La forma de magda gran:	The form of great abscess:
Forma de magda migier:	The form of female abscess:
Forma de magda pauc:	The form of small abscess:
Sian faytas de eram e so semblantz de ray am le qual e fayt alcofol.	If they are formed from heat and resemble a red spot on which alcohol is applied.
E es en la extramitat lada punctada am spatum occultada e en aquela corr a las partidas dedintz e defora, quan tu vols, ayssi cum veses.	And if it is in the outer side of the lower leg, prick it with a needle and apply a hidden blistering agent there. When you want, do so as you see fit.
Las formas de spatimis, les quals so amaguatz entre los ditz deves la perforacio dels apostemas e no les percebo les malautes, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc.	The forms of blisters, which are hidden between the fingers, require the puncturing of abscesses and not the patient's lower limbs, and they come in three species: great, female, and small.
E aquestas so las formas de aquels:	And these are the forms of those:
Las formas de ventozas am las quals es abscindit le flux del sanc, e so de tres specias; gran, migiera e pauca; las formas de lu:	The forms of hemorrhoids, which require the cutting of the flow of blood, come in three species: great, female, and small; the forms of it:
Sian faytas de eram citri, redondas am alcuna longitut , e sian subtils.	If they are formed from heat of citrus, round and of certain length, and are subtle.
E cove que sian aquestas specias de ventosas deves tu grans, migieras e paucas, per so que per aquelas abscindas flux de sanc am velocitat en necessitat, e lahoras quan a tu primieyrament no es medicina.	And these suction cups you should make some large, medium, and few, so that through those incised wounds the flow of blood is rapid when needed, and when previously it was not present.
Enpero no uses de aquelas ad abscidir sanc en tot loc del cors, e non uses sino en locs carnoses, ayssi cum en les lacertis de las cambas e de las coyssas, e en les lacertz dels brasses, e de las mamillas e del ventre e dels engonars, e semblantz a lor dels lacertz carnoses humitz.	But do not use those to incise blood from the entire body, and use them only on fleshier areas, such as on the inner sides of the legs and thighs, and on the inner sides of the breasts, abdomen, armpits, and similar fleshier creases.
E alcunas veguadas son faytz de aquels strumentz autres petitz semblantz scorsas de fisacs segon aquesta forma; per les quals lo sanc es abscindit quan es fayt per fleubotomia, o deves inscizio de vena o de arceria.	And some small ones are made with those instruments, resembling curved sickles in shape; through which blood is incised when performed by venesection, or from the incision of a vein or artery.
E alcunas veguadas son faytas redondas segon aquesta forma:	And some small ones are made round in this shape:
Capitol .xlvii.	Capitol. xlvi.
De la cura de las mamillas dels homes las quals so asembladas de femnas.	Of the treatment of the breasts of men which resemble those of women.
Alcunas veguadas so infladas las mamillas de alcus homes deves le compliment del dormir cum comensan esser pellutz, e aprop so infladas las mamillas, e so asembladas las mamillas de las femnas, e romano apostemosas, lejas.	Sometimes the breasts of some men swell when they begin to be flabby, and at times the breasts swell, and the breasts of women gather together, let us wager that this is due.
E ad aquel que avoreys aquo, cove que inscidisca aquelas am seccio lunar segon aquesta forma, de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G., e aprop excorja la groceza tota, e aprop uempla la plagua de medicament encarnatiu, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am cosidura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And to him who has this, cut those areas of the lunar section according to this form, from the line of B to the line of G, then excise the tumor entirely, fill the wound with red medication, suture the two lips of the wound together, and cure him until he is healed.
Mays si la mamilla declina a las partidas dejos e es mollificada per la sua magnitut ayssi cum endeve a las femnas, lahoras sia fendut en dos latz sieus pus sobiras, am dos seccios semblantz a figura lunar, de las quals quascuna sia contenguda en l’autra deves la fi de quascuna, entro que sia que la linha major contengua la menor segon aquesta forma de la linha de .B. e la linha de .G. E aprop excorja la codena la qual es entre dos labias de la plagua, e osta la pingueza, e aministra aquo que havem dit de la sutura e de las polveras aquo que es necessari en la curacio entro que sia sanat.	More so, if the breast droops to the sides and is softened due to its size as in women, then cut it into two lobes, each of which resembles a lunar section. Each should be contained within the other such that the larger line contains the smaller according to this form from line B to line G. Then excise the cord which is between the two lips of the wound, remove the fat, and administer what we have said about suturing and powders as necessary during the cure until it is healed.
E si tu non conpleysses la inscizio de aquo que cove inscidir per la inquietut del malaute, e per flux de sanc, lahoras cove que huemplas la plagua de coto submergit en enguent corrosiu e layssa aquel entro que aquo corroda que es romas de la grayssa, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you do not complete the incision that needs to be made due to the discomfort of the patient and the flow of pus, then you must fill the wound with cotton soaked in corrosive ointment and leave it there until it eats away the roots of the necrotic tissue, and then cure what remains healthy.
Capitol .xlviii.	Capitol. xlviii.
De perforacio de apostemas que veno dejos le titillic.	Of the perforation of abscesses where pus leaves through titillic.
Aquetz apostemas que veno dejos le titillic so de las specias de scrophulas, durs, las quals conte una pel que es sac.	Of abscesses where pus leaves through titillate, they are of the kinds of scrofulous, hard swellings, which contain a core that is extracted.
E de aquelas so alcunas que conteno humiditatz; e aquelas que conteno humiditatz cove que sian inscididas am seccio lunar segon aquesta figura: de la linha de .G. a la linha de .B. E cum es tot evacuat aquo que es en le apostema de la sania, lahoras tu le comple de coto viel e leysa le entro al autra dia.	And of those that contain humidity, they must be incised at the lunar phase of the moon according to this figure: from the line of G to the line of B. And when all the pus in the abscess is evacuated, you fill it with cotton and leave it for another day.
E aprop le coto sia ostat e sia curat am enguent convenient ad aquo, entro que sia sanat.	And then the cotton is left in place and treated with appropriate ointment until it is healed.
E si le apostema de las specias dels nodes es, e de las scrophulas, lahoras tu scindeys sobre aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la seccio sobre las scrophulas engualment.	And if the abscess from the glands or scrofula is, then you incise there in this way as we have said in the section on scrofula equally.
May si la plagua es extenduda en aysso que yesca poyredura, lahoras administra en lu cauteri segon que en aquo havem denant dit.	And if the wound is extended to the point of becoming gangrenous, then apply a cautery to it as we have previously stated.
Capitol .xlix.	Capitol XLIX.
De seccio de apostemas que accideysso per arceria o per vena.	Of the section on abscesses that occur from an arrow or vein.
Quan arceria es rompuda, e la codena es consolidada la qual es sobre aquela, lahoras motas veguadas accideys apostema E les senhals per les quals es conoguda que imflamacio e apostema sian per la arteria o per vena: quar quan apostema es per arceria es lonc agreguat en le preon del cors; e que quan inpelleysses le apostema am les tieus ditz, sentes en lu quays sia stridor.	When an artery is broken and the chain (vein) that is above it is consolidated, then dark spots appear as abscesses. And the signs by which one can know that inflammation or abscess is due to the artery or vein: for when you press on the abscess with hot objects, you feel a stridor in it.
E aquel que es per vena es redon al manifest del cors.	And that which is due to the vein is round in appearance on the surface of the body.
E seccio sobre aquest apostema es error, e majorment en aquel que es dejos las aysselhas, e en les angonars, e en le col, e en motz locs del cors; e es mot gran, donc cove que la sua curacio am ferr sia esquivada, e aquel que es en las extramitatz, o al cap, cove que sia evitat.	Of the section on this abscess: it is especially dangerous, particularly when it occurs in the axillae, in the inguinal regions, and in the neck; and it is very large, so that its cure should be avoided, and that which is in the extremities or the head should be carefully avoided.
Mays sobre aquel que es de lor per imflacio de l’orrifici de la arceria, scindeys en la codena seccio en le lonc; e aprop huebre la seccio am uncis e aprop la arceria, e deliura de las tunicas entro que sia descuberta.	For that which is due to inflammation of the opening of the artery, cut in the middle section along the length; then enlarge the section with clips near the artery, and remove the tunics where it shall be exposed.
E aprop met sobre aquel agulha e fay aquela penetrar entro al autre latz, e estrenh la arceria am fiel doble en dos locs, — la qual causa yeu a tu eyssenhegui en extraccio de doas arcerias les quals so en les templars.	And then place a needle over that and make it penetrate into the other side, and strengthen the artery with double thread in two places, — which you should demonstrate to me in the extraction of two arteries which are in the temples.
E aprop punh le loc le qual es entre dos liamentz am spatum entro que yesca le sanc tot que es en lu, e sia dissolvut le apostema.	And then cauterize the area which is between two sutures with smoke until the bleeding stops, and let the abscess dissolve.
E aprop administra curacio en la qual es engendrat poyre entro que caian les liamentz; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz convenientz ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And then administer a cure where powder is applied until the sutures fall out; and then treat it with appropriate ointments until it heals.
E si es apostema per seccio de vena, lahoras cove que tu tenguas am la tua ma aquo que es a tu possible del apostema am la codena, e aprop intromet la agulha dejos le loc le qual tu has tengut dejos la tua ma, e fay aquela penetrar; e sia en aquela fil doble entro que tu extraguas aquel del autre latz, e aprop ligua le apostema am bo liament segon que yeu he dit a tu en le liament de uva4 de doas partz am doas extremitatz del fil.	And if it is an abscess due to venous congestion, then draw as much of the abscess with your hand as possible; then insert the needle in the place you have drawn with your hand, and make it penetrate; then put a double thread around it where you extract it from the other side, and tie the abscess tightly with good sutures as I have said to you with the grape suture in two parts around the ends of the thread.
Mays si temes que extraguam le fil, lahoras entromet le fiel am aquela agula dejos tot le apostema deves la inscizio de la agulha primieyra, e strenh les tieus fiels en quatre locs.	But if you fear that the thread will come loose, then insert the waxed needle into that pinhole and leave all the abscess from the first puncture, and strengthen your threads in four places.
Aprop secca le apostema en le mieg loc de lu entro que quan es yssit aquo que es en lu, lahoras tu inscideys la superfluitat de la codena, e layssa aquo que de lu es liat.	Then dry the abscess in its middle location where it is situated, and when sitting on it, cut away the excess of the cord, and leave what is soaked from it.
E aprop pausa sobre lu pulvil le qual has submergit en vi e oli, e aprop administra la curacio la qual es fayta am calguas e enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Then place the powder you have soaked in wine and oil over it, and administer the cure which is made with cloths and ointments until it is healed.
Capitol l del apostema le qual accideys per torcio de nervis.	Capitalize the abscess which occurs due to nerve damage.
Ayssi cum accideys apostema en arceria e en vena, e semblantment accideys apostema en les nervis quan accideys en lor percussio o accideys per trebal superfluable, e per semblantz.	Similarly, when an abscess occurs in an artery or a vein, and similarly, an abscess occurs in the nerves when there is a percussion or excessive work, and for similar reasons.
E es fayt le mays de lu en les locs dels adjutoris o del talo, o en tot loc en le qual so maugudas las juncturas.	And it is most commonly found in the areas of the helpers or the thigh, or in any place where the joints are affected.
E es apostema greu, e es asemblat a la color del autre cors, e es en las majors de lu disposicios ses de lor e quan es streyt am vehementia, sent en lu le malaute semblant stupor.	And it is a heavy abscess, and resembles the color of the rest of the body, and is in the major parts of his disposition seven of its kind, when stretched by violence, one feels the patient's illness seeming like stupor.
E no es apostema agreguat en le preon del cors, e per so es dejos la codena, e el es maugut a tota partida e no va a las partidas denant ni detras.	And it is not an abscess attached to the front of the body, and for this reason, the chain is left off, and he is able to move freely in all parts and does not go to the front or back parts.
Donc aquo de aquels que es en las juncturas no cove que sia envasit am ferr, quar fort leu endevenguera contracio.	So what is in the joints does not need to be filled with iron, for strong leaven will bring about contraction.
Mays aquel que es en le cap o en le front fen la codena am spatum.	But that which is in the head or on the forehead should have the chain made of lead.
Mays si es apostema pauc, lahoras te aquel am les forfecs e abscindeys aquel de razitz.	But if the abscess is small, then use lead for the chain and cut that part with flax threads.
E si es gran, lahoras tu le suspen am unci, e excorja aquel, e aprop osta aquel; e ajusta la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if it is large, then suspend it with a hook, and incise that part, and place something over it; and adjust the wound with sutures, and cure it until it is healed.
Capitol .li.	Capitol li.
De seccio de apostema le qual accideys de cheil que accideys al ventre.	Of the section on abscesses that occur in the cheek and the abdomen.
Endeveno ad alcus homes motas veguadas en les ventres de aquels e en las autras partidas del cors de aquels theils les quals son apelatz funguals per similitut de aquels am funges, dels quals la razitz es subtil e·l cap de aquel es gros; e ja las labias de aquels so conversas, e es de aquels que es petit, e es de aquels que es mot magnificat.	Some people have abscesses in their abdomens and in other parts of their bodies. These are called funguals due to their similarity to fungi; the core is fine, but the head of it is large; and the membranes around them are thin, some being small, and others being greatly enlarged.
E yeu ja e vist un, e en le ventre de lu eran dos theils les quals eran mays a funges semblantz, e no era diferencia entre aquels blancs, de menuda razitz.	And I have seen one, and in its abdomen there were two masses which resembled fungi, and there was no difference between those whites, of fine core.
E ja las labias de aquels eran enversadas e se fendian, e humiditat corria de aquel tot temps.	And the membranes of those masses were inverted and split, and moisture flowed from them continuously.
Donc yeu inscidegui aquels e atrobegui en la un en pes quays xviii unc. e l’autre quays vi unc.	Then I incised those and treated one on the foot that was eighteen inches long, and the other that was six inches long.
E la operacio en la inscizio de lor es que consideres lahoras si·l malaute es humit, e la color de atheil es blanca, humit, de subtil razitz; lahoras tu le inscideys am spatum lat, e sian en la presencia tua cauteris en le foc, quar motas veguadas deves la seccio de lu es expellit mot sanc; e si te ventz le sanc, cauteriza aquel.	And in the incision of them, consider whether the patient is wet, and the color of the mass is white, wet, with a fine core. Then you should incise it with a broad blade, and burn it in the fire, for the wet masses must be thoroughly burned to prevent infection; if you encounter the infection, burn that area.
E si vezes le malaute pauruc e temeros, guarda te de inscizio am ferr; mays lahoras pren fiel de plom recent fayt, e strenh am aquel atheil, la manieyra del qual es aquela que havem dita; e leyssa aquel per dos dias.	And if the patient is fearful and trembling, guard yourself against injury with iron; rather when you take recently melted lead powder, strengthen that part, the manner of which we have said; leave it for two days.
E aprop ajusta en la strictura del fil de plom; donc, no cesses strenher le plom granre devetz en theil, entro que sia abscindit e cayha per se ses trebalh.	And then adjust in the constriction of the lead wire; therefore, do not cease to strengthen the lead gradually in that part, until it is cut and falls by itself.
Mays si theil es de grossa razitz, lahoras en la inscizio de lu es alcuna causa de temor e de paor, e majorment en aquel que es en le ventre.	But if the part is of large size, then in cutting it there is some cause for fear and anxiety, especially in that which is in the abdomen.
Mays possibla es que tu inscindas la maytat de lu , e aprop cauteriza aquel per que no retorne.	But it is possible that you cut the majority of it, and then cauterize it to prevent it from returning.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanada la plagua.	And then cure the area until the wound is healed.
E guarda te que tu no presumas inscidir theil le qual es de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, de leg reguardament, quar aquel es absi cancros.	And beware that you do not presume to cut a part which is of dusky color, with little sensation, and of poor appearance; for such a part is thus cancerous.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio de cranc aprop aysso.	And I will recall the pain nearby.
Capitol .lii.	Capitol. lii.
De curacio de eminencia del umbilic.	For the treatment of protrusion around the navel.
Eminencia del umbilic es fayta per motas causas; o per fissuras del ciphac le qual es sobre le ventre, e yeys de lu la tela o budel segon que endeve en las autras rupturas; o per sanc le qual flueys de vena o de arceria segon que es denant dit, o per ventositat coarctada en lu.	Protrusion around the navel is caused by various reasons; or by fissures in the ciphac which is above the abdomen, and through them the membrane or intestine protrudes according to the nature of other ruptures; or by a sore that flows from a vein or artery as stated before, or by constricted hernia within it.
Mays si es per fissura del ciphac e per yssiment de la tela, lahoras la color del apostema es semblant a la color del cors; e es leon ses dolor, e aprop appar de divers situament.	More specifically, if it is due to a fissure in the ciphac and the swelling is caused by the membrane, then the color of the abscess resembles the color of the body; and the pain is severe, and often appears in various locations.
E si es per egressio del budel, lahoras le situament de aquel am lu de aquo que havem recontat, de mays vehement diversitat, e cum tu premes aquel am les tieus ditz es occultat, e aprop retorna; e fort leu es am lu so, e es magnificat mot deves le introt de banh e vehement trebalh.	And if it is due to the protrusion of the intestine, then the location of that differs from what we have described, with greater diversity. When you press on that area, the pain disappears and soon returns; it is strong in that place, and you should use a strong method for its introduction into baths and vigorous work.
Mays si per humiditat, lahoras es leon e no es occultat quan premes am la tua ma, ni es constrengut, ni es cregut.	If by humidity, when you press with your hand it is evident and not concealed, nor constrained, nor believed.
E si es per sanc, lahoras am aquestz senhals apareys le apostema a negror declinant.	And if by scald, when these signs appear the abscess in black declining.
Mays si es per carn nada, lahoras es apostema greu, gros e dur, e es ficat segon una quantitat.	If by no flesh at all, when the abscess is severe, large, and hard, and is situated according to a quantity.
Mays si es per ventositat, lahoras le tocament de lu es leon.	If by dampness, when you touch it, it is evident.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras lahoras si la eminencia de l’umbilic es per sanc de arceria, o de vena, o per ventositat; lahoras cove que sias prohibit de la curacio de lu, quar en aquela es temor e paor ayssi cum t’e ensenhat en le capitol en le qual he dit les apostemas per arceria e per vena.	And the operation in it is that you consider when the prominence of the navel is by scald from artery, or vein, or by dampness; then cover what you are prohibited from treating it, for there is fear and terror as you were taught in the Capitol where I said abscesses from arteries and veins.
E si la eminencia del umbilic es per le budel o per la tela, lahoras cove que comandes al malaute que tengua le ale sieu, e sia stant extendut; e aprop senha am tenta en le circuit de tot le umbilic, e aprop comanda a lu que stia envers entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e aprop circunda am spatum lat en le circuit del umbilic sobre le loc le qual has senhat am la tenta; e aprop exten la maytat del apostema a las partidas desus am unci gran; e aprop lia en le circuit am fiel fort o am ceda e la manieyra del liar decent.	And if the prominence of the navel is by the intestine or the hernia, then cover that you command the patient to have their own ale, and stand extended; then place something to test around the entire navel, and command him to lie between your hands on his sides; then surround with a wide space around the circuit of the navel over the area you tested with the test. Extend the size of the abscess towards the upper parts greatly; then put a strong ligature or a cord in the circuit, firmly and in a proper manner.
E aprop huebre le mieg del apostema extendut sobre le liament e intromet le dit tieu en aquel indic e quereys le budel; e si tu l’as atrobat ni guardat per le liament, lahoras tu extratz alxorati e impelleys le budel a las partidas dedintz del ventre.	And then you should extend the apex of the abscess over the membrane and insert your finger in that space to find the intestine; and if you have touched it or disturbed it with the membrane, then you carefully extract it and push the intestine into the inner parts of the abdomen.
E si has atrobada la tela, lahoras pren aquel am unci; e inscideys las superfluitatz de lu.	And if you have touched the membrane, then take it with forceps; and incise the superfluous parts of it.
Mays si es contraria a tu arceria o vena, lahoras circunda aquel mot, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio; e pren dos agulhas e met en aquelas dos fiels fortz e entromet dos agulhas en le circuit le qual has feyt entorn le apostema en manieyra de crotz, las quals fassas penetrar; e aprop strenh le apostema en quatre partidas sobre las agulhas.	But if it is contrary to your artery or vein, then circumvent that spot, and then return to your operation; and take two needles and put them into those strong threads and insert two needles in the circuit you have made around the abscess in the manner of a cross, making sure they penetrate; and then strengthen the abscess in four parts over the needles.
E si tu vols, osta las agulhas e leyssa le loc entro que poyresca la carn extenduda e caia per si; o inscideys aquel quan es subtiliat e se poyreys, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if you wish, hold the needles and let the area extend and drop by itself; or incise it when it becomes subtle and can drain, and then dress the wound with ointments until it heals.
E si la eminencia del ombilic es de carn nada en lu o per humiditat, lahoras cove que tu conquaves le apostema ayssi cum havem dit e estraguas le sanc o la humiditat, la qual atrobas en lu, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove e que consolide le loc.	And if the eminence of the navel is of flesh and not in it or due to humidity, then you must drain what you find in its cavity as we have said and remove the pus or the humidity which you find there, and then cure that place where you drained and consolidate the area.
Capitol .liii.	Capitol. liii.
De curacio de cranc.	Of the cure of wounds.
Ja havem dit, en la divisio, de specia de cranc e en qual manieyra es via a la curacio de lu am medicinas, e que es squivador en lu la curacio am ferr per so que no sia ulcerat; e havem dit cranc engendrat en la mayra e cautela de la curacio de lu.	We have already said, in the division, about types of wounds and how they are treated with medicines. And that the cure is avoided if it becomes ulcerated; and we have said that wounds are generated in a certain manner and caution in the treatment of them.
E diyssero les antics que alcunas veguadas cranc es en loc on es possibla la eradicacio de lu, ayssi cum de cran le qual es en las mamillas o en la coyssa e a lor semblantz dels membres allocat a estrayre tot aquel, e majorment quan es comensant petit.	And the ancients said that some wounds can be treated by removing them from their location, as with a wound in the breast or in the thigh and similar parts of the body, where one would extract all of it, especially when it is just beginning.
Mays quan es antiquat e es gra, no cove que te propries a lu, quar yeu non pogui sanar de aquel alcu ni no he vist autre, ni que sia pervengut ad aquo.	But when it is old and hard, you must not drain it, for I cannot heal such an ailment nor have I seen another, nor has it been treated in this way.
E la operacio en lu es quan es allocat ayssi cum havem dit, es que tu precedescas e laysses le malaute e purgues de colera negra alcunas veguadas, e aprop sagna aquel, si es atrobada replecio manifesta.	And the operation on them is when it is laid out as we have said, that you first expose and leave the patient and purge of black bile several times, then drain it, if found, and refill with a clear one.
E aprop prepara le malaute am preparacio en le qual sia locat am operacio, e aprop prohiceys en le trauc uncis les quals cove ad aquel; e aprop concava de tota part am la codena sego bona perexcrutacio entro que no romangua alcuna causa de las razitz de lu.	And prepare the patient for the preparation in which the operation is located, and proceed with the cuts that lead to it; and from all sides concave the wound well for a good excision so that no part of the cause remains.
E layssa correr le sanc, e no abscidas aquel leugierament, e exprem les locs, e abstergeys le sanc gros tot am la tua ma o am instrument am le qual es a tu possible dels instruments.	And let the blood flow, and do not stop it lightly, and squeeze the wounds, and wipe away the thick blood with your hand or an instrument that is within your reach.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat de sanc gros inscizio de vena o de arceria, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que·l flux del sanc sia cessat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	But if you experience difficulty in stopping thick bleeding from an incision in a vein or artery, then cauterize that area once the flow of blood has ceased, and treat it with another method until it heals.
Capitol .liv.	Capitulum. Liv.
De curacio de ydropici.	On the treatment of dropsy.
Nos ja havem recomtat, en la divisio, de las specias de ydropici de l’aygua, e les senhals de quascuna especia, de la curacio de lu am medicinas.	We have already treated in the division of the species of water dropsy and the signs of each species, as well as the cure by medicines.
E aquela la qual es curada am ferr no es sino la specia de althitas sola, e no es aproximat am ferr a la specia de timpanistres ni a la especia de yposarcha, quar aquo es mortal.	And that which is cured by iron is nothing but the species of althitas alone, and it is not approximated by iron to the species of timpanites nor to the species of yposarch, for that is fatal.
E quan tu ja has medicat aquesta especia de ydropici timpanistre am medicinas e no comfereys la tua medicacio, lahoras considera, quar si al malaute ja es conseguida debelitat, o es am aquel autra malautia otra ydropici, ayssi cum si es en lu tos o cos de ventre e semblant ad aquels, lahoras guarda te que no le mediques am ferr, quar temor es sobre aquo.	And when you have medicated this species of water dropsy called timpanites with medicines and find that your treatment is not effective, consider this: if in the patient there has already been achieved debility from another illness or another water dropsy, such as in their cough or abdominal organs and similar to those, then do not treat them with iron, for fear is associated with this.
Mays si tu vezes le malaute de vertut exuberant, e am lu no es autra malautia sino ydropici tant solament, e no enfant ni vielh, lahoras la manieyra de la operacio de lu es que tu eleves le malaute entre las tuas mas, e le ministre aprop lu exprema le ventre de lu am la sua ma, enpellen la aygua a la partida dejos del pentenilh, e aprop pren spatum spinos segon aquesta forma:	But if you see the patient suffering from an excess of virtue, and in them there is no other illness but only water dropsy, neither child nor old, then the way to perform the operation on them is that you lift the patient between your hands, and apply your hand near their abdomen to express the abdomen, pushing the water out through the opening at the base of the penis, and then take a thorn spasm according to this form:
sia de dos partz agudas lonc, de aguda extremitat ayssi cum spatum; mays empero sia en lu alcuna brevitat petit a petit, per so que en la operacio am aquel no passes entro al budel, e que ledas aquel.	It should be of two sharp parts, with acute ends like a spike; yet it is in him some small brevity little by little, for in the operation do not enter into the intestine, and to lead that.
E aprop considera si la generacio de ydropici es de part dels budels, quar lahoras cove que tu am la seccio te alonhes del ombelic per la quantitat de tres ditz a las partidas dejos, en le dreyt de lu sobre le pentenilh.	And then consider if the generation of dropsy is from the intestines, for when you reach the section you should be about three digits away from the parts at the right side of the umbilicus.
Mays si la generacio de hydropici es per malautia del fietge, lahoras la tua seccio sia sinistra del ombilic per tres ditz.	Yet if the generation of dropsy is due to malaise of the liver, then your section should be on the left side of the umbilicus by three digits.
E si la generacio de lu es per la melsa, lahoras la tua seccio sia en le las dreyt.	And if the generation of it is due to the spleen, then your section should be on the right side.
E no cove que la tua seccio sia sobre le costat sobre le qual vol jaser le malaute per que no corron las superfluitatz ad aquel loc freul.	And do not place your section on the side where the malaise is felt, so that the superfluities do not flow to that area.
E aprop perfora am le instrument tota la codena, e aprop entromet en aquela seccio, e eleva la tua ma am le spatum entre la codena e·l siphac, e tu excorja aquel; e si’ la quantitat de una ungla o enviro.	And then perforate the instrument completely through the length, and insert it into that section, elevate your hand with a spike between the length of the instrument and the siphon, and you extract it; if the quantity is about an ounce or less.
E aprop perforo le ciphac entro que pervengua le spatum al loc vuoyt, e es loc de l’aygua.	And then puncture the abscess so that the pus reaches the desired location, and this is the place of water.
E aprop extratz aquel e entromet un instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then extract that and insert an instrument of this form:
e es semblant a canula de argent subtil; es fayt de argent o de eram o de lato leon, al qual en la partida pus bassa de lu es un petit trauc, e en les costatz de lu so tres traucs: dos de una partida e un del autra partida; e fayta es la extremitat de lu insciza segon la manieyra de pluma, ayssi cum vezes:	And it is similar to a fine silver cannula; it is made of silver or brass, in which at the lower part there is a small hole, and on its sides are three holes: two from one side and one from the other side; and the end is incised like a feather pen, as you can see.
E en la extramitat de lu pus sobirana es armilla, quar quan le instrument perve al aygua, lahoras aquela tantost deysen sobre le instrument, donc evacua de l’aygua en la ora miega quantitat, quar si tu evacuas de aquela mes que no cove en la hora, fort leu mor le malaute per resolucio del sieu spirit animal, o accideys a lu cincopi que es appropinquada la mort.	And at the end of the instrument above is a stopper; when the instrument reaches the water, it quickly lets some water out through the hole in a few minutes. If you evacuate more than can fit in that time, the patient may die due to the sudden release of his animal spirit, or suffer five signs that approach death.
Mays evacua de aquela segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu e segon que significan a tu las disposicios del malaute de la vertut del pols de lu e de la bontat de lu.	But evacuate from there according to the quantity of the virtue of the fluid and according to your assessment of the patient's condition by examining his pulse and judging its quality.
E aprop extrats le instrument, e rete l’aygua la qual causa es quar tantost es retenguda per la codena la qual rete le trauc que es sobre le ciphac del qual e recomtat a tu que perfores aquel segon aquela manieyra.	And then extract the instrument, and stop the water which causes it so soon is stopped by the cord which I will tie that is above the chip of which you are to perforate it according to that manner.
E aprop itera le instrument al autra dia si vezes le malaute tollerant aquo, e extratz de la aygua petita quantitat, e fay aquo per alcus jorns sobre temor, e guarda te de error entro que no romangua de l’aygua sino pauc.	And then repeat the instrument on another day if the patient tolerates it, and extract a small quantity of water, and do this for several days with caution, and beware that it does not swell from the water but slightly.
Mays si tu temes sobre le malaute, e leyssas de l’aygua gran quantitat, lahoras cura aquel am sepultura en arena cauda, e mota suzor en banh, e al solelh espere per lonc temps; e cura aquel am medicinas dessicativas entro que sia sanat.	But if you fear for the patient, and let a large quantity of water remain, then cure that with burial in sandy earth, and soaking in cold water, and under the sun wait for a long time; and cure that with drying medicines until it is healed.
E cauteriza sobre le stomac, e la melsa e·l fitge aprop la extraccio de l’aygua, segon que yeu he recontat en aquo que es precedit.	And cauterize on the stomach, and the liver near the extraction of the water, as I have recounted in what was preceded.
Capitol .lv.	Capitolium.
De la curacio dels enfants les quals so natz les locs de la urina no-perforatz.	For the cure of children who have stones in the urinary tract that are not perforated.
Alcunas veguadas alcun dels enfantz es eyssi del ventre de la sua mayre e·l cap de la sua mixtio no es perforat (o es trauc streyt o no es en son loc).	Sometimes some of the child is miscarried from the mother's belly and the head of its mixture is not perforated (or is taken straight or is not in its place).
Donc cove coytar am perforacio de lu tantost que es nascut am spatum mot subtil segon aquesta forma:	Therefore, make the incision for the perforation of the belly as soon as it is born with a subtle spatula according to this form:
E aprop pausa en le trauc un clavil subtil de plom e ligua aquel, e te per tres jorns o per .iiii.tre.	Then place a thin lead stylus and close it, and let it be for three days or for four.
E quant vol urinar sia remaugut e hurine; e aprop retorne aquel.	And when he wants to urinate, let him do so; then return it.
E si tu no pauses le plom, ja es possible que la urina la qual va sobre le loc, no leysa aquest claure.	And if you do not place the lead, it is possible that the urine which falls on the area will prevent this from closing.
Mays aquel del qual le trauc es streyt sia medicat am clavil de Plom, ayssi cum havem dit, per trops dias entro que sia amplificat.	But that which you remove should be treated with a lead stylus, as we have said, for several days before it is expanded.
Mays aquels en les quals es le trauc no en son loc, so leditz, la qual causa es quar de aquels, aquel que es nat e·l trau es deves la fi del cap de la vergua per que no pot urinar a las partidas dedintz, entro que eleva la vergua am la sua ma a las partidas desus; e no es a lu generacio, per so quar le sperma no pot pervenir a la mayre segon rectitut, e es malautia mot laga.	But those in which it is removed not in its place, are said to cause this condition. The one that is native and occurs during childbirth should be placed at the end of the head of the fetus so that it cannot urinate inside; while lifting the head with their hand above the upper parts; and it is not a generative issue, because the sperm cannot reach the mother according to its correct position, and this is a malady lasting.
E la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que·l malaute sia envessat sobre le sieu dos, e aprop exten le cap de la vergua de lu am la tua ma sinistra am vehement extraccio, e inscideys le cap del cap de la vergua del loc del perpucii am spatum agut, ayssi cum es inscizio de pluma, o que tu ne razas alcuna partida, per so que·l mieg de lu vengua semblant al cap de la vergua e que le trauc caia en le mieg loc segon que cove.	And the manner of the operation on him is that the patient is placed on his side, and then extend the head of the penis with your left hand with strong extraction, and incise the head of the head of the penis in the place of the peripucium with a sharp blade, thus like the cutting of a feather, or any part you do not cut out, so that the vein of him comes forth resembling the head of the penis and that I pull it down into the middle place as it suits.
E guarda te que en la tua operacio de flux de sanc, quar motas vetz accideys aquo; e pausa te a lu am aquo que abscindeys le sanc, e cura la plagua entro que si’ sanada.	And watch that in your operation for the flow of sand, if you see any spots occur; pause there and apply something to it where you cut the sand, and dress the wound until it is healed.
Capitol .lvi.	Capitol. lvi.
De albater le qual accideys en le prepucii en le cap de la vergua e de corropcio e negror e adherencia del prepucii del cap de la vergua.	Of the white substance which occurs in the prepuce, on the head of the penis, and is associated with corruption, discoloration, and adhesion of the prepuce to the head of the penis.
Motas veguadas accideys aquest albater en la vergua e es eminencia de carn laga.	Spots appear on the penis and are an elevation of whitish flesh.
E de aquela una es maligna e autra es no-maligna.	And of those two, one is malignant and the other is non-malignant.
No-maligna, cove que suspendas am unci subtil e abscindas aquela entro que aquela mondes tota; e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto submirgit en enguent egipciac; e aprop aquel, cura le am enguent diafinicon entro que sia sanat.	And of those two, non-malignant, you should suspend one on a thin string and cut through that in which that monster is entirely contained; then place your hand over it to submerge it in Egyptian ointment; afterward, treat it with diafinicon until it is healed.
E si albater es maligna, de lega color, lahoras cove que tu aministres cauteri aprop la inscizio de lu e la razio de lu.	And if the abscess is malignant, of a white color, then you should apply a cautery near its incision and around it.
Mays si albater es en le prepuci del cap de la vergua no-circumcis, e la una partida de albater es dedintz le prepucii e l’autra partida es defora, lahoras cove que tu ostes albater le qual es dedintz al comensament entro que es consolidat; e lahora tu cura aquel deforo, quar quan tu curas aquel ensemps le prepuci, no es asegurat que no sia trinquat.	But if the abscess is in the prepuce of the head of the penis in an uncircumcised man, and one part of the abscess is inside the prepuce and another part outside, then you should remove the part that is inside at the beginning, before it becomes consolidated; and afterward, treat the part outside. For when you treat this together with the prepuce, it is not assured that it will not be torn.
E ja eysamen accideys en les genetius e en le prepuci negror e corruccio, adonc cove que tu conquavas tot aquo que ja es denigrat e que ja se vol corrompre o que ja es corrumput; e aprop lineys sobre aquel aprop aquo am mel, le qual es contusit am farina de scorsa de milgrana e de errs trissatz e crivellatz.	And we have examined accidents in the genitalia and in the black prepuce with corruption. Then you should evacuate all that which is already darkened and which is about to腐烂或已经腐烂；然后在其上方划线，使用蜂蜜，它是由新鲜大黄粉、三味切碎并筛过的药草制成的。
E aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sana.	And then cure that as in another treatment when it is healthy.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, lahoras aministra cauteri lunar segon aquesta forma:	And if there is a flow of blood, then apply a lunar cautery according to this form:
quar cauteri juvatiu es a dos disposicios ensemps, so es a flux de sanc e a la plagua quan es corrumpuda.	A lunar cautery is used in two positions together, either for a flow of blood or during the plague when there is corruption.
E si le cap de la vergua es corrodut e es destruit tot en la hora, lahoras cove que tu intrometas en lo meat del prepucii una canula de plom per so que le malaute urina per aquela.	And if the head of the abscess is corroded and is completely destroyed within an hour, then you should introduce a lead cannula into the meat of the prepuce so that the malignant urine flows through it.
En la adherencia del prepucii am le cap de la vergua (et aquesta adherencia no accideys sino en aquel del qual le prepucii es sa, e sobre lu no es exhigida circumcizio; e quan accideys adherencia per plagua o per apostema) cove que excorjas am spatum obtus entro que sia dissolvut le liament e sia deliurat le cap de la vergua de tota partida.	In the adhesion of the prepuce to the head of the abscess (and this adhesion occurs only in that part from which the prepuce originates, and on which circumcision is not required; when such adhesion occurs due to the plague or an apostema), you should excoriate with a blunt spatula while the adhesive is dissolved and the head of the abscess is completely released.
E si es dificil desirnir aquelas exquisidament, lahoras cove que tu excorjes am spatum alcuna causa del cap de la vergua e del prepucii, e aysso es quar le prepucii, quan es subtil, fort leu es perforat per la sua subtilitat leugierament.	And if it is difficult to excoriate those thoroughly, then you should excoriate with a spatula some part of the head of the abscess and the prepuce, and this is because the prepuce, when thin, being light, is perforated slightly by its thinness.
E aprop separa entre·l prepucii e·l cap de la vergua am dra7 de li subtil, le qual ja es mulhat en l’aygua frega per que no adherescan autra veguada.	And then separate between the prepuce and the head of the penis a strip of the fine skin, which is already moistened with the rubbed medicine so that it does not adhere again.
E aprop sia curat am vi stiptic entro que sia consolidat.	And then let it be cured with vinegar soaked in cloth until it is consolidated.
Capitol .lvii.	Capitol. lvii.
De mundificacio dels enfants e de la curacio de aquo que accideys ad aquels de circumcisio.	On the purification of children and the treatment of what occurs to those who have been circumcised.
Circumcisio no es solucio de continuitat ayssi cum las autras plaguas: mays empero cum sia de la nostra operacio e de nostra voluntat, e lus de aquela sia propriament en les enfants, es necessari que asignem en aquela milhor operacio e via pus leugiera perdusent a salut.	Circumcision is not a solution for continuity as are other infections: nevertheless, since it is of our operation and our will, and those of others are properly in the children, it is necessary that we assign to it the best operation and the most gentle way, losing nothing for health.
Donc dic que les antics no diyssero circumcisio en alcu dels lors libres, quar no n’usan en las suas leys, e no es sino quar havem aquisit per speriment, la qual causa es que yeu he atrobat la major partida dels artifexs e dels barbies usar circumcisir e mundificacio am novacula e am torores; e usan de liament am fiel e de inscizio am la ungla.	Therefore, it is said that the ancients did not use circumcision among any of the free peoples, for they do not use it in their laws, and it is only because we have acquired this knowledge through experience. The reason is that I have examined the majority of craftsmen and barbers who use circumcision and purification with a knife and with torches; and they use lint with wine and incision with unguents.
E yeu ja he prohadas totas aquestas manieras e no atrobegui milhor mondificacio am forfexs, am liament am fiel que en mondificacio cum la ungla, quar motas vetz efugeys la codena pus desus, quar la codena del prepucii a dos tunicas, e roman la tonica pus dejos, e fort leu es forsat ad autra inscizio e dolor sicura.	And I have already tried all these methods and cannot find a better modification using scissors, or lime or vinegar in modification like unguent, for you will always find the cord above, for the cord of the prepuce is between two tunics, and relax the inner tunic and fortify the light one so as to another incision and certain pain.
E am mundificacio le qual es fayta per alphecati, e es digital, del qual usan les sabatiers, no es segurada la inscizio de la extremitat del membre viril, quar fort leu intra en le trau de lu.	And in modification by alphectomy, which is digital, of which cobblers use it, the incision at the extremity of the male member is not secure, for it deeply penetrates its channel.
Mays en la operacio am ungla, fort leu obazeys ferr e corromp la tua operacio.	In the operation with unguent, you must use iron and corrupt your operation.
E la codena del enfant es breu per natura, e motas veguadas nays en tal manieyra que no ha necessitat de mondificacio, e yeu he vist aquel.	And the cord of the child is short by nature, and often does not need to be cut in such a manner that there is no necessity for modification, and I have seen it.
Mays de la mondificacio que·s fa am forfexs e liamentz am fiel, la bontat, experiment descrobic a mi, quar las forfexs so de proporcional inscizio, per aquo quar la acuitat que es desus es ayssi cum la acuitat que es dejos; e donc cum tu premes la tua ma so proporcionadas dos acuitatz, e inscideysso segon una comperacio en un temps; e es fayta compressio del fiel am figura contenent la codena de la vergua de tota partida, am le qual no catz error de tot.	More of the modification that is made with scissors and lime or vinegar, the quality, I have observed through experience, for the scissors are of proportional incision, for which the acuity above is thus as the acuity below; and therefore, as you press your hand proportionately on two acuities, you cut according to a comparison in one time; and it is made compression of the vinegar in a figure containing the cord of the foreskin from all parts, with which no error can arise.
E la manieyra de la operacio primeyra es que tu fassas estar le enfant majorment si es de aquels que entendo un petit, que no fassas sino que tu lies le fiel en la sua vergua tant solament, e que leysses aquel entro al autra dia.	And the manner of the first operation is that you make the child stay primarily if it is among those who understand a little, that you do not do so but that you tie the lead in its foreskin only, and that you leave it for another day.
E aprop fay aquel alegrar en tota aquela manieyra que es a tu possibla de aquo que recep la sua intelligencia.	And then make that recovery in every way that is possible for what receives its intelligence.
E aprop fa aquel estar entre las tuas mas estatuir preparadament, e no sia ges cezent; e occulta las forfexs en la tua ma o dejos le tieu pe, que l’enfant no veia aquelas ni degun autre dels instruments.	And then place it among your most skilled helpers, and not more than a hundred; hide the scissors in your hand or hold them behind your back so that the child does not see those nor any other of the instruments.
E aprop entremet la tua ma a la vergua de lu e suffla en la codena, e tira aquela entro que sia eyssit le cap de la vergua, e aprop mondifica aquel de aquo que es agregat en ela de sordicia.	And then insert your hand into the foreskin and blow into the glans, and pull that out so that it sets the head of the foreskin free, and then modify that which is attached to it due to stiffness.
E aprop lia le loc signat am fiel dobla, e aprop ligua pus bas de aquel un petit le segon liament, e aprop te am le dit pous e endic tieu le loc del liament dejos am bona retencio, e inscideys entre dos liaments.	And then tie the marked area with a knot in the foreskin, and then tie just below that a small second ligature, and then place your finger on the site of the ligature with good tension, and incise between the two ligatures.
E aprop eleva la codena sus leugierament e estratz le cap de la vergua; e aprop leyssa le sanc corre petit e petit, quar es milhor ; e pausa polvera desus e sobre la polvera pausa drap en le qual es spandut mugol de huou coyt en ayguaros concosit am oli rozat recent bo; e layssa aquel sobre aquel entro al autra dia; e cura aquel am curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then lift the leg slightly and stretch the head of the vein; and let the bleeding proceed slowly, for that is better; and place powder above and on top of the powder place a cloth in which is infused mullein in oil freshly pressed olive oil; and leave it there until the next day; and cure that with healing until it is healed.
La forma de las forfexs a mondificacio, aquesta es la forma:	The shape of the forceps after modification, this is the shape:
Sian las unas extramitatz no-talhantz e las autras sian talhant, que non sia yssit le ram del clau, e sia la longitut de las doas acuitatz ayssi cum la longitut de dos manubres engualment.	If the tips are not sharpened and the other tips are sharpened, let the shape of the fork be such that the length of the two curved tips is equal to the length of two equal-sized handles.
Mays la error en mundificacio es quar fort leu efugeys la codena intrinseca tota, o partida de lu deves la inscizio.	More importantly, in modification, the error is that if you lift the intrinsic ligament entirely or partially, you must incise it.
Donc cove que tu extendas aquela de la tua hora am la tua ungla denant la apostemacio del loc e que inscidas aquela segon equalitat.	Therefore, make sure that you incise that part with your finger in front of the flap of the area and incise it according to equality.
E si no la podes tenir am la tua ungla, lahoras extratz aquela am unci e inscideys aquela.	And if you cannot hold it with your finger, then lift that part with a needle and incise it.
Mays si son passatz tres dias, e roman aquo que es imflat dejos la vergua apostemat, lahoras tu leyssa aquo entro que sia cedat le apostema caut, e excorja aquel am fecilitat, e inscidex aquel segon que a tu es preparat.	If they have passed three days and remain what is swollen due to the inguinal abscess, then you let it be until the abscess is lanced with a cautery, and excoriates that area for ease, and incises that according to how you are prepared.
E guarda te del cap de la vergua, quar no nosera a lu aquo.	And guard the head of the abscess, for if not done properly it will not heal.
E donc cura aquel am aquo que la plagua consolida de las polveras las quals havem recomtadas en le tractat de las polveras.	And therefore treat that area where the wound heals from the powders which we have recommended in the treatise on powders.
E si es inscidit de la codena sobre mesura, e obezeys a las partidas desus, aquo no notz a lu.	And if it is incised beyond measure, and you adhere to the rules above, this will not harm it.
E mays cura aquel am aquo que havem dit entro que sia sanat.	And therefore treat that area as we have said until it is healed.
Capitol .lviii.	Capitol. lviii.
De curacio de urina retenguda en la vesiqua.	On the treatment of retained urine in the bladder.
Retencio de urina en la vesica es fayta per oppulacio fayta per peyra o per sanc congilat, o per poyre o per carnada, e semblantz ad aquels de aquo que havem dit de las manieyras de curacio en la divisio.	Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by an obstruction due to a stone, or a sore carbuncled, or pus, or flesh wound, and resembles those we have said of in the methods of treatment in the division.
E si no es dissolvuda la urina, e veses retencio de lu esser per peyra le qual ja es en le col de la vesica, lahoras cove que le malaute sia encorbat sobre les sieus denolhs.	And if the urine is not dissolved, and you see retention of it being due to a stone which is at the neck of the bladder, then know that the patient has a kink in his groin.
E aprop conponeys les pes de aquel sobre le sieu dos e extendas le sieu ventre de la partida pus desus del sieu dos, e le malaute estrengua le sieu ale tant quant es a lu possible.	And then place his feet on his own buttocks and extend his belly from the part above his back, and the patient straightens his legs as much as it is possible.
Donc lahoras le col de la vesica es costreyt ha espulsio de la peyra a las partidas detras, per que la urina es absolta.	Then when the neck of the bladder is stretched there will be expulsion of the stone to the rear parts, so that the urine is released.
E si no es dissolvuda am aquo que havem dit he vehement es fayta la causa sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que aministres extraccio de lu am instrument le qual es apelat siringua, del qual aquesta es la forma: Sia de argent e sia subtil leon conquau, ayssi cum canula de pena de ausel am subtilitat de ray lonc en similitut d’un palm e mig, al qual sia cana subtil en le cap de lu.	And if what we have said is not dissolved, then strongly the cause must be brought to the attention of the patient. Then know that you should administer extraction from the body with an instrument which is called a syringe, of which this is the form: It is made of silver and is thin and hollow, like a goose quill in thinness and length resembling about half a palm, to which is attached a thin tube at its head.
E la manieyra del eyssiment de la urina per aquel es que prenguas le fiel doblat e lies en la extramitat de lu lana o coto per bona liadura; e entrometas las extramitatz del fiel en la partida dejos de la ciringua, e inscideys am las forfexs si superflueys alcuna causa de la lana, mays intromet la en la canula am vehemencia E aprop enongeys la ciringua am boder e am album de huou.	And the way to evacuate the urine through it is that you take the tube folded and tie its end with good thread or fine wool; then insert the ends of the tube into the part left by the syringe, and cut with scissors if there is any excess cause from the wool, but firmly insert it into the canula with vigor. Then closely apply the syringe to the skin and to the inside of the thigh.
E fay cezer le malaute sobre la selha, e embroca la vesiqua de lu e la vergua am olis umitz, e oli de oliva e ayguaros.	And press the scrotum over the seat, and sponge the bladder and groin with a mixture of olive oil and vinegar.
E aprop entromet la ciringua am facilitat entro que pervengua a la razit de la vergua; e aprop dobla la vergua desus a la partida del embelic; e aprop empelleys la ciringua dintz aquela; e aprop empelleys aquela entro que pervengua a la vesica, e aquela centa le malaute esser pervenguda a la causa vuoda, e no es fayt asso segon aquest orde, sino le meat en le qual va a tortuositat.	And then introduce the string easily until it reaches the root of the groin; and then fold the groin upwards at the part of the string; and then push the string inside until it reaches the bladder; and then push that towards the scrotum so that it is delivered to its cause being reached by the string, and not be made thus according to this order, but the meat in which it goes becomes tortuous.
E aprop exten le fiel am la lana petit a petit, quar la urina siec la lana.	And then extend the thread slowly in the wool, for urine dries the wool.
Aprop extratz aquela e fay per curacio urina, e usa ciringua, no cesses fer aquo e usa ciringua entro que sia evacuada la vesica e le malaute atrobe alleviacio.	And then extract that and use urine for treatment, and apply the string, continue doing this until the bladder and scrotum are evacuated and recovery is achieved.
Capitol .lix.	Capitol.lix.
De qualitat de clisterizacio de la vezica am clampcedra e am semblantz instrumentz les quals sian acordants ad aquo.	Of the quality of cleansing the bladder with enemas and using instruments that are appropriate for this.
Quan accideys en la vesica ulceracio o apostema, o sanc congilat en aquela, o es coartat poyredura, e vols en aquela destillar ayguas e medicinas, lahoras sia fayt am instrument le qual es apelat clampcedra, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When an ulcer or abscess occurs in the bladder, or there is a wound with gangrene, and you wish to pour waters and medicines into it, then make an instrument which is called clampcedra, and this is its form:
sino que en la extramitat de lu es sorda, so es clausa.	so that at the extremity of it is closed, so it is clamped.
Et en aquela so tres traucs: dos de la una partida , ayssi quo vezes.	And in it there are three cuts: two on one side, thus twice.
En le comensament es loc concau, en le qual es aquo que es enpellit, e sia segon quantitat que oppile aquel, ses addicio, entro que quan alcuna causa es ab aquel tirada de las humiditatz, sia atirada, e quan es expellida, am aquo sia atirada, e quan es expellit lonc, segon que fa clampcedra am la qual es phicat naphta en las batalhas de mar.	At the beginning it is concave, in which what is pushed in lies, and according to the quantity that fills it, its addition, within which when any cause is drawn by the humidities, it is drawn, and when it is expelled, then it is drawn again, and when it is expelled long, according to how it clamps, on which naphtha is placed in the battles of sea.
Donc cum tu vols prohicir humiditatz en la vesica, entromet la extremitat de clapcedra en la humiditat, e atira am aquel aquo que es empellit a las partidas desus, quar la humiditat es atirada en la conquavitat de clapcedra.	So, in order to prevent humidities in the bladder, insert the extremity of the clampcedra into the humidity, and draw out what is pushed to the upper parts, for the humidity is drawn into the cavity of the clampcedra.
E aprop entromet la extramitat de clapcedra en la vergua segon que havem recomtat en la ciringua; e aprop empelleys la humiditat am aquo que empelleys, quar aquela humiditat perve a la vesica tantost, e le malaute cent aquela.	And then insert the end of the cedar stick into the vagina as we advised in the operation; and then push the moisture with what you push, for that moisture will quickly reach the bladder, and the disorder settles there.
Forma del cristeri subtil am le qual la vesica es cristerizada, e es aquela la forma:	The form of the subtle catheter through which the bladder is catheterized, and that is the form:
E sia fayta de argent o de lato, de la qual le cap pus aut sia semblant a petita pluma, e dejos lu cana dedintz liament.	And it should be made of silver or copper, with its head resembling a small feather, and insert the canal inside cotton.
E aprop pren vesica de moto, e pausa en aquela la humiditat que vols cristirizar en la vesica, e aprop lia aquela entre dos am fort liguatura am fiel doble, e escalfa aquela humiditat sobre le foc.	And then take a bladder of mule, place the moisture you want to catheterize in the bladder, and tie it between two strong ligatures with double thread, and heat that moisture over the fire.
E aprop entromet la extremitat del cristeri en la vergua.	And then insert the end of the catheter into the vagina.
E aprop estrenh la tua ma sobre la vesica am la humiditat am strectura descent entro que·l malaute centa que aquela humiditat ja es pervenguda a la vesica.	And then strengthen your hand on the bladder with the moisture in a descending structure so that the disorder centers where that moisture has reached the bladder.
Mays si a tu no es present vesica, lahoras tu pren una pessa de parguames e fay de aquel cercle; e perfora aquel de tota la sua retonditat; e aprop entromet fiel fort en aquels traucs, ayssi quo so revolgut; e aprop agregua le cercle ayssi quo es agreguat alsofatur, pus que tu pausas en aquel aquo que tu vols de las humiditatz, e olis e ayguas.	If you do not have a bladder present, then take a piece of parchment and make a circle from that; perforate it completely round its entire roundness; then insert strong thread through those stitches, as they are turned; then attach the circle so that it is attached, for you pause in that which you want of the humidities, smell and waters.
E aprop tu lia aquel en le instrument e fay am aquel ayssi cum has fayt am la vesica, e exprescio am la tua ma entro que la humiditat pervengua a la vesica.	And then you tie that to the instrument and do so with it as you did with the bladder, and keep your hand there so that the humidity may reach the bladder.
Capitol .lx.	Capitol. lx.
De extraccio de peyra.	Of the extraction of pear.
Nos ja havem dit en la divisio las specias de peyra e curacio de lu am medicinas, e la diferencia entre peyra engendrada en los ronhos e peyra engendrada en la vesica, e les senhals de aquela.	We have already discussed in the division the species of pear and its treatment with medicines, and the difference between a pear generated in the hernia and a pear generated in the bladder, and the signs of that.
E havem dit la peyra en la qual catz operacio am ma, e seccio.	And we have discussed the pear in which case the major operation and sectioning are performed.
E la peyra engendrada en la vesica propriament es aquela que es ficada en la vesica.	And the stone generated in the bladder properly is that which is lodged in the bladder.
E yeu so narrant aquel am exposicio manifesta e abreviacio.	And I now narrate that matter in an exposition and abbreviation.
Donc dic que peyra engendrada en la vesica majorment ve als enfantz; e dels senhals de lu es que la urina que es eyssida de la vesica es semblant a aygua en la sua subtilitat, e apar en aquela arena; e le malaute fregua la sua vergua, e motas veguadas pen, e aprop es dressada; e am aquo yeys foro le cul en motz de aquels.	Therefore, I say that the stone generated in the bladder most commonly appears in children; and its signs are that the urine discharged from the bladder is similar to water in its subtlety, and forms that sand; and the patient grinds his teeth, feels severe pain, and soon becomes restless; and for this, he often writhes in agony.
E es laugiera la sanacio dels enfants de aquela entro que han conseguitz xiiii ans; e es dificil curacio en les viels.	And this is the recovery of children within about four years; and it is a difficult cure in old people.
Mays en les joves es migiera per aquo quar es entre aquels.	More in young people, the change occurs through that which is between them.
E de aquel del qual la peyra es major e la curacio es pus leugiera; E si es pauca, es contraria ad aquela.	And of that which has the stone more and the cure is easier; And if it is small, it is contrary to that.
Donc cum pervenem a la curacio de aquela, cove al comensament de aquela que mondifiquem le malaute am cristeri le qual extragua tota la fenda la qual es en les sieus budels; quar aquela fenda alcunas veguadas prohibeys la envencio de la peyra deves la inquisicio de lu.	Therefore, when we arrive at the cure for that, begin with the modification of the patient's diet by having them take crystal which excretes through all the orifices in their intestines; for that orifice sometimes prevents the passage of the stone and facilitates its inquiry.
E aprop sia pres le malaute am les sieus pes e sia contosit e maugut enjos per so que la peyra descenda al preon de la vesica, o que saute de loc aut alcunas veguadas.	And then place the patient's feet and ensure they are extended and bent slightly so that the sole descends to the neck of the bladder, or that it swells in some places.
E aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas preparat, e las mas de lu sian dejos las coysas de lu, per so que la vesica tota sia fayta declinant a las partidas dejos.	And then place those clothes that you have prepared under your hands, while the others keep the patient's limbs, so that the bladder is made to hang downward.
E aprop perquier aquela e tota aquela deforo.	And then apply that and all that incision.
Donc si sentes la peyra en l’espazi, lahoras tu te coyta tantost am seccio sobre lu.	And if you feel the sole in the space, then quickly apply heat to it.
E si no catz de tot dejos le tieu tocament, lahoras cove que tu untes am oli le tieu dit indic de la ma sinistra, si malaute es enfant, o le dit miga si es jove complit, e entrometas aquel en le sieu cul.	And if you do not feel it all with your touch, then check that you anoint your index finger of your left hand with oil, if the patient is a child, or your thumb if the patient is an adult, and insert that into its anus.
E perquier de la peyra entro que stia dejos le tieu dit.	And apply heat to the sole while you feel your finger.
E converteys aquela petit a petit entro al col de la vesica.	And gradually insert that finger into the neck of the bladder.
E aprop prem sobre aquel am lo tieu dit, e expelleys aquel a las partidas defora ves le loc del qual vos la seccio.	And then press upon that area as you have said, and expel that to the external parts. Look for the place from which it came.
E comanda al ministra que prema la vesica am la sua ma; e comanda a un autra ministra que am la sua ma dextra extenda les genetius a las partidas desus, e am la sua autra ma remaugua la codena la qual es dejos les genetius, en partida del loc en le qual se fa la seccio.	And command the minister to press the bladder with his hand; and command another minister to extend the genitals upwards with his right hand, and with his other hand draw back the codena which is below the genitals, at the location where the section is made.
E aprop entromet espatum be inscident del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then insert a speculum; this is the form of which:
e scindeys en lu aquo que es entre·l cul e·ls genetius, no en le mieg loc, abantz al latz de la coyssa sinistra; e sia la seccio sobre aquela peyra e·l tieu dit sia en le cul, e sia fayta seccio transversa, per que la seccio defora sia ampla e dedintz streyta segon la quantitat que egrecio de la peyra sia a lu possibla, e no major, quar fort leu comprem le tieu dit le qual es en le cul la peyra deves la seccio, e es foro-getada ses defacultat.	And cut in it what is between the anus and the genitals, not in the middle, before the left thigh; and let the section be on that stone which you said is in the anus, and make a transverse section, so that the section outside is wide and inside narrow according to the quantity that flowed from the stone to it as possible, and no greater, for we carefully examine the section which is in the anus, the stone you should make the section, and it is surgically created.
E sapias que de la peyra es alcuna a la qual so angle e margers, per que le eyssiment de lu es fayt deficil per aquo.	And know that from the heel there is some angle and margins, because the movement of it is made difficult by this.
E de aquela aquo es leon semblant a glan, e es redonda, e es fayt de lu leugier eyssiment.	And from that there is something that resembles a lion's claw, and it is round, and they make the movement of it light.
Donc si es aquela al qual so angles e marger, ajusta en la fissura.	And if that which has angles and margins is adjusted in the crack.
E si no es ayssi foro-getada, lahoras cove que tu engenes sobre aquel, o que strenguas sobre aquel am gesti decentment, la extremitat del qual sia ayssi cum lima am le qual strenguas sobre la peyra, e no evasesca de lu; o que entrometas dejos lu instrument subtil de curvada extremitat.	And if it is not so perforated, then you must either probe it or strengthen it with a gesture decently, the extremity of which should be like a rasp on which you strengthen the heel, and do not deviate from it; or you must insert a thin instrument with a curved extremity into it.
Mays si tu no podes sobre aquel, lahoras tu amplifica le trauc un petit, e si tu veus flux de sanc, abscindeys en strenh aquel am vitriol trissat.	But if you cannot do this, then you slightly enlarge the crack, and if you wish to induce a flow of blood, cut it strongly with vitriol trisser.
Mays si la peyra es mays de una, lahoras al comensament tu impelleys la ma a la boca de la vesica, e aprop inscideys sobre lu; e aprop impelleys un petit aprop aquo; e semblantment fay si son motas mays de doas.	But if the heel is more than one, then at the beginning you press your hand to the mouth of the bladder, and then cut slightly over it; and then press a little there; similarly do if its spots are more than two.
E si es peyra mot gran, lahoras ignorancia es que tu inscidas aquel am gran seccio, quar accideys al malaute una de doas causas: o que mora o que endevengua a lu destillacio de urina continuabla, per aquo quar le loc no es de tot consolidat.	And if the stone is very large, then ignorance leads you to incise that great section, for when it happens to the patient one of two causes: either that he dies or that he achieves a continuous urinary distillation, by which the area is not completely consolidated.
Mays aministra expulcio de lu entro que sia fora-getada, o engenia en la fractura de lu am las forfexs entro que extragua aquela en pessas.	Administer the expulsion of the stone when it is within so that it is expelled, or use forceps in the fracture of the bone to extract it from the wound.
Donc cum tu auras cumplit la tua opperacio, lahoras omple la plagua de enses de aloe e de sanc de drago, e strenh aquel.	Then, after you have completed your operation, fill the wound with slices of aloe and dragon's blood, and strengthen it.
E pausa sobre aquel drap enfus en oli e vi, o en oli rozat e aygua frega, per so que apostema caut sia cedat.	And place the soaked cloth on it in oil and wine, or in linseed oil and wrung water, so that the abscess may yield.
E aprop resupina le malaute sobre le sieu col, e no deslias le liament entro al tertz dia.	Then raise the patient's leg on a stool, and do not apply the bandage on the fifth day.
E cum aquel auras desliat, embroca le loc am aygua e mot oli, e aprop cura aquel am enguent diafinicon e am enguent diabazilicon entro que sia sanat.	And when you have removed it, smear the area with water and much oil, and then treat it with ointment containing diafinicon and ointment containing diabazic acid until it is healed.
Mays si en la plagua accideys apostema caut, adhust e corrosiu, e de aquel semblantz ayssi cum si le sanc es en la vesica congelat, e per lu es la hurina prohibida (e aquo es conogut per la egressio del sanc am urina), a donc entromet lo tieu dit en la plagua e extratz aquel sanc, quar si roman provoca la vesica a corropcio de la vesica e de lu putrefaccio.	But if in the wound you encounter an abscess that is hot, corrosive, and appears as if the blood were frozen in the bladder, and through it urine flow is prohibited (this is known by the discharge of blood with urine), then insert your said instrument into the wound and extract that blood, for if it remains it will cause corruption of the bladder and its putrefaction.
E aprop lava la plagua am vi agre, aygua e sal, e am opposicio a tota specia, am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	Then wash the wound with warm water and salt, and oppose all species, using what you find suitable for the cure until it heals.
E cove en las horas de tota la curacio que tu lies amdos las coyssas e ajustes las medicinas las quals so pausadas sobre le loc.	And observe the hours for all the treatment you perform, placing your hands on both thighs and applying the medicines which are placed over the area.
E si la peyra es petita e es en le meat de la vergua, e es ficat en lu, e eyssement de urina es prohibit, lahoras cura aquel am aquo que yeu recomti denant que pervenguas a seccio, quar tropas veguadas per aquesta curacio yest acusat de seccio; e ja yeu e esproat aquo, e es que tu prenguas un perforador de ferr alfelut, del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if the stone is small and located in the meat of the penis, and its passage is prohibited by urine, then treat it as I have recommended before you reach the point of excision; for too many operations of this kind are blamed for causing excision. Now I will describe this: take a needle file, which is the shape of this:
de triangulada extramitat, agut, ficat en fust.	from a triangular instrument, sharp, inserted in wood.
E aprop pren fiel, e lia am aquel la vergua dejos la peyra per so que no retorne a la vesica.	And then take honey, and bind it to the gland so that it does not return to the bladder.
E aprop entromet le ferr en la vergua, perforant am fecilitat entro que·l perforador vengua ad aquela peyra.	And then insert the iron into the gland, piercing easily where the puncturer will reach that stone.
E revolveys le perforador am la tua ma en aquela peyra petit a petit, e tu perforsa la perforacio de lu entro que fassas aquel del autra part penetrar; quar la urina tantost es absolta.	And turn the puncturer with your hand in that stone little by little, and you make the perforation complete before you do it on the other side; so that the urine is quickly relieved.
E aprop prem la tua ma sobre aquo que es romas de la peyra de la partida deforo de la vergua, quar aquela es trinquada, e es foro-getada am la urina, e le malaute es sanat.	And then press your hand on what is torn from the stone of the part pierced through the gland, for that is jagged, and the wound is cleansed by the urine, and the patient is cured.
Mays si aquesta curacio no es a tu aparelhada per alcuna causa la qual prohibeys de aquela, lahoras lia un fiel dejos la peyra, e autra fiel desus la peyra.	But if this cure is not done through your apparatus for some reason that prohibits it, then bind honey to the stone, and another piece of honey above the stone.
E aprop encideys sobre la peyra en aquela vergua entre doas liaduras.	And then apply something hot over the stone on that gland between two layers.
E aprop extratz aquela.	And then extract it there.
E aprop deslia le liament e mondifica le sanc congilat, le qual es fayt en la plagua.	And then untie the bandage and change the wet dressing, which is done on the wound.
E no es necessari liament de fiel dejos la peyra, sino per que no retorne a la vesica, e l’autre liament desus sino, quar quan es desliat le fiel aprop la egrecio de la peyra, la codena retorna a son loc e cobra la plagua.	And do not use a flax bandage for the stone, but only to prevent it from returning to the bladder. Instead, place another bandage above, for when the flax is removed near the edge of the stone, the constriction recovers and heals the wound.
E per aquo es a tu necessari quan lias le fiel desus, que tu eleves la codena a las partidas desus, o que retorne deves le tieu compliment, e cobra la plagua ayssi co havem dit.	And for this reason, when you remove the flax above, you must elevate the constriction to the parts above, or the stone will return and take its place, and the wound will heal as we have said.
Capitol .lxi.	Capitol.lix.
De extraccio de peyra de las femnas.	On the extraction of stones from women.
Peyra en las femnas pauc es engendrada.	Stone in women is less commonly generated.
Mays si ve peyra ad alcuna de aquelas, lahoras dificil es la curacio de lu, e es prohibida per tropas manieyras.	Yet if a stone does occur in any of them, the cure is difficult, and it is prohibited by too many methods.
La una de lor es quar la femna fort leu es verges.	One of them is that a woman who is very light is a virgin.
E la segonda es quar tu no trobas femna be scient que descroba si meteyssa al metge quan es casta, o es de las femnas haventz maritz.	And the second is that you will not find a woman well versed who can describe to the doctor whether she herself has had intercourse, or if she is among women who have husbands.
La tersa es quar tu no hatrobas femna be sabent aquesta art, majorment la operacio am ma.	The third is that you will not find a woman well knowing this art, especially the operation among them.
E la quarta es que·l loc de la seccio sobre peyra en las femnas es longinc del loc de la peyra, per que indigeys de seccio preonda, e en aquela es temor.	And the fourth is that the location of the section near the kidney in women is far from the location of the kidney, so you need to perform a general section, and there is danger.
Mays si necessitat provoca a tu ad aquo, lahoras cove que tu prenguas una femna metga be scient, e pauc es atrobada.	But if necessity prompts you to do this, then seek out an experienced old woman who is well versed in these matters, and such one is not easily found.
Mays si tu es privat de aquela, lahoras cerca metga quast e subtil, o presenta una femna matrona be esenhada en le feyt de las femnas, o femna que en aquesta art ennueys partida del art.	But if you are deprived of that, then seek out an experienced and subtle doctor, or present an elderly woman skilled in the affairs of women, or a woman who has knowledge of this art.
Donc fay aquela present, e comanda a lu que fassa tot aquo que tu li mandaras, de la enquisicio sobre la peyra al comensament; la qual causa es que reguarde si la femna es verges, lahoras cove que meta lo sieu dit en le cul de lu e quiera la peyra.	Therefore, have her present and command her to do everything you will tell her, from the examination of the kidney to the beginning; the reason for this is that she should check if the woman is a virgin, and then insert her finger into the woman's vagina to feel for the kidney.
Donc si atroba aquela, coarte aquela dejos le sieu dit, e lahoras comanda a lu que inscida sobre aquela.	Then if you find it, cut it out and leave his said [wound], and then command him to rest over it.
Mays si no es verge, lahoras comanda a la matrona que entrometa lo sieu dit en le conh de la malauta e enquiera sobre la peyra, pus que pausa la sua ma sinistra sobre la vesica, e comprem aquela am bona comprecio.	But if it is not a stone, then command the midwife to insert her finger into the bladder and feel for it, while placing her left hand on the bladder, and keep a good grip.
Donc si atroba aquela, lahoras cove que gradantment maugua aquela de l’orrifici de la vesica a las partidas dejos am somman de la sua vertut entro que pervengua am aquel a la razit de la coyssa.	Then if you find it, gradually wash out the bladder through its orifice with water, making sure to retain as much of its virtue as possible so that it reaches the root of the thigh.
E aprop inscida sobre aquela apposicio de la maytat del conh deves la razit de la coyssa de qualque part sia a lu parada e cent la peyra en aquela partida, e·l dit de lu no sia remaugut de la peyra coartan dejos lu.	And then insert your finger into the opening to hold the root of the thigh in any part where it is stopped and center the stone there, so that the patient is not harmed by the stone as you cut it out.
E la seccio sia pauca al comensament; e aprop entrometa lo ray sobre aquela seccio, e si sent la peyra, lahoras ajuste en seccio segon la quantitat la qual sap que la peyra sira getada de aquela.	And let the incision be small at the beginning; then insert the probe into that section, and if you feel the stone, adjust the incision according to the quantity you know the stone will be removed from there.
E sapias que las specias de peyra son motas: quar de aquelas es pauca e gran, e leon e aspra, e longua e redonda, e havent ramps.	And know that the grains of pepper are motas: some are small and large, lion and spicy, long and round, and having spurs.
Donc tu sapias quantas specias so de lu per aquo que tu signifiques sobre aquo que vols.	Therefore you know what spices are in it so that you may signify about what you want.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, ajusta en le loc vetriol trissat e te aquela per una hora entro que sia abscindit le sanc, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	And if you want to induce a flux of blood, apply vitriol tripartite to the area for one hour until the blood is absorbed, and then return to your operation once the pepper has been removed.
E fay que prepares am tu dels instrumentz les quals e ditz en la extraccio de peyra en les homes, per so que sias ajudat per aquels en la tua operacio.	And make sure to prepare for yourself the instruments you mentioned in the extraction of pepper from men, so that you may be assisted by them during your operation.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, e sabes que la expulcio del sanc es de la arceria que es insciza, lahoras tu pausa polvera sobre le loc e estrenh aquel am pulvils e strictura descent, e no iteras aquo; e layssa la peyra e no extraguas aquela, quar fort leu morira la malauta.	And if you want to induce a flux of blood, and know that the expulsion of blood comes from the artery that is incised, then apply powder to the area and strengthen it with powders and allow descent; do not repeat this; leave the pepper and do not extract it, for strongly removing it will kill the patient.
E aprop cura la plagua.	And then cure the wound.
Donc cum es cedada la acuitat del sanc aprop alcus jorns, e·l loc se poyreys, lahoras tu retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	When the heat of the wound subsides after several days, and the place heals, then you return to your operation while the stone is forgotten.
Capitol lxii.	Chapter LXII.
De seccio sobre ernia acoza.	On the section about inguinal hernia.
Hernia ayguoza no es sino agregacio de humiditat en le ciphac blanc lo qual es dejos la codena dels genetius contenent le huou, e es nompnat ciphac.	Hernia aquoea is nothing but the addition of moisture in the white cell which is left by the chain of the generations containing the humor, and it is called achipac.
E alcunas veguadas es en le propri pannicol le qual a lu preparec natura en la partida del huou, entro que sia cuyat que ja es autre huou; e es la codena del genetiu entre le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, e no es aquo sino tart.	And sometimes it is in the own linen cloth which nature prepares for the part of the humor before it is cooked and another humor has already taken its place; and this is the chain of the generations among the white cell, which we have said, and it is not this other than a tart.
E la generacio de aquest hernia es per debelitat la qual accideys als genetius, per que ad aquels es efundunda aquesta materia, e alcunas vetz accideys per percuscio fayta sobre les genetius.	And the generation of this hernia is due to weakness which occurs in the generations, because this material infiltrates into them. Sometimes it occurs due to percussion made on the generations.
E aquesta humiditat es havent motas colors, quar la color de lu o es declinant a citrina o a sanguinent, o rog, o es negra feculenta, o es ayguosa blanqua, e es aquo que es mays.	And this moisture having colored spots, its color is either declining to yellowish or reddish, or brown, or it is black and floury, or it is white watery, and this is the most common.
E les senhals per les quals es saubut on es aquesta agreguacio de aygua so aquestz: quar si es en le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, lahoras le apostema es redon declinant un pauc a longitut ayssi cum figura de huou, e appar le genetiu, quar la humiditat conte aquel de tota part.	And the signs by which one knows where this addition of water is located are these: if it is in the white cell which we have said, then the abscess is round, slightly tapering in length like the figure of a gourd, and the root appears, for the moisture contains that from all parts.
E si la humiditat es en le propri pannicol, lahoras le apostema es redon am partida del huou e per aysso hom estima que es autre huou.	And if the moisture is in the proper flesh, then the abscess is round, detached from the gourd, and for this reason one estimates that it is another gourd.
E si la humiditat es entre la codena dels genetius e·l ciphac blanc, lahoras catz dejos le centiment.	And if the moisture is between the root of the gourd and the white cell, then cut away the root.
E cum tu vols la cognicio de la color de la humiditat, lahoras tu esproa la color de la humiditat en le apostema am entromes cayrat del qual la forma es precedida; e segon aquo que es eyssit en le vestigi del entromes, jutga de aquo que es dedintz lu.	And to know the color of the moisture, you probe the color of the moisture in the abscess through a small incision made before the form appears; and according to what happens in the trace of the incision, judge what is inside it.
Donc quan nos vinem a la curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que comandem al malaute que sia fleubotomat si aquo es a tu possibla, e vezes le cos de lu ple.	Then when we come to the treatment of it, you must command the patient to bleed if this is within your capability, and often raise his body.
E aprop sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos sobre alcuna causa un pauc auta, e pausa dejos lu motz draps.	And then lift it up on its back for a moment or two, and place the rest of the cloth.
E aprop setz tu sobre la part sinistra de lu, e comanda al ministra que segua a la dextra de lu, le qual extenda la sua vergua a hun de dos latz a la codena dels genetius e a la partida del mirac del ventre.	And then set yourself on the left side of the patient, and command the minister to stand on the right side of the patient, who extends his hand to one of the sides at the hip bone and to the part of the flank.
E aprop pren spatum lat e scindeys la codena dels genetius del mieg loc per la longitut entro prop le pentenilh.	And then take a spatula and split the hip bone at the midline along its length near the pelvis.
E sia fayta la seccio segon rectetut engualment distant de la linha que deveseys la pel dels genetius, entro que pervengua al ciphac blanc comprehendent.	And make the section according to the correct distance from the line where you should split the skin of the hip, until it reaches the white linea composita.
E excorja aquel, e observa, e guarda te per aysso que tu no inscidas aquel; e la tua excoriacio am la qual aquel excorjas per partida jassia que sia suspenduda am le huou mays e subtilment escruta am la excoriacio segon la quantitat a tu possibla.	And excise that, and observe, and guard it for this: do not go deep into that; your incision should be just wide enough to excise the lesion, hanging it on the greater and finer hook, and carefully examine the incision according to the quantity you can manage.
E aprop perfora le ciphac ple de aygua am perforacio ampla, e extratz tota l’aygua.	And then puncture the linea alba full of water with a broad perforation, and extract all the water.
E aprop separa entre doas labias de la seccio am uncis, e exten le ciphac a las partidas desus; e no toques la codena les genetius comprehendent, e inscideys le ciphac en aquela manieyra que es a tu possible.	And then separate between the two lips of the section with clips, and extend the clamp above the parts; and do not touch the chord around the genitalia, and incise the clamp in that manner which is possible to you.
E inscideys aquel am la sua totalitat o en pessas, e majorment le sieu latz subtil, quar si tu no perscrutas exquisidament la inscizio de lu, no es fayta segurtat que la aygua no retorne.	And incise that completely or in pieces, especially its thin edge, for if you do not thoroughly examine the incision, there is no guarantee that the water will not return.
Mays si le huou procezeys de aquela defora de la sua codena en la ora de la tua operacio, lahoras quan tu auras complida la seccio del ciphac, retorna dedintz aquel, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la codena dels genetius am sutura, e aprop cura aquel ayssi cum las autras plagua, entro que sia sanat.	But if you proceed with the hot process outside of its chord in the time of your operation, when you have completed the section of the clamp, return inside that, and properly adjust the two lips of the genitalia's chord with sutures, and properly care for it as for the other wounds until it is healed.
E si atrobas le huou corromput per autra malautia, lahoras cove que tu lies les vayssels les quals so sore le suspensori, e extrat le huou, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit.	And if you find the hot process corrupted by another illness, then ligate the vessels which are over the suspensory, extract the hot process, and properly care for it as we have said.
Mays si l’aygua es agreguada en doas partidas esemps, lahoras sapias que doas son las ernias; donc inscideys aquela partida segon que has feyt en l’autra engualment; e si es a tu vist que sia una opera, lahoras tu la fay.	But if the water is added in two parts, then you know that there are two hernias; therefore, incise that part according to how you have done in the other equally; and if it appears to be a single operation, then you perform it.
E aprop tu abstergiys le sanc, e entramet en las seccios lana submersa en oli o en oli rozat; e pausa deforo autra lana la qual tu as submersa en vi e oli, e expandeys aquela sobre dos genetius e·l mirac del ventre; e pausa desobre draps doblatz e pulvils, e lia aquels desobre am liament le qual es segon aquesta forma:	And then you clean the blood, and interlace in the sections wet wool soaked in oil or rubbed oil; outside place another wool which you have soaked in wine and oil, and spread that over two genitiae and ·the miracle of the belly; outside cover with folded cloths and powders, and apply those on top of plaster which is according to this form:
e aprop sian preses dos draps e sian humplitz de lana carmenada segon aquesta semblansa; e sian faytas las extremitatz am les quals es premut de coto o de lana humida, e sian agreguatz am strectura en le braguier de las braguas, e la una de las extremitatz prengua del cul entro al dos, e la segonda prengua a la partida del pantenilh, e dos extramitatz sobre dos coyssas dejos e dos extramitatz autras sobre dos angonars, e tota extrictura sia ajustada en le braguier de las braguas.	And then place two cloths and fill them with pounded wool according to this likeness; and make the ends which are pressed with a clot or wet wool, and attach them to the structure in the pocket of the breeches, and one end take into the two, and the second take to the part of the gusset, and two ends leave on two thighs, and the other two ends on two ankle supports, and all structure be adjusted in the pocket of the breeches.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta hernia es medicada artificialment am cauteri en loc de seccio am ferr; e es que tu prenguas cauteri cutellar subtil e que inscidas am aquel la codena dels ginitius, e es ignit segon que havem recomtat entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc contenent la aygua, e lahoras tu pren cauteri segon aquesta forma:	And sometimes this hernia is treated artificially with a cautery at the section instead of iron; so you take a thin surgical cautery and incise there at the cord of the genitiae, and ignite it as we have recommended until the white chaff containing the water is revealed, and then you take the cautery in this form:
e es asemblat a letra greca.	and it resembles Greek letters.
E aprop perfora am aquel ciphac, e es ignit entro que tota la humiditat sia fora-gitada.	And then puncture that pouch, and ignite it so that all the moisture is expelled.
E aprop exten le ciphac am uncis, e excorja am uncis, e excorja am cauteri subtil ignit; e inscideys aquel segon que es a tu possible entro que eradiques tot lu; e guarda te del huou que·l foc no·l toque.	And then stretch the pouch with needles, and incise it with needles, and burn it with a fine cautery ignited; and cut it as much as possible so that you remove all of it; and guard it from the heat so that the fire does not touch it.
E sapias que aquesta operacio es pus salva e pus longinqua de flux de sanc, e milhor que operacio am seccio.	And know that this operation is safer and more distant from the flow of blood, and better than an incision.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat apostema caut en la hora de seccio o en hora de cauteri, o flux de sanc, lahoras cove que tu cures qual contrarietat fa a tu per aquo, am curacio la qual conveneys a lu segon que es dit.	But if you find it contrary to apply a cautery at the time of incision or during the time of cautery, or when there is a flow of blood, then treat it as any other contrary condition, applying the cure that is appropriate according to what is said.
Mays si le malaute es pauruc, e no spera la segonda operacio per la sua horribilitat, lahoras administra perforacio segon que yeu recomti aquo; e es quan es certificat deves tu, per aquo que havem dit de las significacios, que aquela hernia es ayguosa.	But if the patient is afraid and does not expect the second operation because of its horror, then administer a puncture as I will advise you; and when you are certified by what we have said about the significance, that hernia is dangerous.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute sobre alcuna cezelha elevada, aprop perfora le apostema en la partida pus bassa de lu am spatum lat, e pausa la perforacio segon la longitut del cos.	When you need to incise the abscess on some elevated part, then puncture the apsema in the lower part of it with a spatula, and pause the puncturing according to the length of the body.
E sia la apercio ampla entro que corro tota l‘aygua.	Let the incision be wide enough to drain all the water.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc coto e lia aquel e layssa aquel, per so que corro le romanent de l’aygua.	Then place your hand firmly over the area, press it, and release, to allow the water to continue flowing out.
E aprop cura aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	Then take care that the wound heals properly.
Mays si contrarietat es a la egrecio de l’aygua en aquela hora tu perforas aquela: e aquo no es fayt sino per aquo quar le pannicol blanc en le orrifici de la plagua fa contrarietat e prohibeys le eyssiment de l’aygua, lahoras cove que tu metas en la plagua pena o instrument am la qual es extrayta l’aygua dels ydropitz, la forma del qual es precedida; o ajusta en la opprecio de la plagua un petit.	But if contrary to the flow of water at that time you puncture it: this is not done except because the white lint causes a contrary effect and prohibits the effusion of water. Then, when you need to put in the wound a needle or instrument from which the water of dropsy is drawn out, use the form of which is preceded; or apply a small sponge in the region of the wound.
E sapias que l’aygua retorna, e es agueguada aprop vi meses o enaviro aquels; e cum es agreguada, lahoras sia perforat segon aquela meteyssa manieyra, quar le malaute ayssi passara les sieus dias.	And know that the water returns, and is absorbed approximately six months or even more; and when it is absorbed, then puncture according to that method, so that the abscess passes its days.
Capitol .lxiii.	Chapter LXIII.
De seccio sobre hernia carnosa e la curacio de lu.	On the section about fleshly hernia and its cure.
Sapias que en la seccio sobre aquesta hernia es temor perdusent a pernicia en las majors disposicios; per que a mi es vista la dimissio de lu e esser salvat per aquela milhor.	Know that in the section about this hernia, there is fear of losing great danger to the major organs; for I have seen its dismissal and been saved by the better method.
E yeu so rememorant la operacio en aquela e las specias dels apostemas.	And I am remembering the operation in that case and the types of abscesses.
Donc, dic que l‘apostemas natz en les cos dels quals les genetius so conponutz e es fayt aquo per motas causas: o per superfluitat aguda agra, la qual es efundida als genetius, o per percuscio.	Therefore, I say that abscesses naturally occur in the parts where the glands are conjoined, and this is done for various causes: either due to acute excess that is poured into the glands, or due to percussion.
E es la color de la apostema segon la color del cos, e no es atrobat en lu dolor, e es apostema greu.	And the color of the abscess depends on the color of the part of the body, and there is no pain in it; it is a serious abscess.
E fort leu es apostema lapificada, del qual la color es fosca, e no es centiment a lu.	And the abscess that is hardened has a dark color, and there is no throbbing in it.
E alcunas veguadas es fayt per nodacio de las arcerias, e per imflacio de aquelas ayssi quo ja es perceubut la rememoracio de lu, o per imflacio de venas.	And sometimes abscesses are formed due to the concretion of the arteries, and due to swelling as you already remember, or due to swelling of the veins.
Mays aquo que es per imflacio de arcerias es conogut per la dispercio de la apostema quan compremas aquela am les tieus ditz; e no cove que aquel toques.	More than that, when caused by the inflammation of arteries, it is known as the dispersion of the abscess when you press upon those points said; and one should not touch it.
Mays aquel que es fayt per imflacio de vena no es dispergut de lu alcuna causa deves la compressio am les ditz.	More than that, when caused by the inflammation of veins, it is not dispersed for any cause; you should apply compression to those points.
E ja es possible que sobre aquesta specia sia fayta seccio e sobre les autres carns; e es que tu inscida la codena dels genetius, e aprop esten le huou a las partidas desus, e extratz aquel del ciphac blanc, e deliura le suspensori dels vaysels, e ligua les, e inscideys le suspensori pus que tu deliuras aquel de tota partida de las partidas del huou.	And it is possible that section be made on this species as well as on other tissues; and you incise the cord of the glands, then extend the knife upwards, extract that from the white cyst, and deliver the suspensory ligament of the vessels, ligature them, and incise the suspensory ligament after you have delivered that from all parts of the kidney.
Donc si l’huou ja es am aquelas carnadas consolida, lahoras cove que tu extraguas le huou e inscidas aquel.	Then if the kidney has already consolidated with those tissues, you should extract the kidney and incise it.
E si es adherencia entro alcuna causa del ciphac, o entre aquo que es entre les bayssels, lahoras cove que tu deliures tota aquela adherencia e inscidas aquela per inscizio redonda.	And if there is an adhesion due to something in the cyst, or between what is between the vessels, you should deliver all that adhesion and incise it with a round incision.
Mays si es nativitat de carn en le loc de la adherencia la qual es detras, lahoras cove que tu inscidas tot aquo que es de lu, e extraguas le huou ayssi cum havem dit.	If the native flesh is in the place of adhesion which is behind, then thoroughly incise all that belongs to it, and extract the humor as we have said.
Donc cum es complida la tua operacio, lahoras omple la plagua de lana imfuza en oli rozat e vi; e aprop cura aquela am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Then since your operation is completed, fill the wound with wool soaked in rubbed olive oil and wine; and then cover it with another dressing until it heals.
Capitol .lxiv.	Chapter LXIV.
De la curacio de hernia que es de vitz.	On the cure of hernias that are viscous.
Vit es apostema envolut per alcuna envolucio semblant a broto am mollificacio dels testiculs, e es fayt dificil movement exercitiu e deambulacio sobre le malaute.	A vit is an apysterma enveloped by some envelope similar to a blister, and it makes exertive movement, exercise, and walking on the affected side difficult.
E en la curacio de aquesta malautia es per temor per aquo del qual es precedida rememoracio.	And in the cure of this illness, there is a fear of what preceded it, which is remembered.
Empero cove que diguam opperacio en aquela segon que fero les primiers.	However, perform the operation there according to how we have described first.
E dic que cove que fassas sezer le malaute sobre una cezelha elevada; e aprop enpelleys le suspensori dels testiculs a las partidas dejos; e aprop te la codena dels genetius am les tieus ditz am les baysels que so probdas a la vergua; e tengua aquels autre ministre que tu, e extenda aquels am extencio vehement.	And I say that you should incise the affected side on an elevated cloth; and then draw the suspensory ligament of the testicles towards the parts left; and place the codena of the inguinal region on your thumbs which are tried by the touch; and have another minister with you, and extend those thumbs vigorously.
E aprop inscideys am spatum lat agut per seccio traversa en le dreyt dels vaysels entro que sian les vayssels descubertz.	And then incise sharply with a sharp knife across the vessels among which the vessels are exposed.
E aprop excorja de tota partida ayssi quo a tu havem dit en extraccio de arceria las quals so en las templas.	And then excise from all parts as we have said in the extraction of arteries which are in the temples.
E aprop fica en aquelas un’agulha en la qual sia fiel doble, e lia aquel en le primier del locs en les quals accideys vit, e lia aquel autra veguada en le derier de lor.	And then place a needle in which there is a double thread, and tie that at the beginning of the locations where you cut, and tie the other half at the end of them.
E aprop inscideys aquels en le mieg loc per seccio dreyta segon la longuesa del cos, e extratz aquo que es agreguat de las humiditatz fetulentas e corruptas.	And then incise those in the middle location with a straight cut according to the length of the body, and extract what is accumulated from the foul and corrupted humors.
E aprop cura la plagua am curacio de las autras plaguas en las quals vols sania esser engendrada per so que caian les vaysels les quals noyreysso un de dos genetius, quar no es mal per aquo.	And then cure the wound with the treatment of other wounds in which you want health to be generated so that it causes the vessels which do not nourish one of the two spirits, which is not bad for this.
Mays si accideys vit a totz les bayssels, lahoras cove que·ls testicols sian extragutz o que les testicols per aquo se cequo am les vayssels, per que sia privat de tot nutriment per la inscizio dels vayssels, e que sian estaborits, o que cequo per so que no sia juvament am aquels.	But if you cut all the vessels, then ensure that the testicles are extracted or that they wither due to the cutting of the vessels, so that it is deprived of all nutrition due to the incision of the vessels, and become established, or that they wither for this reason.
Capitol .lxv.	Capitol. lxv.
De la cura de hernia entestinal.	Of the cure for intestinal hernia.
Le adveniment de aquesta hernia es per seccio que endeve en le ciphac extendut sobre le ventre de part dels angunars del mirac del ventre, per que deysendo les budels de aquela ruptura ad alcu dels budels.	The occurrence of this hernia is due to a seance that ends in the diaphragm extending over the abdomen from the muscles of the abdominal wall, because from the rupture of those intestines, some of them are displaced.
E aquesta ruptura es o del ciphac o de excencio de lu, e accideysso aquestas doas specias per motas causas: o percussio, o per sautz, o per clamor, o per elevacio de alcuna causa greu, o per semblantz.	And this rupture is either of the diaphragm or of its excision, and these two species occur due to various causes: through a blow, by jumping, from shouting, from lifting some heavy cause, or from similar actions.
E·l senhal de aquo, quan es per extencio del ciphac, es que accideys pauc a pauc en lonc temps, e no accideys soptament, e es apostema engual entro ves le preon per so quar le ciphac comprem le budel.	And the sign of this, when it is due to the extension of the diaphragm, is that it occurs gradually over a long period of time and does not occur suddenly. It is an abscess that grows within the cavity, as the diaphragm compresses the intestine.
E le senhal de lu es quan es per seccio del ciphac, quar al comensament fa accidir dolor vehement sobtament; e es apostema divers aparent dejos la codena propdana aparent, e aquo es per eyssiment del budel, e·l cos de lu a las partidas deforo del ciphac.	And the sign of this is when it is due to the seance of the diaphragm, for at the beginning it causes sudden and intense pain; it is an abscess that appears differently from the nearby apparent wound, as this is due to the compression of the intestine, and the body around the parts outside the diaphragm.
E alcunas veguadas es fora-getat am le budel la tela, e es apelada aquesta hernia entestinal zirbal.	And sometimes the intestine protrudes through the skin, and this hernia is called zirbal.
E alcunas veguadas es fayta am ventositat, e alcunas veguadas corr en le budel fenda, e aqui es retenguda, e es am aquo gran pernitia3 del malaute, e alcunas veguadas fa endevenir dolor malvada e majorment quan es premut.	And sometimes it is caused by distension, and sometimes a hole forms in the intestine, where it gets stuck, and this causes great discomfort to the patient, and sometimes it causes severe pain, especially when pressed.
E en la curacio de las especias de aquesta malautia am ferr es temor, per que cove que sia esquivat le cazament en aquela.	And in the treatment of these symptoms of this illness, there is fear, because it is thought that hunting should be avoided at that time.
E la manieyra de la operacio de aquela es que comandes al malaute que redugua le budel am la sua ma a las partidas dedintz de la sua conquavitat si obezeys al sieu retornament, e aprop sia envessat sobre le sieu col entre las tuas mas, e eleva las cambas de lu.	And the method of the operation is that you command the patient to push the intestine back into its cavity with their hand at the internal parts of their cavity if it obeys on its return, and then tie it over their collarbone between your hands, and lift the patient's shoulders.
E aprop sten la codena la qual siec la codena dels testicols a las partidas desus, e inscideys la codena dels testicols tota per le lonc; e aprop fiqua en doas labias de la seccio uncis segon que indigeysses a hubrir la seccio am aquels.	And then stretch the cord which holds the testicular cord above, and incise the testicular cord entirely along its length; then place it in two folds of the incised section according to where you need to open the section.
E si’ la seccio segon la quantitat que a tu sia possible que de aquela le huou sia foro-getat.	And if the section according to the quantity that it is possible for you to have been perforated.
E aprop excorja aquela ciphaqueth les quals so dejos la codena dels testicols, entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc dur de quascuna partida.	And then excise that cyst which they leave near the string of the testicles, after the white hard cyst of each part has been discovered.
Lahoras tu entromet le tieu dit en aquo que siec le testicol, en aquo que es entre ciphac blanc, le qual es dejos la codena del huou, e entre le ciphac segon, e absolve am aquel’adherencia que es en la partida detras del huou.	And then insert your thumb into what you are excising from the testicle, in what is between the white cyst, which they leave near the hernia, and between the second cyst, and separate all the adhesion that is in the rear part of the hernia.
E aprop mau am la ma la codena dels testicols a las partidas deforo, e am aysso exten le ciphac blanc en sus am la ma sinestra, e eleva le huou am le ciphac a la partida de la seccio; e comanda al ministre que extenda le huou ensus e tu dissolveys la adherencia que es detras am solucio complida.	And then hold the testicle with your hand near the front part, and with this extend the white cyst on its side, and raise the hernia above the cyst to the part of the section; and command the assistant to extend the hernia upwards while you dissolve the adhesion behind with the completed solution.
E cerqua am les tieus ditz que lay no sia alcuna causa del budel envelopat en le ciphac blanc dur.	And near your thumbs, say that there is no cause for the intestine being enveloped in the white hard cyst.
Mays si tu atrobas de lu alcuna causa, lahoras tu enpelleys aquel al ventre dejos.	But if you find some cause, then you peel it off to the abdomen and lay it down.
E aprop tu pren una agulha en la qual sia fiel gros fayt de x fiels, e entromet aquel deves le derier del ciphac, le qual es jos la codena dels testicols, la qual siec seccio; e aprop inscideys las extremitatz las quals emineysso del fiel entro que sian quatre fiels, e aprop compausa alcus de lor sobre alcuna figura en manieyra de crotz; e lia am aquel le ciphac del qual havem dit que es dejos la codena dels testicols am fort liament de dos partz.	And then take a needle made of thick wire, and insert it into the lower part of the scrotum, which is the junction; and then incise the ends from which the wire emerges, ensuring there are four wires, and then place some of them on a cross-shaped figure; and tie that to the scrotum from which we said is the junction of the testicles with strong thread divided into two parts.
E aprop envolveys las extremitatz dels fiels e lia aquelas am liament vehement entro que alcu dels vayssels que noyrrisso aquels no puscan trametre alcuna causa per so que de aqui no accida apostema caut.	And then wrap the ends of the wires and tie those with strong thread so that none of the vessels nourishing them can transmit any cause, thereby preventing an abscess from occurring.
E pausa autra veguada liament segon foro le primier liament, lonh de lu mens tres ditz; e aprop aquestz dos liaments layssa del ciphac le qual es dejos la codena dels testicols la quantitat de la grandeza del dit, e inscideys tot le romanent segon redondeza, e osta de lu le huou.	And place another layer of thread according to the strength of the first thread, keeping it about three fingerbreadths away; and for these two threads, leave from the scrotum, which is the junction of the testicles, the quantity of one finger's breadth, and incise the remaining part in a circular manner, and cover it with skin.
E aprop inscideys en la partida dejos de la codena dels testicols per seccio de la qual corra sanc e sania ayssi cum havem recomtat en aquo que havem dit.	And then incise in the part left of the cord of the testicles by section of which flows pus and healing as we have recommended in what we have said.
E aprop aministra lana submersa en oli, e pausa en la plagua; e aministra le liament le qual havem recomtat (e alcunas veguadas le ciphac blanc es cauterizat, le qual havem dit aprop la inscizio de lu temen de flux de sanc, quar motas veguadas accideys aquels) e leyssa le liament entro que per si caia.	And then apply wool soaked in oil, and place it on the wound; apply the plaster which we have recommended (and after several applications the white cloth is cauterized, which we have already mentioned near the incision of where there is a flux of pus, for several days this occurs). And leave the plaster until it falls by itself.
Mays si le cazement de lu es tardat, lahoras de aygua cauda sia embrocat, e pausa sobre aquel entro que caia segon que havem dit.	But if the healing of it is delayed, then apply warm water, and place it on that area until it falls as we have said.
E aprop cura la plagua am l’autra curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And then heal the wound with the other treatment for wounds until it is healed.
Capitol .lxvi.	Chapter LXVI.
De hernia ventosa.	On Hernia Ventosa.
En aquesta hernia no e vist alcu que sia estat ardit sus la curacio de lu am ferr.	In this hernia, it is not seen that anything has been burned during the treatment of it.
E les primiers diyssero que es fayta ayssi cum havem recomtat en la hernia que es am vi; la qual es que tu lies les vayssels aprop la seccio sobre aquela am fecilitat de lu; e aprop secca en le mieg loc en enviro le apostema am aquo que obro aquel, entro que caian les vayssels.	And the first ones would say that it is done this way as we have recounted in the hernia case; which is that you tie the vessels near the section at that place of ease; and then dry out in the middle location around the apostema with what I operate there, before the vessels fall.
E cura la plagua segon que havem dit entro que sia sanada.	And cure the plague according to what we have said until it is healed.
Capitol .lxvii.	Chapter LXVII.
De la disropcio que es fayta en les anguonars.	Of the disorder that occurs in the ankles.
Alcunas veguadas endeve ruptura en les angonars ayssi cum havem dit, e emineys le loc.	In some cases, there is a rupture in the ankles as we have said, and you apply a poultice to the area.
E no deyssen als genetius alcuna causa dels budels al genetius; e si deyssen, aquo es pauc; e retorna s’en en totas horas.	And the genii do not give any cause of the hernias to the genii; and if they do give one, it is rare; and returns soon in all hours.
Mays si es prolonguat le temps am aquo, es ajustada fissura en le ciphac entro que deysenda le budel en le ciphac; e accideys aquo per la extencio del ciphac le qual es en le angonars ayssi cum havem dit, la qual causa es quar le ciphac es estendut, e aprop es mollificat e·l loc es apostemat e emineys.	But if the time at that is prolonged, there is an appropriate crack in the hip where the hernia descends into the hip; and this happens due to the extension of the hip, which occurs in the ankles as we have said, the cause being that the hip is extended, and soon becomes softened, and the area becomes an apostema and poultices are applied.
E la cura de lu es am cauteri ayssi quo es precedida la narracio de lu.	And the treatment of it is with a cautery as it is preceded by the narration of it.
E alcunas veguadas es curada am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: e es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos entre las tuas mas, e aprop secca le loc de la ruptura dels apostemas emineys am seccio per la latitut segon la quantitat de tres ditz.	Sometimes it is cured with iron according to this manner: and the patient lies on his side between your hands, and then the place of the rupture of the abscesses dries out by evaporation according to the width as per the quantity of three fingers.
E aprop strenh le ciphac blanc que es jos la codena entro que sia descubert.	And then strengthen the white cloth that is under as it is uncovered.
E aprop pren le ray e pausa aquel sobre le loc eminent del ciphac, e prem aquel al preon del ventre.	And then take the wick and place it over the prominent part of the cloth, and press it against the front of the abdomen.
E aprop cus le dos locs eminentz sobre la extremitat del ray del ciphac, e ajusta am la sutura un de aquels am l’autre.	And then stitch the two prominent parts over the end of the wick of the cloth, and adjust one to the other with the stitches.
E aprop extratz la extremitat del ray, e no inscidas del ciphac de tot, ni no extenda le huou, ni autra causa ayssi cum yeu te fi saber en la curacio de hernia entestinal.	And then extract the end of the wick, and do not go through the entire cloth, nor extend the wound, nor any other cause as I have faith in the treatment of intestinal hernia.
E aprop cura aquela am la curacio de las plaguas, e cum inscideyses les fiels, mundifica aquela e restaura la plagua entro que sia consolidada; quar le ciphac es contrayt e no es ajustada la eminencia de ruptura.	And then cure that in the treatment of wounds, and as you incise the flaps, purify it and restore the wound while it is consolidated; for the cloth contracts and the prominence of the rupture is not adjusted.
E cauteri es milhor en aquest loc, quar es pus propda a salut.	And cautery is better in this place, because it is more proximate to health.
Capitol .lxviii.	Capitol. lxviii.
De mollificacio de la codena dels testiculs.	For the mollification of the skin of the testicles.
Motas veguadas la codena dels testiculs en alcus homes es mollificada per aysso quar las carns que so entre aquela son mollificadas, e es fedat le reguardament de lu.	When the skin of the testicles turns dark in some men, it is mollified by this because the flesh that is between them is mollified, and care is taken of it.
Adonc necessari es ad aquel que es preguat en la curacio de lu que fassa jazer le malaute segon le sieu dos, e enscida tota la codena la qual es mollificada sobre la codena natural; e aprop que ajuste doas labias am la sutura.	Then it is necessary for him who is in charge of the cure to make the patient lie according to his condition, and completely extend the area which is mollified over the natural skin; and then he should bring together the two lips at the suture.
E si vols, cus en le comensament la superfluitat de la codena mollificada am tres cozeduras o quatre e am ferma sutura.	And if you want, make three or four initial stitches in the excess of the mollified skin and perform a firm suture.
E aprop inscideys entre las suturas; e aprop cura per curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat e caian les fiels.	And then cut between the stitches; and proceed with the cure of the other wounds until it is healed and the stitches fall out.
Capitol .lxix.	Capitol lxix.
De castracio.	Of castration.
Sapias que castratio en nostre ley es excomengada, mays per causa es legut a mi que·m remembre de lu en aquest libre; e no es necessaria la rememoracio de lu sino per doas manieyras, de las quals es la una per so que aquo sia en la sciensa del metge quan es enterroguat de aquela, que sapia la curacio de lu al qual accideys; e l’autra manieyra es que nos motas vetz havem necessitat de castracio de autras bestias per les juvamentz nostres per aquelas, ayssi cum de motos, e de bocs, e de porcs, e de semblantz a las bestias.	Know that castration in our law is excommunicated, but by necessity I am reminded of it in this treatise; and the recollection of it is necessary to me for two reasons, one of which is that when asked about it as a doctor, he should know the cure for whom it happens; and the other reason is that we may sometimes have need of castration for our young animals, such as mules, boars, pigs, and similar beasts.
E donc dic que castracio es fayta en dos manieyras: o per atrissio, o per fissura a seccio.	And therefore say that castration is performed in two ways: either by incision or by making a cut and separating.
Mays en aquela que es fayta per atrissio, la via de la opera es que nos fassam cezer la bestia en aygua cauda entro que·ls genetius de lu sian mollificatz e sian linhitz e que pendan.	But in that which is performed by incision, the way of the operation is to slaughter the beast in cold water so that its genitalia are softened and relaxed while they hang.
E aprop pren aquels am la tua ma entro que sian resols e no apparescan dejos le tocament.	And then take those parts in your hand so that they are relaxed and no marks appear upon touch.
Mays en castracio fayta per fissura e seccio, cove que tu tenguas la bestia e premas la codena dels testicols de lu am la ma senestra.	In case of castration caused by rupture and desiccation, make sure you have the animal and press its testicle with your left hand.
E aprop lia le suspensori, e inscideys sobre quascun huou am una seccio entro que dos huous proceseysso.	Then lift the suspensory ligament, and incise over each groove between two processes.
E aprop inscideys aquels pus que auras quascu excorjat.	Then incise those abscesses that have formed from the excoriations.
E no leysses sobre aquels del ciphac alcuna causa, sino le ciphac subtil le qual es sobre les vazes.	And do not incise those of the scrotum for any cause, but incise the thin layer which is over the veins.
E aquesta manieyra de castracio es milhor la qual es fayta per atrissio, quar atrissio fort leu layssa alcuna causa dels testicols per que la bestia desira coyt.	And this method of castration is better which is done by traction, for traction firmly leaves no cause of the testicles since the animal desires copulation.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	Then treat the wound until it is healed.
Capitol .lxx.	Chapter 70.
De la cura de hermafrodozia.	On the treatment of hermaphroditism.
Hermafrodozia en les homes es segon dos manieyras: la una es quar o appar en aquo que siec l’espazi en la codena de testiculs, en aquel que es entre dos testiculs figura quar cunh de femna en la qual so pels.	Hermaphroditism in males is according to two methods: one where it appears that the space in the scrotum is split, and in which there is a figure between the two testicles resembling a female with its pelvis.
E alcunas veguadas de aquel corr urina le qual es en la codena dels testiculs.	And sometimes a flow of urine comes from that part in the cord of the testicles.
Mays en las femnas es una specia: e es que·l conh de la femna sobre le pentenilh es ayssi cum dos testiculs de home un pauc de tot yminiheys a la partida deforo ayssi cum le perpucii de home e dos testicols.	In women, it is special: and the woman's scrotum is such that it has two testicles like a man, but slightly smaller and hung forward like the penis of a man with its two testicles.
E la curacio es de tres specias: de dos dels homes e de una specia de las femnas.	And the cure is of three kinds: two for men and one for women.
E es que cove que tu inscidas aquelas carns ajustadas entro que efuga la emprecio de aquela, e aprop que cures aquelas am curacio de las autras plaguas.	And you must incise those tight flesh areas where the excretion of that fluid escapes, and then proceed to treat those with the cure for other wounds.
E en la segonda specia dels homes de la qual yeys urina la qual es en la codena dels testiculs, no es curacio ni opperacio en lu.	And in the second kind for men from which urine comes from the cord of the testicles, neither cure nor operation is performed on it.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI.
De lentinge e de carn eminent per causas de las femnas.	On the labia and flesh protruding due to causes in women.
Lentige fort leu es ajustada sobre causas naturals entro que es etressat e es fayt leg le reguardament; e alcunas veguadas es magnificada en alcunas femnas en tant entro que es spandit ayssi cum en les homes e perve entro al coito.	Labia firm and tight is placed over natural causes where it is stretched and made lax by examination; and sometimes it is enlarged in some women to such an extent that it stretches like in men and protrudes during intercourse.
Adonc cove que tu tenguas la superfluitat de lentinge am la tua ma o am unci e inscidas.	Then you should have the superfluity of phlegm in your hand or cup and suck it.
E no ultimes en inscizio, majorment en le preon de la razit, per so que no endevengua flux de sanc.	And do not end by sucking, especially in the root of the tongue, lest there be a flow of saliva.
E aprop cura aquela am curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanada.	And then attend to those wounds that need care for their healing.
Mays carn nascuda es carn que nays en le horrifici de la mayre entro que umple aquel, e fort leu es eyssit a las partidas deforo segon semblansa de coa (e per aquo alscus primiers appelero aquo “malautia caudada”); donc cove que nos inscidam ayssi cum inscidem lentinge, e curem aquela entro que sia sanada.	More hidden flesh is flesh that arises in the horror of the mother until it fills that space, and a large tumor is situated outside according to the likeness of a mass (and for this some first called this "cured gout"); therefore, you should incise it thus as we incise phlegm, and attend to it until it is healed.
Capitol .lxxii.	Chapter 72.
De curacio de alratica.	On the cure of arthritis.
Alratica es que le conh de la femna no sia perforat, o sia le trauc petit.	Arthritis is when the joint of the woman is perforated, or is torn slightly.
E es o natural o accidental.	And it can be natural or accidental.
Accidental es per malautia la qual ha precedit, e aquela es fayta o per carn nada ajustada o per ciphac subtil o espes.	An accident is due to ill-health which has preceded, and that is caused by flesh not fitting well or by a fine or thick thread.
E es fayt o en le preon de la mayre, o en les costatz de lu, o en le pus sobira de lu, o en le pus bas de lu, e prohibeys de cuoyt e de enprenguacio e de enfantament, e fort leu prohibeys las mestruas.	It is caused in the swelling of the groin, or in the sides of the abdomen, or in the upper part below it, or in the lower part of it, and you prohibit cure, conception, and childbirth, and severely prohibit menstruation.
E la cognicio de aquela es fayta per reguardament de la metrona, si la oppilacio es apparent, propdana; mays si no es apparent, lahoras tu cerqua aquela am les tieus ditz o am le ray.	The knowledge of that is made by observing the midwife, if the obstruction is obvious, probe gently; but if it is not obvious, then you should feel for it either with your fingers or with a rod.
Mays si oppilacio es per ciphac subtil, e es propda a las doas labias, lahoras tu coyta e disromp aquela.	But if the obstruction is due to a fine thread, and is close to the two lips, then you should gently separate and untangle that.
E es que pauses sobre las doas labias pulvils, e aprop pausa les tieus ditz indicz de amdoas las mas encemps.	And you should place powder over the two lips, and then feel with your fingers for the indicators on both sides near them.
E la femna sia sobre le sieu dos, las sieuas coyssas extendudas, e aprop exten las doas labias am forsa entro que aquel ciphac subtil sia romput e la oppilacio sia uberta.	And the woman should be on her back, her thighs extended, and then spread the two lips with force until that fine thread is broken and the obstruction is opened.
E aprop pren lana e enbeu le4 en oli e pausa aquela sobre·l loc, e jagua am home le dia per so que·l loc inscis no sia consolidat.	And then take wool and dip it in oil and place it over the area, and keep someone there to ensure that the incised area is not consolidated.
Mays si le ciphac es gros e espes, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel am spatum lat o am fuelha de mirta.	And if the ulcer is large and deep, then you must incise it with a lancet or leaf of myrtle.
Mays si la oppilacio es per carnada, lahoras suspen aquela am unci, e inscideys aquela.	And if the oppression is due to a mass, then suspend it with an incision, and incise there.
E sian am tu las medicinas que fan cessar flux de sanc ses mordicacio, ayssi cum ahacatia, e sanc de drago, e enses, ajustat am album de huou.	And use those medicines that stop the flow of venom from bites, such as aconite, dragon's blood, and ensete, adjusted with alum.
E aprop aministra una canulha de plom ampla per so que la plagua no sia consolidada leugierament.	And then administer an ample lead tube to prevent the plague from consolidating lightly.
E tengua aquela per alcus jorns e aministra calgua de li sec.	And keep it there for a few days and administer cool water.
E aprop sia curada am l’autra curacio de consolidacio entro que sia sanada.	And then cure it with the other consolidation treatment once it is healed.
E alcunas vetz accideys en la mayre nativitat de autres carns, e lahoras cove que inscidas segon aquesta manieyra.	And sometimes accidents occur in the main site of other tissues, then you must incise according to this manner.
Mays si aysso es per apostema crancos, a l’apostema crancos le qual es en la mayre no sia fayta contrarietat am ferr en deguna manieyra.	If this is due to a chronic abscess, in the chronic abscess which is in the major part do not make any counterpressure by means of iron in any manner.
Capitol .lxxiii.	Capitol LXXIII.
De la cura de emorroydas e de tayl e de botor roja que accideysso en le conh de las femnas.	For the cure of hemorrhoids and of tail and of red boil that occurs in the groin of women.
Emorroydas so apprecio dels orificis de motas venas entro que de aquelas corro mot sanc continuadament; e cum so antiquadas emorroydas e son fayts theyls.	Hemorrhoids are appreciated as the result of small veins situated between which constantly carry flowing blood; and since old hemorrhoids are formed they become hard.
E ja yeu he dit en la divisio las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e diyre ayssi aquelas que recebo curacio e aquelas que no recebo curacio.	And I have already said in the division the species of those and the signs of those, and to say likewise which receive cure and which do not receive cure.
Donc dic que emorroydas e theyls quan so en le preon de la mayre e no apparo al sentiment, lahoras en aquelas no sia fayta curacio am ferr.	Therefore say that hemorrhoids and thrombosed ones when they are in the pelvis and do not appear by sensation, then in those do not make any cure.
Mays aquelas las quals so en le orrifici de la mayre sobre las quals catz sentiment, so aquelas que so curadas.	But those that are in the pelvis near which one has sensation, are those that can be cured.
E cove que tu metas la femna en mayso frega e aprop exten atheyl am les forfexs, o am drap aspre, e inscideys aquelas am las razitz.	And ensure that you put the woman in a warm bath and then extend the thighs with scissors or a rough cloth, and incise there where the roots are.
E aprop pulveriza sobre aquelas deves le fluxs del sanc de una de las polveras insciscivas ses mordicacio, ayssi cum acassia e semblant ad aquels.	And then sprinkle above those wounds the flux of the blood from one of the incisive powders six times by biting into it, thus causing a similar effect in appearance to those.
E aprop enpellesca les sieus pes per una hora, e aprop pausa aquela en aygua freja.	And then wrap her feet for an hour, and place her in cold water.
E si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras fay aquela sezer en decoccio de sumat e de scorsas de milgranas e de gualas e de semblantz.	And if the bleeding persists, then apply her to a decoction of sumac and cloves of garlic and ginger and mint.
E aprop pren farina de ordi e comfiys aquela am miel e vi agre e fay emplastre am aquo sobre le dos de lu.	And then take flour of ocher and apply it with honey and vinegar, and make a poultice with this on their back.
E si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, fay adherir am dos ventozas, e a las mamilhas ses escarificatio.	And if the bleeding is stopped, that is good; otherwise, apply two ventosas (cupping glasses) to the breasts, and perform six scarifications.
E aprop pren lana e submergeys aquela am suc de coliandre o am suc de arnagloza o am suc de guarravier am vi pentit e fay adherir al loc; e aprop cura le loc am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then take wool and submerge it in the juice of cumin or the juice of arnica or the juice of purslane in sour wine, and apply it to the area; and cure the area with ointments until it is healed.
Mays athyl rog le qual es de aspre reguardament, cove que tu inscidas aquo que a tu appar de aquel segon que he dit en theyl engualment.	May I first look at it from afar, and then enter as described previously according to what appears to you.
E cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And cure that which is within, making it healthy.
Capitol .lxxiv.	Chapter 74.
De perforacio de eyssedura accident en la mayre.	On the perforation of the vein in the thigh.
Motas specias de apostemas accideysso en la mayre, ayssi cum cranc e apostema lapident e ulceracios e adhubelat e erpetromens e fistulas emorroyas e raguarrias e thyl e autres apostemas.	Various specific cases of abscesses occurring in the thigh, such as carbuncle, abscess with hardness, ulcers, hematomas, erysipelas, fistulas, and swellings, as well as other abscesses.
E yeu ja he dit aquestas malautias e las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e las curacios de lor en la divisio.	And I have already described these diseases and their specific types, as well as the signs of these conditions, and their treatments in this division.
E cove que yeu digua en aquest tractat de apostema caut le qual ve en la mayre quan es dels apostemas que collegeysso sania, e si vols saber en qual manieyra se fa la opperacio de lu am ferr.	And you should know that I have described in this treatise how to apply a cautery to an abscess that occurs in the thigh among those abscesses that heal well, and if you want to know how the operation is performed.
Adonc cove que tu consideres si la dolor de la apostema en le sieu comensament es aguda am percussio e flecma e febre, e vezes aquel enrogezir e si catz sobre aquel le sentiment, lahoras no·t coytes am perforacio de lu, e cura aquel am aquo que ajuda sobre la maturacio entro que cesse la acuitat dels accidentz.	Then you should consider whether the pain of the abscess at its initial onset is acute with percussion and fever, and observe if it turns red and if touch on it gives a sensation. When there is no perforation of it, treat it according to what helps in promoting maturation until the acuity of the symptoms ceases.
E lahoras cove que tu fassas cezer la femna sobre una cezelha que aia doas cezelhas; e recline sobre le sieu dos e ajusta les sieus pes a la partida pus dejos del ventre, e las sieus coyssas sian expandudas, e pausa les sieus brasses dejos les sieus denols, e lia quascus am liament ad aquo convenient.	And when you must place the woman on a stretcher that has two divisions; recline her on one side and adjust her feet to the part behind the abdomen, and spread her thighs, and place her arms behind her back, and tie a quascum with linen as is appropriate.
E aprop la matrona segua del latz dreyt e aministre le instrument am le qual es ubert le orrifici de la mayre, la forma del qual vindra en aquelas causas que·s faran aprop.	And then the midwife follows straight to the side and administers the instrument through which the space of the vagina has been opened, the form of which will come in those cases that will be described later.
E cove quan vols ministrar aquest instrument que tu fiques am lo ray le preon de la mayre de la femna, e aquo que del instrument es intrat en la mayre no sia mays que·l preon de la mayre e leda le malaute.	And when you want to administer this instrument, place it along the side of the vagina opening, and what part of the instrument enters the vagina should not exceed the opening of the vagina and reach the patient.
Mays si l’estrument es major que·l preon de la mayre, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils sobre la textura del preon de la mayre per sso que sia prohibit l’intrament de tot instrument en le preon de la mayre.	And if the instrument is larger than the opening of the vagina, then you should sprinkle powder on the tissue of the vaginal opening to prevent the instrument from entering the vaginal opening.
E cove que tu pauses le vertitge que corr en le strument del latz pus desus e que le ministre tengua le strument e revolva le vertitge entro que sia ubert le orrifici de la mayre.	And you should sprinkle the powder that runs along and above the instrument of the vagina, ensuring that the instrument is held and the powder is rotated inside until it has opened the vaginal opening.
E cum appar la excitura, e es tocada am la ma e es leon e molh, lahoras cove que tu secces aquela deves le cap de lu am spatum lat.	And when the excitement appears, and it is touched with the hand and is hot and moist, then cover that which you have dried with the head of a sponge.
E cum la sania es evacuada, lahoras cove que tu pauses en la plagua una meca submersa en oli rozat o oli vert en le qual sia alcuna stiptisitat; e pausa la calca7 en la seccio en le preon de la mayre.	And when the flux is evacuated, then place a sponge soaked in olive oil or green olive oil with some astringency on the wound; and keep the wick in the dry section at the base of the thumb.
E pause deforo la mayre e sobre le pentenilh lana munda submersa en aygua en la qual sian bulidas malvas.	And place the thumb and over the patella a clean woolen cloth soaked in water in which vervain has been boiled.
E aprop sia curada aprop dos dias am enguent le qual conveneys ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And then it is properly cured over two days by applying ointment which you apply to that until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es lavada la mayre e la plagua enayssi que es cristerisat am aygua e mel, e aprop am aygua en la qual es bulhida razit de liri o de aristologia longua, e aprop retorna al enguent.	And sometimes wash the thumb and the wound with water and honey until it is cleansed, then with water in which rue or wormwood has been boiled, and then return to applying the ointment.
E si la plagua es dedintz en la mayre ameguada, lahoras cove que tu sias prohibit de la curacio de lu am ferr, habantz cura aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio.	And if the wound is deep in the thumb, then do not attempt to treat it with force, but attend to it as we have said in the division.
Capitol .lxxv.	Capitol seventy-five.
A ensenhar las matronas en qual manieyre les enbrios bius sian medicatz quan yeysso segon figura no-natural.	To instruct midwives how to properly treat cases when it occurs according to an unnatural figure.
Necessaria causa es que la matrona conogua en le comensament la figura del enfantament natural per senhals de lu, e es que quan tu vezas la femna expremar a las partidas dejos e desira odorar le ayre, e sobre aquo es enleujada per aquo que sobre ela es del part, e festina le eyssiment del enbrio, lahoras sapias que aquest part es segon figura natural, e es l’eyssiment de lu sobre le sieu cap, e la segondina am aquel o suspensa o pendent del ombelic.	Necessary cause is that the midwife know at the beginning the figure of a natural birth by signs thereof. And when you see the female bear down at the openings and desire to smell the air, and about this she is soiled by what comes from her, and hastens the delivery of the child, then you know that this part is according to the natural figure, and its delivery above its head, and the second one either at the side or suspended or pendant from the navel.
Donc cum tu vezes aquels senhals, lahoras cove que·l ventre de lu sia compremut per so que l’embrio deysenda leugerament quar quan deyssen sobre le sieu cap, deysen a lu la segondina, e es mondada de aquelas superfluitatz am bona mondificacio.	Then, when you see those signs, then know that the abdomen is compressed so that the fetus descends lightly; when it comes above its head, it brings forth the second one, and it is cleansed of those superfluities by good cleansing.
Mays aquel que es otra aquest part es no-natural e no-lausable, quar quan le enbrio es eyssit sobre sos pes e·l cos de lu es eyssit devant le cap de lu e·ls pes de lu, e la ma de lu una, o al pe de lu i, o es eyssit le cap de lu e la ma de lu, o al ventre de lu, e fort leu es convertit sobre le sieu col, e semblant de las figuras de lu no-lausablas.	But that which is another from this part is unnatural and unseemly, for when the fetus comes above its feet and the body of the mother is delivered in front of its head and its feet, and its hand on one side or at its belly, or the head of the fetus is delivered and its hand, or at its abdomen, and strongly it is turned over its neck, resembling unseemly figures.
Don necessaria causa es a la matrona que sia savia e subtil en totas aquelas causas, e que·s guarde de error e de decepcio.	It is necessary for the midwife to be wise and subtle in all those causes, and to guard against error and deception.
E yeu so mostrant tota figura de aquelas, e qual engen es en aquelas per so que sia significat per aquo e sia stat sobre aquo.	And she should show all the figures of those causes, and what engine is in those so that it is significant by that and be placed there.
Quan le feyt es eyssit sobre le sieu cap per egrecio natural, e aquel es vehement sobre la femna e es fayt a lu part dificil, e vezes la vertut de lu ja debelitada, lahoras fay aquela sezer , o que las femnas tenguan lu, e evapora le conh de lu am fenugrec coyt e am olis humitz.	When the pain is set over her head by natural accident, and it is vehement against the woman and is made at a difficult part, and sometimes the virtue of the womb is weakened, then make that sezer, or what women have for it, and evaporate the juice from fenugreek and olive oil.
E aprop entrometa la metrona entre les sieus ditz espatum petit e fenda am aquel la segondina, o secce aquela am la sua ungla entro que corro aquo que es en ela de humiditat.	And then introduce the midwife between her thighs slightly and place the second one, or dry it with her finger within which flows what is in it of humidity.
E preme le ventre de la femna entro que deyssenda le fet.	And press the woman's abdomen until the fetus descends.
Mays si no deyssen, lahoras cove que la femna sia cristirizada de mucellage de ptilli e mucellage de fenugrec am cizami.	But if it does not descend, then make the woman drink a mixture of plantain mucus and fenugreek mucus with water.
E aprop comanda a lu, aprop le cristeri, que sia compremuda e fay aquela stornudar am condisi; e te la boca de lu e·l nas de lu per huna hora, quar le fet sira foro-getat tantost.	And quickly command him, the patient, to breathe through his nose and mouth with difficulty; and close his mouth and nostrils for about an hour, so that he will soon faint.
E si las doas mas del fet so foro-getadas al comensament, lahoras cove que tu redusiscas aquelas am fecilitat petit a petit.	And if the patient's hands become too faint at the beginning, then you should reduce them gradually with ease.
Mays si no obezeys al intrament, lahoras pausa la femna sobre una cezelha e leva les pes de lu sus, e aprop concuceys la cezelha sobre la terra; e la femna sia tenguda que no caia deves la concussio.	But if the patient does not obey the instrument, then place the woman on a cushion and lift his feet up, and quickly pour the water over the ground; and the woman must hold her to prevent her from falling due to the shaking.
E si las mas no son dedintz tornadas e morr le fet, lahoras inscideys aquelas e extratz le romament del fet o lia le cors a la ma de lu am drap e extratz aquel am equalitat, quar aquel sira foro-getat.	And if the hands have not been turned inside and the patient has died, then incise those areas and extract the wound from the patient's body or hold the body with a cloth and extract it equally, so that he will soon faint.
De eyssiment del embrio sobre les sieus pes.	Of the embryo's displacement to its feet.
Quan le fet yeys sobre les sieus pes, lahoras cove que tu impelliscas aquels en sus, e aprop convertas le fet petit, e aprop que engualhes aquel, e aprop que prenguas un pe de lu e extendas aquels petit a petit.	When the patient's feet are affected, then you should push those areas back in, and quickly reduce the swelling, and gradually take hold of one foot and extend those areas little by little.
Mays cum son eyssit entro a las coyssas, lahoras tu comanda a lu que se exprema, e fay aquela extornudar am condizi, quar sira foro-getat si Deus lo vol.	When they are situated between the thighs, then you command them to express it, and do let that evacuate through the condition, for so it will be discharged if God wills.
E si no es foro-getat am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras tu retorna le fet petit a petit entro que pauses aquel segon figura natural, quar aquel sira lahoras foro-getat am leugier eyssiment.	And if it is not discharged as we have commanded, then you return the fetus little by little until you place it according to the natural figure, for it will be discharged thereafter with a slight effort.
E si es prohibit am tot aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras pren de musellage de altea e de goma dissolvuda, e percuteys tot en le mortier per bona percussio, e aprop linieys am aquo le conh de la femna, el pus bas del ventre de lu.	And if all that we have commanded is prohibited, then take of alum and dissolved gum, and pound them together in the mortar for good pounding, and then lay it over the woman's abdomen, just below the waist.
E aprop fay aquela cezer en aygua tebeza, entro que consegua les ypocondias.	And then make a decoction in clear water, until it reaches the hypochondria.
E cum vezes que las partidas dejos de lu so lenificadas, lahoras fay a lu subfumiguacio de mirta e sub-pausa aquela a lu.	And when you see that the parts of her have become relieved, then perform a fumigation on her with mint and place it over her.
E quan te la sub-fumiguacio per una hora, lahoras tu la fay sezer sobre una cezelha, e aprop fay aquela stornudar e extrenh la boca de lu, e levas de aquela, e prem la partida pus bassa del ventre de lu am leugiera compressio, quar le fet sira tantost foro-getat.	And when you have performed the fumigation for an hour, then set it aside on a cloth, and then make her sneeze by tickling her nose, and remove it, and apply a light compression to the lower part of her abdomen, for the fetus will be discharged soon.
Eyssiment del fet sobre les sieus denols e las suas mas.	Lift the foot above the patient's hips and hold their hands.
Quan le fet eyssira segon aquesta forma, lahoras tu engenies en entrometen las suas mas petit a petit; e aprop la femna stia evessada sobre le sieu col, e les pes de lu pengo en jos, e aquelas sia jasent sobre le lieyt, e complegua las suas mas.	When the foot is lifted in this manner, then you gently insert the patient's smaller hand; and the woman lies stretched over her back, her feet downward, with her hands resting on the surface, and hold their hands.
E aprop prem sobre le ventre de lu petit a petit, e aprop extratz aquo que es dejos les pes de lu de las aurelhas entro que sia preparada en la partida pus dejos.	And then gently press on the abdomen, and as soon as the feet are placed in the auricles, prepare for the next part.
E si le fet no es fora-getat, lahoras pren les pes de lu e mau aquels am movement vehement, e aprop prem aquo que es sobre les ypocondres petit a petit entro que le fet puege a las partidas desus.	And if the foot does not come out, then take the patient's feet and move them vigorously, and gently press what is above the hypochondria gradually as the foot passes to the upper parts.
E aprop entrometa las suas mas e engualhe le fet petit a petit, e comanda a la femna que se exprema entro que le fet sia foro-getat.	And then insert the patient's hands and gradually guide the foot out, and command the woman to apply pressure as the foot comes out.
Eyssiment del fet latutidinalment pendent una de las suas mas.	Lift the foot laterally with one of the patient's hands.
Sia engeniat en reduccio de la ma de lu, mays si no podes aquela reduzir, lahoras eleva la femna e fe aquela anar.	Gently reduce the hand, but if you cannot reduce it, then lift the woman and attempt to dislocate it.
E si anar no pot, lahoras fay la jazer sobre le lieyt, e concuteys las coyssas de lu am concussio vehement, e aprop aministra liamentz les quals yeu e recomtatz de mucillages.	And if the patient cannot lie down, then place the juice over the lying place, and shake the patient's thighs with a strong concussion, and nearby administer liaments which you have prepared from mucilages.
E si es vengut le enfantament, lahoras fay aquela sezer sobre cezelha, e aprop studia sobre la reduccio de la ma, e enguala le fet segon figura natural, e fay stornudar la femna e comanda a lu que comprema a si entro que sia foro-getat.	And if the childbirth has come, then place the sizer over cheesecloth, and nearby study on the reduction of the hand, and restore the fetus according to its natural figure, and make the woman sneeze and command her to contract herself within a short time.
Eyssiment del fet sobre·l col expandudas las suas mas e la fassia de lu es al dos de la sua mayre.	Place the fetus over the mother's abdomen with its back expanded and the mother's belly is at the front of her body.
Cove que la matrona tengua la ma del fet e aprop revolva aquel petit a petit, e eque aquel am facilitat.	Have the midwife hold the fetus and nearby rotate that small one slowly, so that it becomes more easily placed.
E cum es e quant so es engualhat, e lahoras pausa sobre le conh de lu aquo que havem recomtat de oli e de mucellages.	And when it is restored to its natural position, then place over the mother's loins what we have prepared from oil and mucilages.
E aprop comandas a lu que·s maugua petit a petit, e quan auras feyt aquo, lahoras fay aquela cezer sobre una cezelha e comanda li que sia inclinada sobre le latz dreyt, e aprop comanda a lu que sia compremuda; e fay aquela stornudar am condizi.	And nearby command her to urinate slowly, and when you have done this, then place the sizer over cheesecloth and command that it be inclined over the right flank, and nearby command that she contract herself; and make her sneeze with a gentle concussion.
Exitus foetus praeparati super latus.	The fetus's exit has been prepared on the side.
Quan deyssen a horrifici de la mayre segon aquesta manieyra, considera, e lahoras tu inscideys la segondina am la tua ungla entro que sia evacuada de la humiditat.	When you make the incisions for the major hemorrhage according to this method, consider, and then cut the second incision with your knife so that it is evacuated of moisture.
E si le fet es suspendut sobre la cara e·l col de lu, lahoras tu inscideys aquela del embelic, per so que no sia retengut e mora.	And if the fetus is suspended over the face and neck, then cut the incision for the amniotic fluid, so that it is not retained and death occurs.
E aprop empelleys le fet a las partidas dedintz entro que pauses aquel segon que cove, e manda a la femna que comprema a si alcunas veguadas, e el sira fora-getat am eyssiment leugier, si Dieus o vol.	Then push the fetus into the internal parts while pausing the second incision as it fits, and tell the woman to take some deep breaths, and let it be gently expelled by her own efforts, if God wills it.
Exitus geminorum aut foetuum multorum.	The exit of twins or multiple fetuses.
Sapias que gemels motas veguadas so natz, e alcunas vetz naysso tres o quatre , mays aquo es estranh e tart s’endeve; mays v so causas foro natura, e no vivo.	Know that twins or multiple fetuses are naturally born, and sometimes even three or four are born, but this is rare and strange and needs to be investigated; yet the causes are generally natural, not supernatural.
E conte aquelas, ja sia que sian montiplicatz, una segondina, e son seperatz per ciphac, distingen aquels enter le liguament en l’ombilic de cascun de aquels E alcunas veguadas so foro-getatz ayssi cum es un fet per eyssiment natural leugier, e so eysitz alcunas veguadas per eyssiment no-lausabla ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And concerning these, whether they are multiple, one additional incision, and they are separated by ligature, distinguish those in the umbilical cord of each. Sometimes a few breaths are gently expelled thus as if it were a fetus by natural expulsion, and some a few breaths by non-laborious expulsion as we have recounted.
E si son dificils alcus de lor deves le enfantament e perveno ad aquo que havem dit de las figuras no-naturals, lahoras tu cura aquels ayssi cum havem recontat.	And if some are difficult labors you should bring about the delivery and proceed to what we have said about unnatural figures, then you cure those thus as we have recounted.
E si’ la matrona subtil e fassa aquo que fa am facilitat e subtilitat, e am tarditat, e sia ingeniat segon tota figura segon que es a lu preparat de l’engen amenant a salut.	And if the midwife is skillful and does what she does with subtlety, and with delay, and be ingenious according to all figure as is prepared in her mind leading to health.
Rememoratio eius quod formatur in matrice ex embrionibus et Abortiuntur.	Remembrance of that which is formed in the matrix from embryos and are aborted.
Alcunas veguadas son formatz en la mayre un, e dos, e tres, e quatre, e v, e vi, e vii, e mays x, e ja es deves mi verificat que una femna abortem ne getet vi, e una autra x totz formatz, la qual causa fo fayta per mensuracio dels glorios savis.	Sometimes one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, and more up to ten are formed in the matrix, and you must verify that a female aborts with six, and another with all ten formed, the cause of which is made by the measurement of the glorious sages.
E tot aysso cove que sia en la sciencia de la matrona quar fort leu ad aquela parve semblant de aquo, e donc opause se ad aquo am so que cove.	And all this covers what is in the science of the midwife who must attend to that which seems to her like this, and then act according to what is appropriate.
Capitol .lxxvi.	Chapter LXXVI.
De extraccio del fet quan es mort.	Of the extraction of the fetus when it is dead.
Quan tu curas le fet mort am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la medicacio e no es defora eyssit, e tu yest forsat usar de opperacio am ma, lahoras cove que consideras si la femna es de sana vertut e no es am alcu dels accidentz per les quals sobre ela es temuda perdicio.	When you treat a dead fetus, as we have said in the division of medicine and it is not far from birth, you may be forced to use surgery more. Then consider whether the woman has good health and is not among those accidents for which her safety is feared.
Lahoras cove que la femna sia envessada sobre le lieyt sobre le sieu dos, e sia le cap de lu enclinat enjos e las coyssas de lu sian elevadas.	Then place the woman lying on her back, and let her head be bent forward and her thighs elevated.
E·l ministre tengua aquela de doas partz o sia liada en le lieyt per so que·l cos de lu no se extenda deves la extraccio del fet.	And the minister hold that one in two parts or tie it to the bed so that the body does not extend during the extraction of the fetus.
E aprop tu humecta la boca de la mayre de lu am olis humitz e am mucellage de altea e de fenugrec e de semensa de li.	And then moisten the mouth of the mother with sweet-smelling oils and almond milk, fenugreek seed, and linseed.
E aprop unte la matrona la sua ma am aquels olis e mucellages, e aprop entrometa la sua ma am fecilitat en la mayre, e aprop cerque am la ma loc en le qual fique les uncis en le fet.	And then the midwife places her hand on those oils and milk mixtures, and further insert her hand with facilitation into the mother, and then seek with her hand where the fingers should be placed in the fetus.
E locs convenient en aquo: adonc tu considera si le fet es preparat que deysenda sobre le sieu cap, e lahoras tu fique les uncis en les huels de lu, o en le col, o en la boca, o en le palat, o dejos la barba, o en la furcula de lu, o en les locs propdas de las costas, o dejos les ypocondres.	And in this place: then you consider if the wound is prepared to be placed on its head, and there you keep the fingers in the palms of him, or in the neck, or in the mouth, or in the palate, or let the beard, or in the clavicle of him, or in the nearby places of the ribs, or let the hypochondria.
Mays si le deysendiment es sobre les pes de lu, lahoras en le pentenilh, o en le mieg de las costas.	But if the descent is on his feet, then in the instep, or in the middle of the ribs.
E cove que tengua le unci am la ma dreyta, e pausa la curvitat de lu en aquel loc le qual es entre les ditz de la ma senestra, e entrometa la ma am facilitat e fique le unci en alcu de aquels locs les quals havem ditz, entro que pervengua a la causa boyda.	And make sure the finger is on your right hand, and curve it at that location which is between the fingers of your left hand, and insert your hand easily and place the finger in one of those locations which we have mentioned, until you reach the underlying cause.
E aprop pause e fique en la apposicio de lu un autre unci, o le tertz si es necessitat, per so que sia atraccio engual, e no sia extencio segon la sua rectetut tant solament.	And then place and keep another finger, or the third if necessary, so that it is an equal pressure, and not extension according to its straightness solely.
Ans sia maugut a tota partida, per so que l’eyssiment de lu sia alleujat ayssi cum es fayt en dent deves la eradicacio de lu.	And let it be held at all times, so that the tension of the thread be alleviated as is done in拔出牙齿的拔除。
E cove en lu aquo que es entre lor que la extencio sia mollificada; e si alcuna partida de lu es retenguda, lahoras cove que la matrona unte alcus sieus ditz am oli e entrometa aquels espertament e revolva am aquels aquo que es retengut.	And explore there where the extension should be softened; and if any part of it is retained, then the midwife should apply some of her known ointment and skillfully insert and rotate those things that are retained.
Donc si la partida del fet es fora-getada, lahoras les uncis sian permudatz entra loc le qual sia pus aut; e fay aysso entro que tot le fet sia fora-getat.	And if the part of the fetus is forgotten, then the fingers should be inserted where it may be; and do so while all of the fetus is not yet forgotten.
Mays si la ma es eyssida denant l’autra, e no es possible reduzir aquela per la coartacio de lu, lahoras cove que drap sia envolopat sobre aquela; e aprop extratz aquela entro que tota sia fora-getada, e inscideys aquela o en la junctura de la ma o en le coyde.	And if the hand is placed in front of the other, and it is not possible to reduce it due to the constriction, then cover that part with a cloth; and extract it while all of it is forgotten, and incise it at the wrist or at the elbow.
E ayssi cove que fassas en l’autra ma e en les dos pes.	And do so with the other hand and with both feet.
Mays si le cap del fet es gran, o accideys a lu coartacio en le eyssiment, o es en le cap de lu aygua ajustada, lahoras cove que entrometa entre les ditz espatum spinos e fenda le cap e extragua la aygua, o que discroba aquel am un instrument le qual es nompnat “alundat”, la forma del qual vindra am las formas dels autres instruments en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	And if the head of the fetus is large, or it experiences constriction during extraction, or water is pressed in its head, then insert sponge-tipped forceps between the fingers and open the head to drain the water, or use an instrument called "alundat" to evacuate it, the shape of which will be described in the chapter on other instruments, which follows this.
E semblantment fassa si·l fet es de gran cap per natura: e lahoras cove que inscida aquel am algematu, o que prengua aquel am alunda ayssi cum havem dit; e aprop extra les osses am les forceps.	And the operation seems so great by nature: and then cut that part open, or draw that part out as we have said; then extract the bones with forceps.
E si le cap es eyssit e es coartat deves la furcula, lahoras sia fendut entro que la humiditat la qual es en le pietz sia efunduda.	And if the head is swollen and constricted, you should incise the furcula, then cut into where the moisture which is in the foot has infiltrated.
Mays si no es complicat, ni obezeys a eyssiment, lahoras tu inscideys le cap tantost segon que a tu sira possible.	But if it is not complicated, and does not respond to incision, then you should incise the head as soon as possible according to what is convenient for you.
E si le dejos del ventre es apostemat o es en lu ydropici, lahoras cove que tu perfores aquel entro que corro la humiditat que es en lu.	And if the swelling in the abdomen is suppurated or is in hydrops, then you should perforate it where the moisture is located.
Mays si le fet es sobre les sieus pes, lahoras la atraccio de lu es leugiera e la direccio de lu a la boca de la mayre es leugiera.	But if the wound is on his feet, then the direction of it towards the mouth of the vein is light.
Mays si es coartat deves le ventre e·l pietz, lahoras cove que tu extraguas aquel am drap le qual auras envolopat sobre la tua ma, e que fendes le ventre e·l pietz entro que corra aquo que es en aquels.	But if it is constricted, you should incise the abdomen and foot, then you should extract that which you have wrapped around your hand, and cut into the abdomen and foot where what is within flows out.
Mays si les autres membres so ostatz e torna le cap, lahoras la metrona entrometa la ma senestra; mays si la boca de la mayre es huberta, lahoras intrometa la ma en le preon de layre, e cerque am aquela le cap, e atira aquel am les ditz entro a la boca de la mayre, e aprop entrometa en lu un unci, o dos uncis, e atire lu am aquels.	But if the other limbs are cold and return the head, then the midwife intervenes with her left hand; but if the mouth of the mother is opened, then insert your hand into the space under the chin, seek out the head, and pull it in between the fingers towards the mouth of the mother, and then insert one or two fingers into her and pull them out.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada per apostema caut le qual accideys a l’u, lahoras cove que no sia trebelhat sobre lu; abantz cove lahoras aministrar efusio de causas humidas grassas.	And if the mother's mouth is narrowed by an abscess, and such an abscess occurs in him, then ensure that it is not squeezed; first, ensure that you administer effusion of wet, fatty causes.
E aministre emplastres; e segua le pacient en ayguas que mollifican e humectan.	And administer plasters; and follow the patient with waters that soften and moisten.
E si le fet es sobre le sieu costat, lahoras si possible es, sia agulat: e sia aministrat aquo que havem dit en le fet viu.	And if the pain is on the patient's side, then if possible, lance it: and administer what we have said about the live abscess.
E si aquo no es possible, lahoras sia inscidit en pessas, e sia extrayt.	And if that is not possible, then incise it into pieces, and extract it.
E cove que non layssas alcuna causa dedintz de la segondina.	And ensure that you do not leave any cause inside the patient.
E cum tu auras complida tota la tua opperacio, lahoras aministra aquo que havem dit de la curacio en les apostemas cautz les quals accideysso de la mayre.	And when you have completed your operation, then administer what we have said about the cure for abscesses by cauterizing those that occur from the mother.
E si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras deyssendas en ayguas stipticas e aministra l’autra curacio.	And if there is a flux of blood, then apply cold waters and administer the other cure.
E yeu ja e vist una femna en le ventre de la qual era fet mort, e aprop sobre aquel foc autra veguada emprenhada, e aprop foc mort es le fet autre.	And I have already seen a woman whose belly contained a dead fetus, and nearby another pregnancy began, so the dead fetus remained.
Accidit al u aprop lonc temps apostema en le sieu embelic; e inflat es entro que foc ubert, e comensec a getar brac.	It happens that after a long time an abscess forms in the breast; and when the wound is open, it begins to drain.
E yeu fu appelhat a la cura de lu, e medicat a lu per lonc temps, e la plagua no es consolidada.	And I was called to cure it, and treated it for a long time, but the wound did not heal properly.
Adonc yeu pausegui sobre lu de alscunas causas emplastra de forta atraccio, e eyssic de lu un os, e aprop passero alcus jorns, e eyssic un autre os; e yeu fu trop meravilhat, cum en le ventre no sia os.	Then I applied some strong attracting plasters to it, and extracted one bone, and after several days, extracted another bone; and I was too amazed, for in the breast there is no bone.
E adonc yeu cogitegui que eran dels osses del fet mort.	And then you will find that they are of the bones of the dead foot.
Donc yeu enguisigui la plagua, e extrayssi de lu motz osses , la femna existent en las sieuas milhos disposicios, e ja visquec en tal manieyra per lonc temps, correc de lu un petit de brac.	Then you will ignite the wound, and extract from it dead bones, the matter existing in the socket's dispositions, and having visibly done so in such a manner for long times, correct of it a little with the arm.
E yeu no afermegui asso esser stranh, sino quar en aquo es sciensa e ajutori ad aquo que le metge artifec am la ma per curacio aministra.	And you should not consider this strange, but rather that in this is science and aid to what the physician artfully administers for cure.
De las formas dels instrumentz que so necessaris a extrayre le fet.	Of the forms of the instruments that are necessary to extract the foot.
Forma de vertitge am la qual es uberta la mayre:	Form of the vertigo from which the thigh is opened:
Aquesta es la forma de strenhedor en le qual so engualhatz les libres, al qual engualhament sian dos virtitges en doas extremitatz de dos futz.	This is the form of the stretcher on which you place the thighs, to which position two vertigos are at the ends of two rods.
May empero aquesta virtitge cove que sia pus subtil de strictori, e sia fayt o de eba o de fust de boys.	But let this vertigo be hollow, more slender in construction, and made of elm or wood of young shoots.
E sia la latitut de quascun fust quays dos ditz e le marge de quascu amdos quays un dit, e la longitut de quascu es un palm e mig; e en le mieg loc de dos fustz so dos ajustaments de aquel meteys fustz les quals ja son fermatz, dels quals la longitut es la maytat de un palm e un pauc mes, e la latitut de quascu es quay dos ditz, o un pauc mes.	And the width of each wound should be two fingers' breadth and the margin on both sides one finger's breadth, and the length of each is a palm and a half; and in the middle location of two wounds are two stitches of that manner, the ones already tightened, whose length is the span of a palm and a little more, and the width of each is two fingers, or a little more.
E aquestz dos additamentz sian entromeses en la boca de la mayre per que sia uberta am aquels quan tu revolves las doas prescriptas virtigges.	And these two additional stitches should be inserted in the mouth of the wound to keep it open when you revolve the two prescribed vertigges.
Forma autra semblant de aquela pus subtil e pus leugiera:	Form another similar to that one, subtle and light:
Sia fayta de fustz de eba o de boys segon la semblansa de forceps.	Let it be made of threads of flax or hemp according to the likeness of forceps.
Mays empero en la extremitat de lu so dos additament ayssi cum vezes, e la longitut de aquels additament es quays un palm, e la latitut de quascu es dos ditz.	However, at the extremity of it, there are two additional stitches as you can see, and the length of those stitches is about a palm, and the width of each is two fingers.
E cum tu vols am aquels ubrir la mayre, lahoras tu fay cezer la femna sobre le lieyt les pes pendentz, ubert aquo que es entre las coyssas de lu.	And when you want to open the wound, then place the woman on her side with her feet hanging down, opening what is between her thighs.
E aprop obre la tua ma am le instrument ayssi cum fas am forfexs engualment segon la quantitat que vols de la aprecio de la boca de la mayre entro que la metrona fassa so que vols.	And then open your hand with the instrument as you would with scissors equally according to the quantity you want from the depth of the mother's mouth until the metrona does what you want.
La forma de vertitge la qual diysero les antics:	The form of vertigo which the ancients would say:
Forma de impellent am le qual es empellit le fet:	Forma de impellent am le qual es empellit le fet:
Forma de amisidat2 am le qual es conterit le cap gran	Forma de amisidat am le qual es conterit le cap gran
E es asemblat a forceps al qual so dentz en la extremitat, ayssi cum vezes, e alcunas veguadas es fayt lonc ayssi cum forceps segon aquesta forma, ayssi cum vezes, al qual so dentz ayssi cum dentz de ressegua am le qual es inscidit e conterit.	And it is similar to forceps with teeth at the extremity, as you see, and sometimes it is made long like forceps according to this form, as you see, with teeth similar to sheep's teeth, upon which it is inserted and held.
Forma de amesidat pauc:	Forma de amisidat pauc:
Forma de unci havent una spina:	Forma de uncus having one spine:
Forma de unci havent doas spinas:	Forma de uncus havent duas spinas:
Forma de forceps a la qual so dentz de cerra am le qual le cap del fet sia conterit:	Shape of forceps in which the head of the fetus will be contained:
Forma de spatum havent dos extremitatz am le qual le cap es abscindit:	Shape of a spatula having two ends in which the head is to be incised:
Forma de dos espatums latz:	Shape of two lateral spatulas:
Totz aquels instrumentz so excersitatz, e quan mes so multiplicadas las specias de aquel e so preparadas deves le artifexs, quant es pus leugier a la sua opperacio e pus aut deves les homes per la sua quantitat.	All these instruments are exercised, and when more species of those are multiplied, the artisan should prepare them, making their operation lighter and more convenient.
E no obres de aquels instrumentz ja sia qua sia deves tu aparalhat, quar la necessitat de aquels no es excusabla.	And even if the work of these instruments is already prepared by you, you should still prepare them, for the necessity of those is not excusable.
De extraccio de la segondina.	Extraction of the second child.
Quan la segondina es retenguda deves le enfantament, lahoras cove que tu comandes a la malautae que retengua le sieu ale, e aprop fay aquela stornudar am condizi, e strenh la tua ma sobre la boca de lu e sobre las nars de lu, e si per aysso es defora eyssit, bo es.	When the second child is retained, you should induce labor, when you command the patient to hold her breath, and then apply a stimulating fomentation, and firmly place your hand over the mouth and nose of the patient. If this succeeds in expelling the fetus, it is good.
E sino, lahoras tu pren una ola e perfora en la cuberta un trauc e pausa en aquela erbas ubrent la boca de la mayre, ayssi cum calament e ruda e anet e camamilla e scicados arabic e cassia lignea e santaurea.	And otherwise, when you take a needle and perforate in the covering a tract and pause at those herbs burning the mouth of the main one, as with calamus, rue, nettle, chamomile, scikado Arabic, cinnamon wood, and santoor.
Totas aquestas erbas o alcunas de lor sian submersas en aygua en la ola, e pausa aquela sobre le foc.	All these herbs or some of them may be submerged in water in the needle, and pause that over the fire.
E aprop pausa una canula de canaviera en la boca de la mayre, e tengua aquela entro que la evapor vengua a la concavitat de la mayre.	And then place a cane tube in the mouth of the main herb, and hold that so that the vapor comes to the cavity of the main herb.
E aprop fay aquela stornudar ayssi cum havem dit, e la segondina sira fora-getada am velocitat.	And then make that sneeze as we have said, and the second one shall be performed quickly.
Mays si roman aprop aquesta curacio e no es eyssida, lahoras tu comanda a la matrona que submerge la sua ma sinistra en oli sizami o en micellage de altea, e aprop entrometa aquela en le conh e queresca am aquela la segondina, e cum aquela auras trobada, lahoras pren la e exten aquela pauc a pauc Mays si es annexsa en le preon de la mayre, lahoras entrometa la sua ma segon que havem recomtat, e quan aura trobat la segondina, extragua aquela petit a petit segon rectetut per so que la mayre no caja deves la atraccio vehement.	If this cure does not succeed further, then command the midwife to submerge her left hand in sesame oil or in the powder of aleertia, and then insert that into the nose and search for the second one with that, as you have found. If it is attached in the root of the main herb, then insert your hand according to what we have recommended, and when you have found the second one, extract it little by little so that the main herb does not fall due to the strong attraction.
Abantz cove que sia permudada als costatz dreyt e sinestre am facilitat.	Before you turn the patient's back to the right and left with ease.
E aprop sia ajustat en la quantitat de atraccio, quar ela obedira e evasira de adhirencia.	And properly adjust the amount of suction, so that it obeys and avoids adhesion.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada, nos ja havem recomtat la curacio am sturnutacio e am medicacio de la ola am erbas.	And if the mouth of the vein is constricted, we have already recommended the cure by cauterization and treatment of the wound with herbs.
Mays si no es fora-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recomtadas, lahoras guarda te que no fetigues sobre aquela en iteracio de abstracio, mays empero cove que aquo que es eyssit de lu a la boca de la mayre lies a la coyssa de la femna, e aprop cristeriza aquela am enguent e tetrafarmacon; quar aquel fara poyrir aquela aprop alcus dias e sira dissolvuda e sira fora-getada.	But if it is not fully resolved by all the causes we have recommended, then guard that you do not fatigue it in iterations of abstraction, but rather lead what has succeeded to the mouth of the vein to the woman's thigh, and properly anoint and apply tetra-pharmaceuticals; for that will cause it to dissolve and resolve over several days.
Mays quan se poyreys, es de lu elevada mala audor al cap, e al estomac, e aquo ledeys la malauta; e adonc cove que sian aministradas sub-fumiguacios e convenientz ad aquo.	But when it should be removed, raise the bad humor to the head and to the stomach, and this will bring the illness; then you must administer fumigations and what is suitable for this.
Mays alcus dels Antics ja so esproatz sub-fumigacio de nazitort e de figuas seccas.	But some of the Ancients already recommended fumigations with nard and dry figs.
Forma de instrument am le qual la femna es sub-fumiguada deves la retentio de mestruas e de la segondina:	Form of an instrument with which a woman is fumigated below to retain menstruation and the second period:
Sia fayta de veyre o de eram.	It should be made of wool or of hair.
E sia pausada la extremitat subtil en le conh e la extremitat ampla sobre le foc, e la sub-fumiguacio sia pausada sobre las brazas del foc.	And place the fine end in the coign and the broad end over the fire, and the fumigation be placed on the brasiers of the fire.
E tengua aquela entro que sia consumida aquela sub-fumiguacio e itera·n autra.	And hold that there until the fumigation is consumed and then repeat another.
De curacio del cul del enfant no-perforat.	For the cure of the anus of an unperforated child.
Motz enfantz naysso e les culs de lu no so perforatz, les quals ya ciphac subtil e opilat.	The child cries and its anus is not perforated, which have been closed with a fine ligature.
Adonc cove a la matrona que perfore am le sieu dit aquel ciphac; e sino, perfora aquel am spatum agut, e guarda se que no toque le lacert.	Then the midwife should perforate with her said ligature; otherwise, perforate it with a sharp spatula, and take care that it does not touch the membrane.
E aprop pause sobre aquel lana enfusa en vi e oli; e aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia senat.	And place it over that wound infused in wine and oil; and cure that with ointment until it heals.
Mays si temes que sia opilat, lahoras pausa en le trauc una canula per motz dias, e osta la quan le enfant voldra degerir.	But if you fear it is obstructed, then place a cannula through the traunch for several days, and block it when the child wants to defecate.
E ja accideys oppilacio del cul per consolidacio de plagua o de apostema; adonc cove que aquela consolidacio sia inscidida, e aprop sia curada am aquo que avem dit de la curacio e del plom.	And when there is an obstruction of the anus due to the consolidation of a boil or abscess; then cut into that consolidation, and proceed to treat it as we have said for the cure and the lead.
De curacio de las fistulas que endeveno dejos.	For the treatment of fistulas that discharge.
Las fistulas que endeveno en la partida dejos pus bassa so nodacio e grossetut las quals endeveno prop del cul defora o en l’espazi de la una partida.	The fistulas that discharge at the side, with pus below, and which are located near the anus outside or in the space of one side.
E es una fistula o motas.	And it is a fistula or abscess.
E cum aquela nodacio es antiquada e corr de la humiditat aygosa blanca o poyridura subtil, e alcunas veguadas so de aquestas fistulas alcunas penetrantz.	And when that abscess is old and comes from watery white moisture or subtle corrosion, sometimes some of these fistulas penetrate.
E aquelas penetrantz so conogudas per aquo que es eyssit de aquelas per la egressio e per ventosetat; e alcunas vetz use le malaute de egressio, e fort leu es eyssit de aquelas verm.	And those that penetrate are known by the symptoms of those due to discharge and windiness; sometimes the patient complains of discharge, and strongly the worms are present.
E so de aquelas fistulas alcunas veguadas en l’espazi penetrantz entro a la vesica, e entro al meat de la vergua; e so de aquelas penetrantz entro la junctura de la coyssa e entro al notz de la coeta.	And some of those fistulas penetrate into the space between the bladder and the flesh of the groin; and some penetrate between the hip joints and the notch of the pubis.
E aquo en que es conoguda fistula penetrant entro al cul e no-penetrant, es que tu metas le tieu dit endic en le cul, e entrometas tenta subtil de eram o de ferr en la fistula quan no y es turtuositat.	And in distinguishing between a fistula that penetrates into the anus and one that does not, you should insert your digit into the anus, and introduce a thin probe of reed or iron into the fistula when there is no pus.
Mays si en aquela es turtuositat, lahoras entromet en aquela tenta subtil de plom o de pels de caval entro que tu sentas la tenta o le pel en le tieu dit.	But if there is pus in that, then introduce a thin probe of lead or horsehair into it, and feel the probe or hair with your digit.
E si no sentas aquela de tot ni no procezeys del trauc alcuna causa de egestio ni verm ni ventositat, ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras sapias que es no-penetrant, e lahoras coyta te a la curacio.	And if you do not feel it at all, nor observe any cause of evacuation, worm, or obstruction, as we have said, then know that it does not penetrate, and proceed with the treatment.
E quan la fistula es penetrant entro a la vesica o entro al meat de la vergua, lahoras la significacio de lu es eyssiment de urina de aquela e prohibicio de lu ad aysso que·l loc am medicina sia consolidat.	And when the fistula penetrates into the bladder or the flesh of the groin, its significance is an increase in urine flow from that and a prohibition to it until the area is medically consolidated.
Mays si es penetrant entro la junctura de la coyssa o entro al os e envencio de dolor en le circuit, lahoras senhal de lu es que la tenta perve entro aqui si en lu no es turtuositat entro al os, e envencio de dolor en le circuit de la partida; e que de lu yeys poyredura tostemps; e que no val en aquela medicacio, ni es consolidada am enguent.	But if it penetrates into the joint of the groin or into the bone and causes pain in the circuit, then a sign of it is that the tenta permeates here if there is not tortuosity in the bone, and pain in the circuit of the part; and that from it there is always gout; and it does not avail in that medicacio, nor is consolidated by ointment.
E en totas aquelas fistulas penetrant no es curacio de tot, e la curacio de aquelas es trebalh e vanetat dels folyls metges sobre·l qual so fermatz.	And in all those fistulas that penetrate, there is not complete cure, and the cure of them is labor and vainness of the leaves of doctors over which they firm.
Mays en aquela que no es penetrant e no antiqua, sanacio am ferr es sperada segon que yeu a tu recomtare, e aquo que ja yeu e proat.	But in that which does not penetrate and is not old, cure by iron is hoped for according to what I will recount to you, and that which we already have and prepare.
E es que le malaute jagua entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos e eleva las cambas de lu entro sus, las coyssas sian enclinadas al ventre de lu, e aprop entromet tenta de plom, o de eram si es en la fistula turtuositat, entro que sapias le loc on perve la tenta.	And that gout affects your feet in the second toe and elevates the legs within them, the thighs incline toward the abdomen, and then insert a lead or iron probe into the fistula if there is tortuosity, so you can feel where the probe permeates.
E si aquela sent le malaute entorn le cuol, lahora cove que tu entrometas le tieu dit endic en le cuol.	And if that area around the neck seems ill, then carefully insert your thumb in the neck.
E si sentas en le tieu dit la tenta ja per si meteyssa descuberta penetrar, otra aquo que sentas entre le tieu dit e aquela siphac o carn, lahoras sapias certanament que aquela es penetrant; e adonc no trebalhes en aquela, quar no es en aquela sanacio, ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you feel in your thumb that the tumor is already partially revealed and can be easily penetrated, or something between your thumb and the tumor or flesh, then you can certainly determine that it is penetrable; and then do not operate on that, for it is not where the cure lies, as we have said.
Mays empero diyssero alcus que es sana en alcus homes tart.	But some may say that it is sound in some men and not in others.
E de la medicacio per la qual es sperat juvament en lu es que tu ignes cauteri subtil segon le ample de la fistula, ayssi cum es precedit, e intrometas aquel ignit en la fistula entro que pervengua entorn le cuol; e aprop itera aquel doas o tres vetz entro que sapias que ja son adhustas totas aquelas carns ajustadas fistuladas que so semblantz a cana de pluma de ausel.	And concerning the treatment in which hope of healing is placed, you should heat a fine cautery according to the size of the fistula, as previously described, and insert that heated cautery into the fistula until it reaches around the neck; then repeatedly insert it two or three times within which you determine that all those tissues adjacent to the fistula are properly adhered, resembling feather quills.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder entro que en yescan totas aquelas carns que so adhustas, e aprop cura aquela am medicinas la carn engendrantz e consolidantz, e si es sanada, bo es; e sino, lahoras no es sana en degun temps per autra curacio.	And then cure the area with cloths wrapped in bandages until all those tissues that are adhered are thoroughly treated, and subsequently cure it with medicines generating and consolidating flesh. If it is healed, well and good; but if not, then it will not be cured in any time by another treatment.
E si la tenta intra, e no penetra entro·l tieu dit le qual es en le cul, e entre aquel e la tenta que es velament spes de carn o de ciphac, e vezes la fistula en aquo que siec la superficia de la codena, lahoras secca la codena del comensament de la fistula, e tu ve seccan am la tenta, e sia en la fistula entro que la seccio pervengua al loc en le qual perve la extremitat de la tenta, e per la tenta es liberat e catz.	And if the probe enters but does not penetrate into the rectum, you say which one is in the anus, and between that and the probe that is a veil of flesh or skin, and wash the fistula in what seeps from the surface of the leg, then dry the leg from the beginning of the fistula, and you dry the probe itself, and in the fistula where the drying reaches the place where the extremity of the probe passes, through the probe it is cleansed and healed.
E aprop mundifiqua aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so asembladas a canula de pena de ausel e no romangua de aquelas alcuna causa.	And then cleanse those fistulous tissues which are assembled around the anal canal and do not drain from any other cause.
Mays si flux de sanc vezes que vengua entre tu e la tua opperacio quan ensideysses aquelas carns, lahoras le milh que sia e del pus leugier instrument es cauterizar am foc o am medicina acuta, quar cauteri am foc ajusta bonas doas habitutz: so es adhustio de aquelas carns ajustadas, e abscizio del sanc exseccacio de las humiditatz.	But if a flow of blood comes between you and your operation when you have exposed those tissues, then let the greater part of it be removed, and for the light pus use a cauterizing instrument either with fire or with acute medicine. For the cautery with fire, adjust it to give two good doses: one adjustment of those tissues tightened, and one excision of the blood by the elimination of moisture.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder o en caus trissat entro que·l loc geta brac, e aprop lahoras cura la plagua am enguentz carn dura engendran e consolidan.	And then cure that which is caused by water or by third-degree burns before the area swells, and then cure the wound with a thick ointment that generates and consolidates flesh.
E so medicinas en las quals so stipticitat e exseccio; quan lahoras es restaurada ja es sanada e no temes iteracio.	And in medicines where there is stiffness and excitation; when once restored it is cured and you fear no recurrence.
Mays si la fistula ja perve entro al preon del cul e es elonguada de lu superficia del cos, lahoras entromet le tieu dit en le cul e inquireys am aquel.	And if the fistula has penetrated into the pelvis and is long from the surface of the body, then insert your finger into the anus and inquire about it.
E donc si centes la tenta e entre tu e ela es velament de ciphac o de carn, e es propda a la penetracio, lahora no es operacio en lu sino segon via di fiducia e de speransa.	And if there is a tendon and between you and her it is covered with cicatrix or flesh, and is close to the penetration, then it is not an operation in it but rather according to the way of faith and hope.
La qual causa es aministrar en lu una de tres manieyras: o que cauterize aquela ayssi cum havem dit; o que secces aquela entro que consieguas la conquavitat de lu per que sia a tu possible entrometre las qualcas e la curacio propdana; e no procesiscas mot am seccio per so que no inscidas le lacert contenent le cuol, e que accidisque sobre le malaute eyssiment de la egistio ses voluntat; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit quar fort leu sira sanat; o que elongues aquel velament e mondes aquel pus que seccas aquel entro prop le cul, ayssi cum havem dit, o am tenta o am autre instrument de aguda extremitat, e aprop mondifique aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so en la seccio entro la on podes am percrustacio; e aprop esforsa te a far la restauracio de tota la plagua am seccio, e si le orrifici pus desus no es consolidat, e romangua la fistula uberta en la partida del cul, e sira pus leugier per le malaute.	That cause is to administer in it one of three ways: either cauterize that as we have said; or excise it until you achieve the cavity of it so that it is possible for you to insert and cure it properly; and do not proceed with cutting for fear of injuring the muscle containing the cord, and doing harm over the malady by excessive intervention; and then cure that as we have said which will be greatly healed; or elongate that cicatrix and cleanse that part which excise that close to the anus, as we have said, either with a tendon or another sharp instrument, and then modify those fistulated tissues which are in the cavity between where you can reach pericrustation; and then strive to perform the restoration of the entire wound by cutting, and if the opening above is not consolidated, and rupture the open fistula at the part of the anus, it will be easier for the malady.
E alscunas veguadas la fistula es finida segon aquesta manieyra: es quan tu entrometas la tenta en la fistula, e es en le latz del cul entorn la superficia del cos am la codena e en le marge del cul, lahoras pren tenta de perforada extremitat, que es ayssi cum agulha de preparantz les coers segon aquesta forma:	And sometimes the fistula is closed this way: when you insert the probe into the fistula, and place it in the cavity of the buttock near the surface of the body and around the margin of the anus, then take a punctured extremity of it as if it were an awl prepared according to this form:
e entromet en aquela fiel envolopat de v fiels o entorn aquels; e aprop entromet tenta am fiel en la fistula entro que consiegua la conquavitat de lu.	And insert it there wrapped in several threads or around them; then insert a probe with thread into the fistula until you reach its cavity.
Mays si es penetrant en le marge del cul prop dedintz, lahoras tu extratz le fiel de aquel trauc ayssi que tu intrometas le tieu dit en le cul; e extraguas la extremitat del fiel e ajustes las duas extremitatz essemps, e estrenh cascuna, e leyssa aquo per un dia o per dos, e quan mays inscideys le fiel en la carn, estrenh be aquel entro que aquelas carns sian inscididas las quals so entre doas extremitatz del fiel e que cajan.	But if it penetrates into the margin of the anus more deeply, then you extract the thread from that by doing as I have said to insert your hand into the anus; then extract the end of the thread and adjust both ends equally, strengthen each one, and leave it for a day or two. When more of the thread has been incised into the flesh, strengthen well that part where those muscles are incised between the two ends of the thread.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia consolidada e sanada.	And then cure the wound as it is consolidated and healed.
Mays si le orrifici de la fistula no es penetrant, lahoras fay aquel penetrar, en qualque manieyre sia a tu preparat, sino que sia mot en le preon, quar no es a tu que fassas aquo per que no inscidas le lacert; e aprop fay am aquela entro que sia sanada.	If the openings of the fistula are not penetrable, then make them penetrable in any manner you prepare, but do it gently so as not to tear the skin. Then place something inside that will heal.
La forma de spatum spinos am lo qual es fenduda la fistula: la curvitat del qual es mot aguda e l’autra partida es no-aguda, per so que no inscidas aquo que no es necessari, ayssi cum vezes.	The shape of the spinal spike for which the fistula is cut: the curvature of which is acute and the other part is not acute, so as not to tear what is unnecessary, thus you see.
De sutura de emorroydas en las quals corra sanc en la inscizio de aquelas.	For the suturing of hemorrhoids where there is infection at the site of those.
Emorroydas so segon dos manieyras, quar o so entre le cul semblantz aysi que es de carbos, o quays aquelas sian cum a gras de rasim.	Hemorrhoids can be of two kinds, for some appear as if they are made of charcoal, or others resemble grape seeds.
E de aquelas so petitas e grans, e que le sanc corr de aquelas tostemps e es una, e so motas, e so fora·l cul, e en las extremitatz de lu.	And some hemorrhoids are small and large, and the infection flows from them constantly and is one, as well as the spots, and the external part of the anus, at its extremities.
Mays empero aquelas que so foro le cul so segon las mes de pauca humiditat, de las quals corr aygua citrina o un petit de sanc am cos continuabla, e so segon la color del cos.	But the external hemorrhoids are according to those with less humidity, from which yellowish water or a little of bloody discharge continues, and are according to the color of the body.
E la curacio de aquela que es dedintz le cuol es que comandes al malaute que se assela e que se exprema entro que le cuol yesca e las emoroydas apparescan a tu.	And the treatment for that which is inside the belly is to command the patient to lie down and press between where the belly bulges and the veins appear.
Adonc tu te coyte e suspen am uncis o que tenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, e aprop incideys aquelas deves las suas razitz.	Then you lift up and suspend with your fingers those which you feel with your hand, and then apply pressure to them gently.
Mays si les uncis no so tengutz en aquelas per la humiditat de lor e mollificacio de aquelas, lahoras pren aquelas am drap aspre o am coto o am flassada de lana, e extratz aquelas am les tieus ditz, e aprop inscideys aquelas e polveriza sobre lor alcunas polveras caudas aprop la inscizio, per que sian ad aquelas en loc de cauteri; o cauteriza aquelas segon que es precedit en le capitol de cauterizar.	But if your fingers cannot feel them due to the moisture and softening of those parts, then take rough cloth or coarse or flaxen wool, and extract them with the tweezers mentioned, and then apply pressure to them and sprinkle some finely ground substances over them near the application, so that they act as a cautery; or cauterize them according to what is described in the chapter on cauterization.
E aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And then treat them with the other treatment until they are healed.
E si le cul no obezeys a egressio, lahoras cristerisa le malaute am cristeri en le qual sia mordicacio petita, e sia lavat am aquel aquo que es en le cuol e que obezesca a egressio leugierament quan le malaute s’esprem.	And if the anus does not yield to evacuation, then apply a small bite of the crista (a sharp instrument) to the patient's anus, and wash it with the fluid from the belly that allows slight evacuation when the patient strains.
Mays si las emorroydas so defora le cul, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiera, e es que tu prenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, o que prenguas aquelas am unci, e inscidas aquelas, e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit entro que sian sanadas.	If the hemorrhoids are outside the anus and the cause is slight, then you take those with your finger or pinch them with one finger, cut them, and later cure them with what we have said when they are healed.
E aquel que avoreys inscizio, cove que aministres sutura de lor segon aquesta manieyra: pren fiel envolopat e entromet aquel en agulha e aprop extratz las emorroydas a las partidas dessus, e fay aquel penetrar am la agulha en la razit del autra part, e envolveys las doas extramitatz del fiel en la partida pus dejos de la agulha, e so latitudinalment; e estrenh la emorroyda am strectura fort, e aprop noza le fiel e extratz la agulha.	And if you have a cut, ensure that you suture it according to this manner: take thread wrapped around a needle and carefully extract the hemorrhoids from above, making the thread penetrate through one part into the other, wrapping the two ends of the thread around the parts behind the needle, in a lateral direction; strengthen the hemorrhoid with strong stitches, and later remove the needle.
E fay aquo a totas, e layssa de aquelas una e no la cozes, per so que la superfluitat del sanc corra de aquela.	And do this to all of them, leaving one unsewn so that the excess blood can flow from there.
E aprop pausa sobre le cul drap enfus en oli rozat o en cerot; e pausa aquel sobre·l cuol e comanda al malaute que·s repause.	And place a warm cloth on the anus in olive oil or ointment; place this over the anus and command the patient to rest.
E aprop layssa aquela entro que caja; e quan es casuda, cura aquelas am enguentz o am autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And leave it there until it heals; when healed, treat them with ointments or other treatments until they are completely cured.
De curacio de fistulas.	Of the treatment of fistulas.
Motas veguadas accideys per exseccacio de fenda o per costriccio de natura.	Motes veigades accidently occur due to the excision of a fissure or by natural constriction.
E cum so antiquadas e no val en aquela medicina, lahoras cove que tu razas aquelas am la puncta de spatum o am la tua ungla entro que sian faytas humidas e sia hostada de aquelas la escorsa pus desus, la qual prohibeys aquelas de consolidacio; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian consolidadas.	And since they are ancient and not valid in that medicine, you should lance them either at the tip of the spatum or with your finger where they are made soft and let them drain; then cover those with a poultice, which prevents consolidation. And place those that are consolidated under treatment.
Lahoras tu osta aquelas am razio pus vehement que la primieyra entro que mot sancno e sian excoriadas; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	And when you lance them with strong incision at the first sign of infection and they become inflamed; then treat those that are healed.
De curacio de almesamir, so es clau.	Of the treatment of ulcers, this is crucial.
Sapias que alamermar, so es clau, e no es si no notz redon segon la color del cors semblant a cap de claviel, e es fayt en tot le cors e majorment en las partidas dejos les pes e als ditz, e endeve per aquels dolor deves le anament.	Know that an ulcer, this is crucial, and it should be round according to the color of the body, resembling a turnip head. It occurs throughout the body but mostly in the areas around the feet and fingers, and due to these pains, you must treat them.
E adonc cove que sia inscidit aquo que es en le circuit del clau, e sia tengut am les forfexs o am unci, e sia eradicat de la sua razit; e aprop cura aquel.	And then cut what is in the circle of the key and hold it with tongs or forceps, and eradicate it from its root; and place care there.
E si vols, cauteriza le segont que es precedit en le sieu capitol.	And if you wish, cauterize as follows, which is described in its chapter.
Mays de veruca es eminencia petita aspre fistulada redonda sobre la superficia del cos, e motas veguadas veno en las mas dels enfantz.	More of a veruca is a small sharp pointed round prominence on the surface of the body, and spots often appear in the veins of children.
E curacio de lu es que estendas e inscidas aquela, o que estrenhas aquela am fiel o am pel entro que caja.	And the treatment for it is to extend and cut that, or tighten it with a needle or with a thread that holds.
E si vols, cauteriza aquo, segon que havem dit, am foc o am medicina acuta.	And if you wish, cauterize it as we have said, with fire or with sharp medicine.
E ja so eradicadas enversas e no-enversas am le instrument le qual yeu diyre.	And now both and non-invasive treatments with the instrument you will specify.
Mays formica es eminencia petita feutrada o fistulada grossa sobre la superficia del cos anant mot en le preon, e quan le freg atroba aquela es centit en lu semblant de mordificacio de formigua, e es fayta entorn le cos.	More of a formica is a small fibrous or fistulated prominence on the surface of the body anterior to the groin, and when you palpate it, it resembles the sting of an ant, and it is formed around the body.
E curacio de lu es que prenguas una canula de pena de auca o de pena de voltor, e sia fort, e pausa aquela sobre la formigua entro que la contengua le cercle de la canula de las partidas de lu; e aprop revolveys la tua ma am la canula entro que inscidas aquo que es en le circuit de la formigua, e pauses aquela en le preon de la carn, e que eradiques la formigua de la sua razit.	And the treatment is that you take a needle of iron or a lance, strong, and place it over the tumor between which you contain it with the ring of the needle from the parts of the body; then return your hand around the needle as you enter what is in the circuit of the tumor, and place it in the center of the flesh, and that you remove the tumor from its root.
E si vols, fay aquo am canula de eram o de ferr segon aquesta forma:	And if you wish, do this with a needle of reed or iron according to this form:
Sia la partida desus de la canulha trahent a subtilitat, sorda (so es no-perforada), envolopada per so que sobre le dit la aprencio de lu sia ablaviada e la revolucio de aquela.	Let the upper part of the needle be fine, blunt (i.e., unperforated), wrapped so that above it the learning of the hand is shielded and the revolution of that [needle] is concealed.
E si vols cauteriza la formiga segon que es denant dit en la cauterizacio de atheyl en le capitol de cauteri.	And if you wish, cauterize the tumor according to what is said in the cauterization of athylos at the head of the cautery.
De forma dels instrumentz que so aministratz a dar cristeri.	In the manner of the instruments that you will administer with great care.
Alcunas veguadas es fayt cristeri de argent o de lato o de eram fondut o malleat; e alcunas veguadas es fayt de aquels instrumentz petit e gran segon aquels als quals so aministratz, quar aquel que es aministrat en la curacio dels petitz enfants sia petit; e de aquel dels quals los culs son freuls o doloyrozes, les cristeris de aquels sian petitz.	Sometimes the instruments are made of silver or tin or reed that has been melted or hammered; sometimes they are made of those instruments small and large according to those you will administer, for that which is administered in the treatment of small children should be small; and of those whose buttocks are swollen or painful, the instruments for them should be small.
La forma de cristeri gran e pauc:	The form of striking hard and often:
Le cap de la canula de lu desus en le qual es liada la borsa sia ampla segon aquesta manieyra; e sia a lu distinacio la on la borsa es liada ayssi cum vezes.	The head of the cannula above which the bag is tied should be wide according to this manner; and there should be a place where the bag is tied as you see.
E la extremitat de lu pus dejus, la qual es entromesa en le cul, sia sorda (so es no-uberta) mot leon, atrasent a subtilita; e en la un del latz de lu sian dos traucs, e en l’autre costat un trauc, e sia la amplesa del trauc segon la groseza dels rays e pus gros un petit.	And the lower end of it, which is inserted into the anus, should be closed (i.e., not open) like a lion's mouth, slightly narrowed; and on one side of the tube there should be two openings, and on the other side one opening, with the width of the opening according to the size of the rays and somewhat larger.
E sia la borsa en la qual sian pausadas las medicinas de vesica de bestia o de pel de ovelha, e la razit de lu sia un palm.	And the bag in which the medicines for the beast's bladder or sheepskin are placed should be about a palm in length.
E sia perforada per motz traucs ayssi cum es revolvuda; e si l’espazi le qual es entre les traucs la grossetut del dit.	And it should be pierced with several openings as it is coiled; and the space between the openings should be about the thickness of a finger.
E aprop entromet en aquels traucs fiel fort de fiel cru le qual sia de detz fiels, o enviro aquels; e ajusta am aquel la borsa; e quan es pausada en lu la borsa, sia streyt en le cap del cristeri entre dos distingentz am fort costriccio, e aprop cristeriza am aquel quascun trauc: Mays la qualitat de cristerizar am aquel es que tu omples la borsa de la medicina, que sia escalfada segon la quantitat de la tolleransa del malaute; e guarda te que no sia trop cauda ni trop freja.	Then insert into these openings strong raw honey or something prepared with it; and adjust the bag to that. When the bag is placed there, make it straight at the head of the strike between two distinct ones with firm constriction, and then strike each opening: More specifically, the quality of striking at each one is that you fill the bag with medicine, which should be warmed according to the quantity of tolerance of the patient; and ensure that it is neither too thick nor too cold.
E aprop le malaute sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos, e eleva las suas cambas en sus e pausa dejos lu un cuer sobre le qual ja so les homes o un lansol; e aprop unta la extramitat del cauteri am oli o am album de huou o am mucellage de fenugrec o de semblantz; e aprop entromet aquel en le cul am facilitat, e aprop le ministre prengua la borsa e exprema aquel am doas mas e essemps am vehemencia entro que sia evacuat en le budelh tot aquo que es en le cristeri; e aprop extra le cristeri e le malaute leva las suas cambas a la paret.	And the patient is placed on his back, elevates his hips, and places a cushion under him; then applies oil or honey or fenugreek or similar to the tip of the cautery; inserts it into the anus, and the minister takes the bag and expresses it with two strokes, expelling this with force entirely from the intestines through the rectum.
E si la medicina forsa aquel a eyssiment, tengua le tant quant poyra; e si dorm am aquel per tota una nueyt, es mays derier en juvament.	And if the medicine forces it to evacuation, have it as much as it can; and if it sleeps for the whole night, it is better for recovery.
Mays si tu cristerizas aquel en las malautias de solucio de ventre e l’eyssiment de lu le coyta, lahoras tu itera le cauteri entro que sia sanat.	More so if you intubate that in cases of stomach distension and its evacuation, then repeatedly apply the cautery until it is healed.
E si en le cul so emorroydas o apostemas ledens, lahoras sia le cristeri mot subtil e leon, dels cristeris am les quals les enfantz so criterisatz.	And if in the anus there are hemorrhoids or abscesses, then use a fine and hollow catheter, among the catheters that children use.
De curacio de las plaguas.	For the cure of wounds.
Yeu ja e dit en la divisio de la curacio de las plaguas aquo que convenia al libre, e yeu dic assi la curacio de aquelas am ma e am medicinas segon le conpliment.	And I have already said in the division of the cure of the plagues what was appropriate for the free and I say thus the cure of those more and of medicines according to the completion.
Donc dic que las plaguas son diversificadas segon aquo en que son faytas las plaguas e segon le loc sobre le qual cazo las plaquas.	Therefore say that the plagues are diversified according to what causes the plagues and according to the place on which the plaques fall.
E las causas per que motas vetz son faytas las plaguas so ayssi cum getament de peyra, o inscisio d’espaza o de cotel, o percussio am lansa, o am fustz, o am sageta, o semblantz ad aquels de motas causas.	And the causes why such stones form plagues are thus: by a stone in the bladder, or an incision of the vein or sword, or a blow with a lance, or a blow with a stick, or an arrow, or something similar to those causes.
Mays las plaguas que so en les locz del cos so ayssi cum plagua la qual catz sobre le cap, o·l col, o·l pietz, o·l ventre, o·l fitge, e semblantz ad aquels dels membres.	More so, the plagues that affect parts of the body are thus: a plague that affects the head, or the neck, or the feet, or the belly, or the groin, and something similar to those affecting the members.
E yeu so recomtant la curacio de alcunas plaguas per que pauses aquela ratiocinacio e regla sobre las autras plaguas.	And I am now recounting the cure of some plagues, so that you may apply that reasoning and rule to other plagues.
E yeu comensare de las plaguas del cap simplas, quar la rememoracio de las compostas vindra al comensament del tertz capitol.	And I will begin with simple head plagues, for the recall of composite ones will come at the beginning of the third capita.
Donc dic que quan accideys en le cap plagua simpla e no es fractura, lahoras considera: si es per getament de peyra o de semblant, e ja ha trinquada la codena tant solament e es gran plagla e temes sobre aquel malaute havinement de apostema caut, lahoras tu te coyta e fleubotoma la cephalica tantost, e no tardas aquo; e extrats ad aquel del sanc segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu si no mes alcuna causa prohibent de fleubotomia, majorment si·l sanc que es eyssit de la plagua es pauc.	When an injury occurs in the head with pain and is not a fracture, consider: if it is due to a fall or blow, and has already crushed the brainstem so severely and extensively that you fear an imminent onset of apoplexy, then you should immediately trepan the skull and perform venesection of the cephalic vein as soon as possible; and you withdraw the blood according to the quantity of its virtue if no other reason prevents it; especially if the blood extracted from the injury is minimal.
E sia la flaubotomia del contrari de la partida plaguada; e guardase le malaute de replecio e de vi e de viandas grossas.	And the venesection should be from the opposite side of the injured area; and precautions should be taken to prevent swelling, edema, and heavy foods.
Mays si de la minuicio prohibeys alcuna causa, lahoras sia aminorat de la vianda e no apropinque a carn ni a vi.	But if some cause prevents bloodletting, then reduce the diet and do not approach meat or wine.
E pausa sobre la plagua, si a lu accideys apostema caut, coto enfus en oli rozat solet o en vi en le qual es stipticat.	And place your hand over the injury, if apoplexy with pus occurs, apply heat in olive oil alone or in wine that is infused with astringents.
Mays si est segur de apostema caut, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua, si es recent am le sieu sanc e le ayre no ha mudat aquela la polvera la qual yeu recomtare aprop petit.	But if you are certain of apoplexy with pus, then place your hand over the injury, if it is recent from its own blood and the air has not changed that powder which I will collect soon.
E si le ayre ja ha mudada aquela, lahoras pausa sobre alscus enguentz entro que sia sanada.	And if the air has already changed there, then place yourself over some ointments until it is healed.
Mays si la plagua es gran o es per inscizio d’espaza e de semblantz, e no so ajustadas las labias de lu per puvils, lahoras ajusta aquelas am sutura segon que yeu recomtare de la sutura de lor.	And if the wound is large or due to a tear and the edges do not fit properly due to swelling, then adjust those with sutures as I will instruct regarding the suturing of wounds.
Mays si la plagua ja es discuberta del os e pen, e no es retencio de lu sino un petit suspensori, lahoras inscideys aquela e aprop cura la plagua am medicinas e restaura la carn aprop en loc de codena, e comanda al malaute que sia pescut de viandas en las quals es groceza: caps e formen coyt e semblantz a lor, entro que sia compost.	And if the wound is already exposed to bone and flesh, and it is not a retention but a small suspensorium, then incise that area and properly treat the wound with medicines, restoring the flesh in its place. Command the patient to eat foods in which they take pleasure: bread and vegetables similar to their usual diet, until they recover.
E si atrobas en la codena putrefaccio e no adhereys al os, lahoras tu inscideys tot aquo poyrit e geta aquo, e aprop cura aquo.	And if you find putrefaction in the flesh and it does not adhere to the bone, then incise all that area and let out the pus, and properly treat that.
Mays si en aquestas plaguas es arteria o vena de la qual fluxs de sanc pot evenir, e no es abscindida per medicinas, lahoras tu inquier sobre la arteria, e si atrobas aquela no-inscidida, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am spatum, o lia aquela; e si necessitat te provoca que aquo que havem dit no comfereys, lahoras tu cauteriza entro que·l sanc sia abscidit.	And if in these wounds an artery or vein through which blood flow can occur is present and it has not been incised by medicines, then inquire about the artery. If you find that part unincised, then incise it with a lancet or ligate it; and if necessity compels you such that what we have said does not apply, then cauterize it before the blood flow is abated.
E si aquestas plaguas son simplas e petitas, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiere; enayssi que tu polverizas sobre aquelas aquesta polvera, quar consolidada aquela denant que l’ayre mude aquelas.	And if these plaques are simple and small, when the cause of them is light; try that you powderize this powder over those, which shall consolidate before the air changes those.
E la manieyra de la polvera es aquesta: recipe oli de enses partida una, de sanc de drago partida doas, de caus no-extincta partidas tres; sia tot mot trissat e crivellat, e de lu sia la plagua omplida, e sia constrengida per bona constriccio entro que be sobre aquela aderesca, e sia coagulada am le sanc.	And the manner of the powder is this: take one part of turpentine, two parts of dragon's blood, three parts of caustic but non-extinct substance; mix them all together and sift them, and apply this powder to the area, tightly constrained within a good seal over that adhesive, and let it coagulate with the dragon's blood.
E aprop strengeys aquela desus am pulvils e leyssa aquela, e no la deslias mentre esta ayssi que no es apostemada, quar no es eredicada de lu la medicina entro que sia sanada.	And then strengthen it above with powder and leave it there, not removing it while it is thus unapostemated, for the medicine will not be absorbed until it is healed.
E alcuna vetz fa aquo sola cautz, quan no es a tu en present enses e sanc de drago.	And sometimes alone it makes a small cautery, when you do not have turpentine or dragon's blood in your possession.
E ja fa aquesta meteyssa operacio en las grans plaguas quan conveneys que sia pausada sobre aquelas e sian streytas, e so plaguas recentz am le lor sanc, las quals le ayre no ha alteradas.	And this method of operation is used for large plaques when you deem it necessary to apply them and stretch them, and for recent plaques with their own blood, which the air has not yet altered.
E si le ayre las ha alteradas, e majorment quan es en temps d’estiu, lahoras no es entencio a la posicio de aquesta polvera, mays adonc cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit, enayssi que tu pauses sobre aquelas alcus enguents degistius, o que pauses sobre aquelas pols de la farina del ordi am aygua e mel entro que getan poyredura; e aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And if the air has altered them, especially when it is summer, then do not understand the position of this powder, but rather take care as we have said, try that you place yourself over those woolen bandages, or that you place yourself on those poultices made from flour of coriander in water and honey that turn red; and then take care during the other treatment until they are healed.
Mays si accideys am la plagua fractura en os, e es petita, lahoras tu extratz aquo am gesti.	And if you encounter a small fracture in bone, then you extract this with your fingers.
E yeu diyre la cura de las fracturas del cap en aquo que es envenidor.	And I will say the treatment for fractures of the head in what follows.
De las plaguas del col.	Of the wounds of the neck.
Mays si la plagua accideys en le col, lahoras no es en lu differencia en medicacio, e entre la plagua del cap quan es simpla.	And if the wound occurs in the neck, then there is no difference in treatment, and it is similar to a wound on the head when simple.
Mays si ja le nervi del col es inscis o arteria, lahoras si es nervi, no es en lu engen sino que sia evitada curacio de lu am aquo que fa vehement stipticitat, ayssi cum ziniar e zegi que es vetriol e semblantz a lor quar nozo als nervis e contrazo aquel.	And if the nerve of the neck is cut or an artery, then if it is a nerve, do not attempt to treat it but rather avoid any treatment that causes strong constriction, as is done with ziniar and zegi, which are vitriol and similar to them in their effect on nerves and counteract those.
E no pauses sobre la plagua alcuna causa de tot freja, quar la sustancia dels nervis es freja e la continuacio de lu es am le cervel, le qual es le pus aut de totz les membres.	And do not place any cause over the wound from cold at all, for the substance of the nerves is cold and their continuity is in the brain, which is the root of all members.
E si’ aquo am que es curat de medicinas leugieras, ayssi cum es caus lavada am aygua dousa, alcuna veguada enfusa en oli rozat o no-rozat, e thucia quan es lavada am aygua dousa e las autras peyras minarantz segon aquesta manieyra, e enguentz humitz.	And if it is cured with light medicines, such as a wash with water two or several times infused in olive oil, whether pressed or unpressed, and thyme when washed with water twice and the other herbs mingling according to this manner, and applying it moist.
Mays si la plagua es gran, lahoras aministra sutura, o coarta las labias de lu, e aprop cura aquela am pulvils entro que sia sanada.	And if the wound is large, then administer suturing, or draw the edges of the wound together, and subsequently cure it with powders once it is healed.
Mays si a la plagua es profunditat o accideys en lu a la pus bassa partida poyredura, lahoras perfora aquela en le loc mays depremegut.	And if the wound is deep or has accidents in the lower part where pus has formed, then puncture it in the most congested area.
Mays si en la plagua ja es inscisa arteria e es conseguit flux de sanc, lahoras separa o secca aquela, o lia aquela, o cauteriza aquela si necessitat te provoca ad aquo.	And if a vein is already incised in the wound and there is a flow of blood, then separate or dry it out, or ligate it, or cautery it if necessity demands it for that.
Mays si ja ha insciditz les spondils del golayro o tot, e so salvadas las venas del col, lahoras tu ajusta las labias de la codena am sutura sobre la cana del golayro e no toques aquel; abantz egala aquel e reduzeys aquel sobre la sua figura natural, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent, e leyssa aquela per alcus jorns; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz en les quals es stipticitat e excitacio entro que sia sanat.	If the spinal vertebrae of the patient are fractured or dislocated, and the veins in the neck have been saved, then you adjust the lips of the wound with sutures over the spine and do not touch that; straighten that and place it back into its natural position, and firmly strengthen that with proper structure for some days; and after, treat that with ointments where there is stiffness and excitation until it is healed.
Mays si la plagua ja en le os a fayta enprecio, lahoras percuireys aquela, e lahoras si en lu ha fragmentz de hos, extratz totz aquels que podes de lor; e aquo que a tu no es apparelhat, leyssa aquo entro que la plagua se poyrisca, e sia separat e la egrecio de lu sia alleujada.	If the injury in the bone has already caused damage, then tap that area, and if there are fragments of bone in it, extract all those you can; and what is not suitable for extraction, leave it until the injury decays, separates, and the inflammation subsides.
E si la plagua es recent lahoras polveriza sobre aquela polvera la qual t’e recomtada.	And if the injury is recent, then dust that area with the powder recommended to you.
Mays si en la plagua es fayta fistula, lahoras cura aquela am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra aprop en le sieu capitol.	If a fistula has formed in the injury, then treat that with what will be remembered further in this chapter.
De las plaguas del col o de semblantz quan fayta entre las spallas e es fayta am spaza o am cotel o am lansa o am semblantz.	For injuries to the neck or similar, when they occur between the shoulders and are caused by a sword or axe or spear or similarly.
Si es percussio de lansa o de cotel, e vezes de lu la profunditat, lahoras considera mays si de la plagua yeys ventositat quan le malaute elena; lahoras sapias que la plagua es mortal.	If it is a lance wound or a cut, and you measure its depth, then consider more if from the wound there is edema when the pain arises; then know that the wound is fatal.
E si en lu no es profunditat e la plagua es recent am le sieu sanc, lahoras tu pauses en lu de la primieyra horo polvera, e no strenhas aquel per que no sia le sanc retengut en la profunditat de lu e que retorne al cor e que aucigua le malaute, mays pausa en lu enguent atractiu, e deslia aquela doas veguadas le dia.	And if there is no depth to the wound and the wound is recent with fresh blood, then you should apply powder for the first hour, and do not press it so that the blood is not retained in the depth of the wound and does not return to the heart, and worsen the wound, but apply an attractive ointment, and remove the powder after two days.
E si l’enguent no es a tu present, lahoras tu pausa en le orrifici de la plagua coto viel per que sucque aquo que yeys de las humiditatz; e fay que le malaute dorma sobre la plagua per que corra aquo que es en lu ajustat.	And if the ointment is not present, then you apply to the wound as much as necessary so that what has of moisture drains out; and make the wound sleep over it so that what is in it flows out.
Mays si ja de la plagua son passatz tres dias o mays e no accideys al malaute spasme ni tremor de cor mal ni strictura de ale, e vezes las autras dispozicios bonas de lu, lahoras sapias que plagua es salva; e adonc cura aquela am calguas e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanada.	And if already three days or more have passed from the wound and no spasms or heart tremor nor constriction of the lungs occur, and other good dispositions of it are present, then know that the wound is saved; and then treat it with salt water and the other cure until it is healed.
Mays si la sanacio de lu es excusada, e ja tot temps es uberta, lahoras sapias que ja es fayta fistula; cura donc aquela per le sieu capitol.	If the healing of it is refused, and all time is opened, then you know that a fistula is made; cure that according to its chapter.
E si la plagua es per inscisio de spaza o de cotel, e es simpla en la superficia del pietz o del dos, lahoras cura aquela am aquo que es precedit de sutura, si es gran, o am polvera, si es petita.	And if the wound is due to a stab or a cut, and it is simple on the surface of the foot or the hand, then cure that as preceded by suturing, if it is large, or with powder, if it is small.
Mays si ja ha fayta enprecio en le os, e so ja de lu inscizas pessas, lahoras tu torqua la plagua e coyta ad extrayre aquelas pessas, si so separadas.	And if it has already pierced the bone, and you must incise deeper to extract those pieces, then twist the wound and lift to extract those pieces, if they are separate.
Mays si no so separadas, lahoras leyssa las entro que se poyresca la plagua, que la extraccio de lor es alleujada.	And if they are not separate, then let the pieces rot in the wound, as their extraction is alleviated.
E de las autras plaguas accidentz en les autres membres le juvament en curacio es le juvament de aquo que havem dit.	And for other accidental wounds in other members, the treatment in cure is as we have said.
De las plaguas del ventre.	Of the wounds of the abdomen.
L’indisposicio la qual accideys en le ventre es o gran, o pauc, o migiera.	The disorder that occurs in the abdomen is either great, or small, or mixed.
De la gran alcunas veguadas yeys le budel o nervi del budel, per que es fayta intromissio de lor e la sutura de lor esser pus vehement e pus subtil.	From the large intestine, make several incisions, so that there is an introduction of its contents and for the suture to be more vigorous and finer.
E disrupcio petita es fayta dificil per autra manieyra, e siec se que la reduccio de lor es pus dificil, si no te coytes de la intromissio de lor al sieu loc tantost, quar se ubre e es engrossat per que le intrament de lu es fayt difficil.	A small disruption is made difficult by another method, and I know that the reduction of it is more difficult if you do not make incisions to allow its contents to enter their proper place quickly, as it opens and becomes swollen making the instrument difficult.
E donc la milhor disrupcio es migiera, quar en aquela no es dificil la reduccio del budel, ayssi cum es dificil en las doas specias denant ditas.	Therefore, the best disruption is median, for in that case, the reduction of the intestine is not difficult, as it is difficult in the two species mentioned before.
E sapias que sutura del ventre es segon quatre manieyras, mays doas suturas son comunas que conveneysso en suturas de las autras plaguas del cors.	And know that the suturing of the abdomen is done in four ways, but two sutures are common and agree with the sutures of other parts of the body.
E duas autras suturas proprias comunican a las autras plaguas, mays empero so mays proprias en la sutura del ventre.	And two other specific sutures communicate with the other parts, but more properly belong to the suturing of the abdomen.
E yeu recomti a tu quascuna am exposicio e declaracio.	And I urge you in each exposure and declaration.
Donc dic que quan la plagua es petita e es eyssit alcuna causa del budel per aquela, e es fayt dificil a reduzir aquel, lahoras aquo es en una de doas manieyras: o per parvitat de la disrupcio ayssi cum havem dit, o quan al budel es venguda inflacio per la frigiditat de l’ayre.	So say that when the swelling is small and some cause of the intestine has passed through it, making it difficult to reduce it back, then this is in one of two ways: either due to the smallness of the rupture as we have said, or when the intestine is swollen due to the coldness of the air.
E donc quan aquo es ayssi, lahora cove que tu scalfes aquel enayssi que tu submerges una sponga ho drap humit en aygua tebeza sola, o que coguas en aygua squinant, e cyperum, e spic, e embroques am aquela le budel entro que la imflacio sia resolvuda.	And when this is so, then know that you should cool it by submerging a sponge or a wet cloth in pure water, or by using squill, cyperus, and spica, and wrap the intestine in that until the swelling resolves.
E alcunas veguadas fa aquo vi en le qual ha stipticitat, e es milhor que la aygua sola en resolucio de la imflacio.	And on some occasions, it is better to use the water with styptic substances in resolving the swelling.
E donc cum tu vezes la imflacio esser resolvuda, lahoras tu humecta le budel am aygua en la qual es coyta altea e malvas, quar per aquo es alleujat le intrament de lu am pauca causa.	And when you see the swelling resolve, then moisten the intestine in water in which hyssop and mallows are steeped, for by this the pain of the patient is alleviated due to little cause.
Mays si es escusat le intrament de lu aprop aquesta curacio, lahoras scindeys la disrupcio un petit am strument am le qual so inscididas emorroydas.	But if the pain in the area around this treatment is necessary, then incise the rupture a little with an instrument on which are inserted ligatures.
E la curacio primieyra es milhor, quan es propriada que no es seccio, e no sia occupacio a seccar aprop necessitat e defaliment.	And the first cure is better when it is properly a non-sewing, and not an occupation to be dried soon necessary and deficiency.
Del instrument, sec se la forma de lu:	Of the instrument, see its form:
La una partida de lu torta aguda, e l’autra partida no-acuta, e la extremitat subtil, e no sia am la subtilitat de spatum, abantz sia obtusa un pauc.	One part of the knife is sharp, and the other part not sharp, and the tip is fine, but not too fine like a needle; it should be slightly blunt.
E donc cum la plagua es amplificada e yeys fora le budel, lahoras cove que la sua reduccio sia segon la forma de lu natural, en le sieu loc propri, si es possible sobre aquo, quar milhor es.	And thus, when the wound is enlarged and the intestine protrudes, ensure that its reduction follows its natural form, in its proper place. If possible, do it over the area, for this is better.
Mays quan la disrupcio es ampla, e es en la partida pu bassa del ventre, lahoras cove que tu fassas jazer le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa las suas cambas pus autas que·l sieu cap; e si es en la partida pus desus del ventre, lahoras tu pause le cap de lu e·l pietz pus autz que las partidas dejos.	More when the disruption is wide and is in the lower part of the abdomen, then make the patient lie on their back, and place their hands farther apart than their shoulders; and if it is in the upper part of the abdomen, then place their head and feet farther apart than the other parts.
E semblantment si la disrupcio es en una de las doas partz del ventre, lahoras pausa la tua entencio e la tua consideracio tostemps en aysso per que la partida en la qual es la plagua sia pus auta que l’autra.	And if the disruption is in one of the two parts of the abdomen, then place your hand and your consideration there for some time so that the part where the wound is becomes farther than the other.
E ayssi cove que tu aministres aquo en las plaguas grans e en las plaguas migieras.	And thus you should apply this in large wounds and in medium-sized wounds.
E en las plaguas petitas, pausa aquo que es a tu preparat, e aprop fay que·l ministre sia entre las tuas mas pyatados, le qual tengua la disrupcio tota am la sua ma e ajusta las labias de lu, e aprop descuebre de aquela ad aquel que siec la sutura alcuna causa aprop autra.	And in small wounds, place what you have prepared, and ensure that the minister stands between your assistants, holding all the disruption with his hand and adjusting the edges of the wound, and then uncover that to the one who will suture for any cause nearby.
E aquesta es la manieyra de sutura comuna: una que prenguas la agula, o comte de agula segon la cantitat de la amplitut de la plagua; e aprop layssa de la extremitat de la disrupcio del dit anular, e strenh la agula una, otre que tu no metas fiel en las doas extremitatz de la codena, am doas extremitatz del ciphac que es dejos la codena de las partidas dedintz, entro que fassas aquela penetrar de aquela partida; e tu ja has agreguadas doas extremitatz de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, e so faytas quatre ordes.	And this is the common method of suturing: take the needle, or a counterneedle according to the width of the wound; then leave from the extremity of the disruption at the tip of the ring finger, and tighten the needle once, or another you do not put thread in both extremities of the codena, at both extremities of the ciphac that is left the codena from the inner parts, while you make it penetrate from that part; and you have already added two extremities of the codena and two extremities of the ciphac, and so four orders are made.
E aprop strenh am fiel doble en le circuit de la agula, e alcunas veguadas de doas partz ensemps, e aprop agregua las doas labias e la plagua per agreguacio decent; e aprop layssa la grossitut del dit e fiqua una autra agulha en aquela, e aprop lia aquela am fiel ayssi cum fiest am la primieyra agulha; e no cesses far aquo si es necessitat am las agulhas entro que ajas complida tota la contriccio de la plagua.	And then tighten the thread doubly in the circuit of the needle, and several times from both sides together, and then add the edges of the wound for a decent closure; and then leave the thickness of the finger and place another needle in it, and then tie that with thread thus as you did with the first needle; and do not cease to do this if necessary among the needles until you complete all the tension of the wound.
E sian las agulhas migieras entre groceza e subtilitat, quar las agulhas subtils mot leugierament insciden la carn; e las grossas so de dificil intrament en la codena, e donc per aquo cove que sian migieras en subtilitat e grosseza.	And if the needles are of medium hardness between subtlety and coarseness, for the fine ones penetrate the flesh lightly; and the coarse ones are difficult to manipulate in the wound, therefore they should be both subtle in fineness and coarse in hardness.
E no cove que la agulha sia ficada en doas extremitatz de la codena propdana mot, per so que la carn no sia inscidida leugierament e que la plagua se huebra devant la sua consolidacio.	And it should not be that the needle is placed at two ends of the wound closely together, for then the flesh would be lightly incised and the wound would close before its healing.
E no sian prolonguadas de sutura per que la plagua no sia prohibida de consolidacio.	And they should not be overlength in suturing lest the wound hinder its healing.
E aprop inscideys las extremitatz de las agulhas per so que no ledescan le malaute deves le sieu dormier; e pausaras sobre la sutura pulvils expanduts de tota partida, les quals tenguan las extremitatz de las agulhas; e layssa aquelas entro que sapias que la plagua ja es consolidada.	And then incise the ends of the needles so that they do not slide out of their proper place; and place powder expanded from all parts over the suturing, which contain the ends of the needles; and leave those in until you can tell that the wound has already healed.
E aquestas specias de sutura am agulhas en cal manieyra es pus convenient en las plaguas petitas, quar habasta en la sutura de lor una agulha o doas o entorn aquelas.	And these needles and threads for suturing are more convenient in small wounds, for only one or two needles are needed for their suturing.
Mays la segonda sutura es cominal: e es que tu aministres am sutura las quatre extremitatz, de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, en una veguada, am agulha en la qual sia fiel envolopat engual en subtilitat e grosseza.	And the second suture is performed as follows: and you must suture the four extremities, from the shoulder to two extremities of the hip, in one go, with a needle wrapped equally in subtlety and thickness.
E aprop quan am la agulha auras penetrat aquestas quatre extremitatz, reduzeys la agulha de aquela meteyssa partida de la qual comensest, per so que le fiel retrayt caja de la pus subirana partida a la plagua, per so que la sutura sia segon sutura de drap am la qual les draps so strengutz.	And when you have the needle penetrated these four extremities, withdraw the needle from that stitch started from which, so that the thread retraces its path back to the beginning, going down from above, so that the suture is like a seam in cloth where the threads are tightened.
E pausa entre quascuna sutura la quantitat del gros del dit mendre.	And pause between each suture the width of a little finger.
E aquesta sutura sabo les homes.	And this suture is known to men.
E am tal sutura yeu cozegui la plagua la qual era accidida a un home en le sieu ventre le qual era stat plaguat am un cotel, e era la disrrumpcio de la plagua major de un palm, e era eyssit dels budels entorn dos palms del budel del mieg loc e era la disrupcio en le mieg del membre; e adonc yeu reduzegui aquel depus que le budel havia stat foro la plagua per xxiiii horas.	And with this suture, I closed the wound which was inflicted upon a man in his belly, which had been cut by a刀具，伤口的大约手掌大小，位于腹部两侧约一掌宽处，是肢体中部的破裂；然后我将那个部位在伤口穿透后forty hours.
E la plagua fo consolidada en le spazi de xv dias o entorn, e curegui aquel e es sanat; e aprop aquo visquec per motz ans, e es conversat en las suas disposicios.	The wound is consolidated in the space of fifteen days or so, and heal that and it is cured; then those viscera are returned to their positions.
E les autres metges havian jutgat que no fora sanat; e per miracle foc, quar yeu no curegui aquel am enguent, quar era en loc en le qual enguent no era atrobat ni deguna medicina, mays pausegui sobre la plagua coto viel dos veguadas lo dia e ablucio assiduo am aygua de mel entro que foc sanat.	And the other doctors had judged that it was not cured; by miracle fire, for I did not heal that without ointment, for it was in a place where neither ointment nor any medicine could reach, but I placed my hand over the wound as an old woman would two times a day and applied frequent wet dressings with honey water until the fire healed.
Mays yeu diyre dos specias de sutura proprias segon narracio de Paraula.	And I will speak of two kinds of stitching proper according to the narration of Paracelsus.
E es que tu comenses am sutura de la codena, e entrometas agulha de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz.	And you should start with the stitching of the chain, and insert the needle from one side through to the other inside.
E donc cum la agulha penetra en la codena e en aquel meteys lacertz segon rectetut e en longetut de tot le cos, e layssa la extremita del ciphac en le qual has entromesa la agulha; e fay penetrar en la autra extremitat la agulha de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo en l’autra extremitat del mihat.	And thus, as the needle penetrates through the chain and along that thread according to the correct path and the length of the entire body, you leave the end of the thread on which you have inserted the needle; then pass the needle from the other side inside to the outside in the other end of the stitch.
E don cum tu auras fayta aquela penetrar, lahoras tu fay aquela penetrar autra veguada en aquela meteyssa extremitat del mihat de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz; e leyssa la extramitat del ciphac que es en aquest latz, e fay penetrar la agulha en l’autra extremitat de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo.	And when you have made the penetration, then make another penetration in that limb at the external part from the internal part; leave the end of the catheter that is on this side, and insert the needle into the other internal part from the external part.
E fay penetrar am aquela la tua penetracio am la qual fas aquela penetrar en le ciphac en la extremitat del mirat la qual es en la partida de lu entro que tot aquel penetre.	And make the penetration with your penetration which you make penetrate into the catheter at the end of the limb which is in the internal part until all of it penetrates.
E aprop comensa de aquest meteys costat e cus aquel am la extremitat que es del ciphac en l’autra latz, e extratz la agulha de la codena la qual penetrec, e aprop redutz aquela en aquela codena e cos la extremitat del ciphac que es en l’autra costat am aquesta extramitat del mirat; e extratz aquela de la codena la qual es de part de lu.	And then begin from this side and push it in the catheter at the end that is of the catheter on this other side, and remove the needle which you have penetrated, and then return it into the catheter with the end of the catheter that is on this other side; and remove it from the catheter which is on his side.
E fay aquo una veguada e autra, e fay aquo una veguada aprop autre veguada entro que tu cozes tot aquo que es deforo segon aquel eysemple.	And do this one time and again, and do this one more time or another time until you sew everything that is external according to that example.
E la suma de aquesta manieyra de sutura es que tu cozes am sutura de pellicies am la qual cozo las pels, enayssi que tu cozes le ciphac una veguada de la part de la extremitat de la codena, e que leysses aquela autra veguada entro que la ajas complida.	And the sum of this manner of suturing is that you sew with thread which you sew the skins, try that you sew the catheter one time from the part of the end of the needle, and leave the other time within until the operation is complete.
Mays la segonda specia de sutura propria la qual dieys eyssament Gualia , e aquest es de sermo de lu e per lu recomtat, es que tu cozas aquela segon semilitut am la qual alcus medicantz cozo aquela, enayssi que agreguan tota partida a la sua compar partida a lu convenient per natura; e aplican la extremitat de autre de lu e la extremitat del mirat al autra extremitat de lu, e aquo es fayt segon que yeu a tu recomti.	The second type of suturing which you should do as Gualia does, and this is by talking about it and recommending it, is that you suture that according to semilitut, which some doctors suture that way, in an effort that all parts are added to their corresponding part to him convenient by nature; and they apply the extremity of one of them to the extremity of another, and this is done as I have recommended to you.
Cove que tu fiques la agulha en la extremitat del mirat a tu propdana de la partida deforo, e fassas aquela penetrar a la partida dedintz en aquel sol, e leysses dos extremitatz del ciphac; e aprop revolveys la agulha e fay aquela penetrar de foro a la dedintz en dos extremitatz del ciphac.	When you place the needle at the extremity of the tissue from the outside, make it penetrate into the inside part in that direction, leaving two ends of the thread; then, turn the needle and make it penetrate from the outside to the inside with the other two ends of the thread.
E aprop revolveys aquelas cascunas, e fay penetrar quascunas de la partida dededintz entro a la partida deforo en dos extremitatz del mirat autras que so en le latz contrari.	Then turn those threads, and make each part from the inside penetrate into the part from the outside with two ends of the thread that are not in the opposite layer.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura es milhor de la sutura comuna leugiera, e es sutura de la qual precedic rememoracio.	And this method of suturing is better than the common loose suture, and it is the suturing method of which I have previously reminded you.
Aquest es le sermo de Gualia	This is the saying of Gualia
E mays le diyssero alcus, sutura del ventre es rectificada am dos agulhas, so es que tu entrometas en aquestas a quascunas un fiel, e comensa am intromiccio de agulha de aquo que es deves tu, e fay aquela penetrar entro al autra latz segon sutura de aquels les quals cozo les cuers engualment.	And more some would say, for the belly wound, it is corrected with two needles, so that you insert into these a thread, and starting from the needle insertion, make that one penetrate through the other layer according to the stitches which equalize the wounds.
E sapias que quan disrupcio es en le mieg loc del ventre, lahoras la sutura de lu es pus difficil que dels autres locs del ventre.	And know that when the disruption is in the middle part of the belly, then the stitch there is more difficult than in other parts of the belly.
Mays le juguament de medicacio de plagua es jutgament de las autras plaguas.	More the judgment of plague treatment is the judgment of other plagues.
La qual causa es quar quan tu consieguas la plagua recent am le sieu sanc denant que l’ayre altera aquela, e reduses le budel e cozes aquela e aptas aquela decentment, lahoras pausa sobre aquela polvera encarnativa.	That cause is when you obtain the recent plague from its own poison before the air alters it, and you reduce the intestine and sew it properly, then place it over that red powder.
E si le ayre ja ha alterada la plagua, lahoras pausa sobre aquela alcus enguentz les quals so a tu presens entro que fassan peyra dura e cajan les fiels, e sian consolidatz ciphac e mirat; e aprop cura aquela ayssi cum es la curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And if the air has already altered the plague, then place it over that, some ointments which are present and cause them to dry up and break the threads, and be consolidated tightly; and cure it in this way as is the treatment of other plagues until it is healed.
Mays si a tu no so presens las medicinas, lahoras pausa sobre aquela tantost, pus que comensa a getar brac, coto viel, e permuta aquel dos veguadas le dia, ayssi cum a tu e ensenhat, entro que sia sanat, quar tu no indigeysses de autra medicacio en motas disposicios quan las plaguas so simplas.	But if you do not have the medicines at hand, then pause over that for now, rather than starting to administer it frequently, and change it every two hours during the day, as shown to you, until it is healed, in which case you would not need any other medical treatments when the sores are simple.
Mays si tu temes que la plagua comunique en lesio als membres principals, lahoras cove que tu submergas lana leon en oli de trempada qualiditat, o en oli rozat, e pausa aquela en le circuit dels locs que so entre les angonas e dejos las aysselas.	But if you fear that the sore might communicate infection to the main limbs, then you should submerge lion's wool in well-refined oil or in linseed oil, and place it around the areas between the joints and leave the openings.
E si sent dolor o putrefaccio en les sieus budels, quar motas veguadas aquo s’endeve, lahoras cristeriza aquel am vi stiptic negre tebe, e majorment si la poyredura es pervenguda en le budel e es fayta exitura penetrant entro la conquavitat de lu.	And if there is pain or putrefaction in their intestines, for several hours you should apply it, then compress that with a piece of stiptic black Egyptian cloth, especially if the inflammation has affected the intestine and caused an exitura penetrating into its cavity.
E sapias que aquela que es del budel gros es de pus leugiera sanacio que aquela que es en les budels subtils.	And know that the one from the large intestine is more mildly healing than that from the fine intestines.
E es de dificil sanacio quar le budel le qual es apelat “gegunu” no recep sanacio de plagua que caja en lu de tot; e aquo es per la gran multitut de venas que so en lu e per la magnitut de lu que so en aquelas, e per subtilitat del cos de aquel, e per propinquitat de aquel a natura de nervis.	And it is difficult to heal, for the intestine called "gut" does not receive healing from any sore that enters it; this is due to the great number of veins in it, its large size, the fine nature of that part, and its proximity to the nature of nerves.
Mays si aquo que procezeys de la plagua es la tela, e conseguas aquela recent, redutz aquela segon la tua rectetut am la qual reduzes les budels engualment.	If what you are treating is the skin, and you obtain that recently, reduce it according to your skill with which you return the intestines equally.
Mays si es passat a lu spazi e ja es feyt vert o negre, lahoras que tu strenguas aquela am fiel sobre le loc que es denigrat de lu, per so que vengua fluxs de sanc, quar en la tela so venas e arterias.	If it has passed to the space and is already red or black, when you cauterize that with a hot iron over the part that is discolored, so that it comes to have a flow of pus, for in the skin there are veins and arteries.
E aprop inscideys aquo que es otra aquel liament, e pausa dos extremitatz del fiel pendentz de la partida dejos de la plagua foro lu, per que sobre tu sia alleujada la atraccio de lu deves le cazement de la tela e emissio del brac de la plagua.	Then cut away what is another from that ligament, and place two ends of the hot iron at the edges left by the wound, so that over you the attraction to it is alleviated; close the opening of the skin and the emission of the arm of the wound.
Rememoracio de las plaguas quan accideysso en le budel.	Remembrance of the wounds when they occur in the intestine.
Quan accideys disrupcio en le budel e es petita, lahoras es possibla que sia resteurada en alcus homes, per aysso quar yeu vi aquel le qual era stat plaguat en le sieu ventre am percussio de lansa et era la plagua de la part dreyta del stomac, e la plagua era antiquada e fayta fistula, e eyssic de lu gestio e ventositat.	When disruption occurs in the intestine and is small, it is possible that it can be reduced in some people, for I saw one who had been wounded in his abdomen by a lance strike, and the wound was old, having become a fistula, and healed from the treatment and distension.
Adonc yeu pansegui la curacio de lu ja sia que no era confizat en la sanacio de lu, mays cessegui subtiliar aquel entro que foc sanat e le loc es consolidat.	Then I pursue the cure of him whether he was not fixed in the healing of him, but strive to subtilize that among which is health and the place is consolidated.
E yeu pus que vi le loc ja consolidat, timegui sobre le malaute que endevengues sobre lu accident de mal en le sieu ventre; e no endevenc alcu per aquo mal accident e romas en las suas milhos disposicios mangant e bevent, e aprop entrec en banh e es exercitat en sos ditz.	And when I see the place already consolidated, examine the patient that you discover over his accident of ill in his own belly; and do not discover any through this bad accident and harm his inner workings by eating and drinking, and further immerse him in baths and exercise his words.
E ja diysero alcus experimentados que quan endeve plagua en le budel, e es petita, lahoras cove que sia liada segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas fromiguas de grans caps; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua e pausa una fromigua de aquelas que aja la boca uberta sobre las doas labias de la plagua; donc quan pren sobre aquelas e strenh la sua boca, abscindeys le cap de lu, quar adhereys e no es dissolvut.	And some experienced ones have said that when an inflammation is in the intestine and small, then you must bind it according to this manner: and you should take pieces of wax from large candles; and further adjust the two lips of the inflammation and place one piece of wax with its mouth open over the two lips of the inflammation; therefore when it takes on those and strengthens its mouth, cut off the head of it, for it adheres and does not dissolve.
E aprop pausa autra formigua prop la primieyra, e no cesses aquo a far am formiguas una aprop autra segon la quantitat de tota la plagua.	And further place another piece of wax nearby, and do not cease to make pieces of wax one after another according to the quantity of the entire inflammation.
E aprop reduzeys aquela e cos la plagua; e romanguan aquels caps annexces en le budel entro que·l budel sia sanat; e no accideys al malaute degun nocument.	And then return that and the hernia to their cavity; and when healing the intestine, fix those adjacent ends inside the intestine until it is healed; and do not damage the patient in any way.
E ja es possible que·l budel sia liat am fiel subtil lo qual es fayt del budel de bestia annexs am lu, pus que es mes en agulha; e es que tu prenguas la extremitat de aquestz fiels de budel, e sia mot descarnat, e aprop lia la extremitat de lu am fiel de li, envolopat, e aprop entromet aquel fiel en agulhas e cos am aquel le budel, e areduzeys aquel en la disrupcio.	And it is possible that the intestine be pierced with fine thread made from the adjacent intestinal tissue, which is finer than a needle; and you should take the end of this thread of the intestine, make it sharp, and then bring the end of it with fine thread wrapped around it, and insert that thread into needles and tie it to the intestine, and return it to its disruption.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura am formiguas no es sino segon via de fiducia e d’esperansa.	And this method of suturing with threads is simply done out of trust and hope.
Mays si la plagua es gran e ampla, majorment si es en un dels budels subtils, quar lahoras no es engen sino subtiliacio, e no es sanacio de lu de tot.	But if the wound is large and extensive, especially in one of the fine intestines, then there is only a slight hope, and it may not heal completely.
De curacio de zuchem e fistula.	Of the cure for abscesses and fistulas.
Sapias que tota plagua e apostema quan se envilheseys e se Antiqua, e es fayt ulcus, e no es consolidat e geta braç tot temps e no es abscindit, lahoras, en qualque membre sia, universalment es nompnada fistula e nos la apelam aquela azukem.	Know that any wound or abscess when enveloped and left to fester, turning into an ulcer, not healing completely and discharging continuously for a long time without resolving, in whatever part of the body it may be, is universally named a fistula and we call it an abscess.
E fistula segon veritat es nodacio feutrada, dura, blanqua am la qual no es dolor e a la qual es conquavitat ayssi cum es conquavitat de pena de ausel; e per aysso nompnat aquela alcus rizatz, id est pena.	And according to truth, fistula is a fibrous, hard, white node, in which there is no pain and which has its cavity like that of an abscess; therefore, it is named that way, i.e., ulcer.
E es en alcus homes humida, la qual geta brac; e fort leu la humiditat es abscidida en alcunas horas.	And in some people, it is a moist node, which gets inflamed; and the moisture is expelled in some hours.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta humiditat es mota, e es pauca, e es grossa, e es subtil.	And sometimes this moisture is hot, small, large, and fine.
E yeu ja he denant dit en la divisio, lahoras cum yeu diyssi las plaguas, que tot ulcus que no es sanat ni no es en lu nuda carn, no es aquo sino per una de ix causas: de las quals la una es o per pauquesa de sanc en le cos; o per malicia de lu; o quar entre lu e las labias es carn dura prohibent nativitat de carn; o quar es de mota legesa; o quar aquel ulcus en si meteys es poyrit e la materia que es a lu tramesa es de mala qualitat; o quar la medicina es enconvenient en la curacio de lu; o quan corrupcio catz en la regio, e es pestilencia; o per proprietat de regio ayssi cum endeve a Saragossa , en la qual es fayta difficil degestio de las malautias, e es tardada en aquela sanacio de apostema per natura; o quar en lu es os un, o motz osses.	And I have already previously mentioned in the division, when I spoke of the plaques, that any ulcer that is not healed or does not reveal naked flesh, is this only for one of nine causes: of which the first is either due to a lack of healing in the body; or due to its malignity; or because between it and the edges there is hard flesh prohibiting the natural growth of flesh; or because it is hot and dry; or because that ulcer itself contains corrupt matter that is transmitted to it is of bad quality; or because the medicine used in its cure is inappropriate; or when corruption occurs in the region, and it is pestilential; or due to the property of the region, such as in Saragossa, where there is a difficult digestion of diseases, and this delays the healing of abscesses by nature; or because there is bone in it or bones.
Ja e mostrat totas aquelas causas, e·ls senhals de aquelas e la curacio de lor am medicinas en la divisio.	All those causes have been shown, and the signs of them and their cure by medicines in this division.
E cove assi que yeu fassa a tu saber la curacio de fistula la qual es fayta per via de operacio am ma.	And cover thus so that you may know the cure for fistula which is caused by surgical operation with the hand.
E sapias que fistula accideys en totz les membres del cos; quar de aquelas son fistulas que perveno a las venas grantz e arterias, o als nervis, o al ciphac, o al budel, o a la vesica, o ad alcuna de las costas, o ad alcu dels spondils del dos, o ad alcuna de las juncturas compostas per composicio ayssi quo de la ma e del pe; e de aquelas so que dan a lu propinquitat del membre principal e de semblantz.	And know that fistula can occur in all parts of the body; for those are fistulas that reach the great veins and arteries, or the nerves, or the liver, or the intestine, or the bladder, or to some of the ribs, or to one of the vertebrae, or to some joint composed thus like that of the hand and foot; and these are those that are near the main part and resemble it.
E donc aquela de aquestas fistulas que es segon aquesta manieyra es de las malautias de dificil sanacio, e no recep curacio, e occupacio am aquela es trebalh e ignorancia.	And thus of these fistulas that proceed in this manner they are among the illnesses of difficult cure, and do not receive a cure, and the occupation with them is labor and ignorance.
E si es de las fistulas alcuna la profunditat de la qual no perve ad aquestz locs que e dit, e esperas e confizas en la curacio de lu, e vols pervenir a cognicio de lu, lahoras pren tenta de eram o de ferr, e si la fistula va segon rectetut, e perquireys aquela am lu.	And if any of these fistulas is deep such that it does not reach the locations mentioned, and you hope for its cure and want to gain knowledge of it, then try with a probe or a needle. If the fistula follows a straight course, you will be able to find it.
Mays si la fistula es tortuissitat, lahoras investigua aquela am tenta de plom subtil, quar plom am la levitat del sieu cors es alleujat e curvat deves la tortuositat.	If the fistula is tortuous, then investigate with that of lead, for lead, due to the lightness of its body, is alleviated and curved to reduce the tortuosity.
E si la fistula es havent motz horrificis, no es a tu possible que signifiques sobre lu am tenta.	If the fistula has horrible movements, it is not possible for you to signify about it with a probe.
Adonc cristeriza le orrifici per sos orrificis, quar la humiditat per la qual clisterizas aquela va deves las autras orrificis e corr de lor.	Then christetrize the openings with their own openings, for the humidity by which you christetrize that one will affect the other openings and flow from them.
E aprop inquier exquisitament, segon qual manieyra a tu es possible que conoguas si aqui has os o nervi, e es la conquavitat de la fistula longinqua o propdana, o es una fistula a la qual so motz orrificis e esta sobre aquo tot am la suma de la tua fortaleza, am la tua enterroguacio, am la qual enterroguas le malaute, e la invencio de la dolor deves la tua compressio am la ma sobre le loc, e semblantz de las significacios e de las causas accidentz al apostema.	And then inquire meticulously, according to the manner in which you can know if here it is flesh or nerve, and whether the fistula's cavity is distant or nearby, or whether it is a fistula with only opening movements and is entirely above what you use of your strength, through your inquiry, upon which you inquire about the patient, and by your compression with your hand on the area, and the appearance of the significations and the causes of the swelling.
E cum tu auras stat sobre totas aquelas causas am stacio veraya, lahoras ve a la curacio segon confidencia: e es que tu consideras lahoras si es fistula apparent propinqua o en loc sal, longinqua de junctura, o de nervi, o de arteria, o de vena, o de un dels locs les quals yeu a tu e ditz.	And when you have stood by all those causes in their true position, then go to the cure according to confidence: for you consider now if it is a nearby apparent fistula or in a place solid, distant from the joint, or from the nerve, or from the artery, or from the vein, or from one of the places which I and you call.
Lahoras tu secca la fistula segon que denant es dit de la naracio de lu, e osta aquo que es en aquela filtracio e de carns corrumpudas, e aquo que es nascut en le orrifici de la carn, o de theil e de semblantz, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	When you dry the fistula as described earlier from its narration, and stop what is in that filtratio and of corrupted flesh, and what is born in the orifice of the flesh, or theith and similar, cure that within so that it may be healed.
Mays si la fistula es de longinqua profunditat, e es segon rectetut, lahoras cove que inscidas aquela en le preon atant quant a tu sira possible, e aprop mondifica aquela de totas las suas carns corrompudas; e aprop administra calguas envolopadas en medicinas acutas, e intromet aquelas entro a la conquavitat de la fistula, la qual has conprenduda am ferr.	But if the fistula is of great depth and straight, then you must enter it in the preon until it is as deep as possible, and thoroughly remove all corrupted flesh; and then administer sharp medicines wrapped in cloths, and insert those into the cavity of the fistula, which you have grasped with forceps.
E fay aquo am aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la medicina acuta corroda tot aquo que es romas en la conquavitat de la fistula de la corrupcio.	And do this with that several times until the sharp medicine corrodes all that is rotten in the cavity of the fistula and the corrupted flesh.
E aprop restaura aquela am enguentz les quals engendran carn sana entro que sia sanada.	And then restore it by applying ointments that generate healthy flesh until it is healed.
Mays si no es sanada per aquo, lahoras tu cauteriza aquela segon que havem recomtat.	But if it is not healed by this, then you cauterize it as we have previously recommended.
Mays si la causa de fistula es os e es deves tu certificat aquo, lahoras tu inquireys aquela e secca aquela segon que havem recomtat, si tu no prohibeys alcuna causa de vena o de nervi o de membre principal ayssi cum havem dit.	If the cause of the fistula is bone and you must certify this, then inquire about that dry and that moist one according to what we have recommended, if you do not prohibit any cause of vein or nerve or of principal member as we have said.
Mays si le os es a tu descubert e es en lu alcuna corrupcio e negror, lahoras tu ratz aquel entro que la corrupcio sia hostada tota; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que lu encarne entro que sia sanat.	But if the bone is exposed and there is some corruption and blackness in it, then you must incise into that area until the corruption is completely drained; and then cure that part as the flesh within it heals.
E si no es sana e gieta brac ayssi cum fazia, lahoras sapias que tu no est pervengut a la eradicacio tota de la corrupcio; e adonc tu descuebre sobre lu segondanament e exquisitament fay la razio de lu e la mundificacio de lu am la deriera fortalasa tieua, e aprop restaura aquel.	And if it is not healthy and you graft another piece of flesh as you do, then you must know that you have not completely eradicated the corruption; then you expose it again thoroughly and carefully explain its nature and purification with your final fortification, and then restore that area.
E donc si es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras sapias que aquela corrupcio es en la profunditat longinqua del cors, la qual no ha conseguida, e adonc a tu en aquel no es engen sino laysar aquela.	And so if it is healthy, that is good; but if not, then you must know that the corruption is deep within the body, which you have not reached, and then in that case, you should simply leave it alone.
E si le os corromput es petit, o es a tu possible atirar aquel, lahora tu le atira am forceps subtils las quals conveno ad aquo.	And if the corrupted bone is small, or if it is possible to extract it with forceps, then you should remove it with fine forceps that are suitable for this.
E si so motz osses, lahoras exquisitament fay la extraccio de totz aquels, e de aquels no laysses denguna causa am la tua fortaleza.	And if there are bone diseases, then carefully perform the extraction of all of them, and do not leave any due to your strength.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat alcuna causa de las humiditatz, e en lor inscizio no ha temor ni error, lahoras inscideys aquelas liaments o carns si so aqui, e deliura les osses.	And if there are any contrariness due to humidity, and in their incision there is neither fear nor error, then incise those ligaments or muscles if they are here, and deliver the bones.
Mays si a tu no es preparacio de ostar les osses de la tua hora, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua aquo que poyresca la plagua aquela, e layssa aquela entro que aquo es al enviro de aquels osses de carns e de liamentz, e guarda la plagua que no sia consolidada, e sia constrengida la seccio la qual tu has inscidida en la tua operacio.	And if you are not prepared to expose the bones at your time, then pause over the area that can be freed from it, and leave it in a place near those bones of muscle and ligaments, and guard the area that is not yet consolidated, and keep the section you have incised during your operation tightly closed.
Habantz, si temes, pausa sobre lu coto submers en sopre trissat am oli, o coto submers en anguent egipciac, o en alcu dels enguentz vertz, quar quan poyriran aquelas liaments, e les osses son de lor seperatz la ablacio, e de aquels atraccio es alleujada.	And if you fear, pause over the joint submerged in warm oil, or in Egyptian balm, or in any of the green ointments, until they can be freed from it, and when the bones are free from it, perform the ablution, and the traction is alleviated.
Mays si es un gran os ayssi cum le os de camba o de coyssa o semblantz ad aquels, e aquo que de lu es corromput es la facia de lu tant solament, lahoras ratz aquela am resio tant solament derriera entro que sia ostada aquela negror e corrupcio, e aprop restaura la plagua.	And if it is a large bone such as the hip or thigh bone or similar, and what is corrupted in it affects only its surface, then rush that part with resin only behind to where the darkness and corruption are stopped, and then restore the area.
Mays si aquo que de lu es corrumpyt es gran partida, e la corrupcio ja ha conseguida la medulla del os, lahoras es causa necessaria cerrar aquel e aquel tot inscidir entro al loc on es pervenguda la corrupcio, e lahoras cura aquel entro que sia consolidada.	If what is of it is corrupted and the corruption has already reached the marrow of the bone, then it is necessary to close that and incise thoroughly into the place where the corruption has occurred, and then cure that once it is consolidated.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc ad un home en la sua coyssa per que pausez aquela a eyssempli e adjutori sobre la tua operacio.	And I advise you when examining a man in the groin to place that as an example and helper for your operation.
Foc un home jove per etat entorn xxx ans, al qual accideys dolor en la sua cueyssa, e de las partidas dedintz mauguda es sobre la materia dedintz le cors entro que la materia es pervenguda a la cueyssa, e es materia de apostema am gran apostema, e no foc a lu causa extrinseca.	Let there be a young man around xxx years of age, to whom pain in the groin occurs, and from the internal parts maugava (a term similar to inflammation) is over the material inside the body where the matter has reached the groin, and the matter is of an abscess, a great abscess, and it is not due to an extrinsic cause.
E adonc foc extendut le temps am aquela per la error dels metges entro que l’apostema es hubert, e acorrero de lu materias motas, e la sua curacio foc aprop pausada entro que la camba foc fistulada, e faytz son en lu motz orrificis les quals totz getavan poyredura e las humiditatz del cos.	And then there was prolonged time due to the error of the doctors as the abscess became established, and the matter motas (pus) began to accrue from it. The cure was nearly paused as the hernia fistulated, and you made small orifices in the mass where all of them discharged pus and the body's humors.
E adonc le curec multitut de metges entorn dos ans, e no foc en aquels savia ma en la art, entro que yeu fu appelat.	And then for about two years, the master doctors surround him, and none of them in that wisdom in the art, among whom I was called.
E vi la camba de lu e las materias que corrian de lu aquels orrificis per gran cors; e ja le cos de aquel home era tot stabozit e la color de lu era citrina.	And there is the leg and the materials that were flowing from it through those openings into the body; and already the condition of that man was completely swollen and the color of his skin was yellowish.
E adonc yeu intromesi la tenta ad un de aquels orrificis e pervenguec la tenta al os.	And then I inserted the probe into one of those openings and guided the probe to the bone.
E aprop yeu e perscrutat tostz les orrificis e trobegui aquels pervenir a lor de totas partidas de la camba.	And then I examined all the openings closely and found which ones lead to them from all parts of the leg.
E adonc yeu me coytegui e inscidegui sobre un dels orrificis aquels entro que descrobegui una partida del os, e atrobegui aquel corromput, e ja era terros e corrumput e denigrat; e era ja corrumpuda una partida de la camba entro que havia penetrat entro a la mezola.	And then I positioned myself and incised over one of the openings among which I disclosed a part of the bone, and found the corrupted tissue, which was already terrible, corrupted, and discolored; and a part of the leg had already become corrupted where it had penetrated into the marrow.
E adon yeu serregui aquo que a mi era discubert e preparat del os descubert.	And then I clamped what was revealed to me and prepared the part of the bone that was disclosed.
E yeu cujegui que no fos en le os sino aquela corrupcio la qual abscidigui e serregui, e yeu ja havia derraziguada.	And I concluded that it is not in the bone but that corruption which abscides and constricts. And I had already razored it.
E aprop pausegui la restauracio de la plagua am medicina consolidativas per lonc temps, e no es consolidada.	And then proceed to restore the fracture with consolidative medicines for a long time, and it is not yet consolidated.
E aprop yeu iteregui e descubregui sobre le os segondament sobre le descubriment primier, e atrobegui continua corrupcio am le os.	And then you iterate and uncover over the bone according to the first discovery, and find continuous corruption in the bone.
E serregui aquo que a mi apares de aquela corrupcio, e aprop yeu fo perforsat fayre la curacio de lu e restauracio, e no es restaurat.	And constrict that which appears to me from that corruption, and then you proceed to perform the cure and restoration, but it is not restored.
E adonc yeu descubri sobre lu autra veguada e no cessegui inscidir le os petit a petit particuladament e perforsa la restauracio de lu, e no es restaurat entro que inscidigui entorn un palm de lu, e aquel extraxi am la medula sua, e aprop restauregui aquel am medicinas, e es consolidat leugierament e sanat.	And then you uncover it on the other side and do not cease to incise the bone little by little particularly, and proceed with the restoration. But it is not restored until you incise around a palm's width of it, and there you extract its marrow. Then you restore that part with medicines, and it is slightly consolidated and healed.
E no es necessaria iteracio en la operacio de lu e seccio de lu sino per la disposicio de la freulesa de lu e per la paucitat de la tollerancia de lu e paor de lu de mort, quar a lu accidia en totas horas per superfluitat de evacuacio sincopi mala.	And there is no need for iteration in the operation of the section of the limb, but rather due to the positioning of the limb and the lack of tolerance and fear of death in the patient, who experiences distress at all times due to excessive evacuation leading to poor circulation.
E donc sanat es per sanacio entiera, e nada es en loc de os carn dura; e es fayta bona la disposicio de lu en le sieu cors e retornec la vertut de lu; e es conversat en las suas disposicios e no fec a lu contrarietat en ambulacio ni nocument en denguna causa.	And so health is through complete healing, and nothing is in place of the flesh lasting; and it is done well the disposition of him in his body and return the virtue of him; and it is converted in his dispositions and not forced upon him contrary movements nor injury in any cause.
Mays si es os eminent en loc del cors ja trauquat, lahoras cove que tu secces aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas liament e strenh aquel en la extremitat de aquel os eminent, e comanda ad alcu que extenda aquel en sus; e pausa aquel liament de lana pus gros del primier liament; e aprop lia aquel sobre la carn que es dejos le os, e exten la extramitat de lu per que atires la carn a las partidas dejos, e tu descuebras la carn sobre le loc le qual voles serrar per que la serra no leda la carn.	And if the bone is protruding in a place already injured, then extract it as follows: you should grasp firmly and strongly that end of the protruding bone, command someone to extend that part; cover it with a larger woolen bandage than the first; place this over the flesh left behind by the bone, extending its end so that it draws the flesh towards the place left. You should uncover the flesh at the location you wish to cut for the blade not to pierce the flesh.
E pausa fust o taula dejos le os decentment, quar quan tu fas aquo no es prohibida la serra que no secce la carn corrumpuda.	And place a stick or board properly under the bone, for when you do this, it is not forbidden to cut the damaged flesh with the blade.
E cove que sia la serradura sobre le loc corrumput petit a petit, quar si es en la concavitat del os corrupcio e no appar en la sua apparicio al sentiment, e forssa a serratura de lu autra veguada.	And ensure that the cut is small and gradual at the damaged area, for if the corruption is inside the bone and does not appear in its appearance through sensation, you may need to make another cut.
E si le os es corrumput e no-eminent, abantz es la una partida continuada am la autra, e la corrupcio es al mieg loc o en partida de lu, lahoras tu descuebre la carn de totas partz tota; e aprop pausa fust dejos, e aprop serra aquel de la primiera partida la on es la corrupcio entro que sia continuada la serratura del autra partida.	And if the bone is corrupt and not prominent, one edge is continuous with the other, and the corruption is in the middle of it or part of it, then you uncover the flesh from all parts; then place a fust there, and apply that of the first piece where the corruption is located so that the closure of the other piece remains continuous.
E sia la serradura segon le loc de la corrupcio un petit, segon que havem dit.	And the closure should be smaller according to the location of the corruption, as we have said.
E si la corrupcio es en la junctura, inscideys aquela junctura corrumpuda, e serra le os la on es continuat del autra part.	And if the corruption is in the joint, incise that corrupted joint, and set the bone where it continues from the other side.
E si de la corrupcio es en la continuacio de doas juncturas, lahoras no es en lu razio sino engen.	And if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then it is not in its proper place but irregularly.
E si la corrupcio es en le pecte de la ma o del pe, es mot dificil; empero cove que tu inquieras la corrupcio en qual manieyra appareys a tu, e que abradas aquela, e mondes aquela segon quascuna disposicio la qual es a tu possibla, e am cascum engen sia rectificat a tu, quan no fa a tu contrarietat vena o nervi.	And if the corruption is in the pit of the hand or the groin, it is very difficult; however, you must inquire how the corruption appears to you, and incise and clean that area according to any disposition which is within your capability. In every case, it should be corrected as you see fit, provided it does not contravene veins or nerves.
E sapias qual es inscididors e las serras a inscidir aquestz osses son motz segon le situament dels osses, e la preparacio de aquels, e la grosseza de aquels, e la subtilitat e la grandeza e la parvitat de aquels, e la duricia e la lor raritat; per que cove que tu prepares a tota specia de operacio estrument convenient ad aquela opperacio.	And consider which are incisives and the saws to incise these bones are made of according to the position of the bones, and the preparation of those, and their size, and their subtlety and greatness and smallness, and their hardness and rarity; so that you prepare for every kind of operation an instrument suitable for that operation.
E sapias que aquela operacio significa a tu sobre la specia del strument del qual indigeysses; quan am tu es gran studi e lonc e conoyssensa de las manieyras de aquesta art, e testimoni de manieyras de malautias, quar lahoras ja tu las avias per tu meteys aquo que es convenient a lu dels sturmentz a tota malautia.	And consider that operation for you concerning the type of instrument of which you will need; when you have great study and long knowledge of the ways of this art, and experience with the ways of ailments, so that when you have them before your eyes, you can choose what is convenient for it from the instruments for all ailments.
E yeu so a tu formant en la fi de aquest capitol le nombre dels instrumentz les quals pausaras cum eyssimples am les quals proceziras a la tua prohibicio la qual experimentaras sobre las autras.	And you shall count at the end of this chapter the number of instruments which you will use, some of which you will prepare according to your prohibition, which you will then test on others.
Forma de serra:	Form of the saw:
Forma de autra serra:	Form of another saw:
Forma de autra serra:	Form of another saw:
Forma de autra serra gran:	Forma of another will be great:
Forma de ray:	Forma of ray:
Sia le cap de aquest ray segon la forma de cap de clau stellat, e les puntz de lu sian segon la forma dels puntz alstefegi.	Let the head of this ray be according to the form of the head of a star key, and its points be according to the form of the stars' points.
E no conveneys sino que am aquel sian confricadatz les caps de las juncturas quan so corrumpudas, o es la boca gran ampla.	And do not place them, but rather have those that are to be rubbed at the heads of the joints when they are broken, or at the large opening.
Forma de razori major dels autres:	Forma of the larger razor:
Forma de razori menor:	Forma of the smaller razor:
Forma de razori lat:	Forma of the broad razor:
Forma de serra autra decentment fayta: sia fayt arc de lu pus sobira e la acuitat de lu de ferr, e le membre de lu de boys punhal descentment fayt.	Forma of another saw decently made: let it be made with an arc above and the sharpness of it of iron, and the member of it of well-made pointed blades.
Forma de lu:	Forma of it:
Forma de razori en la qual ha concavitat:	Forma of the razor which has a cavity:
Forma de razori autra subtil:	Form of a razor or else subtle:
Forma de autra razori de curvada extremitat:	Form of another razor with a curved extremity:
Forma de rasori petit semblant a tenta:	Form of a small razor resembling a needle:
Forma de incisori am le qual so inscidit les osses:	Form of an incisor with which one cuts the bones:
Forma de inscisori autra minor:	Form of another smaller incisor:
Forma de un autra inscissori; aquest semblant a ray, e la extremitat de lu es cum serra, e es exhibit en motz locs en la razio dels osses:	Form of another incisor; this resembles a ray, and its extremity is like a锋利的边缘，其在骨的比例位置上显示出来。
Forma de ray lo qual conveneys a rasio de aquel que es perforat dels osses:	Form of a ray which conforms to the ratio of that which is perforated in the bones:
E la extremitat de lu es triangulada e de aguda extremitat.	And its extremity is triangular and尖锐的。
E es fayt de ferr de India , e semblantment cove que totas las causas que havem ditas de rasoris e de inscissoris e de serras.	And it is made of Indian iron, and similarly grooved like all the causes we have said about razors, incisors, and saws.
De inscizio extremitatz e de la serratura dels osses.	For the incision of extremities and the bone sawing.
Las extremitatz se poyresso o per causa intrinseca o per causa extrinseca, o cum tu auras medicat aquela corrupcio per curacio de aquelas medicinas e la curacio no comfereys, o vezes la corrupcio anar deves le membre la qual no percuteys denguna causa, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel membre entro aquo la hon acossec la corrupcio, per que le malaute evasesca per aquo de mort o de malicia que es major defeliment del membre.	The extremities may be affected either by an intrinsic cause or by an extrinsic one, or as you have medicated that corruption through the treatment of those medicines and the treatment does not bring relief, or sometimes the corruption goes away from the member which you do not perceive any cause for, then you must enter that member into it where the corruption accedes, so that the malady escapes by death or malice which is greater misfortune of the member.
E le senhal de aquel al qual accideys, es que·l membre es fayt negre entro que sia cujat que foc la ja comburit, o se poyreys aprop la negror entro que la poyredura aquela ane entro aquel membre que siec lu e que prengua tot le cors; e donc coyta te am inscizio de aquel.	The sign of him upon whom this happens is that the member turns black before it rots like wood already burned, or you may see near the blackness turn red a burning which enters that member and seeps throughout the body; therefore, quickly enter there.
E semblantment si es causa de la corrupcio percussio de alcunas causas venenosas ayssi cum de scorpio mari o de vupera o de rutela e de semblantz.	And similarly, if the cause of the corruption is a blow from some venomous causes such as a scorpion, a viper, or a rattlesnake, and similar.
E si la corrupcio o la percussio es en la extremitat del dit, lahoras tu inscideys le dit e no dones spazi a la corrupcio per que ane entro a la ma.	And if the corruption or blow is in the extremity of the finger, then you must cut the finger and do not give space to the corruption so that it enters your hand.
E semblantment si accedeys a la ma, lahoras tu inscideys aquela de la razit del focil, e no dones spazi a la corrupcio entro que prengua en le focil del bras.	And when you approach the hand, then incise that of the elbow, and do not give space for corruption to enter within the arm.
E si envezeys aquel, lahoras inscideys le bras entro al coyde en la junctura.	And if you prefer that one, then incise the arm between the elbow and the joint.
E si passa otra la corrupcio e la vezes enviro le coyde, lahoras en aquel es la mort del malaute; e aministrar autra causa otra aquo en curacio es quantitat de vertut.	And if corruption passes and surrounds the elbow, then this is the death of the patient; and to administer another cause other than this for cure is a measure of virtue.
E semblantment fay del pe quan corrupcio envezeys le dit del pe, lahoras tu inscideys aquel entro ad un dels nozes.	And similarly do for the foot when corruption prefers the toe of the foot, then incise that between one of the toes.
E si pren en la pente del pe, lahoras tu inscideys tot le pe.	And if it takes in the sole of the foot, then incise the entire foot.
Mays si pueja entro al denol, lahoras tu inscideys la camba entro a la junctura del denol.	But if it enters the sole, then incise the leg between the joint of the sole.
E si la corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denol, lahoras en lu no es engen sino dimissio, e layssar le malaute a la mort.	And if corruption has already permeated the sole, then there is nothing but dismissal, and leave the patient to death.
E la manieyra de inscidir le membre o de serrar lu es que tu strenhas le liament en la partida pus dejos la qual voles inscidir, e strenh autre liament sobre le loc; e extenda le ministre un liament a las partidas dejos, e extenda le ministra autra liament en sus; e tu separa la carn la qual es entre dos liamentz ain spatum lat entro que sia descuberta tota la carn; e aprop sia inscidit o serrat.	And the method of incising the member or sewing it is that you hold the ligament in the part and leave which you want to incise, and hold another ligament over the place; extend the assistant a ligament to the parts left, and extend the assistant another ligament on their side; you separate the flesh which is between two ligaments until all the flesh is uncovered; then it should be incised or sewn.
E cove que sia pausat drap de li de totas partidas per so que no toque le loc sa, e que vengua al malaute lesio ajustada e apostema caut.	And ensure that a cloth of linen is placed all around so that it does not touch the affected area, and that the wound and abscess are properly aligned and cauterized.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc quan obras, lahoras tu cauteriza le loc coytadament, o pausa sus lu alcunas polveras restrenhentz le sanc; e aprop retorna a la tua medicacio entro que sia complida.	And if you happen to have a flow of blood while working, then cauterize the place frequently, or place some constricting powders on it to stop the blood; then return to your treatment until it is completed.
E aprop lia le membre plaguat am liament al u convenient, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then tie the injured member with a ligament as needed, and care for it until it is healed.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc a un home en le sieu pe, aquest meteys accident le qual yeu e a tu recomtat, le qual es quar accidic a lu negror en le sieu pe am adustio que era asemblada a combustio de foc.	And I advise you that when someone finds a dark spot on his foot, this incident which we have both observed, is caused by a burn that resembles the combustion of fire.
E aquela corrupcio accidic primierament en le sieu dit entro que tendec tot le pe.	And that corruption accidently first occurs within the said intestine.
E adonc aquel home preparec per si meteys pus que vic la curacio anar al membre am la vehemencia de lu que atrobec de dolor e de adustrio de lu, e el inscidic aquel pe entro a la junctura, e foc sanat.	And then that man prepares himself to put more when he sees the cure going to the member with the urgency of what attacks him from pain and heat, and cuts that part into the joint, and heals the sore.
Lonc temps accidic a lu aquela meteyssa corrupcio en le dit de la ma indic.	Long time that corruption accidently occurs in the thumb of the hand indicated.
E adonc venc a mi, e so me perforsat repercutir aquela superfluitat am aquo que pausegui sobre la ma de las medicinas, aprop la mundificacio del cos de lu; e no es repercussa la superfluitat e comensec anar al autra dit entro que comensec en la ma.	And then I arrive, and so I force it to reflect the excess back onto what is held over the hand of the patient, near the transformation of the body; and the excess does not reflect back but begins to go into the other thumb where it began in the hand.
E el apelec me a inscidir la ma de lu, e yeu no volgui far aquo sperant sobre la repercussio de aquela superfluitat, e mays que temegui deves la inscizio de la ma de lu mort, quar la vertut del malaute era sobre cazement.	And they ask me to cut the hand of the patient, and I do not want to do this hoping for the reflection of that excess, more because I fear the cutting of the hand of the patient leading to death; for the virtue of gout was overabundant.
E pus que el se desperec de mi, es retornat en la sua terra e pervenguec a mi que aquel home preparec e inscidic la sua ma tota, e es sanat.	And when he wakes from me, he returns to his land and informs me that that man prepared and cut his entire hand, and he was cured.
E no he adhuzida aquesta narracio sino per que sia adjutori sobre aquo que catz de aquesta malautia, e que sia significacio per la qual sia significada e segon la qual sia obrat.	And I have added this narrative only to serve as an aid regarding what is known about this illness, and as a guide so that it may be acted upon accordingly.
De cura sinuum et qualitate clisterizationis cum medicinis.	On the care of colic and the quality of the enema with medicines.
Quan accideys apostema en alcus membres carnozes e·l spazi de l’apostema es prolonguat entro que fa colleccio de sania, e aprop es romput e perforat, e es eyssida de lu la sania, e roman le loc vuoyt quays cum si era vayssel, e la codena que es desobre lu ayssi cum drap subtiliat, e no es pervengut a deriera corrupcio, e no inprimeys en le os o en nervi ni en liament, es apelat sinu, e no es nompnat fistula.	When an apostema occurs in some fleshly members and the space of the apostema is prolonged such that it collects pus, and then is broken and punctured, and the pus is drained, and the place left void as if it were a vessel, and the cover above it remains like a thin cloth, and no further corruption occurs, and it does not imprint on the bone or nerve nor on the sinew, it is called a colic, and is not named a fistula.
Mays empero si le spazi es prolonguat entro que la corrupcio enprema en alcun membre, lahoras es appelada fistula e no zukem.	However, if the space is prolonged such that the corruption imprints on some member, then it is called a fistula.
E la cura de lu es que inscidas aquela codena tota ayssi cum es revolvut, e majorment quan es subtiliada e es fayta cum drap, e comfizas que no adhereys al loc per la sua corrupcio.	And the treatment for it is to insert that cloth entirely as if it were stirred, especially when it is thin and made like a cloth, and ensure that it does not stick to the place due to the corruption.
Mays si tu speras que la codena adheresca e que aquela corrupcio no aja conseguit per deriera consecucio, e en la codena ha spassitut de cara, lahoras tu cura aquel am clisteri.	If you hope that the stone will adhere and that the corruption has not yet reached an incurable state, and on the bladder there is passage through, then you cure it with a clyster.
E es que consideras al sinu, e lahoras si es gran, e·l brac que yeys es de fetent odor, lahoras clisteriza aquel am medicament egipciac le qual es de oli e vi agre e ziniar recebent partidas enguals, e sian ajustadas en un vayssel, e sian coytas sobre le foc entro que’l medicament se fassa rog e pervengua a specitut de mel.	And you consider the stone, and if it is large and the hand that holds it has a foul odor, then use a clyster with a medicinal Egyptian remedy which consists of oil, wine, and ziniar, each part in equal shares, and be sure to mix them in a vessel until the medicine becomes hot and reaches the specific part.
E aprop tu pren de lu aquo que es necessari e dissolveys lu am aygua e mel; e clisteriza am aquel le sinu, e strenh le orrifici de lu, e layssa la medicina en lu per la quantitat de doas horas.	And then you take what is necessary and dissolve the medicine in water and honey; clysterize it into the stone, strengthen the orifice of the bladder, and leave the medicine in it for the quantity of two hours.
E aprop extratz aquela am sprecio; e fay aquo per tantz dias entro que sia mundificat le sinu e sia remauguda la pudor.	And then extract that medicine; do this for several days until the stone is purified and the swelling subsides.
E alcunas veguadas es clisterizat am aygua de cendre, quan no es a tu prezent aquest medicament; e es que tu prenguas la cendra de vitz, e met sobre lu aygua; e aprop cola aquela e clisteriza aquel am ela entro que te confizes que·l sinu lahoras es ostat.	And sometimes a clyster is made with water of ashes when this medicine is not present; you take the ashes from vitriol, put them in water; and then extract that and clysterize it until you are certain that the stone has passed.
E si le malaute no ha tollerancia sobre le medicament egipciac ni l’aygua de la cendre, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aygua e mel e quays sia mesclat ziniar trissat, e clisteriza aquel am vi e mel mesclat, quar de proprietat de mel es que mondifique e lave, e le vi fa adherir le sinu, e majorment quan en le vi ha superfluitat de stipticitat e de siccitat.	And if the patient does not tolerate the Egyptian medicine or the water from the ash, then make a decoction with water and honey mixed in a three-to-one ratio, and make another with wine and honey mixed, for it is the property of honey to purify and wash, and wine causes the sinew to adhere, especially when there is an excess of dryness and aridity in the wine.
E cum tu fas aquo alcunas veguadas e te comfizes que·l sinu ja es remaugut, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aquo que fa naysser la carn en lu.	And when you have applied it several times and you are sure that the sinew is already softened, then use a decoction that promotes flesh growth in the sinew.
E es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e dissolveys aquel am oli rozat e vi stiptic; o que clisterizas aquel am alcunas medicinas e enguentz autres que hajan las proprietatz les quals ja he yeu scritz en le tractat dels enguents.	And you take dyafinicon ointment, dissolve it in oil and wine that is dry; or you make a decoction with some medicines and apply other ointments that have the properties which I have already written about in the treatise on ointments.
E si le orrifici del sinu es streyt en le qual no es recebuda la canula del clisteri, lahoras tu le amplifique aquel am ferr petit a petit, e pausa en lu calgua envolopada en enguent egipciac o en enguent basilicon entro que sia amplificat.	And if the opening of the sinew is narrow and does not receive the catheter, then gradually enlarge it with a small iron instrument, and place it in the opening wrapped in Egyptian or basilicon ointment while it is being enlarged.
E semblantment si le orrifici es ample, lahoras tu agregua las labias de lu am sutura e layssa de lu quantitat en la qual intre le clisteri ses addicio.	And if the opening is wide, then you add the lips of it with a suture and leave sufficient quantity in which the enema will be added.
E si le orrifici de lu del qual corr le brac es elevat a las partidas desus, lahoras secca aquel en le pus bas loc que es en lu per que le brac corra entro dejos, quar quan le brac es coartat en la preondeza de sinu la carn esser en lu engendrada.	And if the opening from which the arm flows is elevated towards the upper parts, then dry that area below which it is located so that the arm can pass through. When the arm is inserted into the sinus cavity, the flesh will be displaced.
E si no es a tu possible seccar le sinu entro al enviro del os pus bas segon que voles, lahoras te perforssa que prepares le membre am preparacio per la qual corr de lu le brac leugierament segon que es a tu apparelhat e que no sia en lu retengut alcuna causa del brac.	And if it is not possible to dry the sinus cavity within the vicinity of the bone below as you wish, then you should puncture the member with a preparation that allows the arm to flow through lightly according to what is convenient for you and so that no cause blocks the passage of the arm.
E pren medicinas consolidativas que sian pausadas sobre le sinu convenientz ad aquo que vols exxten aquelas sobre drap de li.	And take conservative medicines that are applied over the sinus conveniently where you want, extending them on a linen cloth.
E le drap sia de tan gran quantitat cum fa la comunicacio de tot le sinu; e aprop inscidey am las forfexs en le dreyt del orrifici del sinu un trauc pus ample un pauc que l’orrifici del sinu; e aprop exten sobre autre drap de li dels enguentz leons segon la quantitat del trauc, e pausa le sobre aquel per posicio longinqua del orrifici del sinu per que sia aleujat le eyssiment del brac de lu e no ostes le drap gran sino aprop alcus dyas una veguada.	And the cloth be of such great quantity as to make communication throughout the entire sinus; then cut with the scissors along the length of the opening of the sinus a bit wider than the sinus opening; then extend over another piece of linen the lion's ointment according to the size of the cut, and place it above that in a position distant from the sinus opening so that it eases the entry of the arm and does not disturb the cloth greatly but only for about a few days once.
Mays aquel que es sobre le orrifici del sinu, le qual remauguas en tota hora per so que yesca aquo que es ajust en lu del brac.	May he who is over the opening of the sinus, whom you warm at all times so that it does not come out of place in his arm.
E per que sapias si aquo que corr de lu del brac es mot o pauc, o es digest, o es no-digest.	And so that you may know if what flows from his arm is much or little, or is digestible, or is non-digestible.
E am aysso tu considera le loc de aquel sinu, si en lu sent le pacient dolor o no, e si es en lu apostema.	And so you consider the place of that sinus, if in it the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess.
E cum la tua medicacio es prolonguada en la tal manieyra, e vesas la matiera que es gitada sobre le orrifici del sinu ja adhereys, o se apropria adherencia, lahoras le mayti tu le deslia o le tertz dia, e quan deslias la plagua, lahoras muda le drap per autre e renova le enguent.	And as your medication is prolonged in this manner, and you see the matter that is discharged over the opening of the sinus has already adhered, or is approaching adherence, then hold it loose or let it dry for one day. When you remove the dressing, then change the cloth to another and renew the ointment.
Mays si del sinu aprop lon spazi yeys virus subtil, lahoras no te desperes de la adherencia de li, quar la sanacio de lu se apropria, quar so alcus homes en les quals tarda generacio de carn en las lors plaguas, e de aquels so en les quals es fayt le contrari de lu.	May it be that the sinus has a subtle virus nearby, then do not worry about its adherence, for the healing of it is approaching. For some people, the generation of flesh in their wounds takes longer, and in those, the opposite occurs.
E si del sinu aprop motz dias es yssit brac indigest, lahoras sapias que·l sinu no adhereys; e si es tardada la adherencia del sinu e es la causa prolonguada, lahoras tu ajusta en exsiccacio de las medicinas, e si las medicinas so humidas en lor substancia e en la sua vertut, son seccas ayssi cum enguent dyafinicon, quan es en lu ajustada superfluitat de addicio de zegi.	And if from the sinus for several days there is a sitting with indigestion, then you may know that the sinus does not adhere; and if the adherence of the sinus is delayed due to prolonged cause, then you adjust in drying by means of medicines, and if the medicines are moist in their substance and in their virtue, they are dried thus as an ointment yaffinicon when there is excess addition of zegi.
E le mays derier am le qual es curat, es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e sia dissout en oli rozat, e sia sobre lu vojat vi antic engual en la sua substancia, e aprop comfeys aquel am lu, e usa de aquel.	And the best remedy for what is cured, is that you take an ointment of yaffinicon and dissolve it in sweet oil, and apply it very gently on the area, and use only this.
E ja fa semblant en aquela accio, quan no y a brac, enguent dyafinicon, mel quan es coyt entro que sia engrossat, e usa de lu; o que prenguas mirra e aloen e enses, e trissa tot e polveriza sobre le mel quan es sus le foc, e aprop lineys aquo sobre drap e strenh aquel sobre le sinu; e lineys aquel am le mel le qual has cuoyt entro que es engrossat, e polveriza sobre drap e strenh aquel.	And pretend in that action when there is no pain, use yaffinicon ointment, honey when it is mixed in to make it thick, and use it; or what you take myrrh and aloes and incense, and grind them all together over the fire with honey, then line the area with cloth and strengthen the sinus; and line that with honey which you have mixed until it is thick, and sprinkle cloth and strengthen that.
E alcunas veguadas so administratz am lu aristologia longua e razitz de lili celesti (e es lili celesti) e farina de errs e centaurea, e usa de aquels simples o ajustatz, trissa aquels e cribela e polveriza sobre le mel le qual he recomtat; e husa de lu.	And sometimes these are administered to him long speeches and reasonings about the celestial lily (and the celestial lily) and flour of pearls and centaury, and use those simples or adjusted ones, squeeze them and sift over the honey which I have prescribed; and use it.
E si es prolonguat le sinu, e no es sanat per aquesta curacio, lahoras sapias que la corrupcio es en le preon de lu, e ja fa enquisicio en les osses o en les autres membres durs o als liaments; lahoras tu le cura am curacio fistular, ayssi cum desus es dit.	And if the sinus is prolonged and is not cured by this treatment, then you should know that the corruption is in the root of it, and make an inquiry into the bones or other hard members or ligaments; then you cure it with a fistula cure, as was said above.
De curacio de panarici et unguis attritae et incisione digiti additi et sectione.	For the treatment of tumors, nail attrition, and incision of the digit with sectioning.
Panarici es apostema le qual nays dejos la ungla del dit pous de la ma o del pe, e fort leu nays en les autres ditz, e cum es prolonguat e la sua curacio es mens prezada, o es apostemat de apostema caut, o es corrumput, e gieta brac entro que corrodeys la razitz de la ungla, e fort leu corromp aquela tota, e fort leu perve la sua corrupcio al os entro que es a lu odor fetent, e es fayta la extremitat del dit lada, e la color de lu es fayta fusca.	Panarici is an apostema which leaves the nail of the finger of the hand or foot, and is hard in other fingers, and as it prolongs, its cure is less valued, or it becomes a cautery apostema, or it is corrupted, and you insert a brace where you corrode the root of the nail, and thoroughly corrupt that entire part, and allow its corruption to pervade the bone within which there is an odor produced, and the extremity of the finger is cut off, and the color of it becomes jaundiced.
E donc quan tu auras aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas am ferr tota la superfluitat que es romasa de la ungla e aprop cauteriza la plagla aprop aquo, quar cauteri mot es juvatiu en aysso.	And when you have done that as we said in the division and do not apply your cure, then you must enter and remove all the superfluous matter that is released from the joint and place a cautery near it, for cauterization is beneficial in this case.
Mays si le os es sa e la ungla es sana, e las addicios de la ungla vuoydas ja compremen las carns a las partidas dedintz, e comensan lu punger e ledeysso aquela, lahoras cove que tu pauses ray subtil dejos le angle de la ungla que pungeys la carn, e impelleys aquela sus e inscideys aquela carn am facilitat, e pausa sobre aquo que roman de la carn de las medicinas comburentz corrosivas entro que sia tot remaugut; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if the bone is sound and the joint is healthy, and the additions of the joint have already compressed the flesh at the inner parts, and begin to pierce and release it, then you must pause with a sharp knife at the angle of the joint that pierces the flesh, and push it out and incise that flesh with ease, placing your hand over what remains of the flesh until all the medicines containing corrosive substances are thoroughly absorbed; then cure that area by applying ointment until it is healed.
Mays si la corrupcio ja enprem en le os, lahoras cove que tu inscidas le os aquel e le extraguas, car nul temps no es sanat que sia en lu le os corrumput.	And if the corruption has already entered the bone, then you must incise the bone and remove it, for nothing is healed that remains in the corrupted bone.
E si vezes la corrozio e la corupcio anar en le dit, lahoras tu inscideys aquel en un dels nozes segons que es premesa la sua rememoracio, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you see the corrosion and corruption spreading to that area, then you must incise it at one of the joints according to where its location is remembered, and then cure that area until it is healed.
Mays si a la ungla endeve percussio o atricio, e endeve en aquela dolor vehement, lahoras cove que tu al comensament fleubotomes le malaute, e aprop secca la ungla am spatum agut am seccio transversa desus en jus, e guarda te que la seccio no pervengua entro a la carn que es dejos la ungla, quar tu faras accidir al malaute dolor vehement, e sira causa a nativitat de la carn ajustada superflua en le loc; e aprop cura aquel loc am aquo que ceda dolor.	If at the joint there is percussion or friction, and the pain is intense there, then you should at the beginning phlebotomize the patient, and subsequently dry the joint with an incision using sharp extraction in a transverse section above with juice, and guard yourself so that the drying does not penetrate into the flesh left by the joint, for you will cause the patient intense pain, which is due to the natural excess of adjusted superfluous flesh in the area; and cure that area with what alleviates pain.
Mays dit ajustat, le qual es nat en las mas de alcus homes, fort leu es carnos tot, e fort leu so en lu osses, o fort leu es en lu ungla.	Moreover, by "adjusted," which in some people is born with flesh that is very heavy, and bones that are very light, or joint that is very heavy.
E alcus de lu son natz en la razit de la junctura, o es la nativitat de lu en alcus nozes dels ditz.	And in some people it is born in the recess of the joint, or the natural condition of their fingers contains several nodules.
Mays aquel que es nat en alcus nozes del dit no se mau, e aquest que es nat en las juncturas fort leu es maugut.	Moreover, that which is born in finger nodules is not so dangerous, and this that is born in the joints is more serious.
E de aquels que son natz carnoses, la seccio es leugiera, e es que tu inscidas aquel deves la sua razitz am spatum lat.	And for those that are born fleshy, the drying is light, and you should incise it along its recess with a sharp blade.
Mays de aquel que es nat en la razitz de la junctura, la curacio es dificil; e donc guarda te de la abscizio de lu.	More difficult for that which is near the site of the joint, the cure is; therefore, beware of its removal.
Mays en aquel que es nat en dit deves les nozes, cove que tu inscidas al comensament la carn de lu am inscizio redonda entro al os, e aprop serra am una de aquelas serras convenientz ad aquo, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	More difficult in that which is near the site of the kneecap, cut into the beginning of the flesh at the circumference inside the bone, and nearby will be one of those convenient seams for this, and cure that within so that it may heal.
Mays consolidacio la qual accideys als ditz entre lor motas veguadas o per nativitat del home que nays enayssi, o per consolidacio de plagua o per combustio de foc, o per semblantz, adonc cove que secces aquela consolidacio entro que les ditz retorno a la sua forma natural.	More difficult the consolidation which occurs to the fingers between their veins or by nature of the man who is born with it, or by consolidation of plague or by burning, or by similarity, then you should correct that consolidation so that the fingers return to their natural form.
E aprop pausa entre lor draps de li enfuzes en oli rozat per que no sian consolidatz leugierament, e separa entre aquels, o pausa entre aquels una lamina de plom subtil entro que sia consolidat segon que cove.	And place between their bandages what is enfused in olive oil so that they do not consolidate lightly, and separate between them, or place between them a thin sheet of lead so that they may consolidate as needed.
E semblantment si accideys consolidacio en alcus ditz am la palma, lahoras tu secca aquela consolidacio segon que es preparada e conveneys a la figura del membre.	And similarly, if consolidation occurs in some fingers at the palm, then dry that consolidation as prepared and conform to the figure of the member.
De inscizio de vices, so son varicas.	From the cutting of veins, so are varicose veins.
Vices so son varicas, e so venas envolutas grossas plenas de superfluitatz melencolicas las quals veno en motz dels membres del cors, e le major adveniment de lor en las cambas, e majorment en las cambas dels itinerantz e dels laborantz e dels portantz.	Veins are varicose veins, and they are enlarged veins filled with excessive melancholic fluids which occur in the parts of the body, and their most significant occurrence is in the legs, especially in those who travel, work, or stand.
Adonc cove que tu administres purguacio del cors de colera negra alcunas veguadas am expulcio fort, e aprop sangna le pacient de la vena basilica.	Then administer purgation of the body from black bile several times until there is a strong expulsion, and subsequently bleed the patient from the internal jugular vein.
Mays la curacio de lor am ferr es segon dos manieyras: la una es que sia inscizas e sia atirat aquel sanc negre, e l’autra manieyra es que sia elevada la vena e sia extrayta tota.	More often, the treatment of varicose veins can be done in two ways: one way is to cut and remove that black blood, and the other way is to elevate the vein and extract it entirely.
La seccio de lu es segon aquesta manieyra: embroca al comensament la camba am aygua cauda mot entro que le sanc gros sia resolvut, que es feculent de la camba, e aprop strenh la camba del malaute a la partida pus sobirana de la coyssa entro a la partida dejos del denol am una benda, e aprop secca la vena en un loc, o en dos, o en tres am seccio ampla, e aprop eleva le sanc negra am la tieua ma de la partida dejos de la camba entro en sus, e desus en jus, entro que del sanc sia yssida la quantitat que voles e que vezes habastar, e la qual tollera la vertut del malaute.	The sectioning is done in this manner: moisten the beginning of the leg with hot water until the thick blood is resolved, which is clotted from the leg. Then strengthen the part of the patient's thigh above the groin by placing a bandage between the inner and outer parts of the thigh. Next, dry the vein in one, two, or three wide sections. Raise the black blood with your hand on the outer part of the leg, above the fold, until the quantity you desire has drained, which is sufficient to allow the virtue of the thigh to prevail.
E aprop lia aquela, e comanda a lu que abstengua de las viandas colera negra engendrantz.	And then bind her, and command her to abstain from foods generating black bile.
E itera la curacio per fleubotomia quan las venas so umplidas e aquo notz al malaute.	And continue the cure with phlebotomy when the veins are filled and this is noticed by the patient.
Mays la elevacio de lor es segon aquesta manieyra: tu que razas la camba del malaute, si en lu so motz pels, e aprop met le en banh e embroca la camba de lu am aygua cauda entro que s’enrogesesca e las venas sian exuberadas; o que sia exercitat per exercici fort, si banh no es a tu present, entro que·l membre sia scalfat.	Raise the limb in this manner: you raise the thigh of the patient, if there are hairs on it, and then place it in hot water and apply the cloth to the thigh with wet heat until it becomes red and the veins are dilated; or exercise it through strong exertion, if hot water is not available, until the limb is warmed.
E aprop secsa la codena en le dreyt de la vena per seccio en le lonc o en le derier de lu deves le denol, o en le pus bas de lu deves lo talo.	And then dry the cord along the length of the vein. If it is in front, you lance it; if it is at the back, you cut it.
E aprop uobre la codena am uncis e excorja la vena de tota part entro que appara al sentiment, e es deves la appericio de lu que vezes aquela roga declinant a negror.	And then cut the cord with scissors and scrape the vein from all sides until you feel it appearing. You should appreciate the sight when that rope begins to decline into blackness.
E donc cum evazeys e de la codena tu vezes aquela blanca quays sia corda.	And then, when you have incised and cut the cord, you see that white thing which is the vein.
E aprop tu met dejos aquela le ray entro que sia elevada e sia gitada de la codena, e sospen aquela am onci orp leon.	And then you place that ligament elevated and curved from the knee, suspending it on an ounce or lion's skin.
E aprop secsa autra seccio aprop aquela seccio per tres ditz, e aprop excorja la codena de la partida desus de la vena entro que apparia.	And then dry another section near that section for three digits, and then scrape the knee from above the vein where it appears.
E aprop eleva aquela e inscideys aquela en deriera seccio deves le talo, e aprop extratz aquela e eleva aquela entro que sia yssida per la seccio segonda, e aprop extratz aquela de la seccio que es sobre aquela.	And then elevate that and incise the rear section of the tendon, and then extract and elevate it where it enters through the second section, and then extract it from the section above that.
E fay aquo entro que extraguas aquela de la seccio que es pus sobirana o pus auta de totas las seccios, entro que tota es yssida; e lahoras inscideys aquela.	And do this where you extract it from the section that is higher above or above all other sections, where it is fully inserted; then incise it.
E si no obezeys a tu ad extrayre e elevar, lahoras intromet una agulha am fiel fort doble e ligua aquela e extratz la, o intromet dejos lu le ray e revolveys la tua ma a tota part entro qu’en sia getada.	And if you do not follow this to extract and elevate, then insert a needle with strong thread and tie it there and extract it, or insert something the size of the tendon and rotate your hand in all directions where it is curved.
E guarda te que no sia inscidida; quar si es trencada, es fayt a tu dificil elevar aquela mot e es vengut sobre le malaute per aquela nocument.	And make sure it is not incised; for if it is broken, it will be difficult to elevate that part and the damage has come about through that break.
E cum aquela tota auras fora-gitada, lahoras pausa sobre le loc de la plagua lana submerssa en vi e oli rozat e oli no-rozat, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And when the whole has been washed out, then place over the wound wool soaked in wine and oil, and another of undipped oil, and cure that until it is healed.
E si la vit es contrayta havent tortuositat a la qual sia envolucio a las partidas, e no es segon rectitut segon que havem dit, lahoras cove que tu fendas sobre aquela a tota partida de tortuositat de lu e als locs de envolucio de lu, e aprop suspen aquela am uncis entro que eleves aquela tota.	And if the vein is constricted having tortuosity in which there is an encapsulation in its parts, and it does not follow straightness as we have said, then cut into that entirely at all parts of its tortuosity and at the locations of its encapsulation, and raise that completely by suspending it.
E guarda te deves la tua seccio que no inscidas la vena e que no plagues aquela, quar dificil sira a tu elevar aquela; e serva la tua prudencia en aquela.	And guard yourself in your section that you do not incise the vein and that you do not pierce that, for it will be difficult to raise that; use your prudence there.
Forma del inscident am le qual es seccada vit:	Form of the incision where the vein is dried:
Forma de unci orp:	Form of the incision for the vein:
No es a lu accuitat ayssi cum als uncis ni es de aguda extremitat per so que no plague la vena; e es de grossa flexibilitat leon, quar si era subtil, inscidira la vena per la sua subtilitat; habantz es en lu superflua grosseza ayssi cum havem dit.	It is not as deep as other incisions nor does it have a sharp extremity so that it does not pierce the vein; and it is of great flexibility. If it were too thin, it would cut the vein due to its thinness; having this in its superfluous thickness as we have said.
De extraccio venae cruris.	From the extraction of the leg vein.
Aquesta vena es engendrada en las cambas en terras caudas ayssi cum al- Ategi en terra de Arabics e en las terras de India caudas e aridas de pauca teneritat e en las quals no nays erba ni aybre.	This vein is generated in the legs in lands of swamps thus as in the lands of Arabs and in the lands of India, in those swamps and arid lands with little tenacity and in which neither grass nor trees grow.
E fort leu es engendrada en autres locs del cors otra las cambas.	And strongly it is generated in other parts of the body besides the legs.
E la gestacio de lu es de putrefaccio que ve dejos la codena ayssi cum venen dedintz le cors serpentz e vermps e scarides e verms engendrantz entre la codena e la carn.	And its generation is from putrefaction that breaks the chain thus as worms and vermin and lice breed between the chain and the flesh.
E senhal de la suscepcio de l’adveniment de lu es de aquesta vena que accideys en la camba enflammacio vehement; e aprop le loc es vesicat; e aprop comensa la vena yssir del loc de aquela vesicacio quays sembla razit de planta.	And the sign of the susceptibility to the advent of this is from this vein that you accidet in the leg inflammation; and then the area becomes vesicated; and soon the vein starts to issue from the place of that vesication, seeming like a plant shoot.
E adonc cum appar de lu la extremitat, lahoras cove que tu envolvas sobre aquela una pessa de plom del qual sia le pes de una drac. entro a ii drac., e noza aquela e layssa le plom suspendut de la camba.	And then as its extremity appears, when you cover it with a piece of lead weighing the weight of a dragon's foot, about two dragons' worth, smell that and let the lead hang from the leg.
E tantas veguadas cum yeys de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, envolveys aquo em plom e noza aquel.	And as many times as there are reasons for it on the parts outside, wrap this in lead and press it.
E si mot es prolonguat, lahoras tu inscideys una partida de lu e envolopa le romanent; e no inscidas aquela de razit entro que sia fora yssida, quar si inscideys aquela es contrayta e intra en la carn e fa accidir apostema e poyredura en le loc e ulceracio mala.	And if the wound is prolonged, then you incise a part of it and wrap the remainder; and do not incise that which is inside while it is outside, for if you incise it, it will contract and enter the flesh, causing an abscess, suppuration, and bad ulceration.
Per que cove que sia tractada suaument e sia extrayta petit a petit, entro que sia fora-gitada del derier de lu e no remangua de lu alcuna causa en le cors.	To be treated adequately and extracted little by little, until it is expelled from the end of it and no cause should remain in the body.
E de aquesta vena es yssit en alcus homes que es en la sua longitut de v palms e de detz e ja es pervengut a mi que yssic un de xx palms.	And from this vein, some men have been laid out whose length is more than five palm breadths and I have been told that one was cut to twenty palms in length.
E si es inscidida en la hora de la sua medicacio, lahoras intromet lo ray en le trauc de lu e perfora aquela am lonc trauc am le cors, entro que sia evacuat tot aquo que es en la materia, e administra putrefaccio del loc per alcus dias am medicinas; e aprop cura aquela per la curacio de apostemas.	And if it is incised at the time of its medication, then insert the probe into the tract of the vein and perforate that along the tract through the body, until all that is in the material is evacuated, and administer putrefaction to the area for several days with medicines; and then cure it by the treatment of abscesses.
E aquesta vena alcunas veguadas ha motz ramps, e majorment quan apar a la junctura del pe o en le pe, e veno a lu motz orrificis, e es yssit de quascu orrifici ram.	And this vein sometimes has small openings, especially when it appears at the joint of the foot or in the foot, and brings blood to these openings.
E donc cura aquela ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio e am aquo que es desus dit.	And therefore care for it this way as we have said in the division and above.
De sectione super vermes generatos sub cute et dicitur aegritudo bovina.	Of the section on worms generated under the skin, which is called bovine illness.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en alcuna terra deves nos malautia bovina per so quar motas veguadas endeve als bious e es verm pauc un le qual es nat entre la codena e la carn, e va en tot le cos pujan e devalan, e es mostrat al sentiment deves le sieu anament de membre en membre entro que disromp la codena e yeys fora.	This illness is named in some lands as the bovine disease. It is caused by small worms that often affect cows, and these few worms are native between the skin and the flesh, and they ascend and descend throughout the body, and their movement can be felt from one member to another, breaking through the skin and coming out.
E la generacio de lu es per putrefaccio de alcunas humors ayssi cum accideysso verms e serpentz e lombrics e ascaridas en le ventre.	And the generation of these worms occurs through the putrefaction of some humors, just as happens with maggots, snakes, worms, and roundworms in the belly.
E es temut per la malicia de lu, quar quan el va en le cors e es elevat al cap, e es pervengut al huel, lahoras fort leu uebre en lu e intra e destruzeys le huel, e aquo endeve motas veguadas.	And it is feared because of its malice, for when it enters the body and rises to the head, and affects the liver, then greatly weakens it and intrudes and destroys the liver, and this often occurs.
E donc quan tu voles curar aquel e extraire lu, lahoras no se fa si no deves la sieua ambulacio e apparacio de lu al sentiment, e adonc cove que tu strenhas aquo que es sobre lu e aquo que es dejos lu am liament e constriccio fort, e aprop secca sobre lu e extratz aquel.	And when you want to cure that and extract it, it is not done if you do not consider its mobility and appearance with respect to sensation, then check what is upon it and what is left from it in liquid and strong constriction, and dry it thoroughly before extracting it.
E si es preondat en la carn e no le atrobes, lahoras tu pausa cauteri am foc sobre le loc entro que mora, e la major causa que es temuda es corrupcio de lu am la qual corrump le loc ayssi cum havem dit.	And if it is swollen in the flesh and you do not find it, then place a cautery on fire over the area where it resides, and the main fear is corruption of it, which corrupts the area as we have said.
May si tu vezes aquel esser pervengut al cap prop del huel, lahoras strenh sobre le sobrecil am fort strictura, e aprop secsa sobre lu, e extratz aquel; e cove que·l malaute use de mondificacio del sieu cors am medicinas evacuantz humors putridas malas, e guarda se de viandas generantz putrefaccio.	If you see that it has reached the head near the ear, then apply strong constriction over the supraorbital ridge, and dry it thoroughly, and extract it; and check that the ailment uses modification of its body with medicines that evacuate putrid and bad humors, and avoid foods causing putrefaction.
De sectione super aegritudinem nafir.	Of the section on the illness of the nose.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en nostra terra nafir, e es dolor la qual ve en alcus membres, e aprop es permudada de membre en membre.	This illness is called "nafir" in our land, and it is a pain that occurs in some members, and often is shifted from member to member.
E yeu ja e vista aquela segon que yeu te recomtare.	And I have already seen that according to which I will recount.
Yeu fu apelat a una femna malauta ad una vila, e descubric le sieu bras e vi una imflacio petita en la vena funis del bras, e pus que fu romas per una hora, vi aquela imflacio anar ayssi cum va verm pujan ad aquest, mays pus leugierament que esser por, ayssi cum si fos argent viu quan corr de loc en loc.	I was called to a sick woman at a village, and upon examining her arm, I found a small swelling in the vein network of the arm. After it had risen for about an hour, I saw that this swelling rose up similarly to how vermilion rises, but less intensely than feared, appearing as if it were living silver moving from place to place.
E adonc anet s’en la dolor de aquel loc e fiquet se en le muscle, e aprop aqui stec per una hora.	And then the pain was in that place, and a clot settled in the muscle, and there it remained for about an hour.
E aprop correc en l’autre cors entro que pervenc al autre bras.	And then it receded in the other arm as it approached the other side of the body.
E aprop recomtec a mi que revolvia se per tot le cors sieu segon que yeu vi; e fo trop meravelat de la permutacio de lu e de la velocitat de membre en membre.	And then I was told that she moved around the entire body as I observed; it was too marvelous to see the change in her and the speed at which it moved from member to member.
E yeu ja havia vist denant aquo en les mieus huels segon aquela manieyra, empero yeu he vistz motz les quals atroban dolor esser permutada de membra a membre.	And I had already seen this before in my patients in that manner, but I have also seen movements where the pain is perceived to be permuted from member to member.
Mays no vi aquo am les huels ayssi cum en la femna.	But not all have such heels as in the female.
E yeu no cogiti esser aquo sino que es per aquo quar la femna era de viela, on so de secs cors e de venas descubertas, e en aquesta apparec al sentiment aquela ventositat permutada.	And I do not consider it to be so, but rather that it is because the female had a slender body and exposed veins, and in this case there appears a sensation of that fullness changed.
E es necessari que no apparesca segon aquesta retro-curacio en aquels que son delicioses e am cors humitz de venas ameguadas.	And it is necessary that this backward curvature not appear in those who are slender and have soft, engorged veins.
E cum tu voles la curacio de lu, e le pacient sent aquela dolor, lahoras no es a tu aparent al huel ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras tu strenh sobre aquel e dejos lu leugierament e secse sobre aquel entro que sia yssida aquela ventositat coartada, e cauterize le loc.	And since you want the cure for it, and the patient feels that pain, when it does not appear to your eye as those heels we have said, then strengthen there and let it be slightly and gently on that area until the constricted fullness is inserted, and cauterize the place.
Mays si tu no la vezes am los tieus huels, alhoras tu cura aquel am excussio del cors e am aquo que expelleys ventositatz, e carmina aquelas am pillulas fetidas e am pillulas de serapi e semblantz.	But if you do not see it in the heels, then cure that by releasing the body and what you expel of fullness, and cleanse those with stinky pills and snake root pills and similars.
De extraccio de sagetas.	From the extraction of arrows.
Sagetas son diversificadas segon las specias, e segon les locs dels cors en les quals cazo, quar la lor diversitat es que de aquellas so que han grans puntas, e petitas, e concavas, e sordas, so es solidas; e de lor so que han tres angles, e de aquelas a las quals so que han lenguas; e de aquelas a las quals so astelas.	Arrows are diverse according to the species and according to the places of the body where they lodge, for their diversity is that some have large points, small ones, concave, and dull ones, which are solid; and some have three angles, and those to which belong tongues; and those to which belong fletches.
E aquela que es segon les membres e las pessas en las quals cazo es segon dos manieyras: quar les membres o so membres principals concaus, ayssi cum le cervel, le cor, e·l fitge, e le pulmo, e les ronhos, e les budels, e la vezica, e a lor semblantz; e donc quan catz en alcu de aquestz membres e aparo a tu senhals de mort, la qual causa yeu recomtare aprop, lahoras cove que tu evites extraccio de aquela sageta en aquels quar la mort siec aquel en le qual en las majors disposicios, e quan a tu no appareysso aquestz mals senhals, e la sageta no es amaguada en la profunditat del membre, lahoras tu extratz aquela e cura la plagua.	And that which is according to the members and the feet where they lodge is according to two ways: for the members or are principal parts wounded, such as the brain, the heart, the liver, the lungs, the intestines, the bladder, and their like; therefore when it wounds any of these members and appears to you signs of death, which cause I will describe shortly, then cover that arrow in those where death is found. In the major disposals, if at you do not appear these evil signs and the arrow is not hidden in the depth of the member, then you extract that and cure the wound.
E dels senhals del servel es quan catz en lu sageta, e trespassa le os, e es yssit del cyphac le qual es sobre le cervel, quar accideys per lu soda vehement, e scotomia, e vertige, e rogor en les huels, e imflamacio e rogor de la lengua, e spasme e permixtio de entendament e vomi de colera, e fort leu es abscindida la paraula e es destruida la votz, e es yssit del loc de la plagua humiditat blanca semblant a pols, e yeys de lu semblant ad aquositat de la carn.	And of the signs of the arrow, when it wounds the brain and passes through the bone, and is situated above the foramen which is over the brain, for it happens by its violent toxicity, scotoma, vertigo, redness in the pupils, inflammation and redness of the tongue, spasms and confusion of understanding, and vomiting of bile, and strongly the speech is cut off and the voice is destroyed, and is situated above the place of the wound a white moisture resembling powder, and it appears from it as an excess of fleshiness.
E donc si appareyso a tu aquestz senhals, lahoras tu abste de la curacio e de la extraccio de la sageta, si non es fora.	And therefore if you observe these signs, then abstain from the cure and extraction of the arrow, unless it is outside.
Mays les senhals de la sageta quan catz en le cor, so que ela es prop de la mamila senestra, e sent am aquela quays sia ficada en causa dura, e no es causa vueda; e fort leu le movement de la sageta es semblant a movement del pols, e corr de la plagua sanc negra, e siec aquel fregiditat de las extremitatz, e suzor freja, e sincopi; e donc sapias que la mort descen ses tot dopte.	And the signs of the arrow when embedded in the heart are that it is close to the left nipple, and one feels a hard lump there, which is not easily caused; and the strong movement of the arrow seems like the pulse, and the flow of the black bloody wound, and the coldness at the extremities, pallor, and syncope; and from this you would know that death descends totally.
E les senhals quan la sageta ha plaglat le pulmo so eyssiment de sanc spumos de la plagua, e les vayssels que so prop del col so apostematz, e es mudada la color del malaute, e expira sperit gran aut, e demanda atraccio de ayre freg.	And the signs when the arrow has pierced the lung are spitting of foamy blood from the wound, and the vessels near the neck are swollen, and the color of the patient changes, and he exhales a great breath or sighs for air.
E si catz la sageta en le velament le qual es en le pietz, e la dolor lahoras es prop de las costas petitas, e es fayt le ale gran am vehement dolor e am sospir, e no so maugutz totz les membres dels muscles.	And if the arrow is embedded in the periosteum which is in the foot, and the pain then is near the small bones, and causes a great and violent pain along with sighing, and does not affect all the members or muscles.
E si catz la sageta en le stomac, lahoras fort leu yeys de la plagua vianda alcuna indigesta.	And if you cut the arrow in the stomach, then forcefully extract some undigested food from the wound.
E si catz la sageta en le ventre, e es ficada en lu, yeys alcuna fenda de la plagua, o la tela, o budel le qual es disromput, e no es speransa en la curacio de lu extraccio de la sageta.	And if you cut the arrow in the belly, and it is embedded there, extract any wound opening, or the tissue, or intestine which is ruptured, and there is no hope for the recovery of the wound from the extraction of the arrow.
E si la sageta catz en la vesica, e es yssida defora urina, e procesesca de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, e fort leu es dolor sobre le malaute, lahoras sapias que es mortal.	And if the arrow cuts into the bladder and pierces through it, causing urine to leak out, and any process from this causes pain in the patient, then notice that there is a mortal danger.
Mays les autres membres ayssi cum es la cara, le col, e·l golayro, e las spallas e le adjutori, e les spondils del dos, e la furcula, e la coysa, e la camba e a lor semblantz dels membres, son salvatz segon las majors disposicios quan la sageta no atroba vena ni arteria e no es sageta venenosa.	Moreover, other members such as the face, neck, shoulder, arm, helper muscle, spine, furcula, and coxa, along with their corresponding parts of the body, are saved according to the major dispositions when the arrow does not hit a vein or artery and is not a poisonous arrow.
E yeu recomtare aquo a tu que he vist del esser de aquestas sagetas, per que signifiques per aquo sobre la curacio tieua.	And I will recount to you what I have seen about the nature of these arrows, so that you may understand this regarding their treatment.
La qual causa es, quar en un home cazec sageta en le lacrimal del huel de lu en la razitz del nas, e yeu extrayssi aquela a lu del autra partida, dejos le grays de l’aurelha de lu, e es sanat, e no accidic en le huel de lu nocument.	The cause is that an arrow struck the lacrimal bone of his eye in the socket of his nose, and I extracted it from another part, left his ear gray, and he was healed, and did not suffer any harm to his eye.
E extrayssi autra sageta a un Juzeu la qual cazec en lu en lo grays del sieu huel, dejos la palpebra pus dejos, e la sageta ja era occultada e no so conseguit de aquela sino una petita extremitat am la qual adhereys al sieu fust, e era gran sageta de las sagetas agudas dels Turcs , am ferr leon en la qual no havia aurelhas.	And I extracted another arrow from a Jew which struck him in the gray of his eye, leaving the eyelid, and the arrow was hidden so that only a small extremity attached to its shaft could be seen, adhering to it. It was a large arrow among the sharp arrows of the Turks, with a lion engraved on it where no ears were present.
E senat es le Juzieu , e no accidic en le sieu huel mal accident.	And the Jew was fine, and did not suffer any harm to his eye from the mishap.
E extrayssi una autra sageta a un home Crestia la qual era cazuta en le golayro, e era sageta arabica, e es aquela a la qual so aurelhas; e adonc yeu inscidegui sobre aquela entre doas guidegi, e ja era submersa en le golayro de lu; e adonc yeu so subtiliat am aquela, e aprop extraxi aquela, e es sanat le Crestia .	And I extracted another arrow from a Christian man who was struck in the shoulder, and it was an Arabic arrow, with ears on that arrow; then I incised over it between two ribs, which was already submerged in his shoulder; then I scraped at that area, and soon extracted the arrow, and the Christian was healed.
E extraxi autra sageta a un home la qual era cazuta en le sieu ventre, e cogitegui que moris per aquela; e donc, pus que foro passatz xxx dias e no es mudat sobre lu alcuna causa de las suas disposicios, inscidegui sobre la sageta e engenagui sobre aquela, e es sanat, e no accidic a lu accident mal.	And another arrow was extracted from a man which was lodged in his belly, and I perceived that he died of that; and therefore, after thirty days had passed and no change occurred due to his condition, I incised upon the arrow and removed it, and he was healed, and no further accident befell him.
E vi mays un home en le qual cazec una sageta en le dos de lu, e consolidada es la plagua sobre lu, e pus que foc aprop set ans, yssic la sageta en la razitz de la coyssa.	And I found a man in whom an arrow was embedded in his back, and the wound had healed over. After approximately seven years, incise the arrow near the thigh.
E vi una femna a la qual cazec sageta en le sieu ventre, e la plagua es consolidada dedintz lu, e no es mudada en las suas disposicios en re, e la femna no atrobec nocument en alcunas de las suas opperacios naturals.	And I found a woman in whom an arrow was embedded in her belly, and the wound had healed inside her, and there had been no change in her condition over time, and the woman did not experience any discomfort during her various natural operations.
E vi un autre home al qual cazec sageta en la sua cara e consolidada es la plagua e romas la sageta, no atrobant aqui mota dolor, e motz semblantz ad aquestz.	And I found another man in whom an arrow was embedded in his face, and the wound had healed, with the arrow remaining. He did not experience any more pain, and appeared similar to this.
E extrayssi la sageta del home dels princeps del rey que era cazuda en le mieg loc del nas sieu e ja havia declinat a la partida dreyta un petit, e occultada era tota la sageta.	And I extracted the arrow from the king's principal man, who was embedded in the middle of his nose, and it had already tilted slightly to the right side a little bit. The entire arrow was hidden.
E yeu fu appelat a la curacio de lu aprop le cazement de la sageta entro a tres dias.	And I was called for the treatment around the wound within three days.
E adonc yeu atrobegui la plagua de la sageta mot streyta; e adonc yeu inquirigui aquela am tenta subtil, e no sentigui aquela; mays el la sentia puncio dejos la aurelha dreyta, e adonc speregui que aquela punccio era per la extremitat de la sageta.	And then you will find the wound of the arrow broad; and then you will inquire about that which is felt beneath but not above; for he felt it when you pressed with your right ear, and then you suspected that that press was at the extremity of the arrow.
E amplastregui le loc am emplaustre en le qual es vertut atrectiva e digestiva, confizant de mi que·l loc se apostemes per que appares a mi le loc de la sageta, per que secces sobre aquela.	And apply a poultice to the place to be applied which has attractive and digestive virtues, trusting that the place will be indicated to me where the arrow is, so it dries up there.
E no accidic en le loc accident significant que la sageta hagues conseguit aquel loc; e yeu continuegui am le emplaustre sobre lu per motz dias e no accidic accident; e consolidada es la plagua entretant, e romas le malaute de la extreccio de lu per spazi de motz dias entro que un jorn sentic la sageta dintz le sieu nas e recontec aquo a mi.	And do not be misled by the significant place where the arrow has hit; and continue applying the poultice to it for several days without being misled; and meanwhile, the wound consolidates, and the patient suffers from the pain of the extraction for several days until one day I feel the arrow within its sheath and tell you this.
E adonc yeu pausegui sobre la plagua medicina acuta corrosiva per motz dias entro que foc ubert, e am la tenta yeu assagegui aquel, e atrobegui la extremitat de la sageta subtil, la qual adhereys al fust.	And then place a sharp corrosive medicine on the wound for several days until it forms a sore, and over the swelling, I will touch it, and find the extremity of the arrow beneath it, which adheres to the shaft.
E aprop yeu ajustegui en la apersio de la plagua per aquela medicina acuta entro que apparec a mi visiblament la extremitat de la sageta, e passec a mi temps am aquo per le spazi de temps entro quatre meses.	And then you adjust the incision of the wound with that sharp medicine until you clearly see the tip of the arrow, and proceed with this for the space of time between four months.
E aprop pus que la plagua foc amplificada, e foc a mi possible entrometre las forfexs en lu, e remaure aquela, e no obezic ad eyssiment, lahoras yeu no cessegui subtiliar e ingeniar sobre aquela am manieyras de engen, entro que comensegui un dia sobre aquela am manieyras de engens pendre lu am forceps descentment faytas, segon que vindra la forma de aquelas en la fi del capitol, entro que extraxi aquela; e aprop restauregui aquela plagua.	And then, when the wound is sufficiently enlarged, and it is possible for me to insert the forceps into it, I widen that, and without hesitation or delay, I proceed to manipulate it in various ways until one day I was able to grasp it with forceps inserted from below, according to which will be described at the end of this chapter; after which I extracted it; and then restored the wound.
E alcus metges jutgavan que la cartillage del nas no es restaurada, e yeu restauregui aquela e la plagua es consolidada, e sanat es le malaute per sanetat entiera, e no noguec en lu en deguna causa.	And some doctors judged that the cartilage of the nose is not restored, but I restored it and the wound healed, and the patient recovered entirely, with no scar from any cause.
E yeu recomti a tu la qualitat de extraccio de alcunas sagetas per que pauses aquo regla e significacio sobre aquo que no he dit, quar las partidas de aquesta art e las difinicios de aquela no so conprehendudas am narracio ni no comprehen aquelas le libre.	And I recount to you the quality of extracting some arrows, so that you pause and consider this rule and significance of what I have not said, for the parts of this art and the definitions of those are not understood in the narration nor do they comprehend them freely.
E le artifexs savi compara am pauc sobre mot; e am aquo que es present sobre aquo que es absent; e atroba operacio novela e instrument novel deves le descendement de las causas extranhas del art quan accideysso.	And the wise craftsmen compare a little about motion; and about what is present they compare it to what is absent; and find new operations and new instruments for the descent of foreign causes when they occur.
E donc yeu dic que sagetas no son fora-gitadas dels membres en les quals son ficadas sino segon dos manieyras: o per atraccio del loc en le qual intrec; o per le contrari de la autra partida.	And therefore I say that arrows are not removed from the members in which they are inserted but according to two manners: either by attraction of the place where they entered; or by the contrary part.
E aquela que es gitada per le loc don es intrada, o es sageta procedent en loc carnos, e es atirada e fora-gitada.	And that which is removed by the place where it entered, or the arrow proceeding in a fleshly place and being shot and withdrawn.
E si no obezeys a eyssiment de la hora en la qual catz, lahoras cove que tu la laysses per alcus dias entro que poyresca la carn que es al enviro de lu, e sia alleujada l‘atraccio de lu e la sua egressio.	And if it does not obey the estimation of the hour in which it entered, then you must leave it for a few days until the flesh around it can heal, and the attraction and its exit are alleviated.
E semblantment si es ficada en os e no obezeys a tu a eyssiment, lahoras layssa aquela per alcus dias e itera aquela am atraccio e mocio en quascun dia, e ja es fora-gitada.	And similarly, if it is inserted into bone and you do not obey your estimation, then leave that for a few days and use attraction and motion on any day, and it will be removed.
E si no obezeys a tu eyssiment aprop alcus dias, lahoras cove que tu perforas en le circuit de la sageta en aquel os de tota partida am taravel subtil entro que·l loc sia amplificat de la sageta, e aprop extratz aquela.	And if your attempt does not succeed after some days, then you must pierce in the circuit of the arrow at that bone of any part moving subtly where the area is enlarged by the arrow.
E si la sageta es ficada en le os del cap e ja ha procezit en un dels ventres del cervel, e apparo en le malaute alcus de aquels accidentz les quals yeu e ditz, lahoras abste de la extraccio de la sageta e layssa aquela entro que·l sieu esser sia equat aprop alcus dias; quar si la sageta perve al ciphac, lahoras la mort no es a lu prolonguada.	And if the arrow is inserted in the bone of the head and has already proceeded into one of the ventricles of the brain, and appears in the patient after some of those accidents which you call, then refrain from extracting the arrow and leave it there until its effect equates itself for some days; or if the arrow reaches the brain, then death is not prolonged for him.
E si la sageta no es ficada sino en le cors del os tant solament e no passa entro al ciphac, e roman le malaute per alcus dias, e no accideys a lu denguna causa de aquels accidentz, lahoras tu engenia en la atraccio de la sageta e en la atraccio de lu.	And if the arrow is inserted only in the flesh of the bone and does not pass into the brain, and remains in the patient for some days, and you do not suffer any of those accidents from it, then you proceed with the extraction of the arrow and treat it.
Mays si es mot ficada e no obezeys a tu a extraccio, lahoras tu aministra taravels en le circuit de la sageta ayssi cum havem recomtat, e aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	But if it is embedded and does not yield to your extraction, then you administer travels in the circuit of the arrow as we have recommended, and proceed to cure the area until it is healed.
Mays si la sageta ja es amaguada en le loc del cors, e es amaguada del sentiment, lahoras tu inquireys aquela am tenta, e si tu sentas aquela, lahoras atira aquela am alcus sturmentz les quals so convenientz a la atraccio de lu.	But if the arrow is already hidden in the place of the body and hidden from sensation, then you inquire about that area with your hand, and if you feel it, then probe with some instruments which are suitable for its extraction.
E si no podes sobre lu per la constriccio de la plagua e per la longitut del preon, e aqui no es os ni nervi ni vena, lahoras tu fen sobre la plagua entro que sia amplificada e que sia possible extrayre la sageta.	And if you cannot reach it due to the depth of the wound and the length of the arrow, and here there are neither nerves nor veins, then you incise the wound so that it is widened and it becomes possible to extract the arrow.
E si so a lu aurelhas am las quals sia tenguda, lahoras tu deliura la carn en la qual es ficada de tota partida am tot le engen que poyras far; e ingenia sobre aquo, si no podes sobre la evasio de la carn en la fractura de las aurelhas e en torssio de aquelas entro que obezesca.	And if it is in the ears where it is embedded, then you incise the flesh in which it is stuck as much as possible with all the means you can; and use ingenuity about this, if you cannot extract the flesh in the fracture of the ears and in torsion of those areas that must yield.
E quan tu administras la extraccio de la sageta en quascun loc on sia, lahoras tu usa am torcio de la tua ma am forceps a totas partidas entro que fassa aquela obezir; e subtilia am deriera subtilitat que la sageta no sia trencada e que sia fayta a tu dificil atraccio de lu e de aquela extraccio.	And when you administer the extraction of the arrow in any place where it is, then you use a twist of your hand with forceps at all parts so that it yields; and use subtle skill to ensure the arrow is not broken and that it becomes easier to extract.
E si no podes sobre aquela de la tua hora, lahoras tu layssa per alcus dias entro que se poyrescan las partidas que so en le circuit de lu, e aprop itera aquela quar lahoras es alleujada.	And if you cannot operate on that side of your hour, then you let it be for some days until the parts that are in the circuit of him heal, and then repeat that which is alleviated.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat flux de sanc, lahoras tu administra aquo que havem dit de curacio en le sieu capitol.	But if it makes contrary irritation of the blood, then you administer what we have said for cure in its chapter.
E guarda la tua vertut de inscizio de vena o de nervi, o de corda, e aministra engen en tota manieyra a tu possibla de la evasio de la sageta; e fay aquo am facilitat e tranquillitat e tarditat e fermetat ayssi cum yeu e a tu recomtat.	And guard your virtue in incising veins or nerves, or cords, and administer engen in every manner for the avoidance of the arrow; and do this with facilitation, tranquility, and tardiness as I and you have recommended.
E donc que fassas contrayre la sageta per so que·l malaute sia segon la figura segon la qual foc deves le cazement de la sageta en lu, quar es mays juvatiu.	And therefore do compress the arrow by itself so that the patient is according to the figure according to which you should place the tip of the arrow in him, for this is more advantageous.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible, lahoras tu aministra aquo que es a tu possible per las figuras.	But if this is not possible for you, then administer what is possible for you according to the figures.
Mays las sagetas que son fora-gitadas per le contrari del autra partida, o que ja de lu procezeys alcuna partida a las partidas de fora, o fa gilbositat la extramitat de la sageta per sentiment de la partida pus desus de la codena propdana e vezes aquela eminent; adonc tu secsa sobre aquela; e sia la seccio segon la quantitat en la qual prenguan las forceps; e aprop atira aquela, quar ela es fayta leugiera a eyssiment.	But the arrows that are counter-thrust or pierced by the other part, or that you have already treated parts of from the outer parts, or cause swelling at the tip of the arrow due to pain in the part further above the shoulder; then you dry over that; and let the drying be according to the quantity in which the forceps take hold; and then remove it, for it is made light by ejection.
Mays si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu tortz lama segon contrarietat entro que la sageta enprema en le os, e amplifique a si meteys, e aprop extratz aquela.	If it is retained in the bone, then twist the bone according to the opposite direction where the arrow presses on the bone, and enlarge it by doing so, and then extract it.
E sino, layssa aquela per alcus dias, e aprop itera aquela entro qu’en yesca.	And if not, leave it for some days, and then apply it to the place where it hurts.
E si le fust de la sageta es en aquela, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am lu.	And if the shaft of the arrow is there, then push it out from that place.
Mays si le fust es cazut e voles aministrar inpulsio, lahoras tu intromet e aquela, si es sorda, sturment concau per so que intre la concavitat de lu en la coa de la sageta e aprop impelleys aquela am lu.	If the shaft is broken and you want to administer pressure, then insert it there. If it is stuck, stir it with a concave tool so that its concavity enters the groove of the arrow, and then push it out from that place.
Mays si la sageta es concava, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am sturment fort intrant en aquela, quar la sageta es alleujada per aquela.	If the arrow is concave, then push it out by stirring it forcefully into it, for the arrow will be expanded by doing so.
E si la sageta es entoxiguada, lahoras cove que tu concaves tota la carn en la qual es le vere, si es a tu possible aquo, e aprop cura aquela am aquo que si conveneys.	And if the arrow is poisoned, then make sure you indent all the flesh where it entered, if possible, and then treat it with whatever is appropriate.
E si la sageta catz en le pietz, o en le ventre, o en la vesica, o en le costat, e es propinqua per so que tu tocas aquela am la tenta, e es a tu possible secsar sobre aquela, lahoras secsa sobre aquela e guarda te de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e extratz aquela, e aprop cos la plagua si indigeys, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the arrow hits the foot, or the belly, or the bladder, or the side, and is close enough for you to touch it with your hand, and it is possible to extract it there, then extract it, and afterward treat the wound as needed, and cure that part until it is healed.
Forma de forceps am las quals so atiradas las sagetas:	The form of forceps to which arrows are applied:
Sian las extremitatz de lor cum a bec de ausel que son faytas cum serra quan prendon sobre la sageta per so que no la layssen.	Let the ends be shaped like the mouth of an eagle, so that they can grasp the arrow and not let it slip.
E de aquelas son faytas motas specias, grans, paucas e migieras, segon la quantitat de la grandeza de la sageta e de la sieua pauqueza, e de la amplitud de la plagua, e de la constriccio de lu.	And these are made in special forms, large, few, and medium-sized, according to the size of the arrow and its smallness, and the width of the wound, and its shape.
Forma de impellent concau de aquesta extremitat conquava ayssi cum pena de ausel per so que sia alleujat le intrament de la sageta en lu, e impulcio de aquela sorda:	The form of the concave scoop at this end is like the claw of an eagle so that it eases the removal of the arrow and drives it forward.
Forma de impellent de sorda extremitat:	The form of the scoop at the rear end:
ayssi cum ray per so que sia alleujat le intrament de lu en la sageta concava e es impellida am aquel.	as you do so that the instrument in the curved groove may be forced there.
De fleubotomia de las venas.	Of femoral vein puncture.
Las venas de fleubotomia de las quals corr costuma de fleubotomar so xxx, de las quals so en le cap xvi, so es doas venas pulsatils las quals so aprop las aurelhas, dic alhasisain; doas herbas que so en les dos templars apparentz; e doas venas que so en dos lacrimals de dos huels que son appeladas aspicientz; e la vena preparada en le mieg loc del front, e la vena que es en la extremitat del nas; e doas guidegi que so al col; e doas venas que so en la labia desus; e doas venas que so en la labia dejos; e — aquestas so las venas que so appeladas algelic —; e so doas venas que so dejos la lengua.	Of the femoral veins from which phlebotomy is customarily performed, those in chapter XVI are two pulsating veins near the ears, called auriculars by al-Ahsaī. Two herbs that are apparent on both temples; and two veins that are on two eyelids called asymptics. The vein prepared in the middle of the forehead, and the vein that is at the extremity of the nose; two jugular veins at the neck; two veins on the upper lip; and two veins on the lower lip; — these are the veins called algelic;— and two veins behind the tongue.
Mays las venas que so fleubotomadas en les brasses so v; quar de aquelas es una cephalica, e es deves le latz silvestre; e le poble appela “la vena del cap”, e sorda, e es vena migiera, e es composta de un ram de la basilica, e de autre ram de la cephalica; e nomna aquela le poble “vena de tot le cors”, e basilica es vena la qual es pausada en le latz domestic, e es nomnada “citillar”, e nompnan aquela les vulguars “vena del ventre”; e funis del bras, e es pausada sobre le focil, e es aquela en la qual es fleubotomat, e es aquela que appar sobre le poutz per apparicio manifesta; e salvatella, e es la vena que es entre lo dit auricular e·l pus petit dit, e so en lu dos ramps.	But the veins that are phlebotomized in the wrists are V; of which one is cephalic and is from the wild thistle; the people call it "the vein of the head," and it is a midline vein composed of one branch of the basilica and another branch of the cephalic. They call that one the people "vein of the whole body," and the basilica is the vein that is from the domestic thistle, and is called "circumflex" or "citillar," and the vulgar call it "vein of the belly"; the veins of the forearm, which are placed over the cubital fossa, and these are the ones on which phlebotomy is performed, and they appear on the arm due to a manifest appearance; the saphena, which is the vein between the said auricular and the smaller one, and it has two branches.
E en le pe e la camba so tres venas; la una de aquelas es que es dejos la curvatura del denolh del latz silvestre; e la segonda es sophena, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz domestic; e la vena sciatica, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz silvestre; e en la camba son autras venas semblantz ad aquelas.	In the foot and thigh there are three veins; one of them is that which gives curvature to the curve of the wild deer vein; and the second is sophena, and its place is given in the thigh of the domestic deer; and the sciatic vein, and its place is given in the thigh of the wild deer; and in the thigh there are other veins similar to those.
Le juvament de las venas que so aprop las aurelhas es a cataris antics e emigranea e sahafati e ulceracios del cap malas antiquas.	The condition of the veins near the ears is catarrhs, headaches, meningitis, and old evil ulcers of the head.
E la qualitat de sagnar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: es que sia ras le cap del malaute, e sia freguat le cap del malaute en le occipiti en le loc de amdoas las venas am drap ample am bona fricacio; aprop strenha le malaute le sieu col am una benda entro que apparan las doas e les locs de lor so aprop las aurelhas en dos locs depremegutz del cap; e quereys aquela am le tieu dit, e si tu sentes le pols de aquelas am le dit tieu, aqui senha am tenta.	And the quality of sanguifying those is according to what I will recount to you: it is that you rub the patient's head, and rub the patient's head at the occiput in the place of both veins with a wide cloth with good friction; then firmly hold the patient's neck with a band where the two appear and their places are near the ears in two pressed areas of the head; and when you feel those at your own side, here you will sanguify them by touching.
Aprop tu pren la lancea cutellar, e es aquela que es inscident, e aprop tu intromet aquel dejos la vena en la codena entro que·l fleubotomi vengua al os.	Then you take the surgical lancet, and that is the one that will be inserted, and then you introduce it into the vein between which the phlebotomist will come to the opening.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am la vena e la codena a las partidas desus e inscideys la vena am inscizio inscident.	Then raise your hand to the vein and its branch parts above, and incise the vein with an oblique cut.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio la quantitat de dos ditz ajustatz o entorn de aquo; e fay yssir del sanc atant quant voles.	Let the length of the incision be the width of two fingers adjusted or around that; and let the blood flow out as much as you want.
E aprop strenh am pulvils e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	Then apply powder firmly and leave it there until it is healed.
E ja e precedit en le comensament del libre la inscizio de aquelas e de lor la cauterizacio.	And already it was mentioned at the beginning of this book regarding the incision and their cautery.
Mays de las doas venas arterias que so als templars le juvament de la fleubotomia es a emigranea antiqua e sode malvada e obtalmia assidua e cors de superfluitatz acutas effusas als huels.	More of the two arteries that supply the temple with blood for phlebotomy, it is an ancient and evil headache, as well as chronic eye disease and a body full of acute excesses in the veins.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: constrengua le malaute le sieu col mot entro que apparan las doas venas al sentiment per appericio manifesta e sia demonstrat le pols de lor dejos le tieu dit; e lahoras tu senha am tenta.	And the quality of phlebotomizing those is according to what I will advise you: restrain the patient's arm with your hand so that the two veins appear by palpable sensation, and demonstrate the pulse at their location by your finger; then you can proceed when you sense this.
E aprop tu eleva la codena desobre la vena a las partidas desus am le tieu dit indic, e intromet le fleubotomi inscident dejos, e eleva la vena en sus; e inscidey aquela ayssi cum has fayt en las doas venas autras; e fay correr del sanc segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And then you elevate the codena above the vein at the parts superior to what you have just indicated, and insert the flebotomy instrument incidentally. Elevate the vein in them; incise that thus as you have done in the two other veins; and let the blood flow according to the quantity of your necessity.
E aprop deslia la coartacio del malaute, e pausa le tieu dit sobre la vena per una hora, e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto e pulvils e strenh aquela desus am fort constriccio, e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	And then release the constriction of the patient's groin, and place your hand over the vein for an hour, and then place a compress and powder there and strengthen that above with a strong compression, and leave it until it is healed.
E ja es precedida la rememoracio de lor, e de aquelas la inscizio, e la atraccio en le comensament del libre.	And after the recollection of their cases, and after that the incision, and the puncture at the beginning of the limb.
E donc le juvament de fleubotomia de la vena del front es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a las malautias antiquas de la cara e a emigranea e rogor e ulceracios fetidas.	And the treatment of flebotomy of the vein of the forehead is near the flebotomy of the cephalic for the ancient ailments of the face and for headaches, fever, and foul ulcers.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es segon que yeu recomti a tu; so es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col am una benda entro que apparesca la vena; e aprop pren le insturment le qual es nompnat fossori del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the quality of the flebotomy is as I will recount to you: it is that the patient strengthens his side with a bandage under which the vein appears; and then take the instrument named fossor, which has this shape:
Pausa la puncta eminent la qual es al cap del fossori sobre aquela vena e percuteys sobre lu am penche o am autre causa en la manieyra de lu, e layssa lo sanc correr segon la quantitat la qual voles; e aprop deslia la perforacio del malaute e strenh aquela entro que sia sanada.	Pause the point突出的那个点在排泄孔的顶部静脉之上，并倾斜手或因其他原因施击该点，让血按照你想要的数量流出；然后解除排泄孔的穿刺，并加强那里直到痊愈。
E alcunas veguadas es uberta am fleubotomi lat, empero no cove que·l fleubotomi sia de acuta extremitat ayssi cum les autres fleubotomis, abantz sia de lada extremitat, e fleubotoma aquela segon le tranvers, quar le os es propda e fort leu trencaria en lu le fleubotomi quan es subtil.	Sometimes the space is opened by ligature, but I do not know if the ligature should be of acute extremity as with other ligatures, being before of lateral extremity, and ligate there according to the transversal, for the bone is close and strong, and would break in it the ligature when it is subtle.
Mays le juvament de las duas venas que so als lacrimals de dos huels per scabia del huels per rogor e sebol en les huels, e a las malautias de la cara.	More the youth of the two veins that are at the corners of the eyes due to irritation and inflammation in the eyes, and for facial diseases.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia es que·l malaute strenha le col sieu am una benda, e aprop fleubotoma aquelas, e tu sias stant sobre le cap de lu.	And the quality of the ligature is that the malady strengthens the colliculus with a bandage, and then ligate those, and you stand over the head of the patient.
E sia fayta la fleubotomia segon le transvers a longitut un pauc am fleubotomi pauc, quar en le loc no es carn; e si le fleubotomi es subtil, fort leu la extremitat de lu es trencada.	And make the ligature according to the transversal length slightly, with a ligature that is slightly long, for in that place there is no flesh; and if the ligature is subtle, strengthen its extremity so it does not break.
E aprop fay correr del sanc atant quant es a tu necessari, e pausa sobre aquelas coto, e strenh aquelas per una nueyt, e aprop deslia aquelas.	And then let the blood run until it is as necessary for you, place your hand over those cuts, and strengthen them with one night, and then remove those.
Mays le fleubotomi de la vena del nas es conferent a febre acuta e a soda vehement, e a las malautias de la cara e emigranea e rogor que accideys en la cara, e majorment quan es antiqua.	May the femoral puncture of the vein be performed for acute fever and intense toxicity, for facial ailments, migraines, and swelling that occurs in the face, especially when it is chronic.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col e aprop te le sieu nas am la tua ma sinistra, e pren le fleubotomi subtil lonc e fica aquela en le mieg loc del cap del nas segon rectitut, quar la vena no appar al sentiment aqui, e quar le sanc comensa a fluir tantost.	And the quality of the femoral puncture is that the patient holds their neck straight and places their nose to your left hand, and take the thin lancet under the skin and place it in the middle location of the head of the nose according to proper alignment, for the vein does not appear here by sensation, and for the blood begins to flow soon.
Cove que tu ultimes la tua ma am le fleubotomi petit a petit e fassas correr del sanc segon la tua necessitat; e aprop lia aquela per una nuoyt, quar aquela es restaurada leugierament.	Cover your hand with the lancet little by little and let the blood flow according to your necessity; then remove it after one night, for it is restored rather quickly.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de las doas guidegui a constriccio de ale e a comensament de lepra e a motas malautias e inpetige e malas ulceracios corrosivas ayssi cum herpotromeno.	May the indication for the femoral puncture of the vein guide to consumption and the beginning of leprosy and various other ailments and destructive bad ulcers similarly as in phlebotomy.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que el malaute strenha dejos quascuna en le sieu col am liament; e estia le artifexs sobre le cap del malaute, e le malaute sia sezent sobre una sezela.	And the quality of the femoral vein ligation is that the patient strongly leaves each side on their own side with a ligature; and the surgeons are above the patient's head, and the patient lies on a bench.
E aprop fleubotoma la vena al lonc am fleubotomi ample petit a petit; e aprop extratz de sanc segon temprada quantitat o segon aquo que vezes de necessitat que es ad aquo; e aprop fay semblant del autra vena.	And gradually ligate the vein along its length with a small and ample cautery; and extract blood according to the season's quantity or according to what is necessary; and make a similar mark on the other vein.
E aprop deslia le liament e strenh las doas venas am strictura migiera per so que·l malaute no sia prefocat, e laysa entro al mati quar la plagua es sanada.	And gradually remove the ligature and tighten both veins with a median strain so that the patient is not overheated, and leave room in the flesh for the wound to heal.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de las venas algerich, comfereys a petitas apostemas e pustulas de la boca e corrupcio de las gengivas e malas ulceracios e fissuras, e a malas ulceracios que so en le nas e en le circuit de lu.	And the benefit of ligation of the Algerich veins, it helps in small abscesses and pustules of the mouth, decay of the gums, bad ulcers and fissures, and bad ulcers that are in the nose and around it.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que fases cezer le malaute denant tu, e strenh le col de lu am una benda, e aprop revolveys las labias de lu e reguarda a doas venas de las quals la una es de la dextra de la labia e la segonda de la senestra; e la demonstracio de quascuna es per la negror de quascuna de amdos, e aquo mays es quar en le circuit de aquelas so venas menudas negras; e adonc inscideys cascuna per inscizio inscident.	And the quality of the Algerich vein ligation is that you make the patient lie down in front of you, and tie a bandage around their neck, and then rotate the lips and look at two veins, one from the right side of the lip and the second from the left; the demonstration of each is by the blackness of each of both, and this is more so where the veins are small and dark in the area of the lips; then incise each through an incision.
Mays si dubitacio es dejos tu, e no sabes qual es de aquelas, lahoras tu enten a inscisio de la major de aquelas, e de la pus manifesta de aquelas.	But if you are uncertain about which one it is, then you understand the incision of the larger one and the most obvious one among them.
E fay le semblant de las doas venas que so en las labias desus.	And make the appearance of the two veins that are above the labia.
Mays costuma corr mays a inscidir las doas venas que so en la labia dejos.	But it is customarily better to incise the two veins that are in the labia.
Mays de doas venas que so dejos la lengua le juvament es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a prefocacios que so en le guolayro, a la malautia de la uvula, e a malautias de la boca.	But of the two veins that are left, the tongue's juvament is near the phlebotomy of the cephalic vein, for conditions of the glossoptysis, and for ailments of the mouth.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es que segue le malaute entre las tuas mas denant le solel, e eleva la lengua de lu, e reguarda dejos la lengua, de la un latz de lu vena e del autre latz vena, e la color de quascuna es declinant a negror.	And the quality of phlebotomizing these is to follow the illness as it moves in front of your left side before the sun, and to elevate the tongue from the patient, and look at the tongue, noting one half of its vein and the other half of its vein, and the color of each is gradually turning black.
E adonc fleubotoma quascuna; e guarda te que no ultimes la tua ma en fleubotoman aquelas, quar dejos aquelas so arterias.	And then phlebotomize each; and be sure not to end your hand in phlebotomizing these, for they are arteries.
E las tuas venas que so fleubotomadas en le coyde so en las quals corr costuma en totz les homes, e la fleubotomia de lor es fayta segon dos manieyras, o pongen am le fleubotomi mirtilat o olivar a subtilitat declinant; o secsar am fleubotomi cutellar, e apelha si alnessil, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And your veins that are ligated in the groin are in which it is customary for all men, and the ligation of their veins is made according to two methods, or they place a mirtilat or olive needle of fine thickness; or dry them with a surgical ligature, and call it alnessil, and this is its form:
E aquest alnessil es que conveneys a seccio e de aquels so specias latz e subtils segon la amplitut de las venas e segon la strictura de aquelas.	And this alnessil is what you apply in section and of those are species flax and fine according to the width of the veins and according to the structure of those.
Forma de fleubotomi mirti:	Form of mirtilat ligation:
sia le latz de lu ayssi cum vezes, e conveneys a obrir las venas concavas plenas procedentz apparentz grossas, e ad aquelas que conteno sanc gros torbat.	It is the flax species thus as you see, and you apply to opening the concave full veins from obvious large origins, and to those that contain thick turbid blood.
E aquesta es la forma de fleubotomi olivar:	And this is the form of olive needle ligation:
E aquest fleubotomi es de menor latitut e de pus subtil extremitat, e conveneys a fleubotomia de venas subtils que conteno sanc subtil citri.	And this ligation is of lesser width and finer tip, and you apply it to the ligation of fine veins that contain thin citrus blood.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena basilica la qual es una de tres venas: quar extratz le sanc de las malautias que so dejos le guolayro e·l col, e de aquo que siec le pietz e·l ventre.	May the youth of the femoral vein phlebotomy, which is one of three veins: from where we draw the blood from the maladies that are left the gout and the cold, and from what affects the feet and the abdomen.
E conveneys al fleubotomador, quan fleubotomia aquela, que guarde be aquela e sia sobre-temor en aquela, quar dejos lu ha arteria, e si erra e ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi, inscidira aquela arteria e accidira fluxs de sanc, per so que cove que no fleubotomes aquela am fleubotomi pungent, abantz sia sectant cum alnessil.	And it convenes to the phlebotomist, when performing that phlebotomy, that he guard well that and be over-cautious in that, for if he misses and adjusts in the puncture of the phlebotomy, he will incise that artery and cause flows of blood, so that it is fitting that you do not phlebotomize at phlebotomy puncture, before cutting like a razor.
E si no appar la basilica per apparicio manifesta, lahoras cove que tu laysses aquela e que tu mudes a la autre, o que cerques alcun ram sieu; o que fleubotomes en loc de lu finis del bras, quar aquela es manifesta; e secsa aquela am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the basilica vein does not appear by clear sight, then it is fitting that you leave that and change to the other, or that you search for one of its branches; or that you phlebotomize in a place at the end of the arm, for that is manifest; and stop phlebotomy with the razor in such a way as we have said.
Mays si tu voles la fleubotomia de lu meteyssa, lahoras cove denant la strictura del bras que toques le loc entro que conogues le loc dels pols, e aprop senha sobre lu am tencha; e aprop lia le bras e secsa la vena am seccio concava am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit; e guarda te que caja la percussio per alcu spazi del loc de la arteria.	May it be that you wish the phlebotomy of the femoral vein, then before the constriction of the arm touch the place between where you know the location of the pulse, and soon place your hand over it with a thick cloth; then lift the arm and stop the vein with a concave section for phlebotomy with the razor as we have said; and guard that the percussion does not reach some space of the location of the artery.
E quan tu vezes, cum strenhes le liament, imflacio en le loc que has senhat am tencha, lahoras aquela inflacio es inflacio de la arteria, e donc squiva aquela.	And when you see, as you strengthen the ligament, inflation occurs in the place that you have touched with your thumb, then that inflammation is of the artery, and therefore avoid it.
E si vezes le sanc fluir en la fleubotomia ayssi cum aurina de enfant, e·l sanc es subtil rog, lahoras sapias que es del sanc de la arteria; e lahoras tu coyta e pausa le tieu dit sobre aquel per lonc spazi; e aprop osta le tieu dit, e si lo sanc es abscindit, quar motas veguadas es abscindit, lahoras tu strenh le bras e layssa aquel.	And if you see the blood flow in the femoral vein as the color of a child's urine, and the blood is thin and clear, then you know it is arterial blood; then you close and place your thumb over that area for a long time; and press closer to it, and if the blood stops flowing, and four or five drops stop, then you strengthen your arm and leave it there.
E guardes le malaute de la moccio de lu, e sia sobre-temor de lu e no maugua aquel per alcus dias entro que sia sanat.	And keep the patient from the mucus of it, and have no fear of it, and do not wet that area for a few days until it is healed.
Mays si le sanc no es abscindit, e vezes que deves tu no es present medicina ad aquo, lahoras tu inscideys la arteria, si appar a tu; quar la extremitat de lu es contrayta, e es abscindit le sanc; o que prenguas scorsa de fistic, e fen aquela, e pren la una maytat e strenh aquela sobre le loc de la vena am strictura descent am liament e am pulvils entro al autra dia.	And if the blood does not stop flowing, and you see that the appropriate medicine is not present for this, then incise the artery if it appears to you; where the extremity contracts, and the blood stops flowing; or take some from a fistula, and perform that, and take one half and strengthen that over the location of the vein with strictura descent on the ligament and with powder on the other day.
E lahoras si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, lahoras cura aquel am aquo del qual es precedit a la rememoracio del loc de las polveras abscindentz flux de sanc.	And if the wound is incised, that is good; otherwise, then cure that as was mentioned before in the place of the powdered wounds' flux of blood.
E la abscizio del sanc de lu es dificil en motas disposicios per le loc petit de la plagua e la possibilitat del liament del bras.	And the incision of the wound is difficult in small parts due to the size of the wound and the possibility of stitching the arm.
Mays de la vena fusca la fleubotomia es juvament que extratz lo sanc de la partida subirana del cap e a la partida dejos del cors; per aquo quar es composta de ram de la basilica e de ram de cephalica, ayssi cum havem dit.	More from the dark vein, bloodletting is beneficial that you extract the blood from the part above the bend of the arm and from the part below the body; for this, it is composed of a branch of the basilica vein and a branch of the cephalic vein, as we have said.
E cove al fleubotomant aquela que sia sobre-temor en la fleubotomia de lu, quar dejos aquela es un nervi; e adonc si ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi e atroba le nervi, accidira a lu stupor, e es difficil la sanacio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot, E aquest nervi motas veguadas apar al sentiment; e si es ocultat ad alcus homes e es subtil e no es monstrat, lahoras cove que tu pauses le fleubotomi am le qual tu fleubotomas am seccio de alnessil, e evita le nervi am la tua fortalesa.	And when bloodletting that part which is over-temperate in the bloodletting of the arm, then leave that part as it is; for there a nerve is located. Then, if you puncture during the bloodletting and find the nerve, it will cause stupor, and recovery from it is difficult, and it does not heal completely for a strong person. This nerve is often felt in sensations; and if hidden to some people and very subtle without being evident, then pause your bloodletting at the section of alnessil, and avoid the nerve with your force.
E si la vena es entre dos nervis, lahoras tu fen la vena en la longitut.	And if the vein is between two nerves, then cut the vein lengthwise.
Le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena cephalica es que atratz le sanc del cap e comfereys a las malautias dels huels.	The purpose of bleeding from the cephalic vein is to draw blood from the head and relieve ailments of the feet.
E cove en aquest propriament, si vols que la fleubotomes pungen am fleubotomi olivar o am fleubotomi mirti; quar es la pus salva de totas las venas, quar no es dejos lu arteria ni nervi.	And here precisely, if you want to perform a phlebotomy with an olive needle or a myrtle needle; for it is the pure fluid from all the veins, and it does not damage the artery or nerves.
Mays empero conveneys a tu deves la fleubotomia que guardes que am le fleubotomi no punguas le cap del lacert tant solament, e cerques le loc pus leugier, e no notz a lu, si no es atrobat am la percussio primieyra que sia sobre aquela am fleubotomia alcunas veguadas.	However, you must ensure that in phlebotomy, you do not puncture the head of the needle too deeply, and seek a location slightly superficial, and do not notice it, unless it is sore upon the first percussion before starting the phlebotomy.
Mays empero fort leu es apostemat en alcus homes, quan no es fleubotomat en la primieyra percussio, mays no notz en re aquel apostema.	However, in some individuals, swelling is apt to form if phlebotomy is not performed in the first percussion; but do not neglect that swelling.
Mays la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquela e les accidentz de lu so motz, en les quals te cove cogitar en lor rectificacio.	Moreover, the quality of the phlebotomy and the accidents that occur are motives in which you must consider their correction.
Le primier de lu es del qual cove que sapias que fleubotomia no es aministrada sino en conservacio de sanetat e per speransa de lu e cautela de aveniment de malautias, e que sia fayta fleubotomia en la una de las venas que so en le coyde, so es: cephalica, fusca e basilica; e que sia fayta fleubotomia al comensament de primaveyra, sobre dejun en primaviera e autunppne, e en invern aprop la comestio, quan apparo significacios de replecio.	The first is that you must know that fistulotomy is not administered except for preservation of health and hope for it and caution regarding the occurrence of ailments; and that fistulotomy be performed on one of the veins that are in the groin, namely: cephalic, femoral, and basilic; and that fistulotomy be done at the beginning of spring, after fasting in spring and autumn, and in winter near eating, when signs of repletion appear.
E sia fayta fleubotomia e le tertz dia o al primier pus que del jorn siran passadas tres horas.	And fistulotomy should be performed on the third day or after three hours from the beginning of the day.
Mays fleubotomia que es aministrada, mays quan provoca convenencia e necessitat ad aquo, o de nuoyt o de dia, en tota hora e en tot temps.	The more fistulotomy is performed, the more it should be done when it causes convenience and necessity at that time, whether night or day, in any hour, and at all times.
E cove que efant no sia fleubotomat entro que aja xiiii ans, e femna que sia prenhs no sia fleubotomada sino del quart mes entro al sete, e les viels no sian fleubotomatz les quals ja han passatz lx ans.	And you must know that an infant should not be fistulotomized until it is four years old, and a woman who is pregnant should not be fistulotomized unless in the fourth month between the seventh and eighth months. And elderly women who have passed fifty years of age should not be fistulotomized.
E cum alcu vol esser fleubotomat per qualque manieyra sia, cove que mondifique les sieus budels denant la fleubotomia am clisteri leon, si en aquels ha mota fenda retenguda, per so que las venas no atiro las superfluitatz en la fleubotomia dels budels, que son puridas, e que no noguan als membres principals.	And when someone wants to be lanced in some manner, make sure to modify his intestines before the lancing with a leon clyster, if there is any obstruction of retained feces, so that the veins do not carry superfluous matter into the lancing of the intestines, which are purified, and do not harm the principal members.
E no sian fleubotomatz les pascientz naucea sacertiva e crapula, ni evasent de malautia ni de ebretat entro que aquo sia remaugut aquo de lor, ni malaute de ydropici, e mays que fleubotomia sia temuda aprop colica passio e aprop vomit, e aprop cos de ventre, e aprop multiplicacio de coyt e de trebal e de exercici de dejunis o de vigilias e de tota causa que dissolveys la vertut, o sia corpore28 o animal.	And the patients should not be lanced while they are nauseous, vomiting, or suffering from illness or drunkenness until this is remedied, nor from dropsy or bad humor, more so that lancing is feared during colicky pain, and during vomiting, and during abdominal distress, and during an increase in copulation and work and exercise after fasting or watching over (the night), and from any cause that dissolves the virtue, either bodily or animal.
E aprop considera en subtiliacio de humos denant aquo si le sanc es gros, am viandas e beures, e am medicinas si aquo es a lu possible ad aquo.	And consider in the subtlety of humors before this if the wound is large, with food and drinks, and with medicines if it is possible at that time.
E aprop intre en banh si alcuna causa no prohibeys, o sia excersitat per alcun exercici per so que·l sanc sia subtiliat.	And consider bathing the wound if any cause does not prohibit it, or exercise for some exercise so that the wound becomes subtle.
E pausa la fleubotomia de lu en le pietz del dia, so es enviro la hora de tercia, ayssi cum havem dit.	And pause the femoral incision at the foot of the bed, so around three o'clock, as we have said.
E perforsa te que·l pietz de aquel sia guardat en aquel dia de totz mals accidentz animals, ayssi cum es angustia, ira, temor, e de totz accidentz corporals, ayssi cum es trebal e pena superflua e coyt e semblantz a lor.	And I assure you that the foot of that person should be kept on the day of all bad accidents, as when there is anxiety, anger, fear, and all bodily accidents, as when there is toil and excessive pain, or similar.
E a la sua sezelha fassa esser presentz las causas en le us de la qual corr costuma dels homes am aromaticitat e odorament e am bals e semblantz ad aquels segon la cantitat de possibilitat.	And at her side, let there be present the causes in the use of which custom has accustomed men with regard to aromatics and odors, and with balsams, according to the quantity and possibility.
E segua le fleubotomador sobre un coyssi que sia pus aut que·l coyssi de aquel que deu esser fleubotomat.	And follow the femoral incision over a cushion that is placed above the cushion on which the patient should be incised.
E aprop extragua le sieu bras, e fregue aquel am la sua ma le fleubotomador doas o tres veguadas; e aprop strenha le liament am correia e involva aquel doas veguadas.	Then extract his thigh, and rub it with your hand the femoral incision two or three times; then tightly bind it with a bandage and wrap it twice.
E sia la strictura temprada, quar la strictura quant no es engual, o la strictura es am superfluitat, lahoras prohibeys de fluxs del sanc; o es am mollificacio, e lahoras prohibeys le cors del sanc eyssament.	And let the incision be tempered, for if the incision is not equal, or if it is due to excess, then prohibit the flow of blood; or if it is due to softening, then temporarily restrain the body's flow of blood.
E aprop la strictura, cove que aquel que deu esser fleubotomat fregue las suas mas ensemps entre lor entro que las venas sian imfladas, e sian declaradas al sentiment.	And near the stricture, make sure that those who are to be lanced press their hands together between them while the veins are swollen and clearly discernible.
E aprop le fleubotomador unte le sieu fleubotomi am un pauc de oli antic propriament; e aprop pausa le sieu di indic de la ma senestra sobre aquela vena, dejos le loc del qual vol la fleubotomia, per que la vena fuja un pauc, e la percussio sia sessada quar de las venas es la qual atrobas ayssi cum corda fugent deves la fleubotomia, e de aquelas es que es plena de ventositat e quan pauses le fleubotomi sobre aquela es contrayta deves le fleubotomi, e es desceubut le fleubotomador; e le fleubotomi no uobre la vena, e si uobre, aquela es streyta.	And near the lancer, anoint his lancet with a little ant oil properly; then place your left hand's index finger on that vein, leaving the spot where the lancing is to occur, so that the vein can swell slightly and the percussio be exact. For the vein that you find to escape like a string of a violin when you pause the lancing, it is full of wind; and when you pause the lancing over that area, it contracts, revealing the lancer; and if the lancing does not open the vein, or if it does, it is strangled.
E donc, per aquo cove que·l fleubotomador sia fermat e sia sollicit en totas aquestas causas.	And therefore, make sure that the lancer is attentive to all these causes.
E aprop depause le fleubotomi, mays si la vena es huberta en una veguada, lahoras bo es; e sino, tu itera aquo autra vaguada dejos aquel loc un pauc, o sobre lu am festinacio, si le loc no es apostemat.	And when you pause the lancing, if the vein bursts in one go, that is good; otherwise, repeat this or the other passageway, leaving that area a little, or over it with haste, if the area is not abscessed.
Et si le loc es apostemat, o le malaute se spauresca, lahoras tu le layssa per un dia o per dos, e no strenha le liament, quar fort leu atirara apostema caut, ni no intre en banh.	And if the place is suppurated, or the patient becomes feverish, then you let it be for one or two days, and do not strain the wound, for a strong fever might bring on an abscess, nor should it enter the bath.
E aprop itera la fleubotomia si la ama.	And then repeat the phlebotomy if necessary.
E si la apercio es petita e corr sanc subtilment, e temes que non yesca sanc la cantitat que voles, lahoras tu itera le fleubotomi en aquel trauc segon rectitut e ajusta en la appercio un pauc, e fay aquo am festinacio denant que·l loc sia apostemat, quar le loc es apostemat en motz homes deves pauca apercio.	And if the perception is small and the wound heals subtly, and you fear that it will not heal sufficiently, then repeat the phlebotomy in that vein according to rectitude and adjust the incision a little. Do this with hastiness before the place suppurates, for when the place suppurates, you should make less perception.
Mays si vezes aquel ja apostemat, lahoras no iteres sobre lu, quar no escusa a tu alcuna causa; e pausa sobre aquel alcuna partida de la fenda de oli, quar alleuja le cors del sanc.	But if you see that it has already suppurated, then do not repeat the procedure on it, for it is unnecessary for any cause; place your hand over a part of the wound's margin, for it alleviates the pain from the wound.
E es milhor en aquest loc que oli e que les autres olis.	And it is better in this place than oil and other oils.
E semblantment aministra fenda de oli en tota fleubotomia am la qual fleubotomes las venas deves la prohibicio de cors de sanc, e fan aquo tyriaca alfadoc e sagzenea quan es pausat de la una de aquelas sobre le loc, quar le sanc es subtiliat e es revolvut quan es gros.	And similarly administer a margin of oil in all phlebotomies where you puncture the veins; they do this with tyriaca alfadoc and sagzenea when placed over the area, for the wound becomes subtle and is agitated when it is large.
E si en le loc de la fleubotomia es engendrat gran apostema, quar motas veguadas accideys, e majorment ad aquel que no es stat sangnat sino aquela veguada, o en la apercio de la vena pauca, e lahoras tu coyta, e pausa sobre le loc sponja infuza en aygua e sal, un pauc scalfada, e strenh aquela per una hora, quar es dissolvut.	And if in the place of the incision a large abscess is generated, many vesicles occur, especially to those who have not been bled at that time or in the anticipation of the small vein, then you apply and hold over the area a sponge infused in water and salt, slightly heated, and strengthen it for about an hour, as it is dissolved.
E cove que fassa aquo aprop le yssiment del sanc de aquela vena am compliment de lu o de autra vena.	And make sure to do this near the site of the incision of the vein at the completion of it or another vein.
E si roman en le loc per alcus dias alcuna negror o viriditat, no notz aquo; e si voles, pausa sobre aquel alcuna causa de aloen e de mirra dissolvut, o alcuna causa de suc de mentastre o de calament o semblant de lu.	And if there remains any blackness or greenish color in the area for a few days, do not note this; if you wish, place over it some cause of aloes and myrrh dissolved, or some cause of menthol extract or vinegar or something similar.
E motas veguadas accideysso apostemas e eminencias deves fleubotomia de la basilica.	And many vesicles occur and abscesses form from the incision of the basilica.
E donc pausa la tua ma sobre aquela, e si lahoras tu atrobas mollicia deves la tua compressio sobre aquela, lahoras aquela eminencia es malvada e mala; e adonc guarda te que pauses sobre aquela alcuna causa de aquo que havem dit, quar fort leu fluira de la arteria sanc.	And place your hand over it. If then you find it soft, keep the compression on that area; if that eminence is bad and harmful; then guard that you place over it some cause of what we have said, as strong fluid will flow from the artery of the vein.
E fay emplaustre am aquo en que es stipticitat, per que le loc sia endurat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And apply a plaster where there is stiffness, so that the area may become hardened, and then treat it with the other treatment until it is healed.
E cove que extraguas del sanc a tot hom segon la quantitat de la sua vertut e segon la color vencent sobrc le sanc segon que appar.	And know that you should draw from the vein according to the quantity of its virtue and according to the color prevailing over the vein as it appears.
Quar si le sanc es negre, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia rog; e semblantment si tu le vezes gros, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia subtiliat; e semblantment si es agut, entro que sia ostada la acuitat de lu.	And if the blood is black, let it remain until it becomes clear; and similarly, if you see it thick, let it continue to flow until it becomes thin; and similarly, if it is sharp, let it continue until its sharpness is moderated.
E cove ad aquel que es ple e fort e ha necessitat de extraccio de sanc en una veguada, que sia amplificada la fleubotomia de la vena e le fleubotomi sia lat.	And for one who is full and strong and has the need for a bloodletting from the vein in one session, the incision of the vein should be enlarged and the bloodletting should be thorough.
E en aquel que es freul, sia fayt le contrari de aquel, e cove que extragua aquel en tropas veguadas, e que le trauc sia streyt.	And for one who is weak, do the opposite, and know that you should draw off the blood in several sessions, and that you should do so gradually.
E le milhor que es administrat en fleubotomia de vena es que sia la seccio transversa, no punctura.	And the best method in venous bloodletting is to make a transverse section, not a puncture.
E aquesta manieyra de fleubotomia es salva de flux de sanc e de inscizio de nervi, e es pus lausabla e pus salva que fleubotomia segon latitut e longitut.	And this method of femoral puncture saves from flux of blood and injury to nerves, and is more preferable and safer than puncture according to length and breadth.
E a la qual es acostumat sobrevenir sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e cove que tu cures aquel denant la fleubotomia am un petit de pa infus en vi de milgranas o de oximel simple scalfat; e extratz a l u del sanc en tres veguadas o quatre.	And to which it is accustomed to happen fainting from the femoral puncture, cover that with a piece of cloth soaked in vinegar or simple infusion of wormwood; and extract the blood in three or four draughts.
E si es enfregiditat de compleccio, lahoras prengua denant la fleubotomia pa infus en eyssarop de mirra o en eyssarop de mel aromatizat am specias ayssi cum am pebre, canela, gingiebre e semblantz, o en eyssarop aromatizat e mot odorant.	And if there is a sensation of constriction, then apply before the femoral puncture a compress soaked in mirbane syrup or in flavored honey syrup with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and similar, or in flavored and fragrant syrup.
E si accideys sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e es causa de lu issiment de mot sanc, lahoras cove que prengua en beure aygua de carn e eyssarop mot odorant subtil; e use de aromaticitat am algualea, e sia linit le sieu pietz am aquela.	And if fainting occurs from the femoral puncture, and is caused by the passage of fine blood, then cover that with a drink of meat water and fragrant thin syrup; use its aromaticity with ginger, and apply it to their feet.
E usa de las autras causas que havem ditas en la divisio en le capitol de sincopi per evacuacio.	And use the other causes that we have mentioned in the division on fainting by evacuation.
E qui vol eventar le sieu bras e dissolver le sieu sanc segonda veguada, cove a lu del qual la fleubotomia es per mota evacuacio, e la vertut de lu es freol, que evacue le sanc petit a petit, so es segon la quantitat de la vertut en les dias continuables.	And here the patient will swing his arm and dissolve his blood for the second time, apply to him of which venesection is by major evacuation, and the virtue of it is refrigerant, that evacuates the blood little by little, so according to the quantity of the virtue in continuous days.
Mays qui vol eventar le sieu bras, e gitar lo sieu sanc segonda vetz, e le sieu cors es fort, lahoras fassa aquo aprop vii horas o ix de la primieyra fleubotomia.	And when one wishes to swing his arm and draw his blood for the second time, and his body is strong, then do this about seven or nine hours after the first venesection.
Mays qui vol atirar le sanc del cors sieu al contrari de la partida a la qual declina, cove que sia eventat en le segon dia o le tertz.	And when one wishes to draw the blood from his body in the opposite direction to which it naturally flows, apply it on the second or third day.
Mays aquel cors en le qual es mot sanc ja scalfat e es acuit e fa accidir febre, cove que sia gitat de lu sanc en una veguada e sia de lu gitada gran cantitat e sia amplificada la apercio entro que accidesca sincopi, pus que tu auras conservadas totas las condicios de fleubotomia; e que pauses la tua ma sobre le pols de lu deves le cors del sanc, per que no endevengua mort en loc de sincopi, quar motas veguadas endeve aquo quan le fleubotomador es ignorant e negligent.	And when the body in which there is hot blood already inflamed and causes fever, apply the bloodletting in one session and let a large quantity be taken. Increase the sensation between the onset of fever and the occurrence of syncope; for you must have all the conditions of venesection preserved; and place your hand on the pulse to control the body's loss of blood, so that it does not die instead of experiencing syncope. When the venesection practitioner is ignorant and negligent, this should be done in multiple sessions.
E no cove quan tu voles desliar le bras e evacua le sanc segonda veguada, cum ja sia claus le orrifici de la vena e sia fayt difficil issiment del sanc, que tu premas subre aquel am vehemencia e encurvat sia extendut leugierament, quar aquo es trop mal.	And do not pull when you want to remove the arm and evacuate the blood a second time, as the openings of the vein are already closed and it is difficult for the blood to escape, that you press upon it with firmness and slightly extend it, for this is too dangerous.
Habantz le layssa entro que sia fleubotomat segondament; o remau aquo am la acuitat del fleubotomi que es coagulat del sanc en le orrifici de la vena; o pausa sobre aquel de tyriaca alfarach, o de sagzenea, e comprem aquel am compressio leugiera entro que·l sanc sia fora yssit.	Leave it to drain by second puncture; or keep the vein opening closed by the coagulation of blood in the vein's openings; or place your hand over the tyriaca alfargan or sagenea, and apply a light compression until the blood has settled.
E si la vena es apostemada, lahoras layssa aquela e no la toques entro que·l apostema sia sedat.	And if the vein is swollen, do not touch it until the swelling is subsided.
E si necessitat te provoca a evacuar le sanc segondament, e no es excusacio, lahoras tu sagna aquel sobre aquel loc o en l’autre bras en autra vena.	And if necessity compels you to evacuate the blood a second time, and there is no excuse, then let it flow from that same place or to the other arm through another vein.
E la vena apelada “funis del bras” es fleubotomada en loc de la fusca o de la basilica, quan no so atrobadas o so amaguadas, quar es composta de aquelas.	And the vein called "funis del bras" is punctured instead of the profunda or basilica when they are not palpable or hidden, for it is composed of those.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intrometa la sua ma en aygua cauda entro que·l focil se enrogezesca e que la vena apparia manifestament.	And the quality of the femoral vein ligation is that the patient inserts his hand in cold water while the leg becomes red and the vein clearly appears.
E aprop sia strengut sobre aquel am liament am strictura migana; e aprop fleubotoma segon le tranvers petit, no latitudinalment ni segon la longitut.	And then apply pressure on that area with a stick for midwifery; and then perform femoral phlebotomy according to the small transverse vein, neither longitudinally nor by length.
E sia la apercio ampla e sia la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas aquela sobre la junctura de la ma un petit.	And let the incision be broad, and let your phlebotomy be in the area where you perform it above the wrist of the hand.
E si es prohibit le fluxs del sanc, lahoras tu itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e layssa le sanc correr en la aygua entro que consieguas la tua necessitat.	And if the flow of blood is forbidden, then immerse your hand in cold water and let the blood run into the water until you achieve your necessity.
Mays si tu eras en les dias d’estiu, lahoras tu yest excusat de la iteracio de la ma en l’aygua cauda, e le mes es pausat le cors del sanc en aygua cauda en temps de yvern.	But if you are in the days of summer, then you are excused from immersing your hand in cold water, and instead keep the body of the blood in cold water during winter.
E la fleubotomia de aquesta vena es pus salva que de totas las autras venas, quar dejos lu no ha vena pulsatil, ni nervi.	And the phlebotomy of this vein is safer than of all other veins, for it does not have a pulse or nerves.
E la fleubotomia de la savatella de la ma dreyta es conferent a las malautias del fetge.	And the phlebotomy of the vein in the right hand is relevant to the ailments of the liver.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que tu strenguas la ma am liament o am la tua ma, pus que tu l’as mesa en ayga cauda, entro que la vena sia imflada e sia be demostrada al vezement; e aprop fleubotoma aquela transversan; e si inscidas aquela de tot no nozera aquo en re.	And the quality of the phlebotomy is that you tighten the hand with a ligament or with your own hand, placed more in an inferior position, between the vein when it is swollen and well demonstrated; then quickly perform the incision; and if you incise all of it, no harm will arise from this.
E conserve que no ultimes la tua ma am la fleubotomi, quar dejos lu so les nervis dels ditz denudatz de carn.	And make sure that you do not close your hand over the phlebotomy, but leave it so that the nerves of the fingers are naked and exposed.
E aprop itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e laysse correr le sanc en aquela, quar si tu no iteras aquela en l’aygua cauda, le sanc sira coagulat en lo orrifici de la vena, e es prohibit de flux.	And then place your hand in the inferior position and let the blood flow through it, for if you do not place it in the inferior position, the blood will coagulate in the orifice of the vein, which is forbidden to occur.
E cum es extrayt le sanc segon la quantitat de necessitat, lahoras tu pausa sobre la vena oli e sal, per que no sia consolidada coytadament; e semblantment cove que tu fassas en tot ram streyt.	And when the blood is extracted according to the necessary quantity, then pause over the vein with oil and salt, so that it does not become completely consolidated; similarly ensure that you do this for all related parts.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de aquela de la ma senestra, es que es conferent a las malautias de la melsa.	The treatment for the femoral incision on the left side is that it is related to the ailments of the thigh.
E fay semblantment en la fleubotomia de lu ayssi cum has fayt en l’autra.	And perform the femoral incision on the other side in the same manner as you have done on the other.
E le juvament de la vena sephena de la fleubotomia es a las malautias que so en la partida dejos del cos, ayssi cum so malautias de la mayre, e a retencio de mestruas, et a las malautias dels ronhos e ulceracios de coyssas e de cambas antiquas, e a lor semblantz de las malautias.	And the treatment for the vein phlebotomy is for ailments that affect the left side of the body, such as ailments of the liver, and retention of menstruation, and for ailments of hernias and old chest ulcers, and their similar manifestations of ailments.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute entrometa lo sieu pe en aygua cauda e fassa sobre aquel fricacio entro que be apparen las venas; e lia sobre la junctura del pe am correia; e le loc de la vena le talo apparent deves le dit pous, e de aquela so ramificatz en la facia del pe motz ramps.	And the quality of the femoral phlebotomy is that the patient inserts his leg in warm water and makes friction thereon until the veins appear; then place a band around the joint of the leg, and with a pointed tool, cut the location of the vein where it is apparent, and from there its branches spread across the surface of the leg.
E donc fleubotoma le pus ample ram o dejos la camba deves le talo deves la agreguacio de lu, quar es milhor e pus sal.	And therefore, perform the phlebotomy on the larger vein or the old chest, cut it well, and add to its coagulation, which is better and more secure.
E si fleubotomas aquela en la facia del pe, lahoras tu te guarda dels nervis que so dejos aquela sobre la facia del pe, e pausa la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas per le travers, quays cum si tu la volias inscidir.	And if you perform a flebotomy there on the surface of the foot, then you must guard against the nerves that are left there on the surface of the foot, and place your flebotomy needle at the point where you puncture it transversely, as if you were incising it.
E sia le fleubotomi vosil.	And let the flebotomy be sufficient.
Mays si es prohibit le issiment del sanc; lahoras tu itera le pe de lu en l’aygua cauda e layssa correr le sanc en aquela entro que sia evacuat.	But if the bleeding is prohibited; then you prick the foot in cold water and let the blood run into where it should be evacuated.
E si le fleubotomador erra en la primieyra veguada, lahoras itera am le fleubotomi en sus un pauc, quar le loc es sal; e no temes de lu malician, mays que te guardes dels nervis ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the flebotomist makes an error in the first attempt, then repeat the flebotomy with a small prick, for the location is saline. And do not fear its malignity, but guard against the nerves as we have said.
E semblantment fay de la sophena del autre pe engualment.	And do the same for the other foot similarly.
E de la vena sciatica, le loc ayssi cum havem dit es deves le talo dejos la cavilha de la partida silvestra.	And for the sciatic vein, at the location as we have said, you should make a incision in the thigh with the parting wild knife.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de lu es a dolo de anca quan es per sanc caut.	And the relief from the femoral incision is in hip pain when it is due to cauterization.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intre en banh, e festine e strenha la cueyssa de lu del latz de la ancha entro desus le talo desus quatre ditz an una benda longua subtil, quar no appar sino per aquo.	And the quality of the femoral incision is that the patient feels cold, rushes, and strengthens the thigh from the cut above the knee into four fingers' width using a thin long bandage, which does not appear externally except through this.
E donc quan appar, lahoras tu fleubotoma aquela segon cascun engen que es a tu possible e segon le tranvers, e es milhor; o inscidas aquela per inscizio o secces aquela per seccio, quar le loc de lu es sal.	And when it appears, then you perform the femoral incision according to whatever means are at your disposal and according to the tranversal, which is better; or incise there by incision or extract it by extraction, for the place is clean.
E ela es en motz homes mot ameguada; e si atrobas aquela, e no appar al sentiment de tot, lahoras fleubotoma alcun ram de lu, e es aquel que appar en le dos del pe enves le dit auricular e le anular.	And it is often more easily found in men; and if you find it but do not appear by the feeling of the whole, then perform a femoral incision on some part of it, which is that appearing just below the knee between the tibial and fibular arteries.
E guarda te dels nervis, e fay correr del sanc la quantitat que voles.	And guard the nerves, and let the quantity of blood run that you wish.
E aprop deslia la strictura e pausa sobre le loc de la fleubotomia coto e strenh le loc, quar leugierament es sanat.	Then release the tension and place your hand over the site of the femoral incision firmly, for it heals quickly.
De ventozacio e de las qualitatz de uzar de aquelas.	Of ventilation and of the qualities to use of those.
Ventozas so de corns, o de eram, o de veyre.	Ventilations are of corns, or of ear, or of eye.
E ventozacio es fayta segon doas manieyras: la una de lor es am scarificacio e extracio de sanc, e l’autra es ventozacio ses scarificacio.	Ventilation is done according to two methods: one involves incision and drainage of abscesses, and the other is ventilation without incision.
E aquesta ventozacio que es ses scarificacio es segon doas manieyras, quar o es am foc o ses foc.	This ventilation that involves incision is done according to two methods, either by fire or with fire.
E a las ventozas que so administradas am scarificacio e extraccio de sanc son xiiii locs del cors, dels quals la un en lo qual so pausadas ventozas es alnocrati, e es la deriera partida del cap; e le mieg loc d’el de doas partz del col ensemp; e ventozas del mento dejos la mandibula pus dejos de la boca; e ventozas de doas spatulas; e ventozas de alohoster, e es sobre la fi de la coeta; e ventozas de dos focils, e so de dos brasses; e ventozas de doas cavilhas; e ventozas de doas cuoyssas.	For ventilations that are administered by incision and drainage of abscesses, there are fourteenth locations in the body. Of these, one location where ventilation is applied occasionally is at the very end of the head; and the middle part of the neck in two halves; ventitations under the chin leave the jaw intact and then the mouth; ventilations on the cheeks leave the lower jaw exposed; ventilations on the forehead are over the tip of the nose; ventilations on the temples, which are about the end of the ear; ventilations on the ears, which are on the side of the head; ventilations on the ankles, which are two spans wide; and ventilations on the thighs, which are on both sides.
E ventozacio no extratz le sanc sino de las venas menudas sparssas en la carn, e per aquo no catz la vertut per aquelas, ayssi cum es cazement per fleubotomia; ni no cove que ventozacio sia fayta am foc o ses foc en alcuna malautia fayta per replecio entro que le cors tot sia evacuat.	And do not extract the blood from the wound but from the small veins scattered in the flesh, and by this do not lose its virtue as with phlebotomy; nor should you believe that bleeding should be done by fire or several fires in any illness caused by excess within which the body is completely evacuated.
Mays si necessitat provoca a ventozacio per malautia o per continua, aministrem aquela en tota hora al comensament del mes e en la fi de lu, e en le mieg loc de lu e en qualque temps sia.	But if necessity causes bleeding for illness or continuously, we administer it at the beginning of the month and at its end, and in the middle of the month and at any time.
La qual causa es quar dels homes es en les quals es sanc multiplicat entro que indigeys de extraccio de lu per ventozacio e atroba en le sieu cap graveza e soda; e de aquels es que atroba replecio e rogor en la sua cara e en le sieu cap, e en le sieu col; e de aquels es que atroba pruziment en la sua cara e en le sieu front e tenebrositat e hebetut en les sieus huels; e de aquels que gieta le loc de la sua ventozacio; e de aquels es que le lor ris es multiplicat; e de aquels es que atroba gustament de sanc en la sua boca, o que la lengua es apostemada e escup sanc; e de aquels es que lor dormir es multiplicat, e de aquels que vetz sanc en lo dormir rogor e antics e plaguas e autras causas a lor semblantz.	The cause is that in those men in whom the wound is multiplied without digestion of it by bleeding and they find great hardness and soreness; and among them are those who find excess and redness in their face and head, and in their neck; and among them are those who find pain in their face and forehead and darkness and dullness in their eyes; and among those who feel the place of their bleeding; and among them is that their laughter is increased; and among them is that they find taste of blood in their mouth, or that their tongue swells and spits blood; and among them is that their sleep is increased, and among them who see blood in their sleep redness, spots, and other causes like theirs.
E donc quan vezes en alcuna causa de aquelas, e propriament si es en le tertz o miga del mes, lahoras comandam ventozacio esser fayta pus que so passadas del dia dos o tres horas.	And when there are times for any of those causes, and properly if it is in the third or fourth day, then command ventilation to be made more than just passed after one or two hours.
E juvament de ventozacio de la nuca es que quan aquela confereys a gravitat en le cap e ad aquo que es efondit als huels; mays cove que aquo sia aprop evacuacio de tot le cors.	The benefit of ventilation of the neck is when you apply gravity to the head and what is embedded in the heels; more effective is that this be close to evacuation of the entire body.
E aquesta ventoza es en le loc de fleubotomia de la cephalica.	This ventilation is at the location of the cephalic phlebotomy.
E no es legut que use de lu aquel que es de frega complecio, o en le qual es catarr, quar dona ad aquel gran nocument.	And it is not advisable to use that which causes inflammation or in which there is a cold, as this gives great discomfort.
E per aquo no cove que uso de aquela les vielhs, e en les caps dels quals so malautias frejas.	And for this reason, it is not advisable to use those that cause inflammation, especially in the heads where there are inflammatory conditions.
Mays ad aquel que sobre aquela es continuant sobre lu es fayta oblivio; e per aquo cove que tu comandes al ventozador que depause la sua ma un petit am la ventosa a las partidas dejos, temen de la generacio de oblivio.	More advisable is to use that which, when applied continuously, causes forgetfulness; and for this reason, you should command the ventozer to place his hand a little on the ventosa at the affected parts, to prevent the generation of forgetfulness.
Mays ventozacio de alkehel es en loc de fleubotomia de la vena fusca e de la basilica: e per aquo confereys a asma, e a la constriccio de ale e a la scissura del sturment de ale, e a tos, e a replecio.	More vaporization of alkali is in the place of femoral and basilic vein flebotomy: and by this you will contribute to asthma, and to the constriction of veins and to the splitting of the vein's instrument, and to coughing, and to repletion.
E cove que sia enpellida la ventoza alkehel un petit, quar si es pausada dejos, engendra debilitat en le cors e en le stomac.	And ensure that the alkali bulb is slightly heated, for if it is paused, it will generate weakness in the body and stomach.
E la ventozacio de alhagdahan confereys a las dolors accident en le cap e a obtalmia, e emigranea, e prefocacio, e a dolors en las razitz de las dentz; e es en loc de fleubotomia de la basiliqua.	And the alkali fumigation will cause headaches, eye problems, migraines, and toothache pain; and it is in place of basilic vein flebotomy.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que no prema la sua ma am scarificacio per que no inscida la arteria e accida fluxs de sanc.	And make sure you command the fumigator not to press his hand at the scarification site to prevent injuring the artery and disrupting the flow of blood.
E ventozacio dejos le mento comfereys a alcola en la boca, e a corrupcio de la gingiva, e a semblantz a lor de las malautias que so en la boca, e stan en loc de fleubotomia de aliheric que so en las doas labias.	And with the fumigation of the mouth, it will cause bad breath, gum decay, and appearance similar to the illnesses in the mouth, which are in place of anheric vein flebotomy located in the corners of the lips.
Mays la ventozacio que es fayta sobre las doas spatulas confereys a caphatan, le qual es fayt per replecio de caliditat.	May the ventilation that is made over the two spoons be covered, which is done by replenishment of heat.
E la ventosacio de las doas partidas dedintz dels focils confereys juvament de la fleubotomia de tres venas, so es de la basilica, fusca e cephalica, quar aquela atratz le sanc de totas aquelas venas pus manudas que so en la carn, e aquelas venas menudas de las autras venas pus grossas entro que pervengua la atraccio a las tres venas.	And the ventilation of the two internal parts of the flasks contributes to the benefit of the femoral, superficial, and cephalic vein operations, for those larger veins carry the blood from all those veins that are in the flesh, and those smaller veins between the larger veins allow the flow to reach the three veins.
E comanda al ventozador que trop no procezesca en scarificacio, quar le loc es denudat de carn, e dejos lu so nervis e arterias.	And command the ventriloquist not to proceed with incision, for the area is stripped of flesh, and leave only the nerves and arteries.
E es una ventoza am la qual es ventozat sobre alshosses e confereys a las emorroydas del cul e a las ulceracios pus dejos.	And it is a ventilation upon the alshosses and contributes to the hemorrhoids of the buttocks and the ulcers, and leave them so.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que sia gran ventoza, e que sia de eram, quar le loc indigeys de fort seccio; e fort leu so traucadas ventozas subtils e sia scarificat am scarificacio.	And command the ventriloquist to use a strong ventilation, and make it of air, for the area needs strong drying; and after strong incisions, let it be incised.
Mays ventozas de las cambas minueysso per minuicio manifesta, quar atiran le sanc de tot le cors, e comfereysso a dolors antiquas dels ronhos e de la mayre, e de la vesica; e provocan las mestruas, e comfereysso a bothor e ademil; e stan en loc de fleubotomia de doas sophenas, e alahorcoben, e de doas cavilhas.	More wind in the legs diminishes, through manifest diminution, which carries the scum of the whole body, and comforts old pains of the hips and the thigh, and of the bladder; and provokes menstruation, and comforts bothorrhea and ademilia; and are in place of a double femoral ligation, and halrocenion, and of double ankles.
Enpero mot debelitan tot le cors e fan accidir sincopi en motz homes.	But they thicken the whole body and cause syncope in many people.
E de las ventozas alahorcoben le juvament es propda al juvament a las ventozas de doas cambas.	And of the winds, halrocenion is proper to the winds of the hips.
E la qualitat de la posicio de las ventozas es que pauses la ventoza al comensament vueda e sucguas per succio temprada, e no prolongues la posicio de las ventozas, mays pausa aquelas leugierament, e reman aquelas coytadament, e que las humors venguan al loc per adveniment engual.	And the quality of the position of the winds is that you place the wind at the beginning viewable and suck it up by slight suction, and do not prolong the position of the winds, but rather place them lightly, leaving them constantly, so that the humors come to the area by natural means.
E no cesses iterar aquo e continuar entro que veja le loc ja enrojezir e inflar e que appara la rogor del sanc.	And do not cease to repeat this until you see the area already reddening and swelling, and the scum appears.
E lahoras tu scarifiqua e itera la succio pauc a pauc, e aprop considera en la dispozicio dels cors.	And then you incise and iterate the suction little by little, and place your consideration on the disposition of the bodies.
Quar aquel home que es de tendra carn de rars pors, cove que tu le scarifiques una veguada e no pus, per que le loc no sia ulcerat.	If a man has tender flesh due to cold, incise him only once and not more, so that the place does not become ulcerated.
E comanda al ventozador que amplifique la scarificacio e pronde un pauc, e atempre la succio am facilitat.	And command the fan to increase the incision and apply a little, and facilitate the suction.
E si en le sanc es grossitut, lahoras cove que scarifiques doas veguadas, quar en la primieyra veguada es uberta la via de subtiliacio al sanc e a la aquositat de lu.	And if in the wound it swells, then you must incise twice, for in the first incision open the way of subtilization to the wound and its aqueous nature.
Mays en la segunda a la perscrutacio aquisida de la extraccio del sanc gros.	More in the second incision for the acquired scrutiny of the extraction of the swollen blood.
E si le sanc es mot feculent, lahoras sia fayta scarificacio la tersa veguada per que consiegua le derier.	And if the wound is mixed with foul matter, then the third incision should be made to achieve healing.
E derierament, quan volem extrayre le sanc pauc a pauc o un petit, abasta a nos una scarificacio.	Finally, when we want to extract the blood little by little or just a little, suffice us one incision.
E si volem extraccio de mot sanc, scarificam am mota scarificacio; e si nos conoyssem que·l sanc es gros, lahoras cove que scarifiquem per scarificacio preonda.	And if we want an extraction of thick blood, we perform a puncture at the same site; and if we know that the blood is thick, then we incise with a longer incision.
E le terme de scarificacio en la qual es la profunditat de la codena tant solament.	And the term scarification in which is the depth of the incision solely.
E si aquel del qual la codena es grossa, dura, fusca, e les sieus pors so streytz, cove que les locs de las ventosas sian untatz lenitius, apertius resolutius; si es en temps d’estiu, ayssi cum es oli de aloen o oli de violat, o oli de amellas dossas, o oli de cemensa de coja; e si es en temps ivern, lahoras oli narci, o oli de liri, o oli de camamilla, o de sanc, e ad aquels semblantz.	And if the incision is thick, hard, dark, and its pores are straight, then the areas for the suction cups should be gently lubricated, openly resolved; in summer, such as olive oil of aloes or olive oil of violet or balsam of copaiba or pine resin; and in winter, then olive oil of narcissus, or olive oil of marigold, or chamomile oil, or blood oil, and to those similar.
E si la superfluitat es grossa, freja, lahoras le oli sia amaranti, o oli de balsamita, o oli de aloen, o oli aneti, e a lor semblantz.	And if the excess is thick, apply a mustard oil, or balsam oil, or aloes oil, or anethole oil, and to those similar.
Mays si le ventozador es de amples pors de tendra carn, lahoras cove que sia prohibit de oli, e cove que ad aquest les locs de ventozas de lor aprop la ventozacio sian lavatz am ayguaros o am aygua freja de solatrum, o am aygua de coja, o am aygua de bordolaguas, e semblantz ad aquelas.	But if the suction cup is on flesh with wide pores, then it should be prohibited from oil, and instead should be washed with warm water or cold water of Solomon's seal, or water of copaiba, or walnut water, and those similar to them.
E aquel del qual le sanc es de mota humiditat, lava las suas ventozas am vi agre, o am aygua de mirt e sumac e semblant ad aquels.	And for that of which the flux is from a humid nature, wash his bowels with warm water, or with water of myrtle and sumac and similar.
E de aquel del qual las superfluitatz son grossas, lava las suas ventozas am vi antic, o am aygua de sansuc, que es majorana, o de decoccio de anet, o de camamilla, e a lor semblantz.	And for that of which the superfluities are large, wash his bowels with cold water, or with water of santisc (marjoram), or from decoction of artemisia, or chamomile, and similar to them.
E cove que la ventozacio sia guardada denant de banh; habantz cove que sia aministrada aprop issiment del banh per una hora o per doas, e cove que dorma aprop la ventozacio.	And ensure that the bowel movement is retained before bathing; have it administered shortly after bathing for one or two hours, and ensure that he sleeps near the chamber pot.
Quid est quo oportet ut regatur ventosandus aus phlebotomatus ante ventosationem.	What must be done that the patient who is to undergo bloodletting may have a bowel movement beforehand.
Cove que consideras al comensament: lahoras si le ventozador o aquel que·s deu fleubotomar es coleric e ventz sobre lu sanc agut e imflamacio, lahoras cove que prengua causas infrigidantz, ayssi cum milgranas acetosas, e endivia an vi agre e laytuguas, e secanabin, e julep, e a lor semblantz.	Ensure that you consider the beginning: when the patient who is to have his bowels moved or who is to undergo phlebotomy has a colerich temperament and his flux is acute and inflamed, ensure that he takes cooling causes, such as acetic milks, endive with warm water, laxatives, julep, and similar remedies.
E pausa a lor viandas ayssi cum poletz, e carns de auzels serbiges, e viandas conditas am agras, e a lu semblantz.	And feed them thus like lentils, capons, and pigeons, seasoned with herbs, and similar to these.
E de aquel del qual la compleccio es freja, cove que prengua en beure eyssarop almiva, o eyssarop de alsecanabin de semensas, e sumac, e vi mot odorant migier entre viel et noel; e que a lu sia comendat que use de paucitat de beure e de mangar, e pausa las viandas de lu poletz e canabir e pissers e petitz auzels e colombat.	And for that one in which the swelling is hard, let him take to drink essarop of almiva, or essarop of alsecanabin of seeds, and sumac, and vi mot odorant mixed between wine and water; and let it be commanded that he uses moderation in drinking and eating, and eats fewer lentils, beans, peas, and small pigeons and doves.
E cove que en lo dia de ventozacio e de fleubotomia le beure sia major que la vianda.	And let him drink more than he eats on the day of ventilation and venesection.
E cove que sia donat en beure en alcunas horas ad alcus homes tyriaca alpharac, o medicamentz de musc, so es muscada, o alcelita denant la ventozacio o denant fleubotomia o aprop, per so que·ls membres principals sian confortatz e que·l sanc sia subtiliat; e no cove que prenguan aquela scalfatz.	And let him be given to drink in some hours for some men tyriaca alpharac, or medicines of musk, such as muscardine or acellita before ventilation or before venesection or shortly after, so that the principal members may be comforted and the wound subtiled; and do not let them take any scabification.
Mays las ventozas que so ses scarificacio sian ventozas que so pausadas sus le fetge, e sobre la melsa e podagra, e sobre le umbelic, en les locs dels jonolhs, e la pixida del ancha, quar aquestz membres no suffertan scarificacio sobre si.	More the ventilations that are scarifications should be performed over the liver, and on the melena, podagra, and the umbilicus, in the areas of the joints, and the axilla; for these principal members do not suffer scarification upon themselves.
E no es querit per aquelas sino atraccio de sanc de membre, ayssi cum pausam ventosa sobre mamilha en malautia de flux de sanc del sanc de las nars; e usam de aquela per que sia dissolvuda ventositat freja inviscade del membre, ayssi cum pausam sobre le ventre e l’umbelic; quar aquela rarifique le membre e scalfa lu e ramau la dolor quar resolveys ventositat.	And it is not sought by those rather than an attraction of pus from the limb, thus as we apply a suction cup on the breast in illness of flux of blood from the blood of the nostrils; and we use that so that there may be dissolved a superficial fatty substance of the limb, thus as we apply over the abdomen and the umbilicus; for which it rarifies the limb and warms it and relieves the pain which resolves the fatty substance.
E ja es pausada sobre les ronhos quan accideys en lor opilacio o poyra, quar per vertut de atraccio fort leu huobre opilacio e erradica le poyra de son loc.	And it is applied over the hemorrhoids when they occur in their prolapse or puffiness, for by virtue of strong attraction, the man's prolapse is weakened and the puffiness is removed from its place.
E semblantment fa quan es pausada sobre le fetge e la melsa deves ventositat en aquels enclausa.	And similarly when it is applied over the liver and spleen, it dissolves fatty substance in those enclosed.
E aquestas ventozas so administradas vuedas amb succio tant solament; e alcunas veguadas so administradas am foc.	And these suction cups are applied solely with suction; and sometimes they are applied with fire.
E alcunas veguadas so administradas plenas de aygua tebeza en las malautias de la melsa.	And sometimes they are applied full of clear water in illnesses of the spleen.
E aquo es per que la ventoza sia umplida e sia pus gran, so es aygua cauda sola o aygua en la qual sian cuytas herbas ad aquo convenientz.	And this is so that the suction cup may be filled and become larger, it should either be clear water or water in which suitable herbs have been boiled.
Forma de ventoza aministrada am foc: sia la amplitud del orrifici de dos ditz, segon que nos la havem formada; e la quantitat del preon sia la maytat de un palm; e sia en lo latz de lu, en le loc que es en le circuit, la maytat de lu, le trauc sia petit segon la quantitat que intre en lu una agulha.	Form the suction cup with fire: let the diameter of the aperture be two fingers wide, as we have formed it; and the amount of oil be half a palm; and place it in the middle of it, at the midpoint in the circuit, draw it out small according to the quantity that an针灸师，这句话的意思是：“用火制成吸盘：让开口的直径为两指宽，正如我们所形成的那样；油量应为半掌之多；将其置于其中心位置，在电路的中点处，根据进入其中的数量使其略小一些。”请继续提供下一句吧。
Sia fayta de eram rog o citri, de grosses marges, leon, enguals e terses per so que no leda le membre deves la sua posicio sobre lu.	Make it from glass or citrus, of large margins, equal and smooth so that the limb does not deviate from its position on it.
E sia al mieg de lu vergua transversa de eram o de ferr, on es pausada candela am lo foc.	And let it be at the midpoint of the glass or iron, where the candle is placed in the fire.
E ja sia aquesta ventoza gran major de aquela la qual havem recomtat; e la pauca mendre de aquela segon las malautias e la etat de aquel que usa de aquela.	And let this suction cup be much larger than the one we have described; and adjust the amount of oil according to the illness and the condition of the one who uses it.
E las ventosas dels efantz e extenuatz so autres que las ventozas dels joves e de grosses corssas.	And the suction cups for children and those in poor health are different from those for young and healthy individuals.
E la qualitat de pausar aquesta ventoza am foc sobre le membre es que extenda la meca am foc de lenha decentment denant una pauca candela de cera, e pausa aquela sobre le mieg de la vergua transversa en le mieg loc de la ventoza, per que le foc sia accendut enviro la partida dejos per que no sia comburit le cors del malaute.	And the quality of placing this cautery on the limb is that it extends the fire mechanism from the cautery held in front by a small wax candle, and place that one over the middle of the transverse ligament in the middle location of the ventoza, so that the fire be ignited around the area left to prevent the body of the patient from being burned.
E aprop sia pausada sobre le membre del malaute, e le dit sia sobre le trauc que havem dit, entro que quan tenem las ventozas e non indigem que osten le dit e que yesca la vapor sobre aquel trauc, lahoras la ventoza sira tantost dissolvuda.	And then it is placed on the limb of the patient, and they are directed over the tract as we have said, so that when we have the ventozas and do not need to hold the direction and let the vapor vaporize over that tract, then the ventoza will soon be dissolved.
E prop igneys la meca segon la sua manieyra, e itera aquela si indigeyssas de aquela.	And then ignite the mechanism according to its manner, and repeat that if you need that one.
Mays en ventosa que es aministrada en la malautia de plauressi, am aygua, en la qual no ha vergua transversa ni trauc, e no es aministrada sino que sia umplida de aygua, e es pausada sobre le membre tant solament.	More in the ventosa that is administered in the disease of pleurisy, with water, in which there is no transverse ligament or tract, and it is not administered so much as filled with water, and it is placed on the limb only thus.
E aquesta es la forma de lu: E aquesta ventoza quant plus es gran, tant es milhor, per que puya recebre gran quantitat de aygua.	And this is the form of it: And this ventosa the larger it is, the better, so that it may receive a great quantity of water.
Capitol .xcvii.	Capitol. xcix.
Sanguissuguas no so administradas en motz membres sino en les membres en les quals non es possible posicio de ventosas, per la parvitat de aquels, ayssi cum le pot e gingiva e semblantz a lor; o en membre denudat de carn, ayssi cum le dit e·l nas e lors semblantz.	Sanguissuguas are not administered in major members but in the members in which the application of cups is not possible due to their small size, such as the palate and similar parts; or in a naked flesh member, such as the nose and ears and similar.
E la qualitat de usar de aquelas que si has trobadas sanguisugas que so en las ayguas dossas de poyredura mundas.	And the quality of using those that you have found to be sanguissuguas in the double waters of postpartum purification.
E aprop sian layssadas le dia e la nueyt en aygua dossa entro que sian famolentas, e que no romangua alcuna causa en le ventre de aquelas; e aprop sia evacuat le cors en le comensament am fleubotomia e am ventozas; e aprop fregua le membre del malaute entro que s’enrojezesca; e aprop sian pausadas sobre lu.	And then let them lie in the double water during the day and night until they soften, without any cause affecting their womb; and let the body be evacuated at the beginning either by venesection or by cups; and let the limb of the patient be fumigated until it becomes reddened; and let them be placed over it.
E cum son umplidas e caso.	And when they are filled and the case is complete.
E si es possible succio del loc am ventoza, es mays derier en juvament.	And if it is possible to suck the area with cups, it is more effective in treatment.
E sino, lahoras lava le loc am vi agre e aprop am mota aygua; e sia freguat e expremut.	And otherwise, then wash the area with warm water and afterwards apply cold water; and it should be rubbed and squeezed.
E si es prolonguat le cors del sanc aprop le cazement de las sanguissuguas, e es aquo resudan, lahoras tu enfon un drap de li en aygua freja, e pausa aquel de sobre entro que sia abdida la resudacio.	And if the course of the blood prolongs to near the site of the sanguine vessels, and here it pools, then you insert a cloth into cold water, and place that over it so that the pooling is absorbed.
E si le sanc es multiplicat, lahoras polveriza sobre lu vitriol trissat, o guallas e semblantz a lor de las causas stipticas, entro que·l sanc sia abscidit; o sian pausadas sobre le loc las maytatz de favas excocicadas, e sian layssadas entro que las favas aderescan al loc, e es le sanc abscidit.	And if the blood is increased, then powder vitriol trissat, or small pieces resembling those of astringent causes, over it while the blood is being absorbed; or place bandages soaked in boiled fava beans over the area, and let them remain until the fava beans adhere to the area, and the blood has been absorbed.
E cove, si es necessaria, iteracio de sanguissuguas, quan es possible mudar aquelas.	And also, if necessary, iteration of the sanguine vessels, when possible replace those.
E si las sanguissuguas son prohibidas de suspenssio, lahoras sia freguat le loc am sanc recent o fique una agulha en les locs entro que yesca sanc; e aprop sian pausadas, quar aquelas quan sento alcun sanc tantost adarysso.	And if the sanguine vessels are prohibited from suspension, then wash the area with recent blood or place a needle in the areas where blood will soon appear; and afterwards apply bandages, which should be changed as soon as any blood is felt.
E quan voles que cajan, polveriza sobre aquelas un pauc de aloen trissat, o sal, o cendre, e cazo tantost.	And when you want them to cough, powder a little of dragon's blood, or salt, or ashes over them, and do so soon.
Ayssi comensa lo prolec de la tersa partida: de restauracio.	Thus begin the procedures of the second part: on restoration.
Aquest capitol es motas veguadas necessari en la art de medicina; e es restauracio de fractura e de dislocacio accident en les osses.	This chapter is necessary observations in the art of medicine; and it is on the restoration of fractures and dislocations in bones.
O, filh, sapiatz que jactan se de aquest capitol les fols metges e les vulguars e aquels que degun temps no reguardero les libres dels Antics ni legiro de aquels una letra.	Oh, son, know that this chapter is taught by skilled doctors and common people, as well as those who for a long time have not studied the free works of the Ancients or read even one letter from them.
E per aquesta causa es fayt que aquesta manieyra dels scients in terra nostra es privat; e yeu no ho e obliat en aquo degun temps be de tot; e no he adhibit aquo que apres, sino per longitut de lectio dels libres dels Antics e studi sobre le entendement de aquels, entro que extrayssi la sciencia de aquels.	And for this reason, this method of the learned in our land is kept private; and I have not forgotten it after such a long time; and I have not accepted what follows, but only through much reading of the works of the Ancients and study over my understanding, from which I extracted the science.
E aprop adirigui a experiment e studi en la longitut de la mieua vida.	And I direct this experiment and study throughout my lifetime.
E yeu ja he de aquo descrit en aquest capitol tot aquo que conte la mieua sciencia e sobre le qual es passat lo mieu experiment; pus que agui abreujat aquo a vos autres e deliuregui aquo de occupacio de elonguacio; e abreujegui aquo en la fi de abreujacio; et e monstrat aquo en la fi de declaracio; e formegui en aquo motas formas dels sturmentz que so administratz en aquel, cum es fayt per addicio de declaracio, ayssi cum he fayt en dos capitols precedentz.	And I have already described in this chapter all that concerns my science and about which my experience has passed; for here I abbreviate this to you others and deliver this from occupation to extension; and abbreviate this in the end of abbreviation; and show this in the end of declaration; and form in this the shapes of instruments that are administered there, as is done by addition of declaration, thus as I have done in two previous chapters.
Capitol primier.	First chapter.
Summae et collectiones ex esse fracturae ossium, ex eis quarum praemissio necessaria est, antequam incipiamus rememorationem membrorum fraftorum et diversorum si uniuscuiusque.	Summarize and collect the information about fractures of bones, those for which a preliminary discussion is necessary, before we begin the recollection of the various parts of bone fractures and their diverse aspects.
Cove donc que diguam en le prohemi de aquest capitol las summas del sermo; e les capitols al entendament dels quals en le comensament es forsat le artifexs e a stacio sobre la veritat de aquels; so es vos e aquels que so promptz que sapian o aprenguan aquesta art nobla autres de vos.	Let us therefore begin this chapter with a summary of the discourse; and those chapters to which understanding is necessary at the beginning, the craftsmen must study and remain grounded in the truth of those. It is you and those who are prompt to know or learn this noble art from others.
E donc dic que quan accideys a alcu fractura o dislocacio o torcio o cazement, lahoras cove que tu te coytes al comensament am fleubotomia o aleyar aquel, o quascu ensemps, si no prohibeys alcuna causa, ayssi cum debelitat de vertut, o es aquel al qual accideys effant, o viel en decrepitat, o es temps de vehement calor, o de vehement freg.	And thus say that when accidents occur such as a fracture or dislocation or twisting or immobilization, you must immediately proceed to the beginning with incision or reduce it, or both together, unless some cause prohibits it, such as weakness of virtue, or if it is the area where the accident occurred, or in decrepitude, or at a time of intense heat or intense inflammation.
E aprop sia content en vianda sieua de erbas frejas e de carns de auzels e de crabotz; e prohibem carns grossas e umplir si de viandas e de tota vianda que umple las venas de sanc, entro que siras segurat de apostema caut, e si no temes efusio de materia al membre.	And it should be content with food consisting of fresh herbs and of flesh of partridges and of crabs; and prohibit fatty meats and fullness from foods and all food that fills the veins with sanguine, until you are safe from abscess attack, and if you fear effusion of matter in the member.
E lahoras retorne le malaute al sieu regiment primier am le qual corr costuma de lu.	And then return the patient to its primary position as per the usual custom for it.
E donc cum le os trencat comensa esser restaurat, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia pascut de viandas nutritivas de nutriment mot e gros e greu en les quals sia viscositat, ayssi cum so viandas faytas de froment cueyt am aygua, e ris, e caps, e pes, e ventres de vacas, e huous, e peys fresc, e vi gros e semblants ad aquels, e am aquest regiment es fayta coagulacio de fractura pus leugierament e miels.	And so, when the broken bone begins to be restored, then ensure that the patient eats nutritious foods rich in natural and fatty substances with viscosity, such as foods made from cooked wheat in water, rice, eggs, fish, cow's stomachs, nuts, fresh meats, and similar foods, and with this regimen coagulation of the fracture is facilitated slightly with honey.
E sapias que les osses trinquatz quan so en les homes que so en la primiera vilura e en los decrepitz, no es possible que sian continuatz e sian consolidatz segon lur natura per la exsiccacio dels membres de lor.	And know that bones crack in those who are in the first vigour and in the decrepit, it is not possible for them to be cured and consolidated according to their nature due to the drying out of their limbs.
E son consolidatz e continuatz segon lor natura tot temps per la exsiccacio de aquels membres, e so continuatz e consolidatz aquels que so de lor en la fi de la lenitat, ayssi cum les osses dels petitz effantz.	And they are consolidated and continued according to their nature for the duration of the drying of those members, and continue and consolidate those that belong to them at the end of the gentle treatment, thus with the bones of the little animals.
Mays empero natura ajusta e amnecteys sobre le os trencat de tota partida alcuna causa semblant a glut en le qual es grossitut que adhereys e strenh aquel entro que so ensemps conglutinatz e liatz ensemps, entro que venen la fi de fortitut e de fermesa, ayssi cum foc al comensament, entro que denguna causa no prohibeys aquel de las suas obres.	Moreover, nature adjusts and alleviates over the broken bone from any part due to a cause resembling glue in which it thickens and adheres to that, conjoining them together, within which comes the end of strength and firmness, thus like fire at the beginning, in which you do not prohibit that from its works.
E per aquesta causa es necessari que pauses las viandas del malaute, viandas en las quals so gravitat e viscozitat e grosseza, ayssi cum havem dit.	And for this reason, it is necessary to restrict the patient's diet, a diet in which there is gravity, viscosity, and thickness, as we have said.
Mota diversitat de fractura segon diversitat del membre.	Different types of fracture according to the different parts of the body.
E sapias que las specias de fractura son diversas segon la diversitat dels membres, quar fractura del os de la camba es diversa de la fractura del os del cap; e la fractura del os del pietz es divers de la fractura del os del dos; e semblantment totz les autres membres son diverses entre lor.	And know that the types of fracture are diverse according to the different parts of the body; for the fracture of the bone of the leg is different from the fracture of the skull bone; and the fracture of the foot bone is different from the fracture of the thigh bone; and similarly, all other bones are different from one another.
E yeu venc am rememoracio de tota specia de fractura, expausada en le sieu capitol distincta del autre.	And I will recount in memory all kinds of fractures, distinguished in their separate chapter.
Mota diversitat de fractura en si meteyssa.	A variety of fractures within itself.
E son diversificadas las specias de fractura del os en lor meteyssas; quar es fayta fractura arcuada otra aquo que accidan en lu stellas; e alcunas veguadas es fayta fractura segon la longitut del os: e so las fracturas de lu satagia e astelhas e addicios procedentz e no-procedentz, ayssi cum es fayt en la pena quan es preparada a escriure, e es fractura am plagua e disrupcio en le cap, e es fractura fissura petita.	And the species of fractures in bones are diverse; some are caused by arcuate fractures, others by those that occur at the joints. Sometimes fractures happen according to the length of the bone: such as those of the shaft and splinters, and additions both proceeding and not proceeding from them, just as when preparing to write a document, where there is a fracture by slice and disruption in the head, and a small fissure-like fracture.
E a tota specia es engen o turment propri en restauracio de lu segon que vindra rememoracio de lu distincta en les sieus locs.	And for each species, there is a specific method or torture in restoration according to the separate recounting of it in its own place.
Mota senhal de fractura del os.	A sign of a bone fracture.
E per aquo es conoguda fractura del os: es tortuositat de lu, e de aquel eminencia e appericio de lu al sentiment, e so de lu quan compremes aquel am la tua ma.	And by this, a bone fracture is known: the tortuosity of the bone, and the prominence and appearance of the bone upon touch, and its sensation when palpated with your hand.
E donc quan no es en le loc tortuositat apparent ni so no es feyt deves le tieu tocament quan toques le os am agitacio e le malaute no atroba gran dolor, lahoras no es aqui fractura.	And when there is no obvious deformity and you do not feel a fracture upon touching the bone with movement and the patient does not experience great pain, then it is not a break.
Habantz es possible que sia tortuositat o petita fissura, adon no cove que tu mauguas aquel am la tua ma e am compressio de tot; habantz pausa sobre lu de las medicinas de las quals ve rememoracio aprop aquel moment le qual conveneys al loc; e aprop sia streyt per strictura subtil.	It is possible that it is a deformity or small fracture, so observe whether the patient wincing occurs when you touch it with your hand and apply compression to the entire area. Place your hand there for a moment over which you administer medicines from which you can see a reaction at that very spot; then proceed to stretch it gently due to subtle constriction.
E sapias que·l loc quan es arcuat e no es scindit en dos o otra aquo que no accidan en lu satagie, cum es remauguda tota partida de la sua compar, lahoras cove que comenses de la tua hora a rectificacio de lu habantz que a lu accida apostema caut.	And observe whether the area when arched does not split into two or another part that does not occur in the crack, as if the entire part of its continuity is remolated, then you should start your treatment to correct the condition that may lead to an abscess.
E si a lu accida apostema caut, lahoras layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que cesse le apostema; e aprop engualha aquel segon quascuna manieyra que podes de levitat e de engen.	And if an abscess does occur, leave it alone for a few days until the abscess subsides; then proceed to treat it according to any method you can use to promote healing and drainage.
E sapias que restauracio de lu e agulacio de lu es pus leugiera que del os en le qual accideysso sathagie.	And observe that the restoration and piercing of the area are lighter than the condition in which you found it.
E aprop strenh aquel segon que vindra la rememoracio de lu.	And then strengthen it according to the recall of the remedy that will follow.
Mays si en le os so satagias, lahoras es necessaria extencio de aquest membre trencat de doas partz, si es la ma o le pe; o am la tua ma si le membre es petit; o am doas cordas o am una corda e la ma.	And if in the bone there is fracture, when an extension of this broken member into two parts is necessary, or if with your hand if the member is small; or with two cords or one cord and your hand.
E sia la tua posicio am la qual pauses le membre loc engual segon la sua figura natural, mentre que las partidas so extandudas del membre trenquat, lahoras te perforsa que fassas retornar aquelas addicios am engen e segon quascuna manieyra que poyras en lor locs.	And place your position such that you support the member in a location equal according to its natural figure, while the parts of the broken member are extended, then forcefully make the additions return to their place and according to any manner you can in their locations.
E guarda te segon la tua forssa que no accida sobre le malaute per la tua operacio delor ni lesio; e perforsa te segon le tieu poder que tu appliques la un os am l’autre son companho segon lors milhors formas.	And guard yourself according to your strength so that no harm occurs to the patient due to your operation causing pain or injury; and forcefully do so according to your power, applying one bone to its companion bone according to their best forms.
E cove que en aquela hora aprofitablament tu toques am la tua ma aquel, e si vezes aqui alcuna causa diversa, rectifiqua aquel e enguala aquel per la quantitat de la tua vertut.	And ensure that at that opportune moment you touch with your hand that area, and if you see any other cause, correct it and equalize it according to the quantity of your virtue.
E exquiva vehement extenssio e compressio, ayssi cum fan mots fols metges que motas veguadas fan accidir apostema caut per la sua operacio, o fan accidir contraccio en le membre ayssi cum havem vist aquo per la operacio de lor motas veguadas.	And avoid violent extension and compression, just as foolish doctors sometimes cause an abscess to occur through their operations or cause contraction in the limb, as we have seen through their foolish operations.
E aprop annecteys, aprop equacio e decent operacio e strictura de aquel membre, e repaus e tranquilitat; amoneste le malaute sobre aquo e fay le squivar que no maugua aquel en la hora de las suas vigilias e del sieu dormir, e ves la sua revolucio e agitacio, e deves la sua egestio, e deves totz les sieus movementz am tota la sua vertut; e aguarda se que la posicio del membre sia posicio am la qual sia asegurada la dolor, la qual causa es quar quan sent en la disposicio de la posicio del membre delor o lesio; lahoras cove que permutes aquel ad autra disposicio de aquela am la qual non senta dolor; e guarda am aquo que la posicio de lu aquela sia dreyta e engual, per so que al membre non accida tortuositat quan es restaurat.	And apply approximation, equality in operation and stricture of that limb, rest, and tranquility; advise the patient about this and ensure they avoid causing pain during their waking hours and sleep, and observe their revolution and agitation, and manage their egestion, and control all their movements with all their virtue; wait until the position of the limb is in a position where the pain is secured, which causes pain or injury when in the disposition of that limb's position; then change that to another disposition where they do not feel pain; and guard this that the position of the limb is straight and equal, so that when it is restored, the limb does not incur tortuosity.
E la qualitat de la strictura del membre tranquat es aquela que yeu recomti; per que sapias que·ls membres trencatz so diversificatz en lor parvitat e en lor grandeza e en la forma de aquels.	And the quality of the stricture of the tranquil limb is that which I recommend; so that you may know that broken limbs vary in their minutiae and in their size and in the form of those.
E de aquels que son petits ayssi cum le bras e·l dit e·l focil e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras cove que la envolucio sia de drap mol subtil.	And of those that are small like the arm, and thus called easy and similar to those, then cover that envelopment with a fine thin cloth.
Mays aquels que so grosses ayssi cum la cuoyssa o la camba, cove que en aquels sia envolucio lada e dura, quar la liadura lada connecteys le membre gran e strenh aquel de tota part am strictura engual, enayssi que en lu no intre macula.	And those that are large like the thigh or chest, cover those with a firm envelopment, for the firm fabric connects the large and strong member from all sides tightly, ensuring that no stain enters.
E aprop comensa, aprop la tua evacuacio de equacio, pausar liament convenient ad aquo, sobre le loc de aquela fractura am tres envolucios o quatre segon que·l membre mereys; e strenh la tua ma un petit am le liament.	And then begin, after your initial dressing, conveniently pause with three or four envelopments according to which part of the body needs it; and hold your hand a little firm on the pausing.
E aprop ve am aquel a la partida pus sobirana del loc de la fractura, e strenh mens que no foc la tua strictura am la qual has strengut le loc de la fractura.	And then place it at the uppermost part of the fracture site, and ensure that your dressing is firm where you have tightened around the fracture area.
E aprop elongua te am envolucio del loc de la fractura un pauc, e mollifiqua la strictura petit a petit, entro que prenguas del loc sa una gran partida.	And then extend the envelopment around the fracture site a little, gradually soften the tightness, as you take up more of the area with the dressing.
E aprop pren una autra benda e envolveys aquela autra veguada sobre le loc trenquat am envolucio, e aprop ve am las envolucios a la partida pus dejos de la fractura; e sia la tua operacio en la strictura de la envolucio e en mollificacio de aquela segon que havem dit en la envolucio primieyra desus.	And then take another bandage and wrap the other layer around the wounded area with envelopment, and then place the envelopments at the uppermost part of the fracture; ensure your operation in the tightness of the envelopment and in its softening according to what we have said in the first envelopment above.
E aprop pausa entre las volucios de stopa leon o drap am le qual sia engualada la tortuositat de la fractura, si en lu es tortuositat; e sino, no pauses en lu alcuna causa.	And then place something between the rotula of the thigh or a cloth equal to the tortuosity of the fracture, if there is any tortuosity; otherwise, do not pause at all.
E aprop pausa sobre lu autra benda, e aprop enguala sobre aquestas envolucios stelhas decentment faytas tantost, si en le loc no es imflacio o apostema caut, e lahoras pausa sobre lu aquo que sede le apostema aquel e que oste la imflacio; e layssa aquela per alcus jorns; e lahoras tu strenh sobre lu las stelhas.	And then place something on the other side, and then equalize over these sheathed coverings properly made as soon as possible, if there is no inflammation or abscess in that area; otherwise, place something on what is the abscess and that causes the inflammation; leave that for a few days; then strengthen over the sheathed coverings.
E sian las stelhas de la maytat de canna lada raza, e be formada saviament; o sian de fust de pi; o de ramps de palma ; e sia le ample de quascuna stelha segon aquesta forma e aquesta figura:	And let the sheathed coverings be made of tough cane, well formed; or of wood from a pine; or of palm ribs; and let the width of each sheathed covering be according to this form and this figure:
Empero cove que la astelha que es pausada sobre aquela fractura sia pus grossa e pus lada un petit que las autras astelhas, e la longitut de la stela segon qu’es legut al membre en magnitut e parvitat; e aprop strenh sobre las astelhas am autra benda segon la tua primieyra strictura; e aprop lia desus am fiel decentment segon que havem dit de strictura, e es que sia la tua strictura segon le loc de la fractura mes, e quant mes es alonguat de la fractura, es mendre la strictura.	However, note that the sheathed covering placed over the fracture should be slightly thicker and a bit wider than the other sheathed coverings. The length of the sheath should be according to the size and magnitude of the member; then strengthen the sheaths on the other side according to your initial structure. Place a piece of cloth above decently, as we have said regarding the structure, and it should be your structure more at the location of the fracture, and the more elongated from the fracture, the less the structure.
E cove que les fils sian migiers en grossesa e subtilitat, e sian de li mol; e si les fils so grosses, ayssi cum yeu he vist per la operacio de alcus fols pausantz les lors fils de cordas de li tort, e es error gran, quan catz la strictura fora equalitat.	And ensure that the threads are moist and fine in thickness, and that they are of linen; if the threads are thick, as I have seen in the operation of some fellows pressing the veins of a tortoise with their fingers, and it is a great error when closing the stricture to make it equal.
E eyssament fils subtils no so convenientz, quar tu no consaguiras per strictura am aquels aquo que voles, e no cove que entre astela e astela haja mens de un dit.	And such thin threads are not convenient, for you will not be able to achieve the closure at those places you want, and it is not wise that there be less than a finger's breadth between them.
E si le malaute es ledit per las extremitatz de las stelas aprop la strictura en les locs sas, lahoras pausa dejos aquelas de stopa leon o lana carmenada entro que aquo no li fassa lesio.	And if the patient is led to the extremities of the straws near the closure in those places, then place those of linen or dyed wool between them so that it does not cause injury.
Alcunas veguadas fractura es am plagua, e accideys disrupcio en la codena, e yeu vindre am rememoracio en aquela en le capitol segon singularitat.	Sometimes fractures occur at the break, and accidents disrupt the chain, and I will recall this in the Capitol according to its singularity.
E sapias que ges tot membre trencat no es streyt am stelhas al primier dia; la qual causa es quar le membre, quan es gran, no cove que pauses sobre lu stelhas sino aprop v dias o vii o mays, segon la tua seguratat de adveniment de apostema caut.	And know that for any broken member, straying with straws on the first day is not appropriate; this is because when the member is large, it is not wise to place straws directly over it but rather after a few days or seven or more, according to your safety in the advent of an abscess.
E aquesta es la manieyra dels emplaustres am les quals les Antics restauravan, les quals so pausatz sobre fractura e dislocacio e torcio.	And this is the way of plasters that the Ancients used, which are applied over fractures and dislocations and sprains.
Manieyra de emplaustra comu abruejat de restaurament de fractura, convenient a motas compleccios e majorment a las femnas e als efantz, quar es de aquo sobre le qual no ventz calor ni freg: e es que prenguas de polvera de moli, e es la medula de la farina que pen deves le movement de la mola en las paretz del moli.	Method of plastering for the reduction of fractures, suitable for complex cases and especially for women and children, which is of that on which no heat or cold is applied: and you should take powder of molin, which is the marrow of the flour that comes from the movement of the mill in its walls.
E comfeys aquel ayssi cum es, sino que cribelles aquel am album de huou, e pausa la comfeccio de lu no-spessa ni subtil; e aprop usa de aquela.	And you should prepare it thus, but sift the white of egg, and make the preparation of it neither too thick nor too thin; and then use it.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre restaurant fractura e dislocacio e torcio: recipe de assafetida, de lapdanum, de acacia, de enula, e migrach, que es razit de milgraner salvage, de totz ana drac. x; de mirra e aloen ana drac. v; alochil ana drac. xx; totz sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian mesclatz am aygua alichil o am album de huou si la compleccio del malaute es scalfada; e aprop usa de aquest emplaustre, quar es de bona composicio e restaura les osses trencatz leugierament, e confereys a motz homes.	Another method of plastering for the reduction of fractures and dislocations: recipe using asafetida, lapdanum, acacia, enula, and myrrh, which is derived from wild myrtle, all in drachms. x; myrrh and aloe in drachms. v; alochil in drachms. xx; all should be sifted and mixed with alcohol water or with the white of egg if the patient's condition is mild; then use this plaster, which is of good composition and restores broken bones gently, and it helps men recover.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre le qual comfereys a fractura e torcio: recipe migrach e met de altea blanca ana drac. x; de mirra e de aloen ana drac v; de acacia drac. vi; de bol armenic drac. .xx.	Another method of plastering which helps with fracture and twist: take myrrh and white wax a drachm each; of acacia a drachm six; of Armenian bull's gall twenty.
Totz sian trissatz en mortier am mota contricio, e sian cribellatz, e sian comfitz am aygua o am album de huou e sia administrat.	All mixed in a mortar with quicklime, and strained, and sweetened with water or honey and administered.
Manieyra de emplaustre a juncturas e osses separatz de lors locs, e seda dolor accident en aquels e a fissuras e fractaduras: sia presa lana sutza e sia submersa en vi agre e oli cuyt e sia pausat sobre le loc.	Method of plastering for joints and bones separated from their places, and for alleviating accidental pain in those areas and for fissures and fractures: take pure wool and immerse it in vinegar and cooked oil and place it over the area.
Mays en aquest emplastre no es vertut de restauracio, de apostema caut e expelleys dolors propriament.	More in this plaster, there is not virtue of restoration, but of excision by cautery and expelling pain properly.
Autra manieyra de emplastre que restaura os trancat: pren fuelas de figuier sort e fuelas de papaver salvatge; contereys tot e fay emplastre de lor.	Another method of plaster that restores broken bones: take leaves of fig tree and leaves of wild poppy; mix them together and make a plaster from them.
Manieyra de emplastre abreujat aministrat deves la restauracio de fractura de os e quan tu voles resolucio del romanent de apostema: recipe razitz de altea, de camamilla e flors de violes, de farina de ers, de totz ana partida i; sian totz trissatz e sian cofitz am vi, si·l membre no es scalfat.	Method of a brief plaster to be administered for the restoration of bone fractures and when you want resolution of abscess: take parts of white wax, chamomile, flowers of violets, and flour of rye; mix them all together and strain them in wine, if the member is not scalded.
Mays si es scalfat, lahoras comfeys aquel am aygua de coliandre humit o am aygua e usa de lu.	If it is scraped, then apply that which is wet with cumin water or use it.
Autra manieyra de emplastra pus fort en resolucio que aquest primier, quan accideys apostema dur deves la restauracio del membre: recipe de razitz de altea e de semensa de li, e de balaustia, e mellilot, majorana, flors de viol, de camamilla, de totz ana partida i engual; totz sian trissatz e sian cofitz am aygua de sauze o am aygua dousa o am vi, tot aquo segon la qualitat del membre e le repaus de la color de lu.	Another method of applying a stronger plaster for resolution when an abscess occurs: for the restoration of the limb, use a recipe of horseradish juice, seed of lettuce, balloonflower, sweet clover, marjoram, flowers of violet, chamomile, all finely chopped and equal; all should be mixed with water from sorrel or two kinds of vinegar or with wine, according to the quality of the limb and the color thereof.
Mays Ypocras no diyssec en le sieu libre que sia pausat sobre le membre trenquat deves la restauracio de lu sino cerot fayt de cera e de oli e no autre causa; e recomtec que sia migier entre grossitut e subtilitat.	If I presume correctly, do not apply a sponge soaked in hippocratic wine for the restoration of the limb, but use a poultice made of wax and oil, and not for any other reason; and recommend that it be mixed between coarseness and fineness.
Mays a Gualia es vist que sian pausatz sobre le membre trencat deves la restauracio de lu e las causas en las quals es exsiccacio am petit de caliditat so ayssi cum mirra, enses e semblantz a lor de aquelas causas que havem recomtadas.	If it is for Gualia, it is seen that they should be applied on the broken limb for the restoration of it and the causes in which a small amount of heat, such as myrrh, frankincense, and similar to them, act similarly to the causes we have recommended.
Manieyra de emplastre que comfereys a lesio e dolor: recipe migat, de cezes, de pels de home inscizes o pena de auzel, e de altea, e sal, partidas enguals; sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian cofitz, e sia fayt emplastre.	Method of plaster that comforts injury and pain: take equal parts of ginger, of ox skin cut or rabbit hide, of aloes, and salt; boil them, strain and sieve them, then make the plaster.
Mays la quantitat segon la qual cove que romangua la liadura e aprop sia disliada, es que consideres si no es accidit dolor ni pruziment ni le os es trencat no es maugut de son loc, lahoras tu no deslies de motz jorns.	If the swelling is such that you must grind the plaster and it should be well mixed, consider whether there has been no pain caused nor bruising nor bone broken, then you do not need to remove it for several days.
E si accideys al loc dolor vehement o prusiment o imflacio, lahoras tu te coyte o deslie aquel en la hora, e osta le emplastre de lu.	And if pain intense or bruising or swelling occurs at the site, then you should incise or remove it immediately, and apply the plaster to the affected area.
E pren drap de li e spongia marina leon humida, e submergeys aquela en aygua tebeza, e am aquela lava le loc entro que cesse aquel pruziment e la dolor sia sedada; e aprop layssa repausar le membre per una hora; e aprop pausa sobre lu lana sutza submersa en vi agre e oli o oli rozat, e lia sobre lu per una nuoyt entro que sias segur de apostema caut, e que repause la imflacio del membre, e sia remauguda la dolor de lu.	And take a cloth and sea sponge soaked in wine, submerge that in vinegar, and wash the area with it until the bruising and pain are relieved; then place the member to rest for an hour; afterward cover it with woolen cloth submerged in oil or rubbed oil, and tie it overnight until you are sure of no abscess forming, and allow the swelling of the member to subside, and relieve the pain.
E aprop itera aquela strictura subtil e emplastre petit e no·l strenhas per la tua constriccio primieyra, e subtilia am aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then gradually dilate that subtle stricture and apply a small plaster without stiffening it with your first constriction, and keep the subtlety of that area to ensure it is healed.
E si vezes que le apostema e la rogor e la dolor e la imflacio e tots les accidentz ja so remaugutz de tot, e indigeysses de emplastre e de strictura, lahoras tu itera aquel ayssi cum has fayt al comensant engualment.	And if you see that the abscess and the redness and the pain and the inflammation and all these accidents have already been treated with all, and you need neither plaster nor stricture, then gradually dilate it as you did at the beginning equally.
E si no accideys al membre alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no deslies aquel sino aprop tres dias o quatre o v o vii; e alcunas veguadas tot aquo es layssat per xx dias segon que a tu appar per la desliadura del membre, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que la fractura adhereys, e se acosta a la coagulacio de la carn sobre aquel.	And if no other cause affects the limb from those we have said, then do not release it but keep it wrapped for three to four days or five to seven; sometimes all this is kept for twenty days according to how you see by the release of the limb, as we have said, until the fracture adheres and settles into the coagulation of the flesh in that area.
E lahoras ajusta en la strictura mays que en la tua strictura primieyra tota, e ayusta en la engrossacio de la vianda del malaute, segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu.	And then adjust the stricture more than in your first constriction, and adjust for the swelling of the patient's abdomen, according to the preceding recollection of it.
Mays si tu vezes le loc de la fractura ja desiccar e extenuar mays que no cove, lahoras sapias que·l nutriment es prohibit pervenir ad aquel; e donc embroca aquel am aygua tebeza deves tota veguada que delias aquel; e sia aquo en totz tres dias; e alleuja la strictura un petit, e per aquesta operacio corr al membre le nutriment, e es sanat leugierament.	And if you see that the place of the fracture is already drying and weakening more than it should, then you know that the nourishment cannot reach there; therefore, wet that area with a strong black water throughout the day you were applying that; do this for three days; and gradually dilate the stricture a little, and through this operation, supply the limb with nourishment, and it will heal slightly.
Mays aquo que fan les fols restauradors de la fractura del membre autra veguada quan no es restaurat al comensament, segon que cove, e es restaurat segon tortuositat, es error segon la operacio de lor, e temor gran, e si fos dreyturier aquo agrandit les Antics en lors libres e agueran am aquo obrat.	More than what fol restorers do the second time when not restored to the beginning, according to its size, and is restored according to tortuosity, it is an error in their operation, and great fear arises, and if they were correct this would enlarge the Ancients in their books and warn about this work.
E yeu no he vist ad alcu de lor aquo far, per que es pus razonable que aquo no fassa.	And I have not seen them do this, so it is more reasonable that this does not work.
Capitol segon: De fractura quan accideys en le cap.	Capitol segon: When a fracture occurs in the head.
Las specias de fracturas son motas, e las figuras de lor son diversas, e las causas son distinctas, quar de fracturas alcuna es fayta per percussio de spaza, e la percussio osta tot le os entro al ciphac, le qual es dejos le os, ayssi cum fay ayssa en le fust, e per aquo aquesta specia es nompnada ascial; o la spaza inscideys alcuna partida del os, e inscideys la carn de lu e no passa la inscizio entro al derier de lu; e aquesta specia de fractura es nompnada levatio absoluta.	The species of fractures are motas, and their figures are diverse, and the causes are distinct. For some fractures are caused by the impact of a blow, and the impact breaks all the bone into pieces within the skull, which leaves the bone, just as it is felled in a tree; and for this reason, this species is named ascial. Or the blow strikes some part of the bone, cutting its flesh but not passing through to the marrow; and this species of fracture is named levatio absoluta.
E la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca, e de fractura que es contricio o atricio; e causa de lu es percussio am poyra o cazement sobre peyra, e a lor semblantz.	The pain of these fractures is great or small, and of the fracture that grates or rubs; its cause is percussion upon stone or pavement, and to their likeness.
E aquesta fractura o es penetrant que ja apropinqua al pannicol le qual es dejos le os; o es en la facia del os, e la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca.	This fracture is penetrating and nearly reaches the periosteum which covers the bone; or it is in the face of the bone, and the pain of these two fractures is great or small.
E de fractura es que es ameguada en le os, en la subtilitat del cabel petita, e per aquo es nompnada aquesta specia fractura capillar.	Of this fracture, the bone is weakened in its细小的骨髓部分，因此这种骨折被称为毛发状骨折。
E es fractura que es fayta o per cazement o per percussio de peyra e a lu semblantz, que fa intrar alcuna lamina del os a las partidas dedintz, e es fayta en le loc concavitat ayssi cum accideys als payroles de eram quan accideys a lor percussio e es partida de lor intrada a las partidas dedintz.	And this fracture is caused by impact or percussion of stone, similar to which, it causes some lamina of the bone to enter the internal parts, and it occurs in the concave location, as happens with ear drums when they are struck, and it results from their entry into the internal parts.
E majorment es fayt aquo en les cors de osses humitz, ayssi cum so caps de efantz.	And this is mostly caused in the bodies of humid bones, such as those of children.
E so a totas aquestas specias fracturas satagias, so son pessas ayssi cum stelhas separadas.	And all these types of fractures are serious, like separate wounds.
E yeu vindre am reremoracio de tot aquo en son loc.	And I will come back to remind you of all this in its place.
E conoyssem totas aquestas specias de fractura per deteccio sobre aquelas e per inquisicio de lor am tentas e ostament de carn corrumpuda que es sobre lor.	And we know all these types of fractures by detection of them and by inquiry into their marks and signs of corrupted flesh that are upon them.
E specia capillar es conoguda per aysso que es descubert sobre le os, e es abstergit, e linit sobre lu am tentha, quar la fractura appar negra.	And the capillary type is known because it is discovered on the bone, is abraded, and appears black when marked.
Mays en la curacio de fractura considera al comensament les accidentz del malaute, e lahoras si tu vezes per los accidentz que signifique per significacio manifesta sobre paor, ayssi cum es vomit de colera, e extencio, e perdement de entendament, e abscizio de votz, e sincopi, e febre acuta, e eyssiment dels huels e rogor de aquels, e semblantz a lor dels accidentz en las majors disposicios, ses dopte no es sanat.	More in the cure of fractures consider the beginning of the patient's fear, and if you see from the signs that it signifies manifest fear, such as vomiting of bile, extension, loss of understanding, absence of voice, fainting, acute fever, swelling of the limbs and redness of those areas, and signs similar to these in the more serious conditions, you should doubt whether it will heal.
E si vezes accidentz no-correntz tu speras salut, lahoras tu comensa la curacio de lu.	And if you see unusual signs, you hope for recovery, and then you begin the cure.
La qual causa es quar si es vengut a tu le plaguat en le comensament cum es plaguat e aquo es en les dias de ivern, lahoras cove que tu studias en le ostament del os denant le dia xiiii segon tota disposicio.	This cause is that if the injured person comes to you in the beginning of the injury and it occurred on a winter day, then you should study the mark on the bone facing the fourteenth day according to all disposition.
E si es en les dias d’estiu, lahoras cove que te coytes ostar le os denant le vii dia, habantz que aquo que es dejos le os sia corromput del pannicol, e que accidescan les accidentz que havem recomtatz.	And if it is in the days of summer, then cover what you leave of the bones on the seventh day, having that which is left of the bones be corrupted by putrefaction, and that accidents occur which we have recounted.
E si la fractura ja es pervenguda al pannicol cubrent le cervel, e es am partidas menudas e atricio, lahoras cove que inscidas la partida conminuta e atrita, segon que yeu recomtare a tu.	And if the fracture has already reached the marrow and is partly broken and bruised, then you must incise the broken part and rub it, as I will instruct you.
E es que tu razas le cap del malaute plaguat, e descuebres sobre le os segon costuma e manieyra a tu possible segon la figura de la plagua, e que sia leugier sobre le malaute.	And if you incise the thigh of the patient, expose the bone according to custom and your method as possible based on the shape of the wound, and let it be light over the thigh.
E si accideys a tu deves la deteccio del os, fluxs de sanc o apostema caut, lahora tu te oppausa a lu am aquo que cove, e es que huemplas le loc de draps infuzes en vi e oli rozat, e fassa repausar la plagua entro que sia sedat le apostema, e sies segur de fluxs del sanc; e aprop comensa en la circuicio del os e en la ablatio de lu.	And if you detect the bone, fluxes of blood or abscess during the operation, then stop immediately and do as seems appropriate. You should fill the wound with cloths soaked in vinegar and oil, and let the wound rest until the abscess is subdued, and ensure there are no further fluxes of blood; then proceed with the circumference of the bone and its excision.
E aquo sia segon una de dos manieyras de operacio.	And this should be according to one of two methods of operation.
E la una manieyra es que tu inscidas le os am inscisori de streyt tal, e aquesta es la forma de lu: E aprop administra un autre inscissori aquest, un pauc pus lat que aquel; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And one way is to incise the tissue straight through, and this is its form: Then place another incisor here, a little more lateral than the first; and this is its form:
E aprop administra mays le inscissori pus lat que·l segon.	And place the incisor more laterally than the second.
E cove que sia deves tu nombre de inscissoris diverses, dels quals alcus so pus latz que alcus autres; e alcus de lor so pus breus que·ls autres e sian en le derier de acuitat de las suas extremitatz, e sian de ferr indi o felod.	And ensure that you have a number of different incisors, some of which are more lateral than others; and some of them are shorter than the others and should be at the rear of their extremities in acuity, and made of iron or steel.
E usa de lor am facilitat en percussio sobre le inscissori per so que no concutesca le cap e leda aquel.	And use them with ease in percussion on the incisors so that the head does not tremble and guide it.
E si le os es fort, dur, lahoras cove que perfores en le circuit de lu denant que tu administres los inscissoris am les taravels, les quals so nomnatz taravels no-profundantz.	And if the tissue is strong and hard, then ensure that you perforate in the circumference of it before placing the incisors at the travels, which you call shallow cuts.
E no so nomnatz ayssi sino quar aquels no pausan le terme de l’os del test ad aquo que es aprop lu, per so quar al taravel es redonda extremitat o marge sobre aquel que es dejos le cap de lu agut semblant a marge o a cercle petit, le qual prohibeys esser submergit e passar la spissitut del os.	And it is thus named so only because those that do not reach the end of the bone's crest are made at that place where the travel is round at its extremity or margin, over which a sharp head is left resembling a small margin or circle, which you must prevent from being submerged and passing the thickness of the bone.
E es convenient que tu prenguas de aquestz taravels gran nombre dels quals quascu convenesca a la spicitut de quascun os, entro que sia a tu present en tottz testz del cervel la extremitat del qual sia aguda, la quantitat en longitut e brevitat sia segon la quantitat de spicitut de aquest test.	And it is convenient that you take a great number of these travels, of which each suits the thickness of each bone, ensuring that at your presence in all parts of the skull, the extremity of which is sharp, the quantity in length and brevity be according to the quantity of thickness of this test.
E aquesta es la forma de tres specias de teravels: La qualitat de perforar en le circuit del os trencat es que pauses le teravel sobre le os e revolvas aquel am les tieus ditz entro que sapias que l’os ja es penetrat; e aprop permuda le terevel ad autre loc, e pausa aquo que es entre tot trauc la quantitat de la grosseza del ray o enviro aquo.	And this is the form of three species of travels: The quality of perforating in the circuit of the broken bone is that you place the travel on the bone and turn it around with the heated instruments until you know that the bone has been penetrated; then, return the travel to another location, and pause where it thoroughly reaches the quantity of the size of the ray or around it.
E aprop inscideys am inscissoris aquo que es entre quascun trauc del os, e fay aquel pus subtil que podes sobre aquo en fi de levitat, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que erradiques le os, o am la tua ma, o am alcuna autra causa per alcus sturmentz les quals auras apparelhatz ad aquo, ayssi cum tanalhas e forceps subtils.	And then incise with the scalpel where you cut through each part of the bone, and make that thread very fine which you place at the end of levity, as we have said, while you are excising the bone, or with your hand, or by some other cause using certain instruments which you will prepare for this, such as fine forceps.
E cove que tu guardes am tota cautela que l’inscissori no toque alcuna causa del ciphac.	And make sure that the scalpel does not touch any part of the incision.
E donc cum auras circuit le os perforan, e sira separat del ciphac si es continuat am lu, e auras aquel extrayt, cove que razas e enguales aquel en la asperitat de lu de aquo que es en le os am autra sturment semblant a inscissori, mays empero cove que sia pus teon e pus subtil que les autres inscissoris.	And when you have circled the perforated bone and separated it from the tissue if it is continuous with it, and you have extracted that part, make sure to scrape and smooth that area with a roughness similar to the surface of the bone, but moreover make sure it is finer and more delicate than other scalpel blades.
E si roman alcuna partida dels osses petitz e satagias, lahoras pren aquela am facilitat am aquo que es deves tu dels sturmentz; e aprop aquo cura la plagua am lichinis e enguentz les quals havem ditz.	And if any small part of the bones is removed and smoothed, then take that with ease using what you should use from the instruments; and then cure the wound with linseed oil and ointment, which we have mentioned.
E l’autra manieyra de operacio es leugiera, longinqua de paor, la qual diyssec Gualia e la lauzec per gran lausor; e aquest es le sermo de lu: necessari es a tu en le comensament que comenses descobrir la partida del os del loc en le qual es la fractura pus vehement e pus manifesta, entro que quan auras descubert aquela partida e auras pausat dejos lu la extremitat de aquest inscissori lent e alegre del qual aquesta es la forma:	And the other method of operation is lighter, far from fear, which Diossec Gualia and leaves it for great length; this is its saying: At the beginning, you must start by uncovering the part of the bone in the location where the fracture is most severe and most evident. When you have uncovered that part and laid down the extremity of this scalpel slowly and cheerfully, which is its form:
E es que la partida lenticular es leon e no inscideys alcuna causa, e la partida aguda es de lu en dos latz avantz en longitut, ayssi cum vezes; que la partida lenticular sia ajustada al ciphac am la facia de lu inscident aguda en le os.	And this is because the lens-shaped part is lion and you do not cut any cause, and the acute part divides it into two strips lengthwise, as you see; that the lens-shaped part be adjusted to the cusp along its acute face incident on the bone.
E aprop percuteys sobre le inscissori de una partida am un petit malhet entro que inscidas tot le os am facilitat ayssi cum es revolvut, e tu sias segur del pannicol que no accida en lu accident que temas en denguna manieyra, e si le medicant14 era le pus fol de totz les homes e le mays ignorant de lor; certament, e si era dorment.	And then strike on the incisor of a part with a small hammer where you cut through the bone as it is turned, and you be sure of the anesthetic that it does not occur in the accident that you fear in any manner, and if the physician were the most foolish of all men and the most ignorant of them; certainly, and if he were asleep.
Lahoras si romania alcuna causa annexa al os del pannicol en alcus locs de os, inscidira aquel de lu am la extremitat del inscissori aquel lenticular, e deliuraria aquel de lu am facilitat, quar es deliurat de lu ses nocument e ses paor.	And if any additional cause affects the bone of the anesthetic in some places of the bone, it will cut that part at the tip of the incisor lens, and release that part as it is released from its noxious effects and fears.
E si fractura del os no penetra entro al pannicol, e aquo que es abscidit o es ostat del os es la facia de lu, e roman en lu asperitat e satagias subtils, lahoras cove que razas aquela asperitat e erradiques aquelas satagias am razoris subtils per les quals tu has preparat le nombre, de diversas quantitatz per que sia a tu possible administrar de aquels en tot loc les pus convenientz de lor e le pus dreyt de aquels segon aquo en que te perduzeys la tua operacio aquel os trencat e la figura de lu.	And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate into the anesthetic, and what is cut or remains from the bone is its surface, and it remains in it roughness and fine threads, then scrape that roughness and remove those fine threads with sharp instruments you have prepared in various quantities so that you can administer of them the most convenient parts of them and the right part according to where you direct your operation on that broken bone and its shape.
E cove que administres en la tua razio am la qual razes le os al comensament le pus lat de aquels razoris, e aprop usa aprop lu del pus subtil de lu, e no cesses far aquo segon continuitat entro que pervenguas ad aministrar le pus teon e·l pus subtil de totz aquels.	And ensure that you administer according to your reason, sharpening the blade of those razors at their beginning, and then use near the subtle fluid of it, and do not cease doing this continuously until you reach administering the thick pus and the subtle fluid of all.
Mays en quascuna de las autras fracturas petitas capillars e fractura subtil, cove que administres cura segon aquo que perduseys ad rectificacio de lu.	In any other small fracture or subtle fracture, ensure that you administer care according to what is lost for the correction of it.
E es causa que no es ameguada sobre totz les quals han studi en aquela art.	And this is because it does not apply to all who have studied that art.
E stec sobre aquo que nos scriut havem mostrat en grans fracturas.	And place this on what we have written about great fractures.
E si le pannicol es retangut quan tu erradiques le os, lahoras cove que prenguas drap de li segon la quantitat de la plagua, e submergeys aquel en oli rozat, e pausa aquel sobre le orrifici de la plagua; e aprop pren autre drap doblat o triplicat e submergeys lu en vi e oli rozat e pausa aquel sobre drap prim e fay aquo al pus leugierament que podes sobre aquel, que no graves le ciphac; e aprop administra sobre aquel liament lat, e no strenhas aquel sino per quantitat que tengua la plagua tant solament.	And if the linen is cut when you remove the bone, then you should take a cloth according to the size of the wound, and immerse that in olive oil, and place that over the opening of the wound; then take another folded or tripled cloth, immerse it in wine and olive oil, and place that over the first cloth, and do this with light poultices that you can apply over that, without pressing on the wound; then administer a plaster to it, and do not press on it except by the amount that the wound has.
E layssa aquel am aquesta cura per un dia o per dos entro que sias segur de apostema caut; e aprop deslia aquel e aprop aministra medicinas am las quals es superflua siccitat, ayssi cum razitz de lin e farina de errs, e polvera de enses e de aristologia, e de semblantz ad aquels.	And leave that point for one or two days until you are sure of the abscess; then drain it and administer medicines to which excessive dryness is superfluous, such as linseed and wheat flour, powder of thyme and of arsenic, and similar.
E es que tu fassas de aquestas medicinas polvera que sia pulverizada sobre la plagua, ayssi cum son secas; e universalment, administra en aquel tota medicina de proprietat de la qual es que abstergesca e no mordique.	And you make these medicines into a powder that is sprinkled over the wound, as it is dry; and generally, administer to it all medicine of a nature that will cleanse and not irritate.
E guarda te segon la tua vertut que la plagua en la tua curacio sia neta; e no sia en lu surdicia de enguent ni autra; ni no layssas agreguar virulencia en lu; quar quan es ajustada sobre le pannicol del cervel, corromp aquel e poyreys aquel, e accideys sobre le malaute aprop aquo malicia maligna.	And guard that according to your virtue that the wound in your cure be clean; and do not leave surdicia of ointment or any other in it; nor allow virulence to add to it; for when applied over the brain cloth, it corrupts that and spoils it, and brings harm close to that malign evil.
E accideys en le ciphac del cap, cum de lu es mondificat le os e majorment quan es menspresada la cura de lu, e es negror en la superficia de lu; e donc considera lahoras si accideys al malaute les accidentz que havem ditz, sapias que es parnicios ses tot dopte.	And it happens in the scull of the head, as from it the bone is changed and especially when the cure of it is neglected, and blackness appears on the surface of it; and therefore consider when accidents occur to the patient those that we have said, knowing that it is perilous indeed.
E si no accideys negror sino de la medicina que es pausada desus, e es en vertut de aquela medicina que fassa aquela negror, lahoras cove que tu prenguas de mel una partida e de oli rozat partidas iii, e am aquels linieys un drap, e aprop pausa aquel sobre le ciphac; e aprop cura aquel am las specias de curacio que conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if you encounter blackness only from the medicine that is applied above, and it is by virtue of that medicine that the blackness occurs, then take part of honey and three parts of rubbed oil, mix those lines on a cloth, and place it over the scab; and treat it with the species of cure that suits until it is healed.
Capitol .iii.	Capitol. iii.
De restauracio del nas quan es trincat.	For the restoration of the nose when it is broken.
Sapias que no es trencat del nas sino doas partidas ensemps pus sobiranas, o una de aquelas alcunas veguadas, per so quar en lu has dos osses, quar la partida dejos es cartillaginosa, e no es trencada e no accideys a lu sino atricio e tortuositat e sinuitat.	Know that the nose is not broken but only two parts are slightly displaced or one of those few fractures, for in it you have two bones. The part that is left is cartilaginous and not broken; therefore, you do not fracture it but treat with friction and tenderness.
Mays si es trencada la una de las doas partidas de lu, lahoras cove que tu intrometas le dit petit en le sieu nas, e que engualhas aquela fractura dedintz am le tieu dit indic, e am le dit pous defora, entro que retorne le nas segon la sua figura natural.	But if one of the two parts is broken, then you must introduce the little finger into the nostril, and equalize that fracture inside with your thumb, and outside with your finger, until the nose returns to its natural figure.
E sia fayt aquo per tu am facilitat, e guarda te que no caja per aquela tua operacio sobre le malaute delor.	And do this for your own convenience, and make sure that you do not cause any pain to the patient during your operation on the painful side.
E si la fractura es en la pus sobirana partida del nas, e le dit no perve ad aquela, lahoras cove que sia equat am la extremitat del ray en le qual sia petita grossitut.	And if the fracture is in the upper part of the nose, and it does not reach there, then you should treat it at the end of the bone where there is a slight swelling.
E si la fractura es en doas partidas, lahoras tu fay le semblant de aquo.	And if the fracture is in two parts, then you make the appearance of this.
E coyta te am restauracio de lu en le primier dia de la fractura, si es possible; e sino, lahoras aprop le vii o·l x deves le repaus del apostema caut.	And apply this for the restoration of it on the first day of the fracture, if possible; otherwise, as soon as the seventh or eighth day, you should let the apostema rest.
E aprop entromet en la extremitat del nas una meca de drap de li, si la fractura es en una partida, o metz doas calguas, si la fractura es en doas partidas, e sia en la calgua grossitut de tanta quantitat que umpla le trauc del nas.	And insert into the end of the nose a piece of linen cloth if the fracture is in one part, or two strips, if the fracture is in two parts, and ensure that the strip is swollen with as much material as to fill the nostril.
E diysso alcus dels antics restauradors que las calguas sian enfundudas en boder, e sian permudadas en tot dia, mays no es vist a mi; habantz cove que la meca sia enfunduda en album de huou comfit am polvera de moli; e aprop layssa la qualgua entro que l’os sia fermat e sia endurazida la cartillage.	And some of the ancient restorers say that the strips should be soaked in honey and changed throughout the day, but this is not what I see; instead, you should soak the strip in clarified honey and powder of reduction; and leave it in place until the bone is firm and the cartilage is hardened.
E alcunas veguadas sia entromes en le nas, en loc de calgua, pena de auca pus que es envolopada de drap de li leon; e sia que ja te la fractura del nas pus vehement e que le malaute no sia prohibit de inspiracio.	And sometimes in the nose, instead of gout, due to pain wrapped in lion's skin; and you have already fractured the nose violently so that the patient is unable to breathe.
E aquesta causa no es a tu necessaria; e si voles, fay aquo, e si voles, fay calguas.	And this cause is not necessary for you; and if you wish, do this, and if you wish, do gout.
E si accideys autra veguada apostema caut, emplastra le nas am cerot o am coto enfus en vi agre e oli rozat, o am diaquilon.	And if another boil occurs, apply a cautery, plug the nose with wool or with fresh mustard in vinegar and olive oil, or with diachylon.
Mays si no accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que emplaustres aquel defora am farina de sizami e am polvera de enses cofitz am album de huou; e aprop pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e no lies le nas am alcuna causa.	But if no boil occurs, when you need to plug it externally, use sesame seed flour and powder of crushed cloves with honey; then place your hand over the nose to prevent any leakage.
Mays si so trencats les osses del nas am fractura petita o so conminuitz, lahoras cove que scindas sobre aquels, e extraguas aquels am insturmentz que conveno ad aquels; e aprop cos la scissura, e cura aquela am aquo que encarna e consolida, e am emplastres ad aquo convenientz.	But if the nose bones are fractured or reduced, when you need to split those areas, extract them with instruments suitable for those areas; then close the incision and cure it with what fleshes up and consolidates, and with plasters as appropriate.
E si accideys plagua dedintz le nas, lahoras cove que cures aquela am calguas e administra canulas de plom entro que sia de tot sanat.	If a plague occurs inside the nose, then cure that with cold water and administer lead canulas when they are completely healed.
Capitol .iiii.	Chapter IV.
De restauracio de la mandibula quan es trincada.	For the restoration of the jaw when it is broken.
Quan la mandibula dejos es rompuda e la fractura de lu no es am plagua, reguarda lahoras si la fractura es deforas tant solament, e no es trencada en dos e es curvada a las partidas dedintz, lahoras la sua cognicio es leugiera.	When the jaw is broken and the fracture is not displaced, consider whether the fracture is only on the surface and not fractured into two parts but bent inward. In this case, the pain is轻微的。
E cove donc, si la fractura es en la part dreyta, que tu intrometas le tieu indic senestre en la boca del malaute; e semblantment si la fractura es an la mandibula senestra, lahoras intromet le dit indic de la ma dreyta; e impelleys am aquel la gilbositat de la fractura dedintz am facilitat a las partidas defora, am la tua autra ma de la partida defora del os; am aquel decentment equa aquelam.	And consider, if the fracture is on the right side of the jaw, that you introduce the left index finger into the patient's mouth; and similarly, if the fracture is on the left jaw, then introduce the right index finger; and push the bone marrow of the fracture inward towards easier displacement to the outer parts with your other hand from above the bone; do this gently until it aligns properly.
E si la fractura de la mandibula ja es separada en doas, lahoras cove que administres extensio de doas partz segon rectitut entro que sia possibla la equacio de lu.	And if the fracture of the jaw is already separated into two parts, then you must administer extension to both parts according to their proper alignment so that they can be properly realigned.
E si accideys conmocio de dentz a disrupcio, lahoras strenh aquelas de las quals speras que romandran am fil de aur o de argent o de ceda; e aprop pausa sobre la mandibula trencada cerot, e aprop pausa sobre lu drap duplicat, e pausa sobre le drap gran stelha decentment fayta, o una pessa de sola engual a la longitut de la mandibula; e aprop lia aquela desus segon que a tu es apparelhada la liadura de lu e que conveneys la applicacio, entro que no es destruida.	And if there occurs a fracture with dislocation, then strengthen those of which you fear will break along the edge of gold or silver or lead; then place a cerot on the broken jaw, and place another over the doubled cloth, and one over the large star-shaped linen well made, or a wedge of wood equal to the length of the jaw; then tie that above as it is convenient for you and the application, so long as it is not destroyed.
E comanda al malaute que use de repaus e tranquilitat, e pausa la vianda de lu sorbicios leons.	And command the patient to rest and be tranquil, and place a lion's liver and spleen on his food.
E si extimas que ja es alterada la figura en alcuna manieyra, lahoras tu te coyta e deslia aquel al tertz dia; e aprop rectifica aquo que ja es alterat de lu e emplaustra aquel am polvera de moli, am album de huou, o am farina de cisami, pus que tu auras ostat le cerot de lu, e pausa sobre le emplastra lana leon.	And if you think that the figure has already been altered in any way, then on the third day you should extract and remove it; then correct what has already been altered in him and plaster it with powder of flour, white of egg, or flour of cereals, after you have applied the cerot to him, and place a lion's wool over the plaster.
E adonc cum sta annex e ajustat aquel emplastre sobre lu, e la disposicio del os no es alterada, layssa aquel, que no le deslies entro que sia sanat e strenh la fractura; quar motas veguadas aquesta fractura es streyta en tres sempmanas.	And when the plaster is applied and adjusted to him, and the position of the bone is not altered, leave it as it is, do not remove it until he is healed and strengthen the fracture; for most fractures heal in three weeks.
E si autra veguada accida apostema caut, lahoras administra aquo que havem dit motas veguadas en la sedacio de lu entro que sia sanat, e sia remaugut aquel apostema.	And if another time a boil occurs, then administer what we have said many times in the treatment of it until it is healed, and carefully remove that boil.
E si la fractura es am plagua, lahoras considera si es pessa del os separada o satagias, lahoras tu te subtilia que ostes aquelas satagias am aquo que conveneys ad aquo en la remocio de aquelas dels sturmentz.	And if the fracture is displaced, consider whether it is a separation of the bone or displacement. Then you should carefully handle those displacements as needed in their removal.
E si le orrifici de la plagua es streyt, lahoras tu le amplifique am le fleubotomi segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And if the wounds are wide open, then you should enlarge them with the lancet according to the quantity of your need.
E aprop quan tu auras ostat aquelas satagias, e de aquelas no sira remaugut re, lahoras tu cos le orrifici de la plagua si es ampla; e sino, pausa sobre aquela un dels emplaustres que conveneysso ad aquo e encarnan aquela, entro que sia sanada.	And when you have handled those displacements, and there will be no further need to remove them, then you close the wounds if they are large; otherwise, place one of the plasters that suit best over it and allow it to heal.
Capitol .v.	Chapter V.
De restauracio de la furcula quan es trinquada.	On the restoration of the furcula when it is fractured.
Motas veguadas es trencada la furcula de la partida denant deves le muscle, e aquela fractura es fayta en una de tres manieyras.	Many times, when the furcula is fractured at the front part, the fracture is made in one of three ways.
Quar o es trencada, o seperada, o es seperada en doas partz otra que no accidan satagias; e es leugier a la restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que accideysso en lu satagias, e es dificil a restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que la fractura es am plagua.	If it is broken, or separated, or is separated into two parts rather than naturally healing; and if this happens naturally in the area, it is difficult to heal; or if the fracture is open.
E la operacio en aquela, quan la fractura es ses plagua, es que tu fassas esser present dos ministres, per so que la un tengua le adjutori e siegua la furcula trencada, e l’autre extenda le col ves aquela partida.	And the operation in that case, when the fracture is open, is that you have two assistants present, so that one holds the aid and guides the broken fork, and the other extends the leg with that part.
E aprop enguala la fractura am les tieus ditz entro que sia fayta la forma de lu segon que cove, e no sia en lu eminencia pauca ni concavitat.	Then adjust the fracture with the pins called entras so that it is set according to its form, and do not leave it in an area of depression or concavity.
E si indigeysses mes de extencio, lahoras cove que pauses dejos le titillic del malaute spera de drap o de lana, e sia la grandesa de lu segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat; e exten e eleva la furcula e coarta la spera am la tua ma entro que enguales la frectura segon que cove.	And if more extension is needed, then place a pad or wool under the patient's leg to support it and adjust its size according to your need; extend and elevate the fork and hold the pad with your hand so that you can adjust the fracture as required.
E si no podes atirar la extremitat de la furcula a las partidas defora, per so quar es pervenguda al preon, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e pauses sobre le muscle de lu un coyssi migier en grandeza.	And if you cannot pull the extremity of the fork to the outer parts because it is stuck at the joint, then place the patient on their side over their neck, and place a medium-sized cushion under the muscle.
E le ministre prema le muscle de lu a las partidas dejos entro que l’os de la furcula sia elevat que es en le preon en sus, e lahoras tu rectifique la fractura e enguala aquela am les tieus ditz.	And the surgeon presses the muscle of the patient at the parts left between that bone of the scapula when it is in the position, and then you realign the fracture and align it with the joints said.
Mays si sentes satagias de la furcula e so maugudas, lahoras cove que fendes sobre aquela e extraguas aquelas satagias am facilitat.	But if you feel the ribs and they are soft, then cut there and remove those rib segments with ease.
E si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu ingenia inscisio de lu am un dels inscissoris les quals has apparelhatz ad aquo, pus que havias pausat dejos la furcula le sturment que serve le ciphac; e es sturment de fust o de ferr del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if it is retained in the bone, then you ingenious incise it with one of the instruments which you have brought for this, after placing the scapula on the table that serves as a stand; and this instrument is made of wood or iron, of which this is its form:
E es semblant a culier del qual aquesta es la concavitat; e sia la sua latitut segon aquo que has necessitat de lu, segon la grandeza del os o la pauqueza de lu.	And it is similar to a spoon, of which this is its concavity; and its width should be according to what you have needed from it, according to the size of the bone or its smallness.
Mays la longitut de lu sia segon que es a tu possible a la operacio; que haja doas extremitatz ayssi cum vezes, e la una extremitat sia ample e l’autre streyta.	But its length should be according to what is possible for the operation; it should have two ends like you see, and one end broad and the other narrow.
E si la disrupcio de la plagua la qual has inscidida quan has extraytas la satagia del os es ampla, e yest segur de apostema caut, lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura.	And if the wound caused when you have extracted the tendon from the bone is wide and you are certain of an abscess forming, then you adjust the two edges of the wound with sutures.
E si la disrupcio es pauca, o temes apostema caut, lahoras tu uemple la plagua am draps e pulvils segon la quantitat de la scissura de la plagua.	And if the wound is small, or you fear an abscess forming, then you use the wound with cloths and powders according to the size of the incision.
E si accideys apostema caut, lahoras infon drap en vi agre e oli rozat e vi, e pausa sobre aquel.	And if an abscess forms, then soak a cloth in vinegar and rose oil, and apply it to the area.
Mays la strictura del os quan es ses plagua e ses seccio, es que pauses emplastre fayt de farina de moli am album de huou, e pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e aprop pausa la spera dejos le titillic de lu, si indigeyssas de aquela, e aprop pren humemate, so es torca la qual teno les Sarrazis , que sia mot longua, e sia latitut de lu de un palm o entorn aquel; e aprop pausa pulvils duplicatz sobre la stopa e l’emplastre; e aprop pren una stela de taula subtil de la qual la latitut d’ela sia de tres ditz e en longitut semblantment; e aprop envolopa aquela en drap, e aprop envolopa aquel drap am la stela en lo loc sobre le loc de la fractura; e aprop pausa humemati ayssi cum es revout, e revol aquela sobre le col de lu e dejos le titillic de lu sa e dejos le titillic de lu malaute, e reduzeys aquela sobre tota partida, e quan vezes que la strictura de la fractura am strictura descent, e es aquo que no es occultat sobre tu.	For the fracture of a bone when your wound and section are clean, you should apply an ointment made from flour mixed with honey, place it over the area using linen, and then place a small stick, which is about as long as a palm or near that length; then sprinkle double powder over the linen and the ointment; then take a thin table stick, whose width is three fingers and in length similar to that; then wrap that in cloth, and wrap that cloth around the stick at the location of the fracture; then place the stick similarly wrapped, and roll it along the edge of the wound, leaving the bad part outside, and reduce it over all parts, and when the swelling of the fracture subsides, this is what is not hidden from you.
E tot, que no sia mauguda la stelha desobre le os trencat; e per so cove que tu vejas le malaute quascun dia, que quan le liament es mollificat o vezas la stela ja esser remauguda, lahoras tu rectifica aquo e strenh la liadura.	And altogether, provided that the splint does not irritate the bone fracture; and so that you can see the patient every day, when the swelling has diminished or you see the splint already no longer causing irritation, then you adjust this and strengthen the ligament.
E aprop pausa le dormir del malaute sobre le col de lu, e pausa dejos le titillic de lu deves le dormir de lu en la nueyt un petit coyssi; per so que am aquel sia elevat le adjutori de lu del latz de aquel, e donc es elevada la la fractura de la furcula a elevacio del muscle; o sia le bras de lu liat al col de aquel.	And then place the patient's head on its pillow, and put a small cushion under its neck; so that the support of the affected side is elevated, and therefore the fracture of the furcula is elevated to the elevation of the muscle; or attach the arm to the side of the affected area.
E no deslies le liament si no accideys en le loc prusiment o apostema, entro a xii dias.	And do not remove the bandage unless there is an abscess or suppurated area within twelve days.
E aprop renovelha le emplastre si has vista la facia de lu ad aquo, e ajusta en la strictura e restaura aquel e layssa entro que sia restaurat e sia coagulat la fractura de la furcula.	And then renew the plaster if you see the surface of it turn color, and adjust it to fit snugly and restore it, allowing the fracture of the furcula to heal and coagulate.
E es strenguda e comfortada segon le mes en xxviii dias, e alcunas veguadas en alcus homes es fayt en mens de temps de aquel.	And it is strengthened and comforts according to the month in twenty-eight days, and in some cases, it is done in less time than that.
Capitol .vi.	Capitol. vi.
De restauracio de fractura de la spalla.	For the restoration of a shoulder fracture.
Spatula tart es trencada en le loc lat de lu e no so trencatz de lu sino les marges.	The shoulder blade is broken at the site of the injury and not the bone itself, but the margins.
E donc quan es trencat le loc de lu — e es trencat en le mieg loc de lu — e no es conogut sino per tocament, lahoras segon que es la figura de la fractura sforsa te la preparacio de lu e reduzir aquela segon la figura natural en tota manieyra de engen la qual es a tu possible.	And therefore, when the site of the injury is broken — and it is broken in the middle of the site — and can only be known by touch, then according to the shape of the fracture, you should prepare the area and reduce it according to the natural figure in every manner possible that is within your means.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc polvera de moli am album de huou e stopa leon; e aprop pausa pulvil de drap duplicat; e aprop pausa sobre lu stela lada de taula subtil segon la quantitat de la spatula tota o mays un pauc.	And then place powder of ground alum from ox hooves and stoper lion on the area; and then place a dust of doubled cloth; and then place over the splint a thin strip of table according to the quantity of the spoon entirely or somewhat more.
Mays si dejos la stela es concavitat en alcu dels locs de la spatula, lahoras tu enguala aquela concavitat am stopa leon, e aprop pueja la stela segon equalitat.	And if you place the splint with its concavity at any part of the spoon, then equalize that concavity with stoper lion, and then fit the splint according to equality.
E aprop strenh desus am humemati longua ab constriccio decent e am fermesa de la stela entro que no sia remauguda del sieu loc.	And then strongly stretch the affected limb from above using a constriction belt properly and firmly so that it is not displaced from its place.
E considera le liament en quascun dia; e totas veguadas que sia mollificat, lia autra veguada e stren le e equa la stela si es remauguda del sieu loc.	And consider the ligament on each day; and every time that it is softened, treat it again and strongly and equally stretch the belt if it is displaced from its place.
E jagua le malaute sobre le sieu latz sa.	And apply the patient's leg in such a way.
E la spatula es restaurada en xx dias o en .xxv.	And the spatula is restored in xx days or in .xxv.
E donc quan es complit aquest nombre, lahoras tu dissolveys le liament, e que tu scias ensegurat quar aquela es dels osses dels quals la cominicio no es temuda ni lor dissolucio.	And when this number is completed, then you relax the ligament, and know for sure that it belongs to which bones their beginning was not feared nor their dissolution.
E si procezeys del loc del os pessa e pongeys dejos la codena, lahoras tu scindeys sobre lu, e osta le, e fay segon que havem dit en la fractura de la furcula de sadacio de apostema caut si accideys aqui.	And if you proceed from the location of the bone's end and place a clamp there, then cut over it, and hold it, and do as we have said in the section on the fracture of the furcula with an apostema caut if this happens here.
Capitol .vii.	Capitol .vii.
De restauracio de la fractura del pietz.	Of the restoration of the fracture of the foot.
Le pietz alcunas veguadas es romput en le mieg loc de lu e aquo tart endeve; mays las extremitatz de lu mot endeve que so ciccadas e comminuidas.	The foot is sometimes broken in the middle of its length; more often, the ends are fractured and comminuted.
E dels accidentz de lu quan es trencat le mieg de lu es que declina a las partidas dedintz e accideys a lu gran dolor, e dificultat en lo hale, e tos, e fort leu e vomeys sanc; e es declarada en lu cavitat en le os trencat e no es occulta al sentiment.	And of the accidents when the foot is broken in the middle, it leans towards the inner parts and causes great pain, difficulty in walking, coughing, swelling, and nausea; these are evident in the cavity of the broken bone and are not hidden from sensation.
E la restauracio de lu es que sia resupinat le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa entre las spallas de lu un coyssi; e aprop prem als muscles de lu, e ajusta las costas de lu am las mas de dos costatz, e subtilia te en la operacio de lu e en la equacio segon tota manieyra que es ad aquo possibla e que conveneys ad aquo, entro que retorne la figura del os segon que cove.	And the restoration of the foot is to lay the patient supine on their back, and place a cushion between the shoulders; then press on the muscles, adjust the spine against the ribs, and perform the operation with subtlety, adjusting it in every way possible that is suitable and convenient, so that the figure of the bone returns as much as possible.
E aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e estopa e pausa desobre astela de taula subtil de sauze o de caligi e de a lor semblantz en levitat, pus que tu envolopas aquela en drap; e aprop subtilia te en lian aquela sobre le os trencat que no sia maugut; e vay am liadura segon retonditat al dors alcunas veguadas, e strenh aquel am strictura decent; e aprop considera la liadura en tota hora, e quan es mollificada strenh aquela.	And then place something for padding and support above the plaster and on top of a thin wooden board of willow or similar in lightness, wrapping that in cloth; then perform the binding gently around the broken bone to avoid tightening too much; and continuously consider the binding at all times, strengthening it when it becomes soft.
E si necessitat provoca a desliament de aquela deves corrossio o pruziment, o dolor, o apostema que accideysso en le loc, lahoras tu coyta e deslia aquela e erradica le emplastre e rectifique aquo que accideys per aquo am manieyra de curacio de lu; e aprop reduzeys le emplastre, si vezes ad aquo la facia; e ajusta a lu strictura entro que sia sanat.	And if necessity provokes the decomposition of that due to corrosion or pruritus, or pain, or abscess that occurs in the area, then you incise and divide that and eradicate the ointment and correct what has occurred by this method of cure; then return the ointment, if times allow; and adjust the tension between them until it is healed.
Capitol .viii.	Capitol VIII.
De restauracio de las costas quan son trincadas.	For the restoration of the ribs when they are fractured.
Sapias que fractura de las costas no catz sino en locs grosses que siegon le dos; e de las extremitatz de lor de la partida denant no accideys ad aquelas contricio sino per aquo quar so cartillaginosas.	Know that a fracture of the ribs occurs only in large areas where they meet; and at the ends of their front part, no such contact causes fractures since they are cartilaginous.
E cognicio de lu no es amaguada al sentiment deves la inquisicio de lu am les ditz.	And the knowledge of this is not concealed from the feeling of the inquiry into it by the fingers.
E la restauracio sia ayssi que enguales la fractura am les ditz segon la manieyra possibla, entro que sia engulhat segon que cove, e aprop emplastre e strenh le os trencat am stela, si indigeys de aquel.	And the restoration should be done such that you equalize the fracture with your fingers according to the possible method, while it is realigned as it fits, and then apply an ointment and strengthen the broken bone with a splint, if needed.
E si la fractura de las costas es declinant a las partidas dedintz, lahoras accideys al malaute dolor vehement e punctura, ayssi cum punctura que accideys ad aquel que ha pleureci, e per aquo quar le os ponh le velament; e accideys a lu difficultat de hanelit, e tos, e vomit de mot sanc; e aquesta es de dificil curacio.	And if the fracture of the ribs is declining towards the internal divisions, then it happens to the patient violent pain and puncture, just as pain occurs in one who has suffered a pleurisy, and for this the bone is covered with a veil; and there comes difficulty in breathing, coughing, and vomiting of blood; and this is of difficult cure.
E ja les Antixs so engeniatz en aquela am motz engientz.	And already the Antixs are ingeniously made with that same wire winding them.
E de lor so que diso: cove que pauses viandas del malaute que engendro imflacio e ventositat, per que le ventre sia imflat e sia extendut, e la fractura sia impellida a las partidas defora.	And by them we say: place the patient on foods of the foot that cause inflation and swelling, so that the abdomen becomes inflated and extended, and the fracture is pushed towards the external parts.
Mays nos avoreyssem aquo per so que no sia causa leugiera a generar apostema caut, si no accideys; e si ja accideys, lahoras ja ajuda ad aquo.	But we must consider this so that it is not a trivial cause to generate an abscess suddenly; if it does occur, then help is needed for this.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia pausada desus ventoza e aprop que sucque am fortitut; e es semblant a ratiocinacio, mays empero es temut que la ventoza atire las superfluitatz al loc per la debilitat.	And some say that it should be placed above the abdomen and near where it is strong; this seems like reasoning, but nevertheless it is feared that the abdomen might carry the superfluities to that place due to its weakness.
E diyssero alcus de lor: cove que·l loc sia cubert am lana que ja es submersa en oli caut, e sian pausatz pulvils entre las costas entro que sia umplida, que sia la liadura engual quan envolopas aquela segon retonditat; e aprop sia curat le malaute am curacio de pleuresi de vianda e de medicina.	And some of them would say: cover the area with wool that is already submerged in caut oil, and place powders between the ribs until it is full, making the wound equal when you wrap it according to roundness; and treat the patient with a cure of food and medicine.
E si causa vehement constrenh le malaute la qual no sufferta, e le os punh le velament am punctura ledent, temem sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que fendam sobre le loc, descubram de la costa trencada, e aprop pausem desobre aquela instrument que conserve le ciphac, la rememoracio del qual es precedida, e que inscidam le os am facilitat, e extraguam aquel.	And if the pain is intense and overwhelming for the patient, and the bone cannot be punctured with a needle due to the wound, be cautious about the patient, then cut over the area, expose the broken rib, and place your hand over that instrument which contains the ciphac, the memory of which precedes, and cut the bone with ease, and extract it.
E aprop que ajustem las doas labias de la plagua, si es gran, am cozidura, e curem aquela am emplastres entro que sia sanada.	And when we adjust the two edges of the wound, if it is large, with suturing, and treat it with plasters until it heals.
E si accideys dedintz apostema, lahoras tu coyta e enfon pulvils en oli rozat e pausa sobre le loc, e que sia curat le malaute am aquo que cove a la apostema dedintz.	And if an abscess occurs inside, then incise and insert powders in diluted oil, place your hand over the area, and treat the patient with what is appropriate for the abscess inside.
E sia ressupinat sobre le latz sobre le qual dorm, entro que sia sanat.	And may he be placed on his back on the mattress on which he sleeps, until he is cured.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter IX.
De restauracio de fractura del spondil del dos e del col.	On the restoration of fractures of the spine and the neck.
Alcunas veguadas endeve fractura als osses del col, e tart endeve a lor atricio, e semblantment als spondils del dos.	In some cases of fracture of the bones of the neck, and then apply traction, similar to that used for spinal fractures.
E cum aquo accideys ad alcu e voles saber si sara sanat o no, lahoras considera, quar si vezes las sieuas mas ja mollificadas e stupefaytas e mortas e no pot maure aquelas ni extendre ni strenher aquelas e quan constrenges aquelas am les tieus ditz o punges aquelas am agulha e no sent en aquelas dolor, lahoras sapias que no es sanat, e en las mes de disposicios es mortal.	And when this happens to someone and you want to know if they will be cured or not, then consider whether their muscles are already softened, numbed, and dead, unable to grow, extend, or strengthen. When you stretch them or prick them with a needle and they do not feel pain, you can see that they are not recovering, and in such cases, the condition is fatal.
E si mau aquelas e sent en aquelas constriccio am les ditz e punctura, lahoras sapias que la nucha de l’os es salva e que le malaute guereys am curacio.	And if they feel pain in this constriction when you stretch their hands and prick them, then you can see that the spine of the bone is saved and that the patient will recover with treatment.
E si ve als spondils del col le semblant ad aquo e voles saber si sira sanat o no, lahoras considera als pes de lu.	And if you see the spine of the neck in this state and want to know if it will be cured or not, then consider the feet of the patient.
Lahoras si tu vezes que so ja mollificatz, accideys ad aquels aquo que es accidit en las mas, e aprop quan jatz sobre le sieu dos, yeys ventozitat e egestio ses la sua volontat, e alcunas veguadas es resupinat sobre le sieu dos e vol urinar e no pot, lahoras sapias que es mortal, e adonc no trebales en la curacio de lu.	When you see that it has already softened, proceed with what is done in the hands, and when he lies on his back, apply ventilation and evacuation as he desires, and sometimes he will try to urinate and cannot, then you should know it is fatal, and then do not trouble with his cure.
Mays si no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, la causa es milhor e pus leugiera.	But if no cause of those occurs, the cause is better and milder.
E la curacio de lu es que te perforses a la sedacio del apostema caut que pauses sobre le spondil atrissat oli rozat sol, o am mugols de huous asatz; pausa sobre aquela aquel alcunas veguadas le dia entro que sia sedat le apostema caut.	And the cure for him is that you apply cold to the abscess caut where you place it on the spinous or shaved spine, or with bunches of wet herbs; place it over that area for some time during the day until the abscess caut is numbed.
E lahoras pausa un dels emplastres confortantz e exsitans, e strenh sobre aquel am liament; e comanda al malaute que use de repaus e de tranquillitat e que no dorme sobre la partida am la qual atroba dolor entro que sia sanat.	And then place one of the comforting and existing plasters, and strengthen it with honey; command the patient to rest and be tranquil and not sleep on the part where he feels pain until he is healed.
E si accideys deves la atricio del os satagias o alcuna causa que ja es seperada de lu, lahoras cove que secces sobre la codena e que ostes aquel os; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua, am sutura si es gran; e aprop cura aquela am alcu encarnatiu dels enguentz, entro que sia sanat.	And if you need to incise the bone satagias or any cause that is separated from him, then you should cauterize over the cord and hold that bone; and adjust the two edges of the wound,缝合如果伤口较大；然后治愈那块用肉色膏药，直到他痊愈。请注意，这里的翻译可能需要根据上下文进一步调整以确保准确性。
Mays si es trencat le derier del os alhoses, e es la fi de la coeta, lahoras cove que tu entrometas le dit pous de la ma senestra en le cul, e que enguales le os trencat am l’autra ma segon que es possible per equacio segonda; e aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e astelha, si indigeysses de aquels, e aprop strenh aquel.	If the hip bone is broken and it is the end of the femur, then insert your left hand's thumb into the buttock, and equalize the broken bone with your other hand as much as possible through the second equation; then place a compress and bandage there if you need those, and strengthen that.
E si sentes satagias trencadas en lu, lahoras tu fen sobre aquela, e osta aquel, e cura la plagua am la curacio que es precedida entro que sia sanada.	And if you feel broken fragments in it, then move those fragments aside and treat the wound with the cure that follows until it is healed.
Capitol .x.	Capitol.
De restauracio de la ancha.	For the restoration of the hip.
Les osses de las anchas tart so trencats, e si trencan, lahoras la fractura de lor no es sino communicio en las extremitatz de aquelas e son inscidas en la longitut e declinan a las partidas dedintz; e accideys al malaute dolor en le loc e punctura, e la camba es stupefacta quan es fractura.	The bones of the hips are broken, and if they break, then the fracture is merely communication at the extremities of those bones and are split in length and decline towards the inner parts; and pain occurs in the area and punctures it, and the leg is paralyzed when it fractures.
E la restauracio de lu es que tu extendas la tua ma sobre aquel entro que sia sobre la fractura qual es la figura de lu.	And the restoration of the hip is that you place your hand over it, maintaining it above the fracture which has the figure of the bone.
E si fractura es en la extremitat de lu tant solament, lahoras tu enguala aquela segon que a tu es apparelhat per equacio engual entro que sia asemblat a la sua figura natural.	And if the fracture is only in the extremity of the limb, then you align it according to what appears proper by equalization until it resembles its natural figure.
Mays si la fractura es en le lonc o que ja declina a las partidas dejos, lahoras tu fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu ventre entro que sia preparada a tu la restauracio de aquela fractura.	And if the fracture is in the length or what has already declined towards the parts, then you lay the patient on his side and prepare for the restoration of that fracture.
E donc quan auras engualada aquela, pausa sobre lu emplastre, e aprop pausa sobre aquel astela de fust o de codena, e strenh per strictura sobre la qual no temas punctacio de fractura ni remocio de la stelha.	And when you have aligned it, apply a plaster over it, and place the wooden or copper splint over it, and secure with bandaging without fearing the puncture of the fracture or removal of the splint.
E enguala la concavitat am aquo que uempla aquela entro que aquela prengua la strictura segon equalitat, e comanda al malaute que dorma sobre le sieu dos o desobre le sieu costat sa.	And align the concavity with what fills it, so that as it swells it takes the bandaging according to alignment, and order the patient to sleep on his back or on his side.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu cessa de extencio de lu e de la sua restauracio entro que sia sedat le apostema caut, e pausa sobre lu aquo que sede aquel segon que es precedit; e aprop retorna a la restauracio de lu, e strenh aquel ayssi cum cove.	And if an abscess forms, then you stop the extension of it and its restoration until the abscess is sedated, and apply what soaks it according to what is preceded; and then return to its restoration, and secure it thusly as appropriate.
E si accideysso en le os satagias o son comminuidas, lahoras tu las tratz.	And if accidents occur in the joints or are comminuted, then treat them.
Capitol .xi.	Capitol. xi.
De restauracio de la fractura del adjutori.	For the restoration of the fracture of theadjouteri.
Adjutori es aquo que es entre le coyde entro al cap de la spalla.	Adjutori is that which is between the codia (a bone in the upper arm) and the head of the shoulder.
E si es trencat, lahoras la restauracio de lu es en una de doas manieyras, de las quals es la una que tu prenguas fust pla de migiera groceza segon aquesta forma:	And if it is broken, then the restoration of it is in one of two ways, of which the first is that you take a rod of rough wood according to this form:
E sian liatz en doas extremitatz dos liamentz, e aprop sia suspendut del loc elevat.	And insert two pins at the ends, and then hang it from the elevated location.
E segua le malaute sobre una sezela; e aprop gieta fora le sieu bras trencat sobre le fust entro que pervengua al titillic de lu en le mieg loc del qual sia annexa la curvitat del fust.	And place the patient on a bench; then put his broken arm over the rod until it reaches the nodal point of which the curvature of the rod is attached.
E aprop suspen sobre aquel alcuna causa greu, o·l minestre extenda aquel a las partidas dejos; e aprop le metge eque la fractura am las sieuas mas ensemps, entro que la fractura retorne segon que cove.	And suspend it above that with some heavy weight, or the attendant extend it to the parts left; then the physician place his hands on the fracture at the same time, until the fracture returns according to its natural course.
E l’autra manieyra es que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sieua cervitz e suspen la ma del col de lu am liament; e aprop comanda a dos ministres que la un de lor tengua aquo que es desobre la fractura am las suas mas; e l’autre tengua le pus dejos de lu; e quascu de lor extenda a la sua partida.	And the other method is that the patient be laid on his side with his neck supported and his head suspended by the hand from his collarbone with flax; then command two ministers that one of them hold what is above the fracture with his hands; and the other hold the rest of him; and each of them extend to their part.
E si voles que la extencio sia pus fort, lahoras tu strenh sobre la fractura am liament e sobre aquela am autre liament, e quascu dels dos ministres extendan a doas suas partidas.	And if you want the extension to be stronger, then strengthen the support of the fracture with flax and that of another with another piece of flax, and each of the two ministers extend to their parts.
E donc si la fractura es propinquada a la extremitat del muscle, lahoras cove que sia pausat la mitat del liament sobre le citillic e l’autre dejos la fractura deves le coyde.	And if the fracture is near the end of the muscle, then place the middle of the flax over the tendon and let the other end be held at the fracture to secure it.
E semblantment si la fractura es propdana al coyde, lahoras cove que sia pausat le liament sobre aquel loc e sobre aquel coyde.	And similarly, if the fracture is near the joint, then place the flax over that location and the joint.
Enguala aquela am facilitat e ses trebal, e aprop quant sira engualada segon que cove e es applicada per bona applicacio, lahoras strenh aquela si no accideys apostema caut.	Equalize that with ease and your work, and when it is equalized according to what is needed and applied properly, then strengthen it if no abscess occurs.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras layssa la strictura entro al vii dia, e pausa sobre lu lana sutza enbeguda en vi agre e oli rozat entro que repause le apostema, e lahoras tu stren aquela.	If an abscess occurs on the seventh day, then leave the string in place, and place a woolen pad soaked in vinegar and oil under it. Then strengthen the abscess.
E la manieyra de strenher aquela es que pauses emplastre sobre la fractura, e aprop pausa envolopament de drap nau sobre le emplastre; e aprop ajuste le bras sobre aquel adjutori, e pause la sua ma uberta sobre le sieu muscle.	The method to strengthen it is to place a poultice over the fracture, and then wrap a cloth around the poultice; then adjust the arm over this support, and place your hand open over its muscle.
E pausa le drap e strenh sobre le adjutori le bras per so que·l bras sia en loc de stelhas, si no prohibeys de aquo alcuna causa del os trencat.	And place the cloth and strengthen the arm over this support so that the arm is in a stable position, unless some cause of the broken bone prohibits this.
E lahoras usa de stelhas.	And then use splints.
E es que pauses sobre la fractura aquela stela que sia pus lada e pus fort de las autras stelas; e pausa entre quascuna stela la latitut del dit, e sia la longitut de las stelas segon la trencadura am addicio de tres ditz de tota partida.	And you place that splint over the fracture which is longer and stronger than the other splints; and between each splint, you leave the width of a finger, and the length of the splints according to the breakage plus the width of three fingers in total.
E aprop strenh sobre las stelas am la strictura la qual he dita al comensament del capitol.	And then strengthen the splints with the bandage which I mentioned at the beginning of this chapter.
E es que la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura sia pus streyt.	And let your grip on the place of the fracture be rather strong.
E quant pus es alonguada la fractura sia la strictura menor.	And when the fracture is more elongated, let the grip be lesser.
E donc si vezes le situament de las stelas e la strictura ayssi cum havem dit en la hora en la qual restauras le membre al sieu assituament, lahoras tu fay.	And so, if you adjust the position of the bones and apply the grip as we said when restoring the limb to its position, then you do this.
E si temes apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la strictura e las stelas entro al dia vii ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you fear an abscess, cauterize, then let the grip and bones remain for seven days as we said.
E aprop considera le liament en totas partidas per tres dias per so que no accida en le loc pruziment o imflacio; o es prohibida la vianda pervenir al membre per disposicio de superfluitat de strictura; e donc rectifiqua tot aquo segon que havem dit.	And then consider the ligament in all parts for three days so that no infection or inflammation occurs; or is forbidden food to reach the limb due to the excess of grip; and so correct all this as we said.
Mays si tu yest sobre confizanssa que no accida alcuna causa de aquo, lahoras no deslias la liguadura sino aprop tres dias o mays.	But if you are confident that no cause of this will occur, then do not remove the bandage for at least three days or more.
E sia la sua dormicio del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e las sieuas mas sian sobre le stomac.	And let the patient lie on their back, and their hands be over their stomach.
E pausa sobre le adjutori cocena plena de lana engualment, e considera en tota hora de la nueyt o del dia que no sia deliada ni dissolta la figura del membre trencat, o que sia le liament mollificat, donc rectifica aquo tot am la tua vertut.	And place yourself over the assistant holding a basket full of wool equally, and consider at all times during the night or day that the figure of the broken limb is not distorted, or that the ligament is softened, therefore correct this entirely with your virtue.
E pausa la vianda del malaute segon le orde le qual havem denant mes, enayssi que la vianda sia subtil en le comensament entro que es comensat strenher; e lahoras cove que egrossas la vianda de lu.	And place the food for the patient according to the order we have mentioned, ensuring that the food starts subtle and gradually becomes stronger; then observe as the food thickens.
Quar de constuma del adjutori e de la camba de lu es que sian strengutz en xl dias; e lahoras cove que sian desliatz e sia administrat banh e sia medicat am enguentz los quals rectifican aquel.	Four days after the assistant and the belt are strengthened for four days; then observe as they become looser, and a bath is given, along with ointments that correct this.
E si la fractura es layha atrita, lahoras tu no deslies de aquela le liament e las stelhas entro a l dias o entro a dos meses.	And if the fracture has been irritated, then do not loosen the ligament or the splints for four days or up to two months.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter XII.
De restauracio de fractura del bras.	On the Restoration of Fractures of the Arm.
Bras es compost de dos osses les quals so appelatz dos focils; dels quals la un es petit, e es aquel que siec le dit pous, e l’autre es gran e es aquel le qual es pausat dejos le petit dit, de la partida pus dejus.	The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the humerus and the ulna. The former is smaller and is that which connects to the shoulder, while the latter is larger and is placed below the smaller one.
E fort leu es trencat le focil major solament, o le petit, e fort leu son trincatz ensemps.	And if the large or small firebrand is broken forcefully, and you must break them both together.
E quan es trencat le focil petit desus, lahoras la restauracio de lu es leugiera, e la sanacio de lu es pus leugiera.	And when the small firebrand is broken above, then the restoration of it is slight, and the healing of it is even more slight.
E quan es trencat le focil de lu dejos la fractura de lu es mala, e la sanacio de lu es dificil.	And when the firebrand is broken, if you leave its fracture bad, then the healing of it is difficult.
E pus mala de aquela es quan son trencatz dos osses essemps.	And worse than that is when two long bones are broken together.
Donc si l’os le qual es trencat es le focil petit desus, lahoras es convenient al metge, deves la restauracio de lu, que pauze petita extencio am facilitat entro que aquel sia engualhat.	And so, if the bone that is broken is the small firebrand above, then it is convenient for the doctor to perform the restoration of it, allowing a slight extension in order to facilitate its alignment.
Mays si le focil gran es aquo que es trincat, lahoras cove que pause extencio pus vehement.	But if the large firebrand is what is broken, then you must allow more significant extension.
E si les dos focils so ensemps trincatz, lahoras cove que tu pauses la extritura mot pus fort.	And if both firebrands are broken together, then you must allow greater force in the extension.
E cove que pauses la figura de la ma deves la restauracio de lu e la extencio de lu estenduda sobre un coyssi, e sia le pols de la ma a las partidas desus, pus aut que totz les autres ditz, e le dit auricular sia pus bas dels autres ditz, e le malaute sia cezent sobre una cezela cayrada.	And you must place your hand figure for the restoration and extension of it, spreading the hand on a cushion, with the wrist above the parts above, more so than all others, and the little finger be lower than the other fingers, and the patient's thigh be placed over a sloped board.
E sia un coyssi denant lu en la altetut o endreyt de lu, per so que·l malaute no encorra trebalh.	And place a cushion in front of them at their head or side, so that the patient does not further strain.
E aprop le ministre extenda le bras de la partida pus dejos am la sieua ma o am liament, e autre ministre extenda desus semblantment.	And then the minister extends the arm of the affected side and places it either on his own hand or on a cushion, and another minister extends it similarly above.
E aprop le metge engualhe le os entro que redugua aquel segon la milhor figura que pot.	And then the doctor equalizes the bone inside, setting it according to the best shape possible.
E si en la factura del os so satagias, lahoras te perforsa raduzir tota pessa en le sieu loc am la tua vertut.	And if there are fragments in the fracture of the bone, then you must force to reduce all pieces to their proper place with your virtue.
E si appar en lu satagia separada que punh la codena e no es a tu speransa en la restauracio de lu, lahoras tu fen sobre lu e osta aquela segon la manieyra la qual havem dita desus.	And if in it there appear fragments separated that pierce the tendon and are not to your satisfaction in the restoration of it, then you proceed upon it and set those according to the manner which we have said above.
Mays si la fractura es am plagua, yeu ja he fayt ad aquo capitol singular, e donc pren la curacio de aquel.	More if the fracture is external, I have already dealt with that in a separate chapter, and therefore take up the treatment of it.
E si accideys apostema caut al comensament de la tua restauracio, lahoras tu lineys un drap am cerot fayt de oli rozat e cera blanca, e sia migier entre specitut e subtilitat, e strenh drap sobre aquel am strictura subtil entro que le apostema sia cedat; e lahoras remau le cerot e pausa emplastre preparat de polvera de moli am clayre de huou, e aprop pausa stelhas; e sia la stela la qual es pauzada sobre aquela fractura pus lada e pus fort.	And if an abscess occurs at the beginning of your restoration, then you apply a cloth made of woolen thread soaked in olive oil and white wax, making it medium in thickness and fineness, and strongly wrap the cloth over that with a fine string so that the abscess is compressed; then remove the wax and apply a prepared plaster of powdered mulet wrapped in flax; and place the flax above that fracture on the side and more firmly.
E sapias que·l nombre de las stelas del bras so vi en las majors disposicios, o sia la fractura en un focil o en dos focils ensemps.	And know that the number of ribs in the arm I see in the major dispositions, or said differently, the fracture in one bone or two bones together.
E aprop pausa la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura pus fort e pus vehement, e quan mays sira la extrictura a las partidas desus de la fractura o a las partidas pus bassas de lu, pausa la strictura un pauc pus molh segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu en le comensament del capitol.	And then place your compression firmly on the location of the fracture more strongly and vehemently. When the compression is applied to the parts above or below the fracture, apply it a little more mild according to how the memory of it is recalled at the beginning of the chapter.
E les draps que so envolopatz sobre la fractura sian draps mols humitz, e no sian durs ni aspres, e·l fiel am le qual es strenhut sia de li propriament migier entre subtil e gros, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And the cloths that you wrap around the fracture should be moistened cloths, neither hard nor rough. The thick material used for the bandage should be strong and made from properly mixed fine and coarse fabrics, as we have recommended.
E considera le membre e·l liament aprop alcus dias.	And consider the limb and the ligament for several days.
E si accideys alcuna causa de la qual rectificacio es necessaria, ayssi cum prusiment le qual accideys al membre, e lahoras cove que tu enbroques le membre am aygua cauda entro que cesse aquel pruziment.	And if any cause arises for which correction is necessary, as was previously mentioned for what occurs to the limb, then immerse the limb in water until that disturbance ceases.
E leysses le membre no costreyt entro que repause, e aprop torna la strictura.	And keep the limb from being restrained until it rests, and then remove the compression.
E si la extrictura ja es mollificada e l’os ja es remaugut e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras rectifiqua tot aquo am la tua vertut.	And if the constriction is already softened and the bone is already restored and appears like those, then correct all this with your virtue.
E considera mays si le nutriment es prohibit pervenir al membre per superfluitat de strictura, quar lahoras cove que mollifiques aquel un petit e laysses aquel per alcus dias entro que corra ad aquel le nutriment, e aprop strenh aquel.	And consider more if the nourishment is prohibited from reaching the member due to excessive constriction, for then you must soften that slightly and leave it for a few days until the nourishment flows to that, and strengthen it accordingly.
Mays si al malaute no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no cove que sia desliat entro aprop xx dias o enviro de aquels.	And if to the patient none of the causes we have mentioned occur, then you must not let it slip for about 20 days or around those.
E aprop sia suspenduda la ma del malaute per la sua vertut de movement agitatius, e fay aquel dormir sobre le sieu dos.	And place the patient's hand for its virtue of movement agitation, and let it sleep on its side.
E sapias que aquesta fractura es restaurada en xxx dias o en xxxii dias, o fort leu es restaurada en xxviii dias, e tot aquo es segon la disposicio de las compleccios e las disposicios de la vertut.	And know that this fracture is restored in 30 days or in 32 days, or more gently restored in 28 days, and all this is according to the complexity and disposition of the virtues.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter XIII.
De restauracio de fractura de la pinche de la ma e dels ditz.	On the restoration of fractures of the finger and the toes.
Sapias que a la pinche de la ma e als nuzes dels ditz tart endeve fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio motas veguadas.	Know that at the wrist of the hand and the knuckles of the fingers when a fracture occurs, do not hurt them but rub them gently.
E quan accideys a la ma fractura o atrissio, lahoras cove que·l malaute segua cayrat e denant lu lies cezent segon equalitat, e aprop pausa la ma de lu sobre aquela extenduda.	And when a fracture or sprain occurs in the hand, ensure that the patient remains lying down and hold the limb for about a hundred seconds to ensure equality, then place your hand over the extended one.
E aprop le ministre extenda les osses trencatz e·l metge engualhe aquels entro que sian congongitz am bona congoncio.	And then extend the broken bones and the doctor realign them where they should be with good alignment.
E lahoras cove que pause emplastre e estopa, si no accideys apostema caut; e aprop pausa stela desus segon la quantitat del loc, e tu ja has envolopada aquela en drap de li.	And then apply a plaster and bandage, if no abscess forms use a cautery instead; then place a slice of it over the area according to its size, and you have now wrapped that in cloth.
Mays si la trincadura es en las partidas dedintz deves le ventre de la palma, e lahoras fay semblant de spera de drap, e comanda al malaute que strenha aquela am la sua palma trincada; aprop sia strenguda am drap lonc.	More so if the tear is inside the palm, then make a makeshift pad of cloth, and command the patient to hold it tightly with their torn palm; then have them keep it tightly wrapped in long cloth.
E sia la stelha de cuer am drap en le qual sia levitat, per so que le cuer sia aplicat a la palma; e strenh aquela segon que cove.	And let the slice of cloth be light, so that the palm can press against it; and hold it tightly as needed.
Mays si la fractura es a las partidas defora, lahoras cove que pauses desus stela e autre estela de la partida dejos en la palma, per so que la ma sia uberta e dreyta; e aprop pausa la strictura, ayssi cum es revolvuda la ma a la rateta entre les ditz am liamentz.	If the fracture is on the outer parts, then you should place another strip above the bone and another strip on the part below in your palm, so that your hand is open and straight; then place the splint, as if you were turning your hand at a right angle between the fingers with grains of wheat.
E si accideys fractura a alcu dels nozes dels ditz, lahoras si es le dit pous, sia engualat segon que cove e aprop sia strenhut am la palma e si·t voles, pausa a lu astela petita dreyta per so que sia elevada la fractura e no sia mauguda.	If you happen to fracture one of the bones in the fingers, then if it is the base of the finger, equalize according to the extent and then strengthen on the palm. If you wish, place a small strip straight so that the fracture is elevated and not weakened.
Mays si la fractura es en les autres ditz, ayssi cum en aquel del mieg loc, o en le indic, o en le auricular, o en le anular, lahoras sia engualhat e liat am le dit sa le qual siec aquel; o sian totz liatz segon continuacio, e es milhor; o pausa sobre aquel stela petita, ayssi cum havem dit en le pous.	If the fracture is in the other fingers, as in the middle finger, or the index, or the ring, or the little finger, then equalize and ligate on the finger where that bone is; or ligate all according to continuity, which is better; or place a small strip above that bone, as we said for the base of the finger.
E considera, en la tua restauracio, e aprop aquela, la disposicio de apostema caut e oppose — am la tieua operacio — am aquo que cove quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, segon que es iterada la narracio de lu.	And consider, in your restoration, and that, the disposition of applying a cautery and opposing it — in your operation — according to what is customary when such a cause occurs, as per the repeated narrative of it.
Capitol .xiv.	Chapter XIV.
De restauracio de fractura del os de la coyssa.	For the restoration of fracture of the hip bone.
Le os de la cueyssa motas veguadas es trencat e es declarat al sentiment segon que es convertit a la partida denant e a la pus sobirana.	The hip bone, when fractured, is felt according to how it is displaced forward or backward.
E la restauracio de lu se fa enayssi que·l liament es strenhut sobre la fractura e autre liament dejos la fractura, e le malaute sia prostrat sobre le sieu ventre e sobre la cara.	And the restoration is done by strengthening the ligaments over the fracture and placing another ligament below the fracture, with the patient lying on their belly and facing down.
E aprop le ministre extenda tot le liament a la sua partida segon la qualitat, quan la fractura es en le mieg loc del os.	And then the surgeon extends the ligament to its proper place according to the quality of the fracture, when it is in the middle of the bone.
Mays si es propdana a la razitz de la cueyssa, lahoras sia le liament propda al denolh a la partida del pentenilh, per so que la extencio caja en sus, e le autre liament dejos la fractura.	But if it is applied to the back of the hip, then the ligament is placed at the outer side of the thigh, so that the extension reaches there, and another ligament is placed below the fracture.
E semblantment si la trencadura es propdana al denolh, lahoras sia fayt le liament propda al denol, e sia la extencio a las partidas dejos.	And similarly, if the fracture is applied to the outer side of the thigh, then the ligament is placed at the outer side of the thigh, and the extension is made to the parts below.
E aprop le metge enguale le os am amduas las sieuas mas entro que reduzesca aquel segon la semblansa natural e l’os es conjungit per bona conjunccio; lahoras cove que pauses emplastre e strictura, si no accideys al membre apostema.	And then the doctor aligns the bone by bringing his hands close to where you reduced it according to the natural form; the bone is joined by good conjunction; then apply a plaster and bandage, so as not to cause an abscess in the member.
Mays si accideys en lu apostema, lahoras tu layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que l’apostema caut sia cedat, e aprop retorna a la tua curacio.	But if an abscess does occur, then you let it alone for a few days until the abscess can be cauterized, and then return to your treatment.
La strictura de lu sia ayssi fayta: cove que envolopes sobre la fractura una benda dura, e dobla aquela dos o tres veguadas, e remaugua de lu superfluitat; e aprop envolopa la camba entro que pervengua al talo e a la razitz de la cueyssa.	The bandaging should be done as follows: first, wrap a hard bandage around the fracture, fold it two or three times, and secure it to prevent any excess; then wrap the bandage until it reaches the ankle and the heel of the foot.
E intromet lonc fiel entre la cueyssa e la camba prop del denol a las partidas dejos, e venguan las extremitatz del fiel de la partida pus sobirana de las doas partz, e aprop revolveys sobre la camba e la cueyssa aquo que superflueys de la benda.	Insert a long piece of flax between the thigh and the inner side of the leg at the fracture site, ensuring that the ends of the flax extend well above both parts, then wrap this area with the bandage.
E aprop pausa sobre la cueyssa en le loc de aquela fractura astelhas, e pausa de aquelas una stela sobre le os de la camba.	Then place astilbes (medicinal herbs) on the thigh at the fracture site, and place a stick over the bone of the leg.
E aprop uempli las vacuitatz entre la camba e la cuoyssa am draps mols, per so que sia coagulada la extrictura.	And then fill the space between the waist and the thigh with soft cloths, so that the contraction is constricted.
E aprop comensa am strictura fort del mieg sobre le loc de la fractura am tres envolucios o quatre, e quant mays tu te alonhas am liament del loc de la fractura, la tua strictura sia menor e pus leugiera e pus molha.	And then begin a strong bandage around the middle over the place of the fracture with three or four layers, and the farther you are from the site of the fracture, the lesser, lighter, and more flexible your bandage should be.
E aprop exten a doas extremitatz del fiel a las partidas dejos entro que pervengua a la cavilha del pe, e strenh amdoas las extremitatz de las stelhas del autra part per so que·l liament no sia remaugut del sieu loc.	And then extend the two ends of the bandage to the sides where it reaches the foot's cavity, and strengthen both ends of the stars on the other side so that the plaster does not shift from its place.
E aprop leyssa la strectura sobre aquel, don esta ayssi que no accideys al membre corrosio ni apostema caut ni emflacio e semblantz ad aquels; e si accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, adonc cueta te am desliament de lu, e rectifica aquo que accideys tot aprop, segon que havem dit motas veguadas.	And then place the bandage over it so that it does not irritate the limb with corrosion, abscess, or inflammation; and if any of these conditions occur, you should treat them accordingly, and immediately correct whatever happens, as we have said before.
Mays si en le os es pessa del os la qual pongua, lahoras cove que tu engualhes aquel segon que a tu es possibla; e sino, fen sobre lu e remau aquel, e cura am aquo del qual es precedida la rememoracio entro que sia sanat.	If the bone is badly damaged, then try to align it as much as possible; if you cannot, set it and immobilize it, and treat the area from which the memory was recalled until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es strenhuda aquesta fractura de la coyssa otra aquo que sian ajustadas a lu stelhas, ayssi cum havem dit en le adjutori e·n le bras.	And sometimes this fracture of the hip is strengthened by another that is adjusted to it with stays, as we have said in the assistant and·on the arm.
Mays empero en la restauracio de lu en tal manieyra fayta no accideys al malaute claudicacio; e si es restaurada sola, otra aquo que li sia applicada l’autra camba, lahoras es necessari que claudique aquel del qual es tostemps.	But more so in the restoration of the limb in such a manner, no limp occurs in the patient; and if it is restored alone, or another other leg is applied, then it is necessary that the corresponding one limp.
E sapias que la coyssa es strenhuda en xl dias o un pauc mes o un pauc mens, e tot aquo es segon la diversitat de las compleccios e de las autras dispozicios.	And you should know that the hip is strengthened within 10 days or a few more months, and all this depends on the diversity of the complexities and other arrangements.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter XV.
De restauracio de la fractura de la rodela del denolh.	On the restoration of the fracture of the tibia.
Sapias que fractura de la rodela del denol tart endeve, mays accideys a lu motas veguadas atrissio.	You should know that fractures of the tibia occur more frequently, and often result in multiple days of atrophy.
Mays si accideys a lu fractura, lahoras no es sino fissura o trauc en las suas partidas, e aquo es am plagua o ses plagua, e sobre aquo tot es estat am le sentiment.	But if the fracture occurs, then it is merely a fissure or a slight crack in its parts, and about this, everything depends on the sensation.
E la restauracio de lu es enayssi que sia engualat aquo que es romput de las partidas de lu am les ditz entro que sia agreguat e conjongit segon que es possible per equacio e facilitat e fabricacio.	And the restoration of it is attempted to be made equal what is broken from the parts of it among the fingers according to which is possible by equilibrium and facilitation and fabrication.
E aprop pausa emplastre e pausa sobre aquel stela redonda, si indigeysses de aquela; e strenh desus am strictura ad aquo convenient.	And place a plaster there over the round stencil, if you need that; and strengthen it above at the stricture to what is suitable.
E aprop considera totas las disposicios las quals havem recomtadas en las autras fracturas, ayssi cum es apostema caut e semblant ad aquels enaissi que se oppause a tot accident am aquo que a lu es convenient entro que sia sanat.	And consider all the dispositions which we have recommended in other fractures, thus as for abscess and appearance to those that arise when opposing all accidents at what is suitable until it is healed.
Capitol .xvi.	Capitol. XVI.
De restauracio de la fractura de la camba.	Of the restoration of the fracture of the flank.
Sapias que en la camba so dos osses dels quals la un es gros, e es le nompnat per nom de la camba; e l’autra es subtil, e es nompnat focil.	Know that in the flank there are two bones, of which one is thick and is named after the flank; and the other is thin and is named floppy.
E accideys a quascus de las specias de fractura aquo que accideys als dos osses del bras, e per aquo es fayta restauracio de lu ayssi cum restauracio del bras engualment, e la operacio de lu es una.	And accidents of the species of fracture occur to the spaces of the bones of the arm, and for this, the restoration of it is made just as the restoration of the arm, and its operation is one.
E si so trincatz dos osses ensemps, la camba es convertida a totas partidas.	And if you need to break two bones together, the joint is dislocated in all directions.
E si es trinquat le os pus subtil, la camba es convertida a las partidas Denant.	And if the finer bone is broken, the joint is dislocated向前。
E si es trincat le os pus gros, atrobas aquel dejos, e es de aquelas causas que no so a tu ameguadas.	And if the larger bone is broken, you find the fracture, and it is one of those causes that are beyond your control.
E aprop aministra extencio e equacio e liguacio de las astelas segon aquel engualment.	And then administer extension, equilibrium, and ligature of the tendons according to this equalment.
Mays empero cove, si la fractura de la camba es laja havent motas satagias, que la extencio sia mendre e pus leugiera, e alleuja am la tua vertut.	However, more importantly, if the joint fracture is located having marks stable, let the extension be milder and more gentle, and rely on your virtue to alleviate it.
E en la camba es alcuna causa de operacio sobre le bras, e es quan tu engualas las stelhas e que comples tota la tieua operacio, lahoras tu prendras pessas de fustz de pi le qual es pausat dejos las cauzas las quals so pausades en solies, e so faytas eyssament de brancas de palma; aligeys de aquelas a las quals es petita groceza, e no sia ges de las manudas, e sia la longuesa de aquelas segon la longuesa de la camba, e del denol entro al pus dejos.	And in the joint, if there is any cause for operation on the arm, and when you equalize the stars and complete your entire surgical operation, then you will take pieces of wood from the thigh which are placed under the causes that are stopped in soles, and make them accordingly from palm branches; select those with little coarseness, not too large like hand-sized ones, and let their length be according to the length of the joint, and the depth within the flesh.
E aprop envolopa sobre quascuna drap en doas envolucios segon la longitut de lu, e pausa la una sobre la partida de la camba de la una part e l’autra del autra part, e sian del denol entro al pus bas loc del pe.	And then wrap each one in two layers of cloth according to the length of it, and place one layer over the point of the leg on one side and the other layer on the other side, and let them be placed inside directly under the foot.
E aprop lias las doas stelhas en tres locs de doas extremitatz e al mieg loc, quar am aquesta strectura la camba es prohibida de clinar a la partida dextra e sinistra, e sta per bona stacio.	And then place the two stakes in three locations of both extremities and at the middle location, for at this structure the leg is prohibited from tilting to the right or left, and must be in good alignment.
E ja es aministrat un brasset de fust segon la longuesa de la camba; e sia pausada en lu la camba per so que conserve aquel de movement.	And then a brace of wood is administered according to the length of the leg; and place the leg in this position so that it maintains its movement.
E majorment cove que tu fassas aquo en fractura, e quan am aquela es plagua propriament.	And especially make sure you do this in a fracture, for when there is a fracture, it is properly called.
E aprop considera en quascun jorn la camba e studia am aquel per derier studi, e tu le guardes de apostema e de imflacio o de autres causas semblantz; e cum accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, lahoras opausa te a lu am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	And then consider each day the leg and study it carefully, and keep it free from abscesses and inflammation or other similar causes; and if any of these causes occur, then stop what you are doing until it is healed.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter XVII.
De la fractura del talo e dels osses del pe e dels ditz.	Of the fracture of the tarsus and the bones of the foot and toes.
Al talo no accideys fractura de tot; mays als osses del pe accideys fractura alcunas veguadas; e als ditz del pe pauc accideys fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio en las mes de disposicio.	Fractures do not occur in the tarsus as a whole; more often fractures affect the bones of the foot; and fractures of the toes of the foot are rare, and when they do occur, they are not treated with traction but are handled according to the appropriate method.
E si als osses del pe endeve fractura e vezes aquels osses esser elevatz sobre si entre lor, lahoras le malaute pause le sieu pe sobre la terra preparat ayssi cum anant.	And if fractures occur in the bones of the foot and sometimes those bones need to be elevated above each other, then place the patient's foot on a prepared platform as described.
E aprop pausa la un pe sobre aquo que es elevat de aquels osses, e aprop calca aquels, e prem, e engualha aquels entro que torno en los locs.	Then place the other foot on what is elevated under those bones, and compress, press, and align those bones back into their proper places.
E aprop pausa emplastre e stopa desus, e pausa dejos le ventre del pe una petita taula a la qual sian dos caps plas.	Then apply a plaster and cover it with a cloth, and place the patient's foot on a small table with two supports.
E aprop strenh aquela am le pe am strectura descent, pus que tu has envolopada aquela am draps e am autres causes de las quals indigeys.	Then firmly hold the foot in proper alignment, after you have wrapped it with cloths and other materials as needed.
E cum a lu passan tres dias o quatre, lahoras tu deslia le liament, quar tu atrobaras les osses engualatz, o sian trincatz o sian dislocatz, e la operacio en aquels es ayssi co coneysses.	And when three or four days have passed, then you untie the bandage, for you will find that the bones are broken or are dislocated, and the operation in those cases is as you know.
Mays si alcus ditz son trincatz, lahoras restaura aquels, e enguala aquels ayssi cum yeu e recomtat a tu en la restauracio dels ditz de la ma.	And if some say they are broken, then restore those, and set them as I and have taught you in the restoration of the fingers of the hand.
E aprop pausa al dit trincat stela segon la longitut del dit, e sia pus lada de lu un pauc; e aprop dejos le pe aquesta taula la qual e a tu recomtada, e strenh aquela am strictura decent.	And then place the broken finger straight according to the length of the finger, and slightly to the side of it; and place the hand on this table which you have been taught, and tightly bind it with a bandage.
Mays si aquo que es trincat dels osses so dos o tres o mays, lahoras tu pausa sobre quascun dit astela de la sua quantitat envolopada en drap leon, e strenh la taula en le pus bas del pe, e sia stant sobre la un dels caps de la taula foro le ventre del pe per que la tengua am bona retencio.	And if what is broken of the bones are two or three or more, then you place each broken finger straight according to its quantity wrapped in a linen cloth, and strengthen the table under the base of the hand, and standing over one of the ends of the table poke a hole in the sole of the hand so that it has good retention.
E es convenient a tu que no oblides que no consideres totas las causas las quals que e ditas a tu en las autras fracturas dels accidentz que havem dit; e opausa te a tot accident am aquo que cove.	And it is important for you not to forget that you should not consider all the causes which we have mentioned to you in other fractures of the accidents that we have discussed; and pause your treatment where it applies.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter XVIII.
De fractura del conh de la femna e del os del pentenilh e de la vergua del home.	On the fracture of the thigh bone and the shinbone, and the groin of a man.
Quan le conh de la femna es trincat, lahoras fay aquela ceser en cezela cayrada, e aprop enclina aquela a la partida del dos un petit, e sia tenguda detras.	When the thigh bone is fractured, place the limb in a horizontal position, and slightly incline it towards the affected side by a little, and keep it supported behind.
E aprop la matrona umpla le conh de coto, e sia fayt en le conh de lu ayssi cum spera; e aprop la femna sia concutida, e eleva le dos de lu petit a petit, quar tot aquo es fora-getat entro que sia denant la partida del conh ayssi cum spera e l’os trincat retorna.	And the midwife fills the thigh with cloth, and it is done in the thigh as hoped; and the woman is supported, and her leg is slowly elevated little by little, for all this must be carried out so that it is in front of the affected thigh as hoped and the fractured bone returns.
E aprop pausa pulvils sobre le dos de lu, e quan vol urinar remaugua le coto am facilitat e aprop urine, e reduzeys e retorna aquel segon la manieyra segon la qual mezist aquel al comensament, e aprop retorne al sieu pulvil primier.	And place powder on the leg, and when she wants to urinate, moisten the cloth to facilitate it; then she urinates, return to her original position, and put back the powder as it was at the beginning.
E fassa ayssi per vii dias o enviro aquels, quar aquel es restaurat.	And do this for seven days or so, for it will be restored.
E si voles, pren una vezica de ovela e strenh sobre le trauc de lu una canula de canavera; e entromet tota la vesica en le conh de lu, e aprop ensuffla en la canula am vertut entro que la vesica sia imflada dedintz le conh, quar la fractura retorna.	And if you wish, take a bladder of sheep and strengthen it by placing a cannula of reed over the urethra; then insert the entire bladder into his cavity, and proceed to blow into the cannula with virtue until the bladder inflates inside the cavity, that the fracture may return.
E aprop sia umplida de coto e estia per alcus dias segon que havem recomtat, entro que sia sanat.	And it should be filled with honey and left for some days according to our reckoning, until it is healed.
E quan le os del pentenil de home o de femna es trincat, lahoras aministra en la restauracio e agulacio de lu aquo que havem recomtat en l’os del anca.	And when the bone of the thigh of a man or woman is broken, then administer in the restoration and needle therapy for it what we have prescribed for the bone of the hip.
E aquo que es dreyt no es occultat en aquestas fracturas proprinquas e que pauc endeveno, majorment ad aquel al qual es alcun studi e us e enten aquest meu libre mot; quar aquela fractura significa a tu en las majors disposicios via dreyturiera en la restauracio e en la strictura de lu, e donc enten be.	And what is right is not hidden in these nearby fractures that occur rarely, but especially to those who have some study and use and understand this my free will; for that fracture means to you through the major dispositional directions in the restoration and stricture of it, and therefore understand well.
Mays en la vergua del home quan es trincada, pren guarguamela de auca, e met la vergua en aquela; e aprop pausa sobre lu envolucio de drap, e sia envolopada, e aprop sia layssada per tres dias o enviro aquels, e sia sanada.	In the case of the thigh of a man when it is broken, protect it from injury, and place the thigh in it; then cover it with a bandage, wrap it up, and leave it for three days or about that time, until it is healed.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XIX.
De restauracio de fractura dels osses quan es am plagua.	For the restoration of bone fractures when they are displaced.
Convenient es ad aquel al qual accideys fractura am plagua, e majorment si le os es gran ayssi cum es le os de la cuoyssa o de l’adjutori, o semblant ad aquel, que tu te cuoytes e fleubotomes aquel tantost si las condicios de fleubotomia a tu o testifican ayssi cum desus havem dit.	It is convenient for you to treat those upon whom a displaced fracture occurs, especially if the bone is large, such as the thigh bone or the fibula, or similar. You should set and bloodlet that area frequently, provided the conditions for bloodletting are favorable, as we have previously described.
E si la plagua eflueys sanc, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la retencio de lu enayssi que tu polverizes sobre lu zegi trissat, si a tu autra causa no es present.	And if the displacement exudes pus, then you should ensure that you set the wound in retention and sprinkle it with saffron powder, unless another cause is present.
E aprop comensa restaurar la fractura en aquel meteys dia, e no prolongues aquo, si no accideys apostema.	And then begin to restore the fracture on that same day, and do not delay this, unless an abscess occurs.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la restauracio de lu entro al ix dia, entro que sia cedat le apostema, e no apropinques a lu en le tertz dia e·l iiii de tot, quar tu faras accidir mals accidentz.	But if an abscess does occur, then you should allow the restoration to continue for nine days until the abscess is resolved, and do not approach it on the seventh or tenth day, for then you will likely cause worse accidents.
Mays si le os trencat es eminent sobre la codena descubert, lahoras cove que te perforses reduzir aquel e engualar aquel am las tuas mas am facilitat e am pauca extencio.	But if the broken bone is prominent over the unprotected knee, then you must probe to reduce it and equalize it with your hands with ease and little extension.
Mays si extencio no es a tu preparada e la equacio de lu am las tieuas mas, lahoras tu reduzeys aquel am las tuas mas am aquest sturment; e es sturment le qual es fayt de ferr, la longitut del qual es de vii ditz o de viii e la latitut del qual es segon la quantitat de la plagua; e per aquo es necessari al metge que prengua de aquels tres o quatre segon la quantitat que indigeys ad aquo en la curacio en tota specia de fractura.	But if the extension is not at your readiness and the alignment with your hands is not easy, then you reduce it with your hands using this instrument; and this instrument is made of iron, its length being about seven or eight inches and its width according to the quantity of the wound; and for this, the doctor must take three or four of them according to the quantity needed in the treatment for any type of fracture.
E sia redon, e sia en lu pauca groceza per so que no sia doblat deves la comprecio sobre aquel en la hora de la operacio.	And it should be round, and of small thickness so that it does not bend during the operation.
E sia de aguda extremitat al qual sia marge en las sieuas extremitatz; e sia le desus de lu a grossetut tendent, e de la maytat de lu entro a las partidas.	And it should have sharp ends, with edges at the outer ends; and be thick at the bottom, and thin within the parts.
E aquesta es la forma de lu:	And this is the shape of the instrument:
E es nompnat en grec “labre volentz atelarem”, so es paleta pauca.	And it is named in Greek as "labre volentz atelarem," so it is a small palette.
Per que cove que sia pausada la extremitat de lu acuda elevada sobre la extremitat del os eminent.	In order that the limb may be rested, elevate it above the end of the bone.
E inpelleys aquel en una veguada entro que retorne le os, e sia engualat am alcuna equacio.	Lay that [the limb] in one movement into a position where the bone returns and is aligned with some standard.
E donc esforsa te engualar las extremitatz de la fractura entre lor, e si la extremitat de lu trencada es subtil, e no pren aquela le sturment per bona axcepcio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas la extremitat de aquel os entro que l’insturment haja poder de aquo.	Therefore, effort must be made to align the ends of the fracture with each other. If the broken end is fine and does not take the instrument due to a good exception, then you must insert the end of that bone into where the instrument has the power to do so.
Mays si no podes reduzir le os de tot am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras enscideys aquel am aquo que coveneys a lu dels inscizoris les quals havem ditz; o serra aquel am una de las serras en qualque manieyra sia a tu possible.	But if you cannot reduce the bone completely as we have advised, then incise that part with those knives which we have mentioned; it will be that part using one of the blades in any manner that is possible for you.
E aprop ratz aquel que roman en le os de asperitat e de scorsas menudas.	And then cleanse the bone of roughness and small scars.
E cum le os es reduzit, e aprop la reduccio le malaute atroba dolor vehement ledent, lahoras sapias que le os no es retornat al sieu loc natural; e adonc fay aquo quar tu confereyses al malaute gran juvament.	And when the bone is reduced, and after the reduction, if the patient experiences intense pain in the bone, then you should know that the bone has not returned to its natural place; then do what you have been taught to give the patient great relief.
Cum es complida la tua restauracio la qual fas al os, e lahoras submergeys drap en vi stiptic negre, e propriament si es en estiu, e no pauses sobre la plagua cerot ni autre causa en la qual sia oli, per so que no fassa en lu accidir poyredura e corropcio.	When your restoration of the mouth is completed, and then immerse a cloth in vinegar tightly wrung out, and precisely in summer, and do not stay over the wound with caustic or any other cause involving oil, so that no burning or corruption occur.
E aprop aministra stelas en la hora del tieu compliment de la restauracio de l’os, e layssa la plagua descuberta enayssi que inscidas le trauc am forfexs e uses de envolucios segon la quantitat de la plagua.	And then administer steams at the hour of the full moon when the restoration of the bone is completed, and leave the wound uncovered to see if it heals naturally, using flax and applying dressings according to the size of the wound.
E guarda te am tota cautela que no strenhas la plagua am la fractura, quar motas veguadas an fayt aquo les fols metges, e fero accidir sobre les sieus malautes mort o malautia corrodent o zuthement, so es sania.	And guard yourself with all caution that you do not irritate the wound near the fracture, for once mistakes are made by the doctors, they can cause death or severe illness in their patients, to their harm.
E si la tieua strictura leugiera, molli, diversa de la strictura de las autras fracturas.	And if the moon's phase is weak, moist, different from the phase of other fractures.
E si la plagua es gran o es plagua mala, e temes sobre aquel alcus accidentz mals les quals havem recomtatz, e atrobas dolor en le loc, lahoras no cove que pauses sobre aquel astelas, mays fay ad aquel envolucio de draps durs en loc de stelas e strenh lu am aquelas.	And if the wound is large or a bad wound, and you fear certain harmful accidents which we have mentioned, and you find pain in that area, then do not stay over those points, but instead apply steams with hard cloths instead of steams and strengthen it with those.
E cum aprop un dia o dos vezes ja la plagua comensar, que en lu sia engendrat brac, lahoras tu osta desus le drap le qual havias pausat sobre aquel am vi, e aprop aministra calguas, enguentz am les quals de nostra constuma es que mediquem las plaguas, ayssi cum enguentz tetrafarmacon e semblantz ad aquel.	And when about one or two days after the wound begins to heal, where there is a sprain, then you lift up the cloth which you had placed over that limb, and then administer calks, ointments of which according to our custom we medicate wounds, thus with tetrafarmcon ointment and similar to it.
E conveneys a tu que deslias le liament e considera la plagua en quascun dia mati e vespre entro que sia consolidada e fermada, e cove que·l membre sia preparat en tal manieyra que la poyredura corra de lu a las partidas dejos am facilitat.	And you should remove the bandage and examine the wound at midday and in the evening while it is consolidating and closed, and ensure that the limb is prepared in such a manner that the suppuration drains from it to the parts where it is facilitated.
si a la plagua passan motz dias, e no es consolidada ni es abscindit de lu le brac, lahoras sapias que aqui so satagias de las petitas per que cove enquieras la plagua am tenta.	If the wound passes many days and is not consolidated, or the sprain is not abscised from it, then you should know that here you are dealing with the smaller issues, so examine the wound by palpation.
E de aquelas satagias aquelas que so separadas remau e extratz, aquelas que de lor no so separadas e pongen le membre e fan accidir dolor, perforsa te a inscidir aquelas segon que a tu aquo es possibla.	And of those issues that are separated and extracted, and those from which the limb is not separated and cause pain, forcefully you must abscise those according to what is possible for you.
E si accideys a la plagua zuchem o eluchen, so es stiomenios, o autra specia de corrupcio e de putrefaccio, lahoras cove que pauses a quada un de aquels am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio del qual es precedida narracio en le sieu capitol.	And if it happens to the swelling of the leg or arm, so is phlegm or another species of corruption and putrefaction, then you must place something where it is convenient for the cure of which there is a preceding narration in its own chapter.
E de aquo en le qual cove que stia lo mieu sermo e tu fassas present la tua pessa: quan os gros es trincat, emineys sobre le membre ayssi cum le os de la coyssa e del ajutori e semblantz ad aquels dels membres grans, e que no presumas atraccio de lu, ni la extraccio de lu quar motas veguadas accideys per aquo la mort; habantz layssa aquel entro que poyresca, quar fort leu cayra per si aprop xx dias o xxx; e lahoras cura la plagua si a tu es vist, e si no layssa aquela.	And of that in which you must remain most silent and you make present your presence: when the bone is broken, you must appear over the limb as the bones of the thigh and the helper and resemble those of the great members, and do not presume entry to it, nor its extraction for which spots visible occur by this death; having left it there that it may heal, for strong bones will fall in about 20 days or 30; and then cure the swelling if you can see it, and if not leave it there.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter .xx.
De la curacio de nodacio que accideys en le vestigi de alcuna fractura.	For the cure of swelling that occurs in the area of any fracture.
Motas veguadas accideys aquesta nodacio en le vestigi de sanacio de fractura, e majorment que es prop de las juncturas, e es orrasada per lu la figura del membre; e fort leu prohibeys le membre de la sua operacio natural.	Spots visible occur in this swelling in the area of the healing of the fracture, and especially as it is near the joints, and they change the shape of the limb; and strongly you prohibit the limb from its natural movement.
Adonc considera si la nodacio es recent e aministra en aquela medicinas que han stipticat ayssi co es aloen, e enses, e mira, e sercacollo, e acrassia, e semblantz ad aquels; enayssi que prenguas de aquela alcunas o totas, e comfesiys aquelas am vi stiptic, o am album de huou, o am vi agre, e pausa aquela sobre la nodacio en estopa, e constringeys aquelas sobre lu per bona constriccio.	Then consider if the swelling is recent and administer those medicines that have astringent properties such as aloes, saffron, and observe, search closely, and touch; try to use some or all of them, and confirm whether they are astringent or made from white oak bark or vinegar, and place one over the swelling in a cloth, and apply pressure on it with good constriction.
E leyssa extrictura que no deslies aquela per motz dias; e aprop deslia aquela e itera autra, entro que sia remauguda la nodacio; o strenh sobre aquela lamina de plom descentment, quar plom ha proprietat de remaure tot aquo que es imflat en les membres.	And let the constriction remain without loosening it for many days; and then loosen it and apply another, while the swelling is reduced; or strengthen over that lead strip, as lead has the property of reducing all that is swollen in the limbs.
Mays si nodacio ja es en peyra convertida e streyta es e nessessitat provoca a ostar aquela coytadament, e lahoras scindeys aquela per la partida pus sobirana de lu, e inscideys la superfluitat e eminent, o ratz aquela am alcus rezoris entro que sia remauguda; e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Mais if the swelling has already turned into a hard lump and is strengthened, and if necessity demands to open it frequently, then cut through it at its weakest part, and incise the excess and prominent part, or let that hang with astringent herbs until it is reduced; and care for it until it is healed.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI.
De restauracio de fractura quan es restaurada e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul no segon la sieua natura.	For the restoration of a fracture when it has been restored, then approximate that limb according to its natural nature.
Quan fractura de os es restaurada, e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul, lahoras aquo no es fayt sino per motas causas: de las quals la una es multitut de solucio del liament e de la liguacio de lu fayta no segon que cove; o per superfluitat de strictura dels liamentz entro que·l nutriment sia prohibit correr al membre; o per multitut de embrocaccio superflua; o per movement superfluent no en la sua hora; o per pauquesa de sanc en le cors del malaute e per debelitat de lu.	When a bone fracture is restored, then approximate that subtle limb and joint, but this is not done except for certain causes: of which one is the abundance of solution of the ligament and its joining is not done according to what is due; or by excess of tightening of the ligaments among which nutrition may be prohibited from flowing to the limb; or by excess of ointment application; or by excessive unnecessary movement; or by lack of strength in the body of the patient and weakness of it.
E curacio de aquo es dar a mengar al malaute e far le cor de lu tendre entro que·l sanc sia multiplicat en lu; e aministra banh; e entromet gaug e leticia sobre lu.	And the treatment for this is to weaken the patient and make his heart gentle while blood is multiplied in him; give him baths; and insert hope and joy into him.
E aprop pausa pegua sobre le membre, per so que la pegua atire a lu mot nutriment, o continua embrocacio de lu am aygua tebeza, entro que·l nutriment corr e retorne a la sua figura natural.	Then place your hand on the limb, so that the hand draws nourishment to it, or continue the application of the wet ointment, while the nourishment flows and returns to its natural shape.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXII.
De curacio dels osses trincatz quan so restauratz tortuozament e prohibeys la operacio de lor de aquo que cove.	For the treatment of broken bones when they are restored tortuously, and prohibit the operation on them.
Quan accideys al membre ja restaurat aprop la sanacio de lu de tortuositat e eminencia al os trincat e nodacio, e es per aquo fededa de forma del membre, mays empero le membre no es prohibit de la sieua operacio natural, lahora no cove que tu recipias la paraula de aquel que exsistima aquel membre sia de novel trincat.	When the limb is restored near the healing of tortuosity and prominence in the broken bone and its setting, and this is due to the form of the limb itself, yet more so the limb is not prohibited from its natural operation, then you should not receive the word of one who thinks that limb is newly broken.
Mays ja so statz motz fols metges e restauradors les quals han fayt aquo en nostra tera; e aquesta operacio es mot vituperable perduzent a gran temor le senhal de la qual es mortal.	Yet there are many foolish and unskilled doctors and restorers who have done this in our land; and this operation is greatly reproachable, leading to great fear from the sign of which is fatal.
Mays si claudicacio e nodacio son recentz, lahoras cove que sian enbrocatz am aygua tebeza en la qual so coytas erbas mollificantz, ayssi cum son fuelas de altea e razitz de lu, e mellilot, e semblantz ad aquels; e sia fayt a lu emplastre am emplastre mollificatio ayssi cum dyallaquilon ben fayt; o que sia preza mucillage de razit de altea e sia contucida am gray de gualina o am oli de cirami, e sia emplastrat am aquel; o que sian prezes figuas grassas e sian trissadas am fems de colom, e semblantz ad aquels de las medicinas que son nompnadas amermans consolidacio.	Yet if claudication and setting are recent, then it should be soaked in clear water in which herbs softening it are placed, such as hyssop, thyme, clover, and similar; and it should be dressed with a soft plaster likewise well made; or what is pressed with mucilage of thyme and is sprinkled with powder of linen or oil of rosemary, and is plastered with that; or what is pressed with fat figs and is stitched with goose feathers, and similar to those in the medicines named as consolidators.
E alcunas vetz es dissolvuda am assidua fricacio leugiera que sia am las mas humidas, e sia administrat movement del membre a tota partida en totas horas.	And sometimes it is dissolved by frequent gentle friction with the more humid ones, and movement of the limb should be administered at all times in all hours.
Mays si tortuositat ja es anada denant e es fayta fort e convertida es en peyra e provocada es necessitat a curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que sia le pus desus cecsat e la continuacio del os sia dissolvut, e sia inscidit aquo que superflueys de nodacio de aquel meteys am le os am inscissoris subtils, e sia aministrada facilitat en aquel am sollicitut e studi.	And if tortuosity has already gone on before and is strong and converted into a stone and provoked, it is necessary to cure it, so that the pus above the cecum and the continuity of the os be dissolved and incised, and what is superfluous of the nodation of that metey be administered to the bone with sharp incisors, and facilitation should be administered in that which is solicited and studied.
Capitol .xxiii.	Chapter XXIII.
De sermo en dislocacio.	On the Speech about Dislocation.
Dislocacio es eyssiment de alcuna de las juncturas del sieu loc, per que es prohibida de movement, e es orrezada la figura del membre, e fa venir sobre le malaute dolors e lesios grans.	Dislocation is the displacement of one of the joints of that region, making movement prohibited and altering the figure of the limb, causing severe pain and injuries in the patient.
Donc quan accideys ad alcu dislocacio, lahoras cove tantost perforsar que sia reduzit, e no tarde aquela reduzir, quar si es tardada, le loc es apostemat e fort leu am aquo es fayta dificil la reduccio de dislocaccio.	Therefore, when a dislocation occurs, it is necessary to act quickly to reduce it. Do not delay the reduction, for if delayed, the area can become gangrenous, and the dislocation will be more difficult to reduce.
E per aysso no cove que sia maugut ni stendut en la hora de la apostemacio, quar motas veguadas fa venir spasme e dolors ledentz.	And therefore it should not be cut nor stretched at the time of the abscess, for minutes ago have caused spasm and tooth pains.
Mays quan aquo accideys, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la flaubotomia del malaute, e aprop sia layssat entro que repause le apostema; e aprop le membre sia embrocat am aygua cauda e oli, e aprop sia reduzit am facilitat.	When this happens, you should perform a perineal incision on the thigh, and allow the abscess to rest within; then apply cold water and oil to the area, and reduce it with ease.
E tot membre sia curat am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra en son loc.	And each member should be treated with water, of which the remembrance will come to its place.
E yeu ja e ordenatz les capitols de dislocacio segon que es precedit en fractura; de la partida del cos pus sobirana entro a la partida pus dejos.	And you have already ordered the chapters on dislocation according to what follows in fracture; from the division of the body above, then proceed.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter XXIV.
De curacio de dislocacio de la mandibula dejos.	On the treatment of dislocation of the jaw, proceed.
So dislocadas las doas mandibulas si no tart; e la dislocacio de amdos es fayta segon una de dos manieyras: que o son remaugudas de lurs locs per pauca remocio, e so mollificadas un petit; o so dislocadas per entiera dislocacio e complida, entro que sian mollificadas a la partida de la junctura entro que corro saliva del malaute e que no puesca tenir aquela ni puesca claure la sua boca, e la lengua de lu sia envolopada en sa paraula.	When both jaws are dislocated without injury; and the dislocation of both occurs in one of two ways: either they are slightly removed from their places with little movement and somewhat softened; or they are completely dislocated, at which point they should be softened at the joint where saliva flows from the thigh, so that it cannot hold that position nor close its mouth, and the tongue of the patient should be wrapped in a cloth.
Mays quan la dislocacio de lu es pauca, lahoras en las majors disposicios retorna per si an pauca causa.	When the dislocation is minor, then in major arrangements it returns by itself for little cause.
Mays si la dislocacio es entiera e complida, lahoras cove que sia administrada reduccio de lu leugierament, e no sia tardada de tot.	But if the dislocation is complete and thorough, then you must administer a reduction of it lightly, and not delay it entirely.
E es que·l ministre tengua le cap del malaute, e entrometa lo metge le dit pous de la una sieua ma en la razit de la dislocacio de la mandibula dedintz la boca de lu, si la dislocacio es de la una part; o que entrometa les sieus dos pouzes ensemps, si la dislocacio es de doas partz, e les autres ditz de las mas de lu sian defora am les quals enguale; e comanda al malaute que cesse las suas mandibulas e absolva aquelas anar de quascuna partida; e le metge engualhe la mandibula e enpellisca la mandibula entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And the minister should hold the patient's head, and the doctor insert his thumb from one side of the patient's mouth into the region of the dislocation inside the mouth if the dislocation is on one side; or he should insert both thumbs at the same time if the dislocation affects both sides, with the other fingers supporting outside to balance. And command the patient to stop moving their jaw and allow those that are out of place to return to their proper positions; and the doctor should align the jaw and push it back into its correct position.
E si dificil es la reducio de lu, e majorment si amdos las mandibulas so essemps dislocadas, lahoras aministra evoporacio am aygua cauda e oli, entro que sia fayta leugiera la reduccio de amdos e no tardes la reduccio de amdos de tot, ayssi quo havem dit.	And if the reduction is difficult, especially if both jaws are completely dislocated, then apply evaporation with water and oil. Lightly administer the reduction of both, and do not delay the reduction of both entirely, as we have said before.
E donc cum retornam e so engualadas, e es clausa la boca del malaute e no es mollificada, lahoras pausa sobre aquelas polvils de drap am cerot, e sia fayt de cera e oli rozat; e aprop sia liat am facilitat am liamens mols.	And when we have returned them and equalized them, and closed the mouth of the patient without softening it, then place over those powders of cloth soaked in cerote, and made of wax and rubbed oil; and soon let it be moistened with many cloths.
E sia le dormir del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e·l cap de lu sia stant entre dos aurelhes, per so que no maugue aquel a la partida dreyta ni a la sinistra; e no li fassas per forsa masteguar alcuna causa; habans la sieua vianda sia forbicio leon, entro que quan las dolors sian remaugudas e las mandibulas so nozadas, lahoras maugue aquo que vol.	And let the patient lie on his side, with his head standing between two pillows, so that it does not turn to the right or left; and do not force him to spit for any cause; having his food ready, after which when the pains are relieved and the jaws are relaxed, then allow him what he wants.
E aquo sia aministrat am facilita, e no trebalhe sobre la apercio de la boca deves la comestio e beure e ocitatio, entro que la mandibula sia nozada e sanada.	And let this be administered easily, and do not trouble with the opening of the mouth for eating, drinking, and spitting, until the jaw is relaxed and healed.
E si es dificil la reduccio de duas mandibulas quan so dislocadas en alcuna hora e no so convertidas als lors locs, lahoras motas veguadas accideysso febres e soda assidua, e fort leu es alerguat le ventre del malaute, e fort leu e vomeys colera pura.	And if the reduction of two jaws when dislocated at any time and cannot be returned to their places, then movements or kneading accidents may cause fevers and constant swelling. And a strong wind is felt in the abdomen of the patient, with strong pain and vomiting of pure bile.
E quan tu vezes aquo, lahoras sapias que es perdicio; e motas veguadas mor aquel al qual accideys aquo en x dias.	And when you see this, know that it is dangerous; often such cases result in death for the one who suffers this within a few days.
Capitol .xxv.	Capitol.xxv.
De reduccio de la dislocacio de la furcula e de la extremitat del muscle.	Of the reduction of the dislocation of the furcula and the extremity of the muscle.
Furcula no es dislocada del latz dedintz per la sua continuacio am le pietz; e alcunas veguadas es dislocada a la partida defora, e aquo es declarat al sentiment.	The furcula is not dislocated within the sternum by its continuity with the feet; sometimes it is dislocated at the outer part, and this is declared by sensation.
E la restauracio de lu es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos e extenda les sieus brasses.	And the restoration of it is that the patient lies on his back and extends his arms.
E aprop coarta le loc am la tua palma am fort coartacio, quar ela retornara.	And then press the area with your palm firmly, for it will return.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre e pulvils e strenh aquela.	And then place your hand over the area, apply the plaster and powders, and strengthen it.
Mays la extremitat de aquel que siec le coyde e·s continuat am aquel, no es dislocada en alcun dia; lahoras cove que sia reduzida e engualhada segon que havem dit e segon que es a tu aparelhat.	More often, the extremity of that which is connected to the thigh is not dislocated in any day; therefore, it should be reduced and aligned as we have said, according to what you are equipped with.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre, e pulvils, e extrictura, e comanda al malaute adherir a trenquilitat e a repaus entro que sia sanat.	And then place yourself over the plaster, powder, extract, and command the patient to adhere to tranquility and rest until it is healed.
E am aquesta meteyssa curacio es reduzida la extremita del muscle quan es separada del sieu loc.	And this method of cure is to reduce the extremity of the muscle when it is separated from its place.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter XXVI.
De la reduccio de la dislocacio del muscle.	On the reduction of the dislocation of the muscle.
Sapias que·l muscle no es dislocat sino segon tres manieras, de las quals es la una que sia dislocat a la partida del titillic a la partida dejos.	Know that the muscle is not dislocated in any of three ways, one of which is when it is dislocated from the tendon to the bone.
E la segonda es que sia dislocat a la partida desus del muscle, e aquo es fayt tart; e no es dislocat a las partidas detras per la spalla; e no es dislocat a las partidas denant per les nervis.	And the second is when it is dislocated above the muscle, which is called tartr; and it is not dislocated at the back parts through the shoulder; and it is not dislocated at the front parts through the nerves.
E majorment es dislocat e defora eyssit a las partidas dejos deves le titillic, e majorment en aquels dels quals las carns son paucas, leugierament es dislocat; mays en aquels en les quals so motas carns, es eyssit fora am dificultat.	And it is more dislocated and outward at the back parts of the tendon where the muscles attach. It is easily dislocated in those areas where there are few muscles, but with many muscle tissues, it is more difficult to dislocate.
E fort leu accideys ad alcus homes percussio o cazement, e le muscle de lu es apostemat de apostema caut, e es cujat per aquo que ja sia dislocat.	And often accidents occur to some men through percussion or blow, and the muscle of him is abscessed due to a boil, and is pierced by this that it has been dislocated.
Adonc cove que tu sproes aquo entro que estias sobre-sertetut de lu, e lahoras procesiscas en la curacio de lu.	Then probe where you were particularly over him, and then proceed with his cure.
E es conoguda la dislocacio de lu quan es a las partidas dejos deves le titillic; per so que distingescas entre le muscle dislocat e·l muscle sa, quar tu atrobas entre aquels diversitat manifesta; e atrobas en le cap del muscle concavitat e dejos le titillic deves le tocament del cap del muscle ayssi quo un huou, e al malaute no pot redusir la sua ma a la sieua aurelha, ni maure aquela per totz movementz.	And the dislocation is known when it is in the joint areas; you must feel for bumps; so that you can distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the normal muscle, which shows a clear difference; and you find a concavity at the head of the muscle. When feeling with your fingers at the head of the muscle, it should be like touching a hollow, and the patient cannot bring his hand to his ear nor move it for all movements.
Si es dislocat deves le pietz o ensus, e tu lahoras atrobas manifest tocament, e no es amaguat.	If it is dislocated, you must feel the foot or above it, and then you will find a clear touch, and it is not hidden.
E de aquesta dislocacio es fayta leugiera reduccio quan es fresca e le malaute es enfant.	And for this dislocation, a gentle reduction is made when it is fresh and the patient is still in pain.
E la reduccio de lu es que·l ministre eleva la ma de lu a las partidas desus; e aprop pause les tieus pouses dejos le titillic de lu, e eleva la junctura am fortaleza en sus al sieu loc, e·l ministre eleva la ma de lu, e extenda aquela en sus; e aprop pausa aquela dejos quar ela retorna leugierament.	And the reduction is that the minister raises his hand to the parts above; then places the tight bandage, and raises the joint with strength at its place, and the minister raises his hand and extends it there; then places it so that it returns lightly.
Mays si per aquo que havem dit no retorna, e so del comensament que accidic la dislocacio, motz dias, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia banhat en aygua cauda e sia aministrada enbrocacio que mollifique e liniesca ayssi cum si so coytz razitz de altea, e fenugrec, e melillot en aygua, e sia administrada.	And if for what we have said it does not return, and only from the beginning that caused the dislocation, after several days, then it should be bathed in warm water and a moistening poultice applied, as if of rue, fenugreek, and melilot in water, and administered.
E aprop le malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu dos e sia pausat dejos le titillic de lu espera de lana que sia engual entre levitat e strictura, e aprop le metge pause le sieu talo sobre la spera, e eleva le cap del muscle am vertut, e atire la ma del malaute per que no sia mauguda a las partidas dejos, e autre ministre tengua le cap del malaute, que no sia maugut a las partidas dejos, quar aquela tantost retorna al sieu loc.	And then the foot should be placed on its sole and pressed with the bandage until it is warm enough to relax and avoid stiffness. Then the doctor places his hand on the sole, raises the head of the muscle with virtue, and pulls the foot of the patient so that it is not disturbed by the parts below. Another minister holds the foot of the patient, ensuring it is not overstretched, for it returns quickly to its place.
E si voles, reduzeys aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu fassas esser prezent un home le qual sia pus lonc que·l malaute, e estia de la part de aquel latz, e entrometa le sieu muscle dejos le titillic del malaute e eleve le titillic de lu a las partidas desus entro que·l malaute sia suspendut en ayre, e autre ministre tire la ma del malaute de las partidas dejos del sieu ventre.	And if you wish, return the other in this manner: and it is that you make present a man who be longer than the patient, and stand on the side of that limb, and interpose his muscle placing the shivering of the patient under his own, elevate the shivering of him into parts above between that patient's limb being suspended in air, and another minister pull the hand of the patient from the sides away from his own abdomen.
Mays si le malaute es leugier, lahoras cove que am lu que autre causa sia suspenduda, per so que grave aquel, quar la dislocacio retorna tantost.	But if the patient is light, then you have to make sure that another cause is suspended, for fear that the serious one returns quickly.
E es reduzit eysament segon autra manieyra: e es que sia ficat en terra un fust lonc le cap del qual sia redon de figura, ayssi cum pilo de mortier, que no sia gros ni subtil, e aprop sia pausat dejos le malaute; pus que so pausatz sobre·l cap del fust draps leons, e·l malaute sia stant segon la longitut del fust, e aprop sia extenduda la ma de lu a las partidas dejos del autra part; e sia extendut le cos de lu del autre part am fortaleza, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And it is returned by another method: and it is that a long stake be placed in the ground with its head of round figure, as of mortar cloth, neither thick nor thin, and then placed under the patient; so that you lay cloths on the head of the stake, and the patient stands according to the length of the stake, and then extend his hand to the sides of the other part; and the body of him is extended from the other side with strength, for the joint returns to its place with speed.
E si es dificil reduccio de lu per totas las causas que havem ditas, lahoras usa de aquesta cura: e es que tu prenguas un fust la quantitat del qual sia en le lonc de dos brasses, e latitut de aquel sia de quatre ditz, e la grossetut de lu sia aleujat en le preon del tittilic segon aquesta forma:	And if the reduction is difficult due to all the causes we have said, then use this cure: you should take a staff whose length is two cubits, and its width is four fingers, and its thickness be enlarged at the top according to this form:
E aprop sobre le cap redon sian liatz drap leons per so que·l fust no ledesca le malaute.	And then place a round cloth over the staff for the staff not to slip on the patient.
E aprop sia pausat dejos le titillic del malaute, e sia extenduda la ma o le bras sobre·l fust entro a las partidas dejos, e sia liat le fust sobre le adjutori e le bras e la extremitat de la ma.	And then place the staff under the patient, and extend your hand or arm over the staff between the parts you have placed, and tie the staff to the helper and the arm, and the extremity of the hand.
Aprop sia pausat le bras sobre un scalo de scala segon la latitut, e la ma sia extenduda a las partidas dejos, e l’autre cos sia suspendut de l’autre part, quar la junctura intra tantost.	And then place your arm on a step of the ladder according to its width, and your hand extended over the parts you have placed, and the other part be suspended from the other side, that the joint may remain steady.
E cum le intrament de lu es complit segon quascuna maniera que es a tu possibla, e lahoras cove que tu pauses dejos le titillic spera de lana de engual quantitat; e aprop pauza emplastre perparat de polvera de moli am enses e album de huou sobre tot le muscle, ayssi quo es revolvut desus, e aprop strenh dejos le titillic am strictura decent; e le liament sia revolvut sobre le emplastre, e la ma de lu sia annectida al col de lu, e sia leyssat, e no sia mauguda la ma de lu per vii dias.	And when the staff is completed in any manner that is possible for you, then place a woollen rope of equal thickness; and then apply a plaster prepared from powder of molybdaenum and honey over all the muscle, so as to be thoroughly mixed on top, and then tightly bind the staff with decent bandaging; the staff should be rotated over the plaster, and your hand should be attached to the end of the staff, and let it be, without moving your hand for seven days.
E cove que sia pausada la vianda del malaute pauca, entro que·l membre sia confortat, quar es pus leugier a la sanacio de lu.	And ensure that the patient is comfortable after the member is rested, for this is more conducive to his recovery.
E aprop la vianda sia donada major aprop vii o v e sia exercitat un movement; e donc si es fermat e no es mollificat, lahoras ja es sanat.	And the food should be given in larger quantities about seven or five times, and exercise should be performed; therefore, if it is closed and not softened, then it is already healed.
Mays si la junctura es dislocada motas veguadas per humiditat que accideys a lu o per autra causa, lahoras cove que en aquela sia administrat cauteri am tres traucs, segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri.	If the joint is dislocated due to small movements caused by humidity that affects it or for another reason, then you should apply a cautery to it three times, as previously mentioned in the chapter on cautery.
E si tot aysso es fayt e aprop vii dias es desliat le liament e la junctura no es fermada, e le emplastre e la strictura son reduzitz sobre lu alcunas veguadas, e no es fermada e catz e no pot elevar aquel bras a las partidas desus, lahoras sapias que·ls nervis de lu, les quals so al cap del muscle, ja so inscizes o extendutz o mollificatz, e sapia que la junctura nul temps no sira ficada en loc sieu.	And if all this is done and after seven days the ligament is released but the joint is not closed, and the poultice and stricture are reduced several times over it, yet it is not closed and it cannot elevate that arm above its parts, then you should know that the nerves of the muscle, which are at the head of the muscle, are either incised or extended or softened, and you should know that the joint will never be fixed in its proper place.
De la dislocacio de aquela qu’es fayta deves le pietz e la mamilha o las partidas detras, la reduccio es fayta am impulcio e extencio am las mas, entro que retorne.	For the dislocation of that which is caused, you should move the foot and the calf or the parts behind, reducing it with impulse and extension by the hands, while it returns.
E sia administrada en aquela l’autra strictura, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And let it be applied in the other stricture, and care that within it be healed.
E si accideys aprop la sanacio gravitat en le membre e tarditat en le movement de lu, lahoras le malaute uze de banh motas veguadas entro que aquela gravitat sia alleujada e que retorne a la natura de lu primiera.	And if there happens a delay in the healing and a tardiness in the movement of the limb, then the patient uses baths with warm waters until that delay is alleviated and returns to its natural state.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter XXVII.
De curacio de dislocacio del coyde.	On the cure of dislocation of the shoulder.
Sapias que la junctura del coyde es dislocada am difficultat e semblantment retorna am difficultat; e aquela es dislocada a totas partidas, e majorment a la partida denant a la partida detras, e la dislocacio de lu no es amaguada a tu quar es cazent dejos le vezement o dejos le tocament segon qualque figura sia dislocat, e quan ajustes le coyde disloguat am le sa, aquo es a tu declarat manifestament, quar la junctura es concavada e no pot doblar le bras, ni tocar am aquel le sieu muscle.	Know that the joint of the shoulder is dislocated with difficulty and seems to return with difficulty; it can be dislocated in all directions, but most commonly in front and behind. The dislocation is not hidden; whether you quickly observe it or touch it according to the shape it is dislocated, when you set the dislocated shoulder in place, this is clearly manifest, for the joint is concave and cannot bend the arm or reach its own muscle.
E cove que·t coytes, e reduzescas la dislocacio tantost denant que vengua a lu apostema caut, quar si ve a lu apostema caut, dificil es la reduccio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot; e majorment quan es a las partidas detras, quar pus mala es de totas las autras specias de dislocacio, e de major dolor, e motas veguadas deyssen am aquela la mort.	And mark the marks on the skin, and reduce the dislocation as soon as possible before it comes to an abscess. For if it reaches an abscess, reduction is difficult, and even with great effort, it may not be fully cured; especially when it is in the rear parts, for it is worse than all other types of dislocation, causing more pain and often leading to death.
E la restauracio de lu, quan es aquela que es possibla reduzir, es que la ma de lu sia extenduda am doas mas, e le bras de lu sia expandut, e las mas del metge sian sobre le coyde e dejos lu, e el empellisca la junctura am les pouzes de las suas mas ensemps, o am la razit de la sua palma entro que torne en son loc.	And the restoration of it, when that is possible to reduce, is that his hand be stretched out with two more, and his arm be extended, and the doctor's hands be on his knee and let him, and press the joint with the heels of his hands or with the edge of his palm as it returns to its place.
Mays si la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras retorna ayssi que dobla la ma am la sua ma, entro que percuta le coyde am la razit de la sua palma.	If the dislocation is in the front parts, then return it thus by bending his hand towards his own hand, striking the knee with the edge of his palm.
E si la dislocacio no obezeys a la reduccio, lahoras aministra vehement extencio e mot fort.	And if the dislocation does not yield to reduction, then administer violent extension and strong force.
E es que dos ministres extendan le bras, e tenguan aquel eyssament dos ministres per so que no sia remaugut deves la extencio.	And let two ministers extend the arm, and hold that attempt with two ministers so that it is not resisted during the extension.
E aprop sia revolvut le bras deves tota part, pus que es envolopat drap doblat lonc sobre la ma de lu, o liament.	And then rotate the arm completely around, as it is wrapped with a long folded cloth around the patient's hand, or bandage.
E quant le metge toca la junctura am la sua ma, unte aquela am alcun oli per so que aquo sia aquelas causas las quals ajudan en lubricitat de la junctura am facilitat; e aprop empellesca la junctura am empulcio vehement entro que retorne.	And when the doctor touches the joint with his hand, anoint that area with some oil so that it helps in the lubrication of the joint and facilitates its movement; then press the joint with strong pressure as it returns.
E aprop la reduccio de lu cove que sia pausat sobre aquela empastre en le qual sia stipticitat e excequacio am album de huou, e sia extrenhut am strictura descent, e·l bras sia suspendut del col, e sia layssat per alcus dias.	And after the reduction of the cavity let it be placed on that cushion in which there is astringency and excretion of white from the oak, and it should be extended by traction, and the arm should be suspended from the neck, and let it be left for some days.
E aprop sia desliat; e donc si la junctura es formada en le sieu loc, lahoras tu deslia le liament de lu e layssa aquela.	And then let it be released; and therefore if the joint is formed in that location, then you release the ligament and leave it there.
E si vezas la junctura no be strenher, lahoras tu itera le emplastre e·l liament, e layssa aquela per alcus dias entro que sia extrenhuda; e aprop deslia aquela.	And if you see the joint not well strengthened, then repeat the application of the plaster and the ligament, and leave it there for some days until it is extended; and then release it.
Mays si accideys a lu gravitat aprop la reduccio de la junctura, e la disposicio de lu es en movement, lahoras aministra humectacio en banh e fricacio subtil, e comprecio, entro que sia aleujat; o pausa sobre la junctura aleliati, so es coyssa de moto grassa; e aprop sia liada, e layssa aquela sobre le os le dia e la nueyt.	But if accidents happen to it gravitate near the reduction of the joint, and its position is in motion, then administer moistening in bath and subtle friction and compression, until it is relieved; or pause over the joint occasionally, so it is a matter of rapid movement; and then bind it, and leave it over the bone day and night.
E aprop osta aquela, e met aquel en banh; e quan suza, lahoras tu fregua la junctura am fricacio temprada, e aprop itera sobre aquela aleliati, so es ronhonal de moto, una veguada, e la segonda, e la .iii.a.,	And then expose that, and put it in bath; and when soaked, then friction the joint with gentle friction, and then repeat over it occasionally, so it is a matter of rapid movement, one time, and the second, and the third.
am intrament de banh, entro que sia linit.	am intrament de banh, entro que sia linit.
E si voles, pausa sobre aquela fenda de vaca humida e scalfada am boder e stren sobre aquel; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas, quar aquela es humida e reduzeys a la sua disposicio.	And if you wish, place your hand over that wet and flaccid opening on the side and strongly press upon it; do this several times, for that is wet and will bring it to its proper state.
Capitol .xxviii.	Capitol.xxviii.
De curacio de dislocacio de malassen, so es de la junctura que es entre·l bras e la ma.	For the treatment of dislocation of the shoulder, it is of the joint where the arm meets the hand.
Malassen de la ma alcunas vetz es deslocada, e la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es leugiera, e·l contrari es de las autras juncturas, mays empero cove que sia velocitat en la reduccio de lu en la hora en la qual es deslocada, denant que le loc sia apostemat o que accida en lu apostema caut.	Shoulder of the hand is sometimes dislocated, and the reduction of this dislocation is easy. The opposite is true for other joints; however, more importantly, it is that there should be speed in the reduction when it is dislocated, before the area becomes swollen or an abscess occurs.
E la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es que tu pauses la junctura de la ma del malaute sobre una taula e le ministre extenda la ma de aquel, e le metge pause la sua ma o o la sua palma sobre la iminencia de la junctura, e empellisca aquela entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And the reduction of the shoulder dislocation is that you place the hand joint of the patient on a table and instruct them to extend their arm. The doctor then places his hand or palm over the vicinity of the joint, and gently push it back into its proper position.
Mays empero cove que sia considerat si la palma ja es ostada al ventre de la ma, lahoras le malaute pause le dos de la sua ma sobre una taula deves la extencio e la reduccio; e si la dislocacio es precedent deves le dos de la ma, lahoras sia la posicio de la ma de aquel intrinicequement sobre la taula, per so que la ma del metge caja sobre aquela iminencia de la junctura.	More importantly, consider whether the palm is already placed on the patient's abdomen. Then, the patient should place both hands on a table to extend and reduce; if the dislocation preceded, place both hands of the patient, then position the patient's hand intricately on the table, so that the doctor's hand falls over that potential of the joint.
E donc si retorna tantost, bon es; e sino, lahoras strenh aquela am empastre cedant le apostema e layssa aquel; e no iteres aquo, quar sino, no soferta ni no podes sobre la reduccio de lu pus que passan a lu dias.	And so, if it returns quickly, that is good; otherwise, strengthen that and apply an ointment yielding to the abscess and leave it as it is; do not repeat this, for if you do, you will neither tolerate nor be able to proceed with the reduction of it any more than what has passed a day.
Mays empero la junctura roman segon la sua tortuositat; e no notz al malaute alcuna causa, sino que la ma es mollificada e no pot strenher alcuna causa; lahoras sapias que les nervis son trincatz o trissatz, e lahoras no es engen en lu sino que sia strenhuda am cauteri prop le cazament de lu e fort leu aquo confereys alcuna causa.	More importantly, assess the joint according to its tortuosity; and do not note any cause to the patient, but rather that your hand is softened and cannot strengthen any cause; then know that the nerves are torn or split, and thus it is not a matter of strengthening it with a cautery near the site and fortifying it thereby you confer some cause.
Donc cum malassem es retornada, lahoras pausa sobre lu empastre le qual havem recomtat, e sia layssat e strenhut per v dias; e aprop sia desliat e sia layssat e la ma de lu sia excercitada.	And since the gout has returned, then pause over the ointment which we have recommended, and let it be applied and strengthened for five days; then, return it to its position and leave it there, and exercise the patient's hand.
Mays si le movement de lu es ostat e accideys en lu alcuna gravitat, lahoras leniys aquela am aygua cauda e am fricacio alcunas veguadas, entro que sia alleujat.	But if the movement in it has been sustained and occurred with some gravity, then apply that which is cooled water and some friction several times, until it is alleviated.
Capitol .xxix.	Capitol.xxix.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels ditz.	Of the cure of dislocation of the fingers.
Alcunas veguadas so dislocatz les ditz a tota partida.	In some cases, completely dislocate the fingers all at once.
E quan es dislocat alcun dit de aquels al dos de la palma o al ventre de lu, lahoras sten le dit e impelleys la dislocacio de lu am les tieus pouses, entro que retorne.	And when one of those fingers is dislocated at the base of the palm or in its middle part, then hold the finger and push the dislocation back with your thumbs, until it returns to place.
E aprop sostenta le cap del dit, e suspen aquel deves la part a la qual es dislocat, e layssa aquel per dos dias.	Then hold the base of the finger, and suspend that part which is dislocated, leaving it for two days.
E aprop suspen aquel e exten aquel entro que dreyt sia engualhat en aquel sieu dia.	Then suspend that part and extend it until the finger is straight in its own day.
E quan sira noyt, lia aquel segon aquela narracio, e no cesses desliar aquel en le dia e exercitar am movement, e lia aquel en la noyt; e fay aquo per alcus dias entro que sia streyt.	And when it is night, bind it according to that narration, and do not cease to loosen it during the day and exercise with movement, and bind it at night; and do this for several days until it straightens.
E fay semblant am aquo, si es dislocat al ventre de la ma, e lia aquel ad aquela partida e fay am aquo la tieua primiera operacio, entro que sia sanat.	And make it seem as if you are doing this, even if it is dislocated in the hand, and hold that part closely and do your first operation on this, until it is healed.
E semblantment fay am aquo quan es dislocat a las autres partidas.	And make it seem as if you are doing this when it is dislocated in other parts.
Capitol .xxx.	Capitol.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels spondils del dos.	For the cure of dislocation of the spine in the second.
Quan accideys ad alcun dels spondils del dos o del col dislocacio complida, e so remaugutz motz spondils de lors locs, lahoras en aquela no es curacio, quar la mort se coyta al malaute.	When a complete dislocation occurs in any of the spine or neck vertebrae, and multiple vertebrae are displaced from their places, then there is no cure for that, and death ensues.
E senhal de aquo es que la egestio del malaute es fora-eyssida ses voluntat, e no pot retenir aquela; e motas veguadas so mollificatz alcus membres de lu o doas cambas de lu o dos brasses de lu, o un de aquels; o es remaugut un spondil de son loc, quar motas veguadas es remaugut e motas veguadas es fayta la remocio de aquels a quatre partidas.	And the sign of this is that the patient's excretion is forced out against their will, and they cannot retain it; often, several members of the body, or both hips, or two shoulders, or one of those, are softened. Or a vertebra is displaced from its place, because multiple times a vertebra is displaced and multiple times removal of those is done into four parts.
Donc aquela ja es remauguda a las partidas detras e es nompnada gelbozitat.	Then that is relieved at the rear parts and is named yellowness.
Mays la curacio de lu es que lahoras consideras si la gelbozitat accidey de puerissia, quar lahoras en aquela no es curacio ni de aquela no es sanacio de tot.	May the cure of that be such that when you consider if the yellowness arises from pus, then in that case there is neither cure nor recovery from it.
Mays en aquela que ve per cazement o per percussio o per semblant ad aquels, ja diyssero les Antics las manieras de curacio am sermo prolixs, del qual lo mays retorna am profieyt; mays yeu ja e abreujat de aquel del qual lo pauc escusa del trop de lu, per la mieua propinquitat a la entencio mieua exposicio, am la qual he aquo expausat et format ex instrument divers de aquel am le qual mostrero aquo e espausero aquel.	May it be such that when it arises from congelation or percussion or resemblance to those, the Ancients have already detailed the methods of cure in great length, of which the most returns to prophecy; but I shall now abbreviate that of which the few defects are due to the excess of the trope, by my proximity to the clarity of my exposition, with which I have here expanded and formed from various instruments of that from which I will show and expand it.
E dic que en gelbosita que accideys de la partida denant en le pietz, no es engen ni sanacio de aquela; e semblantment en aquela que es fayta a dos latz.	And I say that in yellowness that arises from the front part on the feet, there is neither remedy nor recovery from it; similarly in that which occurs in two spots.
E de aquelas no es curada sino aquela que accideys en le dos propriament am aquo que yeu recomti.	And of those, only the one that arises in two places properly is cured as I recommend.
E es que·l malaute sia extendut sobre la sua cara sobre pug engual prop de paret, e sia extendut dejos lu esturment molh per so que no sia lidit le pietz de lu.	And thus the patient is extended on his back close to the wall, and laid out with a wet cloth to prevent his feet from being chilled.
E aprop un fust dreyt sia pausat, ficat en la terra en la extremitat del pug entorn le cap de lu, e autra fust en aviro les pes de lu en l’autra extremitat del pueg.	And place a straight stick, set in the ground at the end of the back near its head, and another stick across its feet at the other end of the stick.
E·l ministre tengua le fust, e no sia fermat en fossa; e autre ministre tengua l’autre segon aquela forma.	The minister hold the stick, and it is not fixed in the ground; another minister hold the other according to that form.
E aprop envolopa sobre le cap del malaute e dejos les titillic liamen leon ferm; e exten la extremitat del liamel al fust le qual es deves le cap de lu, e lia aquel en lu; e aprop strenh l’autre liament sobre las ancas de lu les denols de lu, e deves las cambas de lu; e aprop ajusta totz les liamentz e lia aquels en l’autre fust le qual es deves les pes de lu.	And wrap around the patient's head and tie tightly with a leather thong; extend the end of the thong to the stick which is placed at the head, and fasten it there; and tie the other thongs strongly around the patient's hips, holding his legs; and adjust all the thongs and fasten them to the other stick which supports his feet.
E aprop le ministre cascu extenda le liament a la partida del fust, e no sian remaugutz les dos fustz e les liamentz dels sieus locs en les quals son ficatz, mays empero no so fermatz ayssi cum havem dit.	And the minister should extend the thong to the part of the stick, and do not move both sticks and the thongs in which they are placed, but do not fix them as we have said.
E le metge pause las suas palmas sobre le spondil am fortaleza entro que retorne, o que pause sobre aquela una taula, e aprop que ajuste sobre la taula les sieus pes entro que retorne.	And the doctor places his palms on the spine with strength so that it returns, or he places one hand on a table and adjusts his feet on the table as it returns.
Mays si no retorna per aquesta forma, lahoras pren una taula de la qual la latitut o la longitut sia en aviro de tres brassas, e cava en la paret de la qual havem dit que es prop le malaute un loc en le qual intre la extremitat de la taula.	And if it does not return in this way, then take a table of which the width or length is about three braccia, and dig into the wall where we said was near the hernia a place at the edge of the table.
E aprop pausa la maytat de la taula sobre le spondilh, e·l metge pause les sieus pes sobre l’autre extremitat, e estrenha be entro que le spondil sia coartat e que retorne al sieu loc.	And place the majority of the table on the spine, and the doctor places his feet on the other edge, and presses well so that the spine is compressed and returns to its place.
E si tu voles, obre am torn le qual es revolvut am la ma; e es que tu fiques en terra deves le cap del malaute en le derier del pug dos fustz, la longitut dels quals sia d’un bras, e deves le cap de lu en le derier del pug eyssament dos fustz; e sia la longitut que es entre quascun fust un palm, e ja es fayt en quascun fust trauc en le qual corr torn, e quascun sia mot fermat en terra per so que no sia maugut.	And if you wish, open the wound which is turned in your hand; and when you are on the ground, place the patient's hernia at the heel of two sticks, the length of which is one braccio, and place his head at the heel of two sticks similarly positioned; ensure the distance between each stick is a palm. And make sure each stick is firmly fixed to the ground so it does not move.
E sia mes un fust redon en le qual es le torn, e sia revolvut en les dos traucs dels dos fustz.	And there is a round stick for the hole, and it is turned in the two slots of the two sticks.
E en la extremitat de lu es un trauc en le qual es format le fust, la longueza del qual es un palm am aquo que es revolvut; e en les dos autres fustz es semblant de aquel.	And at the end of it is a slot in which the stick is fixed, the length of which is one palm's breadth as it is turned; and in the other two sticks it is similar to that.
E aprop strenh les liamentz que has streyt en le pietz del malaute en le trau le qual es deves le cap de lu, e les liamentz que has streyts en las coyssas de lu en le torn le qual es deves les pes de lu.	And then strengthen the ligaments you have stretched in the feet of the patient in the slot where you place its head, and the ligaments you have stretched in the thighs of the patient in the hole where you place its feet.
E aprop deves quascun torn e stia un ministre que torssa le torn am la sua ma, e le metge engualhe le spondil segon que havem dit.	And then you should place each hole with a minister who turns the hole with his hand, and the doctor straightens the spine as we have said.
E aquesta es la forma del torn:	And this is the form of the hole:
E aprop pus que le spondil es retornat, e le loc es engualhat, lahoras cove que pauses empastre exciccatiu am album de huou, e aprop estopa; e aprop pause sobre le empastre astela de taula de la qual la latitut sia de tres ditz o enviro aquels, e la longitut de lu sia quantitat que prengua le loc de la gelbositat, e sobre la partida del spondil sa.	And when the spine is returned and the area is straightened, then cover it with a paste of honey, and some wool; place a slice of table about three fingers wide or slightly more, and the length that can fit the area of jaundice, over the part of the spine.
E aprop sia liat am liament le qual havem dit, e uze le malaute de nutriment subtil entro que sia sanat.	And then apply the honey which we have said, and use the patient of subtle nutrition under where it is healed.
E si roman alcuna iminencia en le loc en la fi de la sanacio, lahoras cove que sian aministradas medicinas que moilifico e liniscan am aministracio de la taula per lonc temps, la qual havem recomtada; e ja es aministrada en aquel loc lamina de plom.	And if there is any danger in the area at the end of the healing, then ensure that medicines that mollify and relieve are administered through long-term use as we have recommended; and already a layer of lead is applied in that area.
E alcunas veguadas accideys imminencia en le derier dels spondils del dos, e es cujat per aquela dislocacio; e es aquel os le qual ja imineys per que no cove que sia fayta prosompcio a lu am aquesta medicina, quar fort leu fara a tu accidir mort.	And sometimes accidents occur at the end of the spinal vertebrae, and they are caused by that dislocation; and it is that bone for which you should beware so that no suspicion arises about it with this medicine, because it will be very harmful to you if it occurs.
Capitol .xxxi.	Capitol.xxxxi.
De curacio de anca dislocada.	On the treatment of dislocated hip.
Sapias que la junctura del ancha e la junctura del muscle no endeve sino dislocacio tant solament, e no accideys ad aquelas aquo que accideys a las autras juncturas de petita remocio e concavitat.	Know that the joint of the hip and the joint of the muscle should occur only due to dislocation, and do not occur with those that happen in other joints with slight movement and concavity.
E la junctura de la ancha es dislocada segon quatre manieyras, quar es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, o a las partidas defora, o a las partidas denant, o a las partidas detras.	And the joint of the wrist is dislocated according to four manners, which is dislocated to the inner parts, or to the outer parts, or to the front parts, or to the back parts.
E majorment es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, e pauc a las partidas denant o a las partidas detras.	And mostly it is dislocated to the inner parts, and little to the front or back parts.
E senhal de la dislocacio de lu a las partidas de dintz es quar, quan tu ajustas la camba del malaute sana am la malaute, es pus longua e·l denolh es pus heminent que de la sana, e·l malaute no pot doblar le sieu pe deves le lenguonar, e es le loc que siec le lengonar apostemat de apostema caut, per so que·l cap de la coyssa ja es pervengut aqui.	And the sign of dislocation to the inner parts is that when you adjust the brace of the healthy side against the injured side, the one without the bump appears higher than the other, and the injured side cannot bend its foot; this is the area where one should cautery the apostema, so that the head of the swelling is already reached here.
E·l senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio es a las partidas defora, es que les accidentz de lu so contraris ad aquest accident.	And the sign of one who experiences dislocation to the outer parts is that the symptoms of this condition are contrary to this dislocation.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas denant es quar expan la camba sieua segon compliment, mays empero no dobla aquela ses dolor que es en le denol, e si se perforsa ad anar e no pot sobre aquo a las partidas denant; e la urina de lu es retenguda e l’engonar de lu es apostemat, e deves la ambulacio de lu sobre le talo.	And the sign of one who experiences dislocation to the front parts is that stretching the brace according to complement does not bend the foot that is in pain; if forced to go further and cannot do so at the front parts; his urine is retained, and his swelling is an apostema; you should treat his condition on the tibia.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas detras es que no expande le denol, ni no puesca doblar aquel denant que doble le engonar, e la camba de lu es pus breva que l’autra, e l’engonar es mollificat, e·l cap de la coyssa es deves aquel loc.	And a sign of dislocation in the parts behind is that the shin does not expand, nor can it bend what is bent in front to be straightened, and the calf is shorter than the other, and the knee is softened, and the head of the thigh is deviated from that place.
Mays reduccio de las specias de aquesta dislocacio es que tu consideras, lahoras, si la dislocacio es vetusta et antiqua, que ja es anticada am le havent aquela aprop tu aministras reduccio de lu e roman segon la sua disposicio, lahoras no es en aquela curacio de tot; e adonc no cove que en aquela sia fayta prosompcio.	The main sign of this dislocation is that you consider whether the dislocation is old, and if it is an old one, you already have it nearly reduced according to its position when you administer reduction by Roman method; then this is not part of the entire treatment. Therefore, you should not guess or make assumptions about it in that process.
Mays en aquel del qual la dislocacio es recent, e es una de las quatre specias de dislocacio, lahoras te coyta ad aquo que volvas la junctura e extendas aquela a las partidas dedintz e a las partidas defora, e mau aquela a la dextra e sinistra, quar fort leu retorna e no indigeys de autra cura.	For the case where the dislocation is recent and one of the four types of dislocation, you should turn the joint back and extend it to the internal and external parts, and manipulate it to the right and left sides, as it will naturally return to place without needing further treatment.
Mays, si no retorna en aquesta manieyra, lahoras cove que tu prepares ministre fort e extendas la camba de lu de la partida pus dejos, o am las suas mas, o am liament lo qual es liat sobre la camba desus le denol; e autre ministre extenda la ma de aquel desus enayssi que meta las suas mas dejos les titillics de lu; e aprop strenha am liament leon sobre la razit de la coyssa, e tengua autre ministre ters le extremitat del liament.	Moreover, if it does not return in this manner, you should prepare a strong application and extend the calf of the foot from the part below, or over its hands, or spread lian on the shin above the tibia; another person should stretch the hand from above trying to place the hands under the titillics of the foot; then firmly spread lion's grease on the sole of the foot, and have another person hold the end of the lian.
E sia extencio de lu o de la partida dedintz a l’angonar a la partida de la furcula, o de la partida detras a la partida del dos.	And it is the extension from his arm or from the inner part to the armpit, or from the back part to the waist.
E sia la extencio de totz aquels en una veguada entro que·l malaute sia elevat am le sieu cos de terra e que romangua pendent.	And it is the extension of all these in one go, lifting the patient's body from the ground and allowing it to hang pendulously.
E aquesta specia de extencio es specia cominal a totas quatre.	And this type of extension is special for all four.
E donc si la dislocacio retorna am aquo que havem dit, sira bo; e sino, lahoras es necessari a tota specia aquo que dire de la propria curacio.	And so if the dislocation returns as we have said, it will be good; otherwise, for every type, what I say about its own treatment is necessary.
En la reduccio de lu propria, quan es dislocada, e la dislocacio es a las partidas dedintz, cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu latz sa; e aprop pausa les liamentz sobre la razit de la coyssa en aquel loc le qual entre le cap de la coyssa e·l loc que es dejos le langonar; e aprop exten le liament en sus de la part del angonar a la pus auta partida de la furcula.	In the reduction of its own, when dislocated, and the dislocation is in the inner parts, make sure the patient's leg is raised over his side; then place the bandages around the thigh in that location where between the head of the thigh bone and the location where the armpit is placed. And extend the bandage above the part of the armpit to the next inner part of the furcula.
E aprop autre ministre fort prengua les brasses de lu, e amerme le loc gros de la coyssa malaute e extenda a las partidas deforo per extencio vehement, quar aquela retorna en le sieu loc.	And have another minister firmly take hold of the leg, and compress the large part of the thigh, then extend to the outer parts by strong extension, for thereby it returns to its proper place.
E aquesta specia es de pus leugiera curacio am la qual aquest membre es reduzit que las autres specias.	And this species is of a lighter cure for which this member is reduced as other species.
Mays si es excusat sobre tu e no obezeys al entrament am aquesta specia de curacio de tot, lahoras cove que sian liatz les dos pes del malaute ensemps am liament fort, leugier, sobre amdos les talos e amdos les denols.	And if it is excused for you and you do not follow the training on this species of cure, then cover that both feet of the patient together with strong but gentle bandaging, over both the soles and both the insteps.
E sia la longitut de quascun de son par la quantitat de quatre ditz, e sia la camba malaute extenduda mays que l’autre per quantitat de dos ditz.	And let the length of each be by the quantity of four fingers, and let the patient's leg extended be more than the other by the quantity of two fingers.
E aprop le malaute sia suspendut sobre le cap del fust, e que sia en la mayso; e sia la longitut de lu de la terra la quantitat de dos brasses.	And place the patient's leg over the head of the stake, and let it be on the side. And let the length of the rope from the ground be the quantity of two braces.
E aprop comanda a un jove fort que minuesca le cap de la coyssa, e sia suspendut am le malaute autre jove, e l’autre jove minuent la coysa am fortaleza empellesca, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And command a strong young man to hold down the patient's thigh, and let another strong youth suspend the leg, while the other youth holds down the thigh with great force, so that the joint returns to its place quickly.
Mays en la reducio propria, quan es dislocacio a la partida defora, cove que·l malaute jaga sobre pug segon que havem recomtat en le havent gelbozitat; e sia strenhut le liament sobre la camba malauta propriament e sobre le pietz de lu.	And in the reduction, when dislocation is at the part outward, cover the patient's leg with a blanket as we recommended when he was unconscious; and strongly bind the bandage around the injured leg and over its ankle.
E aprop dos fustz sian pausatz, la un als pes de lu, e l’autre al cap; e aprop sian pausatz fustz ajustatz al mieg del pueg ficat sobre·l qual draps humitz sian envolopatz, per so que·l malaute no sia dampnajat per que·l fust sia entre las coyssas de lu, per que deves la extencio a las partidas dejos no sia atirat.	And then place two stakes, one on the foot and the other on the head; and place adjusted stakes in the middle of the stake placed over which wet cloth is wrapped, so that the patient is not injured because the stake is between their thighs, for you should allow the extension from the parts left undone to be felt.
E aprop quascun ministre extenda a la sua part, e·l metge am la sua ma enguala la reduccio segon l’art.	And each minister extend to his part, and the doctor with his hand equalize the reduction according to the art.
Donc, si obezeys a revercio, sira bo grandament; e sino, pausa sobre aquela diligentment e ayssi quo havem dit en gelbozitat per aquela engualment.	Then, if you obey reversal, it will be very good; and otherwise, place your hand diligently over it, as we said in equalization.
Mays cove que·l malaute jagua sobre les sieus latz sa quetament.	More so that the patient feels the gout jar on their sides quietly.
E quan la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras cove que la camba sia extenduda leugierament, e es segon aquesta meteyssa narracio sobre pueg; e le metge pause la palma de la sua ma dreyta sobre·l langonar malaute, e aprop coarte aquel am l’autra ma, e am aquela coartacio pausa aquel extendut a las partidas dejos a la partida del denol.	And when the dislocation is in the front parts, then it should be that the cushion is slightly extended, and this is according to this narrative method about the foot; and the doctor places the palm of his right hand on the heel of the gouty foot, and then draws it with the other hand, and at that draw, he extends the part left behind towards the front part.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas detras, lahoras no cove que·l malaute sia extendut a las partidas dejos, e es elevat sobre la terra; habantz cove que sia pausat sobre causa dura, ayssi cum cove le eyssament si l’ancha de lu es dislocada a las partidas defora, segon aquo que havem dit del jasement de lu sobre dos anchas; e es sobre la sua cara e les liamentz sian extendutz, segon que havem dit, no ha guayre.	If the dislocation is behind the parts, then do not allow the patient to lie on those parts, and elevate them above the ground; you should place him on a hard surface, as we have said when the width was displaced outward, according to what we said about lying on two widths; and his face and limbs should be extended, as we have said, with little change.
E cove que sia aministrada compressio am taula sobre le loc al qual yeys la junctura.	A compression should be applied on the area where the joint is displaced.
Donc cum la reducio es complida segon que cove — e·l senhal de la reduccio de lu no es amaguat a tu, e es que tu extendas del malaute doas cambas, e quan tu vezes aquelas enguals e le malaute extrenh la sieua camba e expandeys aquela ses excusacio, lahoras sapias que·l membre segon que cove es retornat — e lahoras tu ajusta doas coyssas e pausa empastre e extrenh am benda ayssi que la ancha no sia mauguda en alcuna de las partidas; e adheresca le malaute a repaus per tres dias o per quatre.	So, when the reduction is completed as it should — and you notice the sign of the joint's reduction, which is that you extend two limbs from the patient, and when you see them equal and the limb returns to its normal position and expands the surrounding tissues — then you know that the member has been returned according to what is right. Then you place two cushions and pad well with bandages so that the width is not disturbed in any of the parts; and you adhere the joint to rest for three days or four.
E aprop deslia le liament e l’empastre, e compara la una camba am l’autra.	Then remove the bandage and padding, and compare one limb to the other.
Lahoras, si vezas aquelas enguals en vustament, lahoras sapias que la dislocacio ja es fermada, e adonc layssa le malaute anar.	When you see the equal signs in the incision, then know that the dislocation is already closed, and then let the patient go.
E si vezas alcuna causa de mollificacio, lahoras tu retorna e emplastra aquel, e extrenh aquel segon la tua primiera strectura, e layssa aquel en tres dias.	And if you see any cause of swelling, then return and apply a plaster to that area, and restructure it according to your first structure, and let it rest for three days.
E aprop deslia aquel, e fay aquel tardar en ambulacio sobre quascu per alcus dias, entro que sia confortat.	Then release that area, and allow it to gradually heal over each part for some days until it is comfortable.
Capitol .xxxii.	Capitol.xxxii.
De curacio de dislocacio del denolh.	On the treatment of dislocation of the shoulder.
Le denolh es dislocat segon tres manieyras, quar es dislocat a las partidas defora, e a las partidas dedintz, e a las partidas dejos mays a las partidas detras; e a las partidas denant no es dislocat.	The shoulder is dislocated in three ways: it can be dislocated to the outward parts, to the inward parts, and more to the front parts than to the back parts; it is not dislocated to the front parts.
E le senhal de dislocacio de lu es que comandes al malaute que aplique la sua camba am la coyssa; lahoras sapias que·l denol es dislocat.	And the sign of shoulder dislocation is that when you command the patient to apply their hand to their hip; then you know that the shoulder is dislocated.
E la restauracio de totas las manieyras de lu es que fassas cezer le malaute dreyt, enayssi que ja extenda la sieua camba, si pot sobre aquo; adherir le tieu dos a la cara de lu, e pausa le pe de lu entre les tieus pes; e aprop fay adherir le denol de lu am las tuas palmas, e rete aquelas entre les tieus ditz sobre le denolh de lu am fortaleza, e autre ministre extenda le sieu pe entro que·l denol retorne a son loc.	And the restoration of all manners of it is that you make cease the labor straight, essay that it already extends its leg over this; attach your two knees to the face of it, and place his foot between your knees; then make attach the sole of it to your palms, hold those between your fingers on the sole of it with strength, and another minister extend his leg so that the sole returns to its place.
E senhal de reddicio de lu es que la sua camba adharesca am la coyssa am levitat no-laboroza.	And the sign of its submission is that its leg adheres to the thigh with light, effortless movement.
E aprop emplastra aquel e fay adhirir la camba am la coyssa, e aprop lia aquelas emsemps am una benda per tres dias o per quatre, e aprop deslia aquelas.	And then apply this and make the leg adhere to the thigh, and afterward bind those repeatedly with a bandage for three or four days, and then remove those.
E no uze le malaute de ambulacio per alcus dias, entro que sia sanat e cofortat.	And do not use the labor of ambulation for some days until it is healed and comforted.
Mays si la reduccio de lu a tu es excusada, lahoras aministra fort extencio am liamentz dels quals en la curacio de la hancha precedit narracio.	If the reduction of it is excused to you, then administer strong extension to the limbs of which in the cure of the hip, the preceding narration was given.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter XXXIII.
De la curacio de la dislocacio del talo.	Of the treatment of dislocation of the ankle.
Le talo alcunas veguadas es remaugut per petita remocio, e alcunas veguadas es dislocat segon compliment, e la dislocacio de lu es fayta o a las partidas dedintz o a las partidas deforo.	The ankle is sometimes reduced by slight movement, and sometimes dislocated according to the injury, and the dislocation of the ankle is done either from the internal parts or from the external parts.
E le senhal de la dislocacio de lu es que vezes le talo imflat procedent a la partida a la qual es dislocat.	And the sign of the ankle dislocation is that you see the ankle swollen coming from the part to which it is dislocated.
Mays la curacio de la remocio de lu es de leugiera reddicio, e es que sia extendut am facilitat am las mas e sia engualhat entro que retorne.	More the treatment of the reduction of the ankle is by gentle return, and it should be stretched with ease and brought back into place.
Mays en la curacio de lu quan es dislocat segon compliment, cove que fasses cezer le malaute dreyt, e tengua aquel un ministre fort e valent de la partida detras del dos de aquel en le mieg loc de lu.	More in the treatment of the ankle when it is dislocated according to injury, make sure you straighten the leg properly, and have a strong and brave assistant at the back of the injured leg in the middle of the location.
E aprop te tu am la tieua ma dreyta le pe de la pus sobirana part, e am la tua ma sinistra de la part pus dejos del pe en le loc de la cavilha.	And then place your right hand on the top part of the foot, and with your left hand from below, place it on the location of the heel.
E aprop atira le pe a tu am la tua ma dreyta, e aprop am la sinistra per dos veguadas, e aprop exten am la sinistra; e empelleys le pietz del pe am la dreyta deves la camba ses trebalh.	And then draw the foot toward your right hand, and towards the left side twice, and extend the left side; and push the foot on the right with the thigh bend it.
E fay aquo doas veguadas segon que havem comtat.	And do this twice according to how we have counted.
E aprop empelleys le pietz del pe a la camba la tersa veguada, e tu es a la cavilha.	And then push the foot toward the thigh for the third time, and you are at the hip.
Donc si retorna en una veguada o en dos segon aquesta manieyra, e si vezes le pe engualhat, es bo; e sino, lahoras sobre lu itera la operacio, quar aquel retorna.	So if it returns in one or two pushes using this method, and if you can grasp the foot evenly, that is good; otherwise, then repeat the operation, for it may not have returned.
Mays si a tu es prohibida la reduccio de lu am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu dos sobre terra, e estrenh un paysel mot en terra fermat, e que caja entre las coyssas de lu, e tu ja has envolopat sobre lu drap per so que no ledesca le malaute.	But if the reduction is forbidden to you as we have prescribed, then let the patient lie on his side on the ground, and place a firm cushion between the thighs, and you have already wrapped it with a cloth to prevent the wound from opening.
E aprop le ministre de lu tengua las suas coyssas, e aprop autre ministre extenda le pe am las suas mas o am liament que lie sobre le col del pe; e aprop extenda aquel quascun ministre contre extencio del sieu par, e le payssel sia extant entre las coyssas del malaute retinent aquel, per so que·l cos de lu no sia atirat a las partidas dejos deves la sua extencio.	And then the minister holds their thighs, and another minister extends the foot with their hands or the cloth tied around the ankle of the foot; and each minister extends against the extension of their side, and the cushion is placed between the thighs of the patient, holding it there, so that the body of the patient is not drawn to the sides as you extend its length.
E aprop le metge enguala la dislocacio am las sieuas mas, e autre ministre tengua la coyssa sana a las partidas dejos, quar la dislocacio retorna am la facilitat.	And then the doctor equalizes the dislocation with his hands, while another assistant holds the healthy thigh at the parts left behind, so that the dislocation returns with ease.
E donc cum retorna la dislocacio e es declarada a tu la sanetat de la reduccio de lu, lahoras pausa emplastre e extrenh aquela am liamentz fortment, e ligua le pe am liament a la camba.	And then, as the dislocation returns and its reduction is declared to be sound, then apply a strong paste externally to that area, and bind the foot with lint to the leg.
E cove que temes o te guardes dels nervis les quals so detras sobre le talo, per que le liament sobre aquel no sia vehement e leda aquel fortment.	And be careful not to press on or protect the nerves behind the ankle, as the lint over that area should not be too strong and severely irritate it.
E aprop layssa aquel per dos dias o per tres; e si le liament es mollificat, extrenh aquel.	And then leave that area for two or three days; and if the lint is moist, apply it externally.
E aprop deslia aquel en le ters dia o en le quart, e prohibeys le malaute de anament per xl dias.	And then remove the lint on the third day or the fourth, and prohibit the patient from walking for forty days.
Mays si es forsat de anar denant aquel spazi, no es fayta segurtat que la dislocacio no sia sobre lu dissolvuda e corrumpuda, e aprop aquo que no recipia curacio.	But if it is necessary to walk in that area, be sure that the dislocation is not dissolved and corrupted, and that it does not receive healing.
E si accideys a lu apostema caut, lahoras cove que tu aministre en la cedacio de lu aquo en lo qual precedic la nostra narracio, en autre loc de curacio e de embrocacio, entro que sia remauguda.	And if an abscess occurs, then make sure that you administer in the evacuation of it what we have described in our narrative in another place for treatment and fomentation, until it is relieved.
Capitol .xxxiiii.	Capitol XXXIV.
De curacio de dislocacio dels ditz dels pes.	For the treatment of dislocation of the toes of the feet.
Cove que aquel qu’es dislocat sia engualhat am pauca extencio ses trebal; e aquo que no es dificil, abantz es leugier.	Make sure that the one which is dislocated is gently reduced within a small extent; and what is not difficult, beforehand is easy.
Mays si la dislocacio es en alcus nozes del dos del pe, lahoras cove que fassas cezer le malaute le sieu pe sobre loc engual de la terra o sobre taula, e sia estant ayssi cum si anava.	But if the dislocation is in several toes of the foot, then make the patient lie on his side over a spot where he can be reduced, or on a table, and let him remain thus as if sleeping.
E aprop tu sta de pes, e pausa le tieu pe sobre aquo que imineys de las juncturas, e aprop calca aquel am le tieu pe am vertut entro que retorne, e que vejas aquel ja engualhat e no aparesca en le loc eminencia.	Then stand behind the foot, and place your hand over what you suspect to be the joint, and gently press that area with your hand to help it return to place, and observe that it is reduced and does not appear as a prominence in that spot.
E aprop pausa dejos le ventre del pe de lu una taula que prengua tot le pe, a la qual sian dos caps, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent e ferma per tres dias; e aprop deslia aquel e fay aquel repausar de ambulacio per motz dias, entro que sia estrenhut e de reddicio sia assegurat.	Then place the patient's foot on a table that holds the entire foot, which has two ends, and firmly strengthen that area with good structure for three days; then remove it and allow the foot to rest by ambulation for several days, until it is strengthened and its recovery is assured.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter XXXV.
De las specias de dislocacio que sian faytas am plagua o am fractura o am quascuna ensemps.	Of the species of dislocation that occur from trauma or fracture or any other cause.
Quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, e tu te perforssas en la curacio de aquela e en la restauracio de lu, motas veguadas succezeys la mort.	When any of these causes occur, and you undertake the cure of it and the restoration thereof, misfortunes may ensue.
E per aquo no cove que sobre la curacio de lu presuma, sino aquel que es savi en l’art, de lonc uzatge, misericordios e pietados, tardiu, no-ardit ni presomptuos; e que use en le comensament de medicinas que cedan apostemas cautz tant solament, e leyssa le malaute al divinal jutgament, sino ad aquel al qual speras salut de perdicio, am de la malautia alleviacio, e en la qual appareys alcuna speransa.	And for this reason, you must not presume in the cure of it, but rather one who is wise in the art, long accustomed, merciful and pious; who delays, neither rash nor presumptuous; and who uses at the beginning of medicines that lead to the healing of abscesses only with a cautery, leaving the disease to divine judgment, but to him to whom you hope for salvation from perdition, for alleviation of the illness, in which you show some hope.
E adonc esforsa te tantost far de lu la reduccio en le comensament de la causa, denant que endevengua apostema caut.	And then strive to perform the reduction at the beginning of the cause, before it develops into an abscess.
E adonc si le membre retorna segon que volem, lahoras aministra regiment le qual ceda apostema caut e cura la plagua am aquo que conveneys a lu dels enguentz desiccatius.	And then, if the limb returns as we want, proceed to administer treatment that leads to the healing of the abscess with a cautery and heals the trauma according to what suits it from drying ointments.
E si dislocacio es am fractura e accideys en le os satagias separadas, lahoras tu perforsa le stement de lor, e fay en aquo so que havem dit en las malautias simplas de aquo que es precedit en les locz de aquels.	And if dislocation is associated with fracture and accidents in the bones separated, then you force their joints, and do so as we have said in simple ailments that precede these in the places of those.
E guarda e esquiva segon la tua vertut aquel del intrament en las vias de temor segon que a tu es precedida la mia predicacio; quar aquo es milhor a tu deves le tieu Creator, e mays permanent a la tua gloria, e mays saludos al tieu cos verays aquels en le tieu temps.	And guard and avoid according to your virtue that of the instrument in the ways of fear according to which my preaching precedes you; for this is better to you from your Creator, and more permanent to your glory, and more greetings to your true things in your time.
Ayssi fineysso las paraulas de Albucasim perfieytament de las quals Dieus ne sia benezeyt.	Thus you finish the words of Albucasim perfectly of which may God bless.
Amen.	Amen.
