Ayssi comensan las paraulas de Albucasim .	Thus begin the words of Albucasim.
O, filhs, pus yeu he a vos complit aquest libre, le qual es le derier de la sciencia de medicina, per le compliment de lu so consequit la fi en lu, e per las exposicios de lu, e per las declaracios de lu, es a mi vist que yeu complesca aquel a vos am aquest tractat, le qual es partida de la operacio am ma, so es cyrurgia.	O, sons, thus I have completed this book, which is the last of the science of medicine, for through its completion and the end it has brought to itself, and through its explanations and declarations, it is evident to me that I have filled you with this treatise, which is part of my surgical operations.
Quar la operacio am ma es prostrada en nostre regio e en nostre temps de tot privada, entro que fort leu peric la sciencia de lu, e le vistigi de lu es ostat; e no romasero de lu sino alcunas petitas descripcios en les libres dels Antics, les quals mudero las mas e endevenc ad aquels error e heyssitacio entro que son clausas las entencios de lu e es elonguada la forsa de lu e l’art.	For our region and in our time, surgical operation is almost entirely private, despite the great importance of its science. Its investigation has been neglected; and only some minor descriptions can be found in the books of the Ancients, which correct many errors and hesitations, but close off the understanding of it and extend its force and art.
E es vist a mi que yeu vivifique aquela am ordenacio de aquest tractat en aquela segon la via de exposicio e de declaracio e de abreviacio; e per que vengua am las formas dels ferramentz de cautheri e dels autres instrumentz de la obra cum sia per addicio de la declaracio, e per preparacio de lu, la qual causa es necessaria.	And it is clear to me that I should vitalize that part of this treatise according to the way of explanation and declaration and abbreviation; and in order that the forms of the cautery tools and other instruments of the work be added through the declaration, and for their preparation, which cause is necessary.
Mays la causa per la qual no es atrobat bo artifex am la sieua ma en aquest nostre temps, es quar la art de medicina es longua, e que cove le sieu actor denant aquo esser excercitat en la sciencia de anotomia la qual recontec Gualia entro que sapia les juvament dels membres e las formas de aquels, e la conjunctio e la separacio de lor; e haia la conoyssensa dels osses, dels nervis e dels lacertz, e·l nombre de aquels, e la egrecio de lor; e de las venas pulsatils e de las quietas, e dels locs del eyssiment de lor.	More so, the reason why a good artisan doctor does not use his hand well in this our time is that the art of medicine is long and involved, and one must be trained before being able to practice anatomy, which Galen knew well, understanding the youth of the members and their forms, as well as their joints and separations; and having knowledge of the bones, nerves, and tendons, their number, and their diseases; and of the pulse veins and quiet ones, and the places of their propulsion.
E per aquo ditz Ypocras que am u nom es mot, mays en l’obra petit, e majorment en la art de la ma.	And for this, Hippocrates is said to have said that by name is good, more in the small work, and most of all in the art of the hand.
Mays nos ja avem dit de aquel en l’introit de aquest libre; quar qui no es scient aquo que li avem dit de anotomia, no es evacuat que no caia en error per la qual siran mortz les homes, ayssi cum yeu he vist trops de aquels, quar alscus son formatz en esta sciencia e gettan se de aquela ses sciencia e ses experiment.	More so, we have already spoken of this in the introduction to this work; for those who do not know what we have said about anatomy, will not be free from error due to which many people will die, as I have seen too many of them. For some are formed in this science and act without that other knowledge and experience.
Quar yeu vi un metge folh e enperit aver incidit un apostema escrophilos en le colh de una femna, e incidic alcunas arterias del colh per que fluic gran sanc entro que la femna cazec morta entre las mas de lu.	For I have seen a foolish and inexperienced doctor who caused an apostema scrophula in the neck of a woman, and damaged some arteries so that great bleeding occurred, causing the woman to die among her greatest sufferings.
E vi un autre metge que pres que el traguera una peyra d’un home le qual avia procesit en sa etat, e la peyra era gran, e venguet a lu e trayssec aquela peyra am un tros de la vesiqua, per que aquel home al tertz dia es mort.	And there was another doctor who almost extracted a stone from a man who had been suffering for some time, and the stone was large, and it came to him, and he removed that stone with a piece of the bladder, so that that man died on the third day.
E yeu ja apelat fuy a estrayre aquela, e vi que per la grandesa de la peyra e per la disposicio del malaute conogui subre lu que morira.	And I have already called for the stone to be extracted, and I saw that due to the size of the stone and the position of the patient, he would likely die.
E vi un autre metge le qual prenia stipendic de un duc de nostra terra per cyrurgia, e endeven a un crastrat negre le qual era deves lu fractura en la coyssa de lu; e perparec le metge am la sua ignorancia, estrayssec la fractura, sobre la plagua, am pulvinas e astelas am forta strectura, e no layssec a la plagua espiracio.	And there was another doctor who took payment from a duke of our land for surgery, and he came upon a black slave who had a fracture in the thigh; and because of the doctor's ignorance, he removed the fracture, over the wound, with pillows and splints of strong structure, and did not allow the wound to breathe.
E aprop le desliet segons los sieus desiriers, e aprop le relieg, e aprop le leyssec per alcus jorns e comandec que nos deslies le liament; e estec ayssi entro que la coyssa e·l pe foro apostematz, e pervenguet a perdicio.	And then the dislocation according to his desires, and then the rejoining, and then the leaving for a few days and commanding us to release the bandage; and we remained thus until the thigh and foot recovered, and then proceeded to our detriment.
E yeu fuy apelat a lu, e aparelhegui a desliar le liament, e conseguida es tranquilitat e enayssi amermet de sas dolors.	And I was called to him, and prepared to dislodge the stone, and peace and an attempt to relieve his pains were achieved.
Mays empero ja corrupcio era confermada en le membre, per que no pogui refrenar aquela, e no cessec perambular la corrupcio en le membre entro que·l malaute peric.	But however, corruption was confirmed in the member, for I could not arrest that, and did not cease to walk the corruption in the member while the malady persisted.
E vi un autre metge le qual perforec un apostema cancros, e fo ulcerat aprop alscus dias, entro que foc magnificada la malicia de lu am lo senhor de lu.	And there was another doctor who perforated an oncological abscess, and it became ulcerated over several days, during which the malignancy of the lesion grew significantly in the presence of its lord.
La qual causa es quar le cranc caut es pur de humor melencolic, lahoras no cove que pervengua a lu am ferr de tot, sino que sia an membre le qual suffertes que de tot fos hostat.	The cause is that the pain is purely due to melancholic humors, and does not affect the entire body, but rather affects a member that suffers from being attacked by all.
E per aquo, filhs, necessari es a vos que la operacio am ma sia devisada en dos devesios: so es en operacio a lu qual es associada salut, e en obra am la qual es perilh en las majors disposicios.	And for this reason, my children, it is necessary that you devise the operation into two divisions: one in which the operation is associated with health, and another in which the work is dangerous in its major dispositions.
E yeu ja he exsitat aquo en tot loc de aquest libre en le qual venc opperacio en la qual es error e temor; per que necessari es a vos que guardetz aquo e layssetz aquel, per que les folhs no atrobo via a parlar e a vos desonestar.	And I have already existed in all parts of this book in which the operation is accompanied by error and fear; therefore, it is necessary that you keep this and leave that, so that the leaves do not find a way to speak and deceive you.
E donc prenetz las vostras armas am sollicitut e am proteccio de Dieu , e les vostres malautes am falicitat e am fermetat.	And therefore take your arms with diligence and protection of God, and the patient with facility and firmness.
E usatz de la milhor via per la gracia de Dieu perdusent a salut e a lausabla successio, e laysatz las malautias terriblas de difficil sanacio, e ostatz las vostras armas de aquo que vos fa temer, per so que ysitatio en vostra fe e en le vostre nom no vos evasisca: quar mays es remanent a la vostra gloria, e pus aut en le mon e en derier a las vostras sanctitatz.	And use the best way by the grace of God seeking salvation and praiseworthy success, and leave behind the terrible illnesses difficult to cure, and stand firm in your arms against what fears you, so that sitting in your faith and in your name you are not forsaken: for more remains to your glory, and better elsewhere and later in the world and beyond in your sanctity.
Gualia ja diyssec en alcunas sieuas monicios:	Gout has already been dissected in some monastic texts:
“No mediquetz malautia mala, per so que mals metges no siatz nompnatz”.	Do not treat ill diseases, lest bad doctors go unnamed.
E yeu ja he devesit aquest libre segontz tres capitols.	And I have already dedicated this book according to three chapters.
Comensa la divisio del libre, e primier de la primieyra partida.	Begin the division of the book, and first of the first part.
Le primier capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, en las formas dels instrumentz e en les ferrementz dels cauteris, e de aquo que necessari es en la opperacio.	The first chapter ordered of the foot, on the forms of the instruments and on the tools of the cautery, and on what is necessary in the operation.
La divisio de la segonda partida.	The division of the second part.
Le segon capitol, de siccio e perforacio, e de ventosas, e de plaguas, e de extractio de sagetas e de semblantz ad aquelas, tot capitolat e ordenat de las formas dels instrumentz.	The second chapter, on dryness and perforation, and on cups, and on sores, and on the extraction of arrows and similar, all categorized and ordered by the forms of the instruments.
Divisio de la tersa partida.	The division of the third part.
Le tertz capitol, de restauracio e de dislocacio, e de curacio de torcio e de semblantz ad aquels; capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, e de las formas dels instrumentz.	The third chapter, on restoration and dislocation, and on the cure of扭伤和类似病症；按仪器形状分类的章节。头部涉及脚部，以及仪器的形式。
De cauteri am foc e am medicina aguda e rememoracio de la opperacio.	On the cautery with fire and with sharp medicine, and a reminder of the operation.
Am aquel comensa le tractat de tot le libre.	With that, he begins the treatise of the whole book.
Cove que yeu digua la qualitat dels juvamentz de aquel cauteri e dels noccumentz de lu, e en qual compleccio sia prohibit cauteri.	I will describe the quality of the irons of that cautery and its effects, and in which complications cauterization is prohibited.
Donc dic que·l sermo de la qualitat del juvament de cauteri e del noccument de lu es sermo lonc e prolixs, e subtil per sciensa, e secret amaguat; e ja de lu a parlat gran multitut de savis, e de lu se son desacordatz, et a mi abasta un petit dels sermons de lor, temen perlonguacio.	Therefore, I say that the discourse on the quality of the cautery iron and its effects is long and prolix, subtle by science, and secretly hidden; much has already been said about it by wise men, and they are in disagreement. It suffices me to give a small part of their sermons, fearing lengthiness.
E donc dic que cauteri comfereys a tota compleccio universalment la qual es am materia o ses materia, exceptat dos compleccios, las quals son compleccios caudas ses materia .	And thus it is said that a cautery applied to any complexion universally works on all matters or bodily substances, except for two complexes, which are complexes of solid matter.
En la compleccio cauda e secca am materia se desecordero; quar alcus dyssero que cauteri es juvatiu ad aquela, e les autres dyssero le contrari de aquel, que cauteri no es convenient en malautia la qual es per qualiditat e per siccitat, quar natura del foc es qualiditat e siccitat, e enconvenient es que malautia cauda e secca am aquo que es caut e sec sia sanada.	In the complex of solid and dry matter, dehydration occurs; for some said that a cautery is beneficial for this, while others said the opposite, that a cautery is not appropriate in illness which is due to quality and dryness, for the nature of fire is quality and dryness, and it is inappropriate that an illness that is solid and dry be healed by what is cautery and dry.
E diysec aquel que ditz le contrari de aquel, que per cauteri es fayt juvament en tota malautia cauda e secca que ve en les cors dels homes, quar quan tu comparas le cors de home e las humiditatz de lu a la compleccio del foc, atrobas le cors de home freg.	And argue against those who say the opposite, that by cautery one is cured in all solid and dry illnesses that come in the bodies of men, for when you compare the body to its humors to the complex of fire, you find the body is parched.
E yeu dic per le sermo de aquel, que esperiment aquo ja a mi alscunas vetz a descubert.	And I say according to the speech of those who have experienced this, that they have already discovered it several times through experimentation.
Mays empero no cove que vengua sobre aquo aquel que ja es exproat e excersitat en le capitol de cauteri per derier exercici, e a conogut la diversitat de la compleccio dels homes e la disposicio de las malautias en lor meteyssas, e las causas de aquelas, e·ls accidentz de lor, e l’espasi del temps de aquelas.	But I do not claim that it comes to me as one who has already been experienced and exercised in the capital of cautery by recent exercise, and who knows the diversity of human complexions and the disposition of illnesses in their manifestations, and the causes of those, and the accidents related to them, and the space of time for those.
Mays en las autras compleccios, no es sobre vos temor, e majorment en las malautias fregas e humidas, quar ja totz les metges se son acordatz sobre aquels, e no so desecordatz en le juvament am cauteri en aquelas.	In other complications, there is no need for you to fear, and especially in the wet and inflammatory diseases, for all doctors are agreed on those, and do not differ in using a cautery in them.
E sapiatz, filhs, que del secret de curacio per cauteri am foc e de la bontat de lu, so sobre cauteri am medicina comburent, es quar le foc es simple, la accio del qual no perven sino al membre le qual es cauterizat e no notz al autre membre am lu ajustat sino am petit nocument.	And I say, children, that concerning the secret of curing by cautery with fire and its goodness, about the burning medical cautery, it is because the fire is simple, and its action reaches only the member being cauterized and causes no great harm to other members in contact.
Mays la accio de medicina comburent perven ad aquel en les membres le qual de lu alunhat, e fort leu fa venir en le membre malautia de dificil sanacio e fort leu ausit.	But the action of the burning medical cautery reaches that part in the member which it touches, and greatly causes illness in the member that is diseased and difficult to heal.
Mays le foc, per la sua sublimitat e de la sua substancia bontat, no fa aquo sino que superfluisca E ja es a nos conogut per experiment e per longitut de servitut de studi am l’art sobre le veritat de las causas; e per aquo yeu so excusat de la longitut del sermo E si no fos que no es legut al mieu libre en aquest pausero a vos secret amaguat am le foc, e la qualitat de la operacio de lu en les cors e de la sieua expulcio per la qual expellis las malautias, am sermo philosophic demostratiu, le qual siria acuit en las vostras pessas.	But fire, by its sublimity and the goodness of its substance, does nothing but superfluous things. And we are already known for this through experience and long service to the study of the art concerning the true causes; and for this reason, I am excused for the length of my discourse. If it were not that it is not written in my liberty in this pause, and that you know a secret about the fire, and the quality of its operation on the bodies and the way by which you expel diseases, then this discourse would be philosophical and demonstrative, which would be acute for your minds.
E sapiatz, filhs, que els se desacordan del temps en le qual es convenient far cauteri e pausan le milhor temps de primaveyra.	And be wise, children, that they do not agree on the time at which it is convenient to make a cautery and pause in late spring.
E yeu dic que cauteri es convenient en tot temps, per so que le nocument per le temps accident es submergit en le juvament de aquo que am le cauteri es atirat, e majorment si le cauteri es per dolors o de dolors necessaries, fortz e fistinas, las quals no suffertan tarditat per so que es temut de aquelas que vengua malicia, que es major que petit nocument entrant per lo temps.	And I say that a cautery is convenient at all times, because the damage caused by the accident of time is submerged in the youth of what is burned by the cautery, and especially if the cautery is for pains or necessary pains, strong boils, which do not suffer delay because it is feared that those that come from evil intent are greater than small damage entering through time.
E aysso no catz en vostras pessas, o, filhs, aquo no estiman sino le poble vulguar e les fols metges, so es que ad aquela malautia que es sanada per cauteri no es redicio tot temps, e pausan aquel consequen.	And this is not good in your feet, children, for they only consider the common people and the foolish doctors, because in that illness which is cured by a cautery it is not convenient all the time, and they pause that consequence.
E la causa no es ges ayssi quo els cuydan per aquo, quar cauteri no es sino en loc de medicina la qual altera la compleccio e esicca las humiditatz las quals son causa per que veno las dolors.	And the cause is not thus because they care for this, for a cautery is not other than in a place of medicine which alters the composition and dries the humors which are the cause of the venous pains.
Mays empero cauteri superflueys sobre la medicina per volicitat de la sua valitut e vertut de la sua operacio e grandesa del sieu senhor.	Yet, however, an excessive cautery over the medicine for the sake of its efficacy and virtue of its operation and greatness of its lord.
E es possible que la sua malautia retorne en alcuna hora del temps, segon la compleccio del malaute e la locacio de la sua malautia, e la vertut de lu, e aquo que es preparat en le cors de lu de la agreguacio de las superfluitatz en lu, e aquo que es pervengut a lu en la sua acquisicio en viandas e semblantz de aquelas causas; sino que la malautia en la qual sia aministrat cauteri sia malautia subtil en membre de paucas superfluitatz e humiditatz, ayssi cum cauteri de dent per dolor e semblantz ad aquel, possible es que en lu no retorne aquela dolor, mays aquo se fa en petitz.	It is possible that the patient's illness may return at some point in time, according to the complexity of the illness, its location, the virtue of the individual, and what is prepared within the body through the accumulation of superfluous substances, or what is acquired by the body in terms of foods and similar causes; but if the illness in which a cautery is administered is a subtle illness in a member with few superfluous substances and humidity, like a dental cautery for pain and similar to that, it is possible that such pain will not return, more so as this is done in small amounts.
E mays sermo vulgar es que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, e es sermo dreyturier, no ad aquo que els entendo en lu, quar els crezo que no es curacio que aprofieyta am medicina ni am autra causa aprop cauteri.	The vulgar saying is that the cautery is the last remedy of medicine, and it is a saying of doctors, not what we understand by it, for I believe it is not a cure that helps either medicine or any other cause close to the cautery.
E la causa es en contrari de aquo; e la entencio que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina no es sino quan administram las manieyras de curacio en alcunas malautias, e aquelas medicinas no conferieysso, e aprop en la fi de la causa aministra hom cauteri, e aprofieyta ad aquela.	The cause is the opposite; and I understand that the cautery is the last remedy of medicine only when one has administered the methods of cure for some illnesses, and those medicines have not been effective, and near the end of the illness, one administers the cautery, which then helps.
E lahoras de aqui cat16 que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, no segon la entencio la qual entendo les vulgars e trops dels fols metges.	And at this point, the last remedy of medicine is the cautery, not according to the understanding which I understand the vulgar and most of the foolish doctors.
E diyssero les antics que cauteri am aur es milhor que cauteri am ferr, e no diyssero aquo sino per la equalitat del aur e sublimitat de la sua sustancia.	And the ancients said that a gold cautery is better than an iron one, and they did not say this only because of the equality of gold and the sublimity of its substance.
E diyssero que le loc de cauteri no fa brac, cum aquo no sia absolutament vertat, quar yeu ja he aquo proat e he atrobat que aquel no fa aquo sino en alcus cors ses les autres, e cauteri am aquel es bo e milhor que am ferr ayssi quo els diyssero; mays empero quan tu fas cauteri am foc am de aur, no es a tu declarat, quar es egnit segon la quantitat que tu vols per la rugor de l’aur, e quar prepara a recebre freg; e si ajustas sobre lu ignicio se fon l’aur per le foc, e caso en le foc alcunas laminas per que le artifex catz per la occupacio de aquel.	And they said that the place for cautery does not burn, since it is not absolutely perfect; for I have already proved and examined that it does not do this in all bodies as others do. A gold cautery is good and better than iron, as they say; but when you make a cautery with fire of gold, it is not up to you to declare, because it ignites according to the quantity you want due to the hardness of the gold, and prepares to receive fire; if you adjust over the ignition, the gold melts by the fire, and some sheets are cast into the fire for the craftsman to catch from that.
E per aquo es fayt cauteri am ferr deves nos pus leugerament e pus propdanament a rectitut de operacio.	And for this, when making a cautery with iron, you should touch it more lightly and more precisely to the correct position.
E yeu ja he ordenat aquest capitol en le cauteri segon capitols, et he ordenat aquels del cap entro les pes, per so que aleugo le demandant aquo que vol de lu.	And I have already ordered this chapter on the cautery according to chapters, and I have ordered those of the foot in the leg, so that I delay the patient what he wants from me.
De cauteri de dolor de cap per frigiditat e humiditat.	Of the cautery for head pain due to cold and humidity.
Le capitol primier.	The first chapter.
Aquesta cauterizacio confereys a la humiditat e frigiditat sobre le servel accident de la qual so doas causas, so es causa de soda e multitut de flux raumatic, apelat corissa, del cap a las partidas dels huelhs e de las aurelhas fluent, e multitut de dormir, e de dolor de dentz e del guolayro, e universalment de tota malautia que ve per fregiditat, ayssi cum paraliticament, sodo e apoplexio, e semblantz en aquelas malautias.	This cautery addresses the cold and humidity over the servel accident of which there are two causes, these being the cause of rheumatism and various pains in the head, from the forehead to the ears flowing, as well as many sleep disorders, toothache, and giddiness, and generally all illnesses that come through coldness, such as paralytic conditions, rheumatism, and apoplexy, and similar symptoms in those diseases.
La forma de aquesta cauterizacio es aquesta, que primieyrament comandes al malaute que sia evacuat am medicina lacsativa le cap mondificant, per tres o per quatre nueytz, segon que exhigeys la vertut del malaute e la edat de lu e la sua costuma.	The form of this cautery is as follows: Primarily, you command the patient to be evacuated with a saline medicine for three or four nights, according to the strength of the patient's condition, their age, and their habits.
E aprop comanda li que raza le sieu cap am razor, e aprop fay aquel sezer entre las tuas mas sobre una banca cayrada e que pause las suas mas sobre le pietz sieu.	And then command him to shave his head with a razor, and place that razor between your hands on a sloping bench and let his hands rest on his own foot.
E aprop pausa la razit de la tua palma aprop le pous sobre la razit del nas entre les huels sieus.	And place the razor from your palm near the throat between his heels.
Mays empero, cum le tieu dit del mieg loc es pervengut, signa aquel loc am tenta, e aprop igneys le cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma:	More over, since the right place has been determined, mark that place with a point, and then heat the olive oil cautery, which is in this form:
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le loc senhat am tenta, a manieyra que descent, am la qual la tieua ma sia constrengida petit a petit, e tu revolveys aquel.	And place that cautery over the marked spot with a point, in such a way that it descends gradually, and you rotate it.
E aprop leva la tua ma leugerament e reguarda le loc, e si veses ja del os esser descubert alcuna quantitat del cap, ayssi cum la quantitat de gra de errs, lahoras eleva la tua ma, e si no torno la tua ma am aquel ferr, am autre de aquel, si es enfrigidat, entro que sia vist del os aquo que yeu he dit a tu.	And lift your hand lightly and look at the spot, and if you see any part of the bone being uncovered by a small amount of oil, as much as a grain of pepper, then lift your hand. If not, return your hand to that cautery or another, if it is cooled, and wait until something is visible on the bone as I have said to you.
E aprop pren un petit de sal e disolveys aquel sobre le loc e leyssa aquel per tres jorns.	And take a little salt and dissolve it over the spot, and leave it there for three days.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto enbegut en boder e leyssa aquel sobre lu entro que sia destrusida la scara del foc.	Then place your hand over the inflamed groin area, leaving the other one on the inside where the fire scar has been destroyed.
E aprop cura le loc am anguent tetrafarmacon entro que sia sanat.	Then apply the ointment of tetra pharmacon to the area until it is healed.
E ja diyssero que quant la plagua roman uberta, tant mielhs geta le brac, per que es milhor e mays juvatiu.	And we have already said that when the wound is opened wide, it heals better, because it is better and more beneficial.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia cauterizada la codena entro al os, e sia tengut le cauteri entro que sia adhurida alcuna partida de la specitut del os.	And some of them say that the knee should be cauterized inside the bone, and that the cautery should be left until it has ignited some part of the bone.
E aprop sia ras aquo que es adhust del os, e aprop sia curat.	Then scrape away what is charred from the bone, and then treat it.
E diyssero autres que am lo cauteri pervengua al derier, entro que enprema en le os forta enprecio entro que le os caga, e aquesta es la forma de alphecati petit:	And others say that the cautery should reach the marrow, pressing firmly on the bone until it cools, and this is the method of Alphécatti.
E estiman de aquel loc expiran la vapors del cap.	And they believe that from that area, the vapors of the head expire.
E sia tenguda la plagua uberta per lonc temps, e aprop sia curada entro que sia consolidada.	And keep the wound open for a long time, and then treat it until it is healed and consolidated.
Mays a mi no so vistas aquestas doas specias de cauteri de tot, sino en alcus homes segon via de temor; e layssa aquel, deves mi, milhor es am salut, quan es; quar le cap es develitat per solucio de continuitat de lu ayssi cum havem testificat en les autres membres, e majorment quan le cap del malaute es de freul natura.	But I have not seen these two types of cautery in all, except in some men according to fear; leave that one, I advise you, it is better for health when possible; as the head is developed by the solution of continuity of the same kind as we have testified in other members, especially when the head of the patient is of cold nature.
E la specia de cauteri primieyra es mays salva e milhor deves mi; e de aquela husi e am aquela obra am salut.	And the first type of cautery is safer and better, I advise you; use that one and do so for health.
Capitol segon.	Capitalize second.
Del cauteri del cap.	Of the cautery of the head.
Quan en tot le cap accideys dolor cronica e longua e aquo es en le malaute prolonguat, e usa de gerras e de cochias e de capipurges e de emplaustres e de guatz e de cadels e de gualinas e de semblantz, e majorment si ja es cauterizat am un cautere le qual recontam e no aprofieyta a lu deguna de aquelas causas, lahoras considera quar si le cap del malaute es de fort creacio en la sua natura; e no es freul et atroba mot gran freg, lahoras aquel cauterisa am autra cauteri dejos aquel un pauc.	When in the whole head chronic and long-lasting pain occurs, and this is prolonged in the patient, and he uses bandages, pillows, head poultices, plasters, compresses, hot water bottles, and similar remedies, and especially if the head has already been cauterized with a cautery which does not relieve him of any of these causes, consider whether the head of the patient is of strong constitution in its nature; and if it is not cold nor finds much pain, then that cautery should be replaced by another.
E aprop cauterisa aquel sobre le corn del sieu cap am cauteri entro que la codena es partida.	And then cauterize that on the top of his head between where the vein is divided.
Incisa la codena e sia descuberta del os la quantitat la qual havem recontat e cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en la partida deriera del cap en le loc le qual es apelat vas, — e es aquel loc en le qual es pausada ventosa.	Incise the vein and the quantity at the mouth which we have counted, and cauterize that with a cautery at the rear part of the head in the place which is called vas, — and this is the place where suction is applied.
Et alleuja la tua ma en aysso, e no descobras le os, quar le malaute per aquo atroba mot gran dolor diversa de la dolor de totz les autres cauteris del cap.	And lift your hand here, and do not uncover the mouth, for the patient finds great pain different from the pain of all other head cauterizations.
E yeu diyre aquest cauteri en son loc, quar cove que·l cauteri am le qual so cauterisatz les corns del cap e le occiput es pus subtil cauteri que aquel am le qual es cauterisat le mieg loc del cap; e aquesta es la forma de lu.	And I will say this cauterization in its place, for I know that the cauterization with which one cauterizes the horns of the head and the occiput is a finer cauterization than that with which the middle part of the head is cauterized; and this is the form of it.
Capitol ters.	Top of the head.
De cauterisacio de emigranea no-antiqua.	On the cauterization for old migraine.
Quan endeve en la partida del cap dolor sodo, o es stenduda dolor entro al uelh, sia evacuat am medicinas le cap mondificantz, e sia aministrada l’autra curacio, la qual yeu he dita en las devesios de las malautias; e tot no aprofieyta, lahoras cauterisacio en lu es en dos manieyras: o cauterisacio am medicina acuta comburent, o am ferr.	When there is a sharp pain at the back of the head, or a dull pain between the ears, the head should be treated with purgative medicines, and then the other treatment I have described for diseases should be administered; and if this does not help, cauterization in that area can be performed in two ways: either with a burning sharp medicine, or with iron.
Mays cauteri am medicina comburent es que tu prenguas una dolsa de alh, e escorgas aquela e abcindas las extremitatz de lu de amdos les caps.	May cautery in medicine that burns you take a hot coal, and extract that and bind the extremities of it from both ends.
E aprop incideys le loc de la dolor en la templa am una lanceta lada entro que sia en lu feyt loc dejos la codena, entro que sia occultada.	And then apply the place of the pain in the temple with a lancet laid into it, and let the needle be concealed.
E aprop strenh sobre lu am stopada per descent constreccio, e layssa aquel per le spazi de tres horas; e aprop deslia le e tratz le alh, e laysa la plagua per dos o per tres jorn, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto submergit en boder entro que le loc fassa brac.	And then strengthen it by stopping the descent by compression, and let it be for the space of three hours; and then draw out the cloth, and leave the wound for two or three days, and then place it over a small opening submerged in balsam until the area heals.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then cure that with ointment until it is healed.
E si tu voys, fe aquo am alcunas medicinas comburentz las quals yeu he scriutas en le douse tractat de medicinas comburentz.	And if you speak, use those medicines that burn which I have written in the second treatise of burning medicines.
Mays la cauterisacio am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: igneys per cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	May the cautery be made according to this manner: heat by cautery of which this is the form:
e es apelat claus clavilhs, quar le cap de lu es ayssi cum forma de clavel en le qual es alcuna curvitat, e·n le mieg loc de lu es eminensia petita.	and it is called a key clamp, for the head of it is thus shaped like a key, and in the middle part there is a small projection.
E aprop pausa sobre loc de la dolor, e rete la tua ma — per que no sia adhurida la arceria la qual es dejos — e revol le ferr petit a petit am velocitat.	And then place your hand over the location of the pain, so that the artery which is left is not adhered, and gently rotate the small iron bit gradually.
E si la quantitat de lu que es adhurida per la specitut de la codena ayssi quo la maytat de lu, e elava la tua ma per so que la arteria no sia adhurida la qual es dejos, per so que no vengua flux de sanc.	And if the quantity that is adhered by the bite of the needle is as great as its thickness, and lift your hand so that the artery which is left is not adhered, so that there be no flow of blood.
E aprop enbibeys coto en aygua de sal e pausa aquel sobre le loc, e layssa aquel per tres dias; e aprop pausa coto mulhat am boder, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then immerse it in salt water and place it over the area, leave it there for three days; and then place it over a warm cloth, and cure it with ointment until it is healed.
E si voys, cauterisa am la extremitat del cutellari segon cauteri, e guarda te de incisio de arteria en aquesta emigranea propriament no-antiqua.	And if you do, cauterize at the tip of the scalpel according to the cautery, and guard yourself from cutting the artery in this not-very-old migraine.
Capitol quart.	Capitol quart.
De cauterizacio d’emigranea antiqua.	Of the cautery for old migraine.
Quan tu curas emigranea am aquo que havem dit de la curacio precedent, e aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias, e no aprofieyta la curacio, e vezes per la malautia que no abasta a lu aquo que havem dit del primier cauteri am medicina o del cauteri am foc, lahoras cove que tu igniscas le cauteri cutellar entro que sia albificat, pus que significas sobre le loc de la dolor am linha de longuesa de la qual sia la maytat del dit, o quays aquel; e depausa la tua ma per una veguada e strenh aquela entro incidiscas la arceria e pervengua entro al os.	When you cure migraine as we have said in the previous treatment, and as we have said in the divisions of diseases, and if the treatment does not improve, and sometimes due to the disease it is insufficient what we have said about the first cautery with medicine or the cautery with fire, then you should ignite the surgical cautery when it is white-hot. Place your line on the area of pain equivalent to its thickness, or place it there; then lift your hand for a moment and strongly apply that part without incising the artery and enter into the bone.
Empero necessari es a tu que guardes de la continuacio de la mandibula, la qual es mauguda deves la masticacio, e que le lacert no sia adhurit e le nervi le qual mau aquela, e que no s’endevengua espasme.	But you must guard against the continuity of the jaw, which is used for chewing, and ensure that the cartilage is not adhered and the nerves which supply it are not damaged, and that no spasm occurs.
E si es sobre la custodia e cautela de flux de sanc de l’arteria que es abciza, quar en la abcizio de lu es temor, e majorment ad aquel le qual ignora aquo que fa e no es studios e esproat; e layssa la operacio en lu al comensament.	And if it is about the custody and caution of the flux of sand from the artery that is amputated, for in its amputation there is fear, especially for one who ignores what he does and is not studious or cautious; and leaves the operation to chance.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio del regiment de flux de sanc accident de la arceria segon la sieua manieyra, en le sieu loc de aquest libre.	And I will return to recall the regulation of the flow of sand incident to the artery according to its manner, in the place of this free text.
E si veses de aquesta malautia que no abaste aquest cauteri e veses le cors del malaute tollerable, cauteriza aquel en le mieg loc del cap ayssi cum havem recontat, e cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And if you see this illness that does not allow the use of this cautery and you find the patient's condition tolerable, cauterize it in the middle of the foot as we have recounted, and cure the wound until it is healed.
E si voys, aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le capitol de streccio de arceria am cauteri havent dos cotels, e es milhor cauterizacio aquesta e mays conferent.	And if you see, administer the cautery which we have said in the chapter on the stretching of the artery with cautery, using two knives. This cautery is better and more appropriate.
Capitol .v.	Chapter V.
De cauterisacio de las dolors de aurelhas.	Of cauterization for ear pain.
Quan en la aurelha ve dolor per freg e es curat am causas lacsativas e am l’autra curacio la qual he dita en la divisio, e no es remauguda la dolor, lahoras igneys le cauteri, e es aquest le qual ha nom puncta, del qual aquesta es la forma:	When there is pain in the ear due to cold and it is treated with cautery and another treatment as mentioned in the division, and the pain does not subside, then apply the cautery with fire, which is called the point. This is its form:
E aprop puncta aprop la ignicio, e sia menat al enviro de tota la aurelha ayssi cum roda es revolguda, o en le circuit de quascuna essemps si la dolor es en quascuna.	Then place the point near the beginning, and move it around the entire ear as if rolling a wheel, or in the circuit of each part if the pain is in that part.
Alonga te am le cauteri de la razit de la aurelha pauc a pauc pus que aias senhat le loc am tenta.	Slowly move the cautery along the edge of the ear gradually after you have touched the area with your finger.
E si le cauteri de detz puntz en tota aurelha, e quays aquela, e aprop cura les locz entro que sian sanatz.	And if the cautery of these points on the entire ear, and leave it there, then continue to treat the areas until they are healed.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter VI.
De cauterizacio de turtura.	Of cauterization for tetanus.
Turtura la qual es curada e am cauterizacio no es sino de las specias las quals veno per flecma, segon que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias.	The torture which is cured by cautery is not but of the species which venom through phlegm, according to what we have said in the divisions of illnesses.
Esquiva cauterizacio de la specia que endeve per siccacio o per spasme del nervi.	Avoid cautery of the species that proceeds through drying or spasms of the nerves.
Quan tu curas aquela specia de turtura am jerras e capipurgi e guarguarismes, e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas le malaute am tres cauteris: la i deves la razit de la aurelha, e·l segon un petit dejos le sieu templar, e le ters deves la conjunccio de doas labias.	When you cure that species of torture by jarring, cerebrospinal fluid drainage, and conservations, and your cure does not agree, then when you cauterize the illness with three cauteries: the first you place on the edge of the ear, the second a little below its temple, and the third on the junction of two lips.
E pausa lo tieu cauteri per le contrari de la partida malauta, quar mollificacio no ve sino en la partida que apar sana.	And place your cautery opposite the site of the illness, for softening occurs only at the site that appears healthy.
E la forma de cauterisacio es que cauterizas aquel am le cauteri en le dreyt de la extremitat de la aurelha pus sobirana un petit sobre le corn del cap, e en le templar autre, la longuesa del qual sia segon la longitut del dit pous, e depausa la tua ma am cauteri entro que sia comburida la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena.	And the method of cautery is to apply it along the outer part of the base of the ear just above a small spot on the top of the head, and another on the temple, the length of which should be according to the length of the thumb, and then place your hand over the cautery until the quantity of the species of scorpion is completely burned.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri, e es specia del cutellari, la forma del qual es denant mesa.	And this is the form of the cautery, and it is special to the barber-surgeon, the form of which is shown before.
Mays empero pus subtil es que aquel un pauc ayssi co vesas; e cove que cotel en lu de superflua groceza un pauc.	But more subtle is that when you see it slightly thus; and cut there a little less out of superfluous crudity.
E aprop cura le loc am aquo que es denant procezit entro que sia sanat.	And place the area where it is shown to be treated until it is healed.
Capitol .vii.	Capitol. vii.
De cauterizacio de apoplextia antiqua.	On the cautery treatment for ancient apoplexy.
Quan apoplextia es antiquada e curas aquela am aquo que havem dit e no confereys la tua medicacio e le malaute no ha febre, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris: sobre totz les corn del sieu cap; e am cauteri e le mieg loc del cap, ayssi cum havem dit; e am cauteri en le coguot.	When apoplexy is ancient and you treat it as we have said, and the patient does not have fever, then cautery treat it with four cauteries: especially on all corners of his head; and with a cautery on the middle part of the head, as we have said; and on the scrotum.
E la manieyra del cauteri es fayta segon que es desus dit.	And the method of the cautery is made as described above.
E ja es cauterizat sobre la boca del estomac; e es mays derier; e aprop sia curat am aquo que procezeys.	And it has already been cautery-treated on the mouth of the stomach; and it is more posterior; and place it to be treated as you proceed.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter VIII.
De cauterizacio de obblivio fayta per flacma.	Cauterization of oblivion performed by flame.
Cove que sian donatz al malaute en le comensament jerras grans e pilulas le servel mondificantz.	Cover what is given to the patient at the beginning with large pieces and pills of the refreshing medicine.
E aprop ras le cap tot del malaute e pausa sus le coguot de lu emplaustre de cetre descrit en le tractat dels emplastres.	Then cover the head of the patient entirely and place it on the chest as described in the treatise on plasters.
E pausa aquel alcunas veguadas, quar aquel es manieyra de cauteri.	Then place it for a few moments, as this is the method of cautery.
E fay aquo segon aquel meteys orde le qual ja he dit.	Then do so according to that method and order as I have already said.
E donc si per aqueles sanat bo es; e sino, lahoras fay a lu tres cauteris en la deriera partida de sieu cap, les quals sian deysendentz de la partida pus sobirana del cap entro a la partida pus dejos del col.	And therefore if it is cured by those good means; and otherwise, then make three cautery marks on the rear part of his head, which should be descending from the upper part of the head to the lower part of the neck.
E pausa entre quascun cauteri la grossetut del dit, e aprop cura lo cauteri am aquo que es procedit.	Then place the thickness of your finger between each cautery mark, and proceed to treat the cautery as described.
Mays si tu vos addicio e le malaute es aquo tollerant, lahoras fay a lu cauteri en le mieg loc; e si voys major addicio, lahora cauteriza aquel sobre les dos corns.	If you have added more and the illness is tolerable, then apply the cautery in the middle place; if you have greater addition, then cauterize that above the two horns.
Aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat; e sia le cauteri olivar segon la forma denant donat.	Then cure that within which is healed; and let the cautery be olive-shaped according to the form given above.
Capitol .ix.	Capitol.ix.
De cauterisacio de parazili e de mollificacio de tot le cors.	On the cautery for the palate and the softening of the entire body.
Cove que tu procesiscas en mondificacio del cap am jerras e am aquo que havem dit; e aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap, e am cauteri sobre totz les corns del cap, e am cauteri sobre la deriera partida de lu, e am tres cauteris sobre les spondils del col.	First, when you process the softening of the head with stones and as we have said; then near the head of the patient, apply a cautery in the middle of the head, and with a cautery over all the horns of the head, and with a cautery over the back part of it, and with three cauteries over the vertebrae of the neck.
E si es necessari en la malautia de mollificacio del cors de trops aquel e les malautes tollerantz e la malautia es fort, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e dererament am cauteri entro que sia comborit de la codena mot de lu, e aleva la tieua ma.	And if it is necessary in the illness of softening of the body to add more and the illnesses are tolerable and the illness is severe, then apply the cautery with four cauteries over the vertebrae of the back, and behind that with a cautery where the spine meets it, and raise your hand.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat, e aquest sia cauteri olivar.	And then cure that which is inside so that it is healed, and this be done with an olive cautery.
Capitol .x.	Capitol.
De cauterisacio de epilemcia.	Of the cautery treatment for epilepsy.
No es cauterizat le epilemtic sino aquella epilemcia es per flecma.	No is it cauterized the epileptic, but only if the epilepsy is due to phlegm.
E donc cove que mondifiques le cervel de lu al comensament de lu am yeras e am l’autra curacio la qual havem dicta en la divisio quan le malaute es gran e es tollerant la exceperacio de las medicinas.	And therefore make certain that you modify the brain at its beginning, both on one side and on the other, as we have described in the division when the illness is large and tolerant of the exception of the medicines.
E si es enfant le qual no sufferte las medicinas, lahoras aministra guarguarissmes e mastiguatoris le servel mondifican, denant aquo per motz dias, am bonifficacio de las viandas.	And if it is a child who does not tolerate the medicines, then administer guar gums and masticators to the servant for several days beforehand, with improvement of the food.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en le mieg loc del cap segon la manieyra precedent, e am autre cauteri en le occiput de lu, e sobre quascun corn del cap sieu cauterisa.	And then place the cautery near the head of the patient, and apply one cautery in the middle of the head according to the preceding method, and another cautery at the occiput, and over each corner of the head he should cauterize.
E si le malaute es fort e es tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteris les quals he ditz, en havent paraliticament e mollificacio del cors sobre les spondils del col e les spondils del dos.	And if the pain is strong and tolerable, then apply the cautery as mentioned, while keeping the body in a state of paralysis and softening over the vertebrae of the neck and the vertebrae of the back.
E sia cauteri olivar segon qu’es precedit.	And use an olive cautery as described.
Mays si le malaute es enfant, lahoras pausa cauteri subtil segon aquesta manieyra.	And if the pain is in a child, then use a subtle cautery in this manner.
Capitol .xi.	Capitol. xi.
De cauterizacio de melencolia.	Of the cautery for melancholy.
Quan las causas de melencolia so humiditatz corrompudas e flacma gros, lahoras cauteriza aquel am les cauteris les quals havem ditz en le havent paralisi.	When the causes of melancholy are corrupt humors and large phlegm, then use the cautery as described, while keeping the body in a state of paralysis.
E si la causa de melencolia es superfluitat declinant a melencolia, e le cors del malaute es humit, lahoras da ha beure aquo que mundifica le cervel de lu segon aquo que ha precedut en la divisio.	And if the cause of melancholy is excess moisture turning to melancholy, and the body of the patient is humid, then give him to drink that which purifies his brain according to what was described in the division.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop fay tortora decentment fayta de li sobre le cercle, e aprop depausa aquela en le mieg loc del cap.	And place your hand on the head of the patient, and properly make a tortora mark on him over the circumference, and then pause that one in the middle of the head.
E le malaute sia sesent cayrat, e sia tengut de tota partida.	And if the patient is senseless and is held from all sides.
E aprop pausa liniment; et es pus digne de boder antic de ovelhas.	And then apply a liniment; and it is more worthy to be rubbed on the backs of sheep.
E escalfa aquel sobre le foc per calefaccio temprada per mesura, le qual le dit sufferta quan es mes en lu.	And heat it over the fire for mild heating by measure, which the patient can tolerate when more is applied.
E aprop vuo’ aquel en le mieg loc del cap de lu en le cercle, e leysa lu entro que sia enfregidat.	And then place it in the middle of his head in the circle, and let him remain until it is rubbed.
E fay aquo am le malaute en tota semmana una veguada, am le autre regiment de lu bo entro que sia sanat; o si vols, cauteriza aquel fazen petitz puntz segon lo mays de lu, sino que tenguas la ma am un cauteri ayssi ordenat: aquesta es specia de cauteri la qual humecta le cervel am equalitat.	And do this for the patient every week once, and use the other regimen until he is healed; or if you wish, make a cautery of it by making small points according to its size. Otherwise, keep your hand on an appropriately ordered cautery: this is a kind of cautery which you moisten equally.
E aprop pausa aquel coto enbegut en boder o en grays de gualina.	And then place that cloth in oil or in gray matter of linen.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter XII.
De cauterisacio de aygua descendent en le huel.	On the cautery using water flowing down.
Quan a tu es declarat le comensament de aygua en le huel per les senhals les quals yeu he ditz en la divisio, lahoras comensa e dona en beure al malaute aquo que mondifique le cap de lu, e guarda aquel de totas humiditatz.	When you have declared the beginning of water in the womb by the signs which I have said in the division, then begin and give to drink to the patient what modifies his head, and keep the other free from all moisture.
E fay aquel suzar en banh en degu per alcus jorns.	And let it sit in bathwater for a few days.
E aprop comanda a lu que raza le sieu cap, e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap; e aprop cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre dos templas si es le comensament de ysement de aygua en dos huels, o de la un latz si es comensamen de l’aygua en un huel.	Then command him to rub his head, and cauterize that with a cautery in the middle of the head; then cauterize that with two cauteries on the temples if it is the beginning of hydramnios of water in two wombs, or on one temple if it is the beginning of water in one womb.
Incideys am cauteri totas las venas e arcerias las quals so dejos la codena; e sian les cauteris en aquela lonh en la latitut de las templas.	Apply the cautery to all veins and arteries which are left unclosed; let the cauteries be in that length along the temples.
E guarda te de fluxs de sanc quan es cauterizat; e si veses de lu fluxs de sanc, osta le am alcuna medicina, la qual es a tu possible.	And guard against flows of blood when it is cauterized; and if you see flows of blood, apply some medicine which is within your reach.
E yeu vindre am savieza la qual es en extraccio de arcerias e am abscizio de aquelas e cautela de fluxs de sanc.	And I will come forth with wisdom which is in the extraction of arteries and in the cutting off of those, and caution about flows of blood.
E alcunas vetz es cauterizat en le cervitz dejos dos osses am dos cauteris dererament produzitz.	And sometimes it is cauterized on the neck leaving two bones thoroughly produced.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter XIII.
De cauterizacio de lacrimas antiquas.	On the cauterization of ancient tears.
Quan lacrimas dels huels so antiquas assuduament e per las venas e arterias las quals so en le loc manifest del cap defora e es verificat que aquo es superfluitatz frejas flecmatiquas, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri le qual havem recontat en le capitol de comensament de aygua cazent en les huels, e am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos templas, e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos osses.	When tears from the feet are ancient and often occur through the veins and arteries which are in the manifest location of the head above, it is verified that these are superfluous phlegmatic fluids. Then cauterize that area with a cautery as we have recounted in the chapter on starting water flow in the ankles, and with a cautery in the middle of the head, and with two cauteries on the neck leaving two temples, and with two cauteries on the neck leaving two bones.
E si indigeyses de addicio, lahoras cauteriza aquel en tot latz de la coa del huel sobre la extremitat del sobrecilh am petit cauteri.	And if you need to add a cautery, then cauterize that area at the entire length of the sole of the foot near the end of the brow with a small cautery.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter XIV.
De cauterizacio de fetor de nas.	On the cauterization of nasal foul odor.
Quan tu medicas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no aprofieyta la tua medicacio, lahoras tu aparelha e dona en beure al malaute las cochias per tres noytz; e aprop ras le cap de lu, e cauteriza le am cauteri migier am cauteri olivar.	When you treat that person as we have said in the division and your treatment is not effective, then you prepare and give to drink to the patient cherries for three nights; then shave his head, and cauterize the area with a cautery made of iron and another of olive wood.
E aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri clavelh am dos cauteris sobre les dos sobrecilhs dejos les cabels un petit.	Then cauterize that area with a cautery made of iron on both supraorbital regions, leaving the hair slightly singed.
E guarda te de la arceria que no incindas aquela.	And be careful not to burn that area.
E del cauteri clavilh aquesta es la forma.	And this is the form of the cautery made of iron.
Capitol .xv.	Capitol. XV.
De cauteri de mollificacio de palpebras dels huels.	Of the cautery for the eyelids of the heels.
Quan la palpebra del huel es mollificada per malautia o per humiditat, lahoras cauteriza aquela palpebre1 am un cauteri am aquest cauteri lunar; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When the eyelid of the heel is softened due to disease or humidity, then cauterize that eyelid with a cautery made from this lunar cautery; and this is its form:
E si vos, cauteriza aquel sobre les dos sobrecils un petit am dos cauteris en tota partida, e sian elonguatz de las timporas.	And if you cauterize that area on both supraorbital regions a little with two cauteries in total, making them long from the temples.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la quantitat del sobrecil.	And the length of each cautery should be according to the size of the sore.
E no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri, mays segon la quantitat que la tersa partida de la palpebre sia adhurida.	And do not press too hard with your hand on the cautery, but according to the extent that the inner part of the eyelid is touched.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter XVI.
De cauteri de la palpebre del huel quan les pels so convertitz a las partidas dedintz e punho le huel.	Of the cautery for the eyelid when the skin is converted to the inner parts and fistula occurs.
Quan les pels del huel son convertitz a las partidas dedintz ayssi que pungo le huel, cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, quar cauteri o es am fer o es am medicina comburent.	When the skin of the fistula is converted to the inner parts, one must puncture the fistula. The cautery for this can be performed in two ways: either by using a cautery or by applying burning medicine.
Si am cauteri de lu am foc, comanda al malaute denant aquo que leyse les sieus pels ayssi cum aquels les quals les mundan, entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz; e si punho aquel deves le lor naysement, lahoras tu strenh les huels de lu am una benda per so que no sia maugut entro que·ls pels sian nascutz.	If the cautery is to be made with fire, command the patient to present himself before you that the skin may be cauterized as those which are cleansed, when they are prolonged and equalized; and if you puncture it, you should place it at its origin. Then strengthen the fistulas of the patient with a bandage so that they do not rupture until the skin is grown back.
Donc cum siran nascutz e engualhatz, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop senha sobre la palpebre dels huels de lu am tenta, am senhal le qual sia segon la figura de fulha de merta, e sia le comensament del senhal prop dels pels.	Then when they are born and equalized, place the head of the patient on your knee, and hold over the eyelids of the patient with a sign, which should be in the shape of a leaf of hawthorn, and is the beginning of the mark for the skin.
E aprop pausa coto enbegut en album de huou o en mucillatge de ptilli sobre le huel.	Then place the head in a pillow of cloth or on a mucilaginous substance over the eye.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu.	Then ignite the cautery of which this is the shape.
E aprop cauteriza sobre la figura la qual as senhada, petit a petit, em motas veguadas, entro que sia comburida la superficia de la codena la qual es ayssi cum fuelha de mirta, tota aparent propriament.	Then apply the cautery over the shape marked, little by little in small spots, until the surface of the wound is burned, which appears like a hawthorn leaf, entirely apparent and proper.
E senhal de sanetat de la tieua obra es que tu vegus la palpebre de l’huel ja esser contrayta e·ls pels de lu esser elevatz deves la punctura del huel.	A sign of healing from your work is that you see the eyelid of the eye now contracted and the skin around it elevated after the puncture of the eye.
E donc eleva la tua ma e laysa aquel per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eredicada la scara.	Then lift your hand and leave it there for three days, and then place it over the head between the eyebrows until the scar is healed.
E aprop cura aquela am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And after apply the ointment where it shall be healed.
Mays si retorna per les pels alcuna causa aprop lor naysement e la palpebra es mollificada, lahoras fay autra vetz le cauteri sobre aquel tot ayssi cum avias fayt primieyrament.	And if it returns through the skin for some cause near their origin and the eyelid is softened, then apply the cautery again over that area as you did first.
Mays si les pels so en la palpebra dejos, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que sia elevada al sieu loc natural e sia engualhat e que les pels no punhan le huelh.	And if the skin is on the eyelid, then apply the cautery there, lifting it to its natural place and ensuring that the skin does not remain loose.
Mays le cauteri am medicina comburent aquest es que comandes al malaute que leyse les pels entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz, e aprop sia fayta de carta de drap la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	And the cautery being medicinally burning, you command the patient to extend and equalize the skin, then make a cloth letter in the shape of a mulberry leaf.
E aprop pren de sabo conogut e de caus viva ana unc. i, o quays aquo, e aprop mescle3 aquelas causas be, e fay aquo am festinacio per so que no sia enfregidat; e aprop expandeys de aquo sobre la carta la qual es fayta ayssi cum forma de fulha de mirtra, e pausa aquel sobre la un huel od amdos; e pausa dejos le huel coto enbegut en album de huou, e el cap del malaute sia en le tieu se.	And then take a well-known and effective ointment and some vinegar. Mix these well, and prepare this mixture without rubbing it; then spread it over the cloth which is made in the shape of a mulberry leaf, and place that over one or both wounds; and leave the cloth slightly loose, with the patient's head at the top.
E pausa le dit sobre le medicina e prem aquela un petit e no la mauguas entro que lo malaute senta la mordicacio de la medicina, quar mordicacio es en lu ayssi cum de foc.	And place it on the medicine and press it a little but do not wet it inside so that the patient feels the bite of the medicine, for the bite is like that of fire.
E donc cum percevera aquo que el atrobo mordicacio, lahoras leyssa la medicina e mau aquela am le tieu dit; donc cum cessa la mordicacio, lahoras remau la medicina he lava le huel am aygua; e lahoras considera si vezes la palpebra ja es levada ayssi cum es lavada deves la costriccio am foc o am incisio, quar lahoras esta be; e si no torna sobre aquela de la medicina sobre le loc en le qual no ha empremut la medicina e no se denigra entro que sia engualhada la tua operacio e sia contrayt le huel.	And so, to perceive the bite of the cauterization, when you leave the medicine and wet that as you have said; then when the bite ceases, place the medicine again and wash it well with water; and then consider if the eyelid has already been raised, as it is washed, close it again with fire or incision, for then it is good; and if not, return to the place of the medicine where you did not press the medicine, and do not deface your operation until it is equalized.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eradicada la codena de la adhustio, e aprop cura aquel am enguent deafinicon o am autre entro que sia sanat.	And then place it on the swelling between the time that the bond of adherence is eradicated, and then treat it with a thick ointment or another method until it is healed.
E es necessari a tu, deves la tua operacio que guardes am pervigil diligencia que en le huel no caia re de la medicina, e si la palpebre aprop alscus dias es mollificada e alcuna causa dels pels punh en le huel, lahoras itera la tua medicina sobre aquel loc le qual de la palpebre es mollificat, e propriamen ayssi quo as fayt al comensament, e aprop enaviro lu entro que sia sanat.	And you must, with diligent vigilance, ensure that the medicine does not fall from your operation onto the whole. If the eyelid becomes softened in a few days or any of the skin blisters on the whole, then repeat your medicine over that area where the eyelid has softened, and do so precisely as you did at the beginning, and continue to apply it until it is healed.
E aquesta es la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	And this is the form of leaf of mistletoe.
E sapias que les huels dels homes son diversificatz segon la magnitut e la parvitat, e donc segon aquo es fayta la tua contraccio.	And know that the humors of men are diverse according to their size and smallness, and therefore according to this you should make your contraction.
E no sira amaguada la via de rectetut ad aquel al qual es studi en aquesta art.	And the way of the straight path should not be hidden from him who studies in this art.
Capitol .xvii.	Capitol. xvii.
De cauterizacio de fistula que es en le lacrimal de l’huel.	On the cautery treatment of a fistula that is in the lacrimal humor.
Quan tu curas fistula am aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquela segon aquesta manieyra: comanda al malaute que pause le cap sieu en le tieu se, e tengua le cap de lu alcun ministre entre las tieuas mas en tal manieyra que no sia maugut ni agitat am le sieu cap.	When you treat a fistula as we have said in the divisions of the maladies and do not refer to our treatment, then when you cauterize it according to this manner: command the patient to place his head in your lap, and have some minister hold his head with both hands in such a way that it is neither too tight nor agitated on his head.
E aprop pausa coto enfus en album de huou o en mucellage de ptilli sobre le huel de lu.	And then place a cloth soaked in oil or in a mucus of ptilli on the eye.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then heat the cautery of which this is the form:
le qual sia conquau, ayssi cum es forma de cana o de pena de voltor, de la una extremitat am la qual es fayta lo cauteri.	which is convex, as the form of a cane or a vuelto pin, from one end of which the cautery is made.
E si voys, sia penetrant entro a la autra extremitat.	And if it goes, penetrate into the other end.
E si vols sia sort ayssi cum tenta.	And if you want it to come out as it tries.
Mays empero aquel que es concau es milhor a la tieua obra.	But nevertheless, that which is concave is better for your work.
E aprop prem la fistula si es uberta, e tra de lu sania et exsicca aquela.	And then press the fistula if it is open, and cleanse and dry that area.
E si no es uberta, lahoras obre aquela e extratz la poyredura de lu.	And if it is not open, then open that and extract the pus from it.
E aprop pausa sobre lu le cauteri le qual sia be ignit, e te am aquel la tieua ma un petit deves le cauteri del huel a la partida del nas, per so que no erre la tua ma o le malaute sia enquietat, e lahoras pausa le cauteri en le grays del huel e corrompas aquel.	And then place the well-heated cautery on it, and with your hand hold the cautery at the end of the nose, so that your hand does not err or the patient be disoriented, and then place the cautery in the nostrils and destroy that.
E donc si al comensament del tieu cauteri perve entro al os, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera le cauteri una veguada o dos, si mestiers era; e layssa aquel ayssi per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre aquel coto am boder e enviro lu am enguent exsiccatiu entro que sia sanat.	And if at the beginning of your cautery it enters into the bone, that is good; but otherwise, then iterate the cautery one or two times, if necessary; and leave it thus for three days, and afterwards place your hand over the spot to keep it warm and apply an ointment while it heals.
Mays si eran passatz xi dias e no es sanat, lahoras pausa sobre lu medicina aguda corrosiva entro que l’os sia descubert e sia ras segon que conveneys en le sieu capitol.	And if it does not heal after ten days, then place your hand over the corrosive sharp medicine until the bone is exposed and cut as needed according to your chapter.
E es autra manieyra de cauteri de fistula la qual alscus primiers diysero: enten al loc de la fistula e fen aquela e aprop pausa en aquela fissura camaen subtil del qual es la forma de lu: E fon en aquela la quantitat de i unc de plom fundut; e te la tua ma am camaem am bona retencio, e no sia maugut le malaute per so que le plom fundut no pervengua al huel de aquel; e cove que pausas sobre le huel del malaute coto enfus en album de huou o en aygua, quar plom adhureys le loc de la fistula e sana aquela per sanacio meravilhora.	And another way to cauterize a fistula that some first say: Apply the cautery at the site of the fistula and immediately place your hand gently over the fissure, forming its shape. Pour one ounce of melted lead into this fissure; keep your hand there with good retention, so that the bad humor does not enter and prevent the melted lead from reaching the spot. Then leave your hand over the opening of the bad humor as if in a thick paste of honey or water, for the lead adheres to the site of the fistula and heals it through marvelous healing.
E si la fistula es sanada am aquo que havem dit del cauteri e de la curacio, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari aministrar trauc del nas e reduzir la fistula al cors del nas segon que vindra en son loc propri.	And if the fistula is healed as we have said regarding the cautery and the cure, that is good; and if not, then it is necessary to administer atracone of the nose and reduce the fistula to the nose's body according to its proper place.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter XVIII.
De cauterizacio de la fendedura des potz.	On the cautery of the fissure of the pus.
Motas veguadas accideysso fissuras en las labias, e majorment en las labias dels enfantz.	Spotting occurs and causes fissures in the labia, especially in the labia of children.
Donc cum tu curas aquelas fissuras am aquo que nos havem dit en las divisios e no aprofieyta la tua cura, lahoras igneys le cauteri petit cutellar segon aquesta forma que s’ensiec:	Then, since you cure those fissures as we have said in the divisions and do not prolong your cure, then heat the small surgical cautery according to this form that is shown:
E sia la conquavitat de lu segon la subtilitat de cotella.	And let its cavity be according to the subtlety of the blade.
Aprop pausa aquel init cuytadament en aquelas fissuras entro que·l cauteri pervengua al preon de las fissuras.	Then place that heated cautery over the fissures until it reaches the bottom of the fissures.
E aprop cura aquel am cerotz entro que sia sanat.	And then cure it with cerate until it is healed.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XIX.
De cauterizacio de fistula en la boca.	Of the cautery treatment for fistula in the mouth.
Quan en la razit de uvula o en le paladar o en las razitz de las dentz endeve apostema e aprop fa brac, e aprop es rompuda, e aprop es antiquada, e corr brac e es fayta fistula, e aprop tu curas aquela e no aprofieyta a curacio, lahoras cove que tu igniscas cauteri segon la quantitat que sia receubuda en la fistula, e aprop met aquel ignit en le trauc de la fistola, e te la tua ma entro que pervengua le ferr ignit al preon de lu, e al derier de lu fazen aysso una veguada o dos; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que nos havem dit de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	When an abscess forms in the uvula or on the palate or around the teeth, and after it bursts and heals, leaving behind a fistula that does not fully heal, you should then cauterize with a firebrand according to the size of the fistula. Place the ignited brand inside the fistula, keeping your hand close so that the flame reaches the entire length of the fistula. Do this one or two times. Then treat the area as we have described for other healing processes until it is fully healed.
E donc si la sania es abscindita e es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari de descubrir le loc e hostar le os corrumput segon que vindra en son capitol.	And if the abscess is incised and heals, that is good. Otherwise, it is necessary to expose the location and excise the corrupt bone as described in its chapter.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter XX.
De cauterisacio de las dentz e de mollificacio de las angivas.	Of the cautery treatment for the teeth and the softening of the gums.
Quan las angivas son mollificadas per humiditat e las dentz son maugudas, e curas aquelas am medicinas e no confereys, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra aprop aysso, enayssi que tu pauses la quanula sobre la dent e entromet en aquela le cauteri ignit festinantment, e te la tieua ma un petit entro que·l malaute cente la calor del foc a la razit de la dent esser pervenguda.	When the arteries are softened by humidity and the teeth are rotten, and you cure those with medicines without applying them, then place the patient's head in a basin of cold water, and soon light the cautery in the form which will be shown to you shortly, try that you place the quinula over the tooth and insert there the burning cautery forcefully, and have it remain just long enough for the patient's teeth to feel the heat from the fire.
E aprop leva la tua ma, e aprop itera le cauteri alcunas veguadas segon que vols.	Lift your hand, and repeatedly apply the cautery several times according to your desire.
E aprop le malaute huompla la sua boca de aygua de sal e tengua aquela per una hora, e pueys stupa aquela, quar la dent mauguda es fermada e la gengiva mollificada es strenguda e la humiditat corrompuda es exsiccada.	And then make the patient spit out salt water and hold it for an hour, after which apply a salve, as the rotten tooth is closed, the softened gum is tightened, and the corrupted humidity is dried.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI.
De cauterisacio de dolor de dent.	On the Cauterization of Tooth Pain.
Quan dolor de dent es per fregiditat, o en lu es freg o verm, o no comfereys la curacio am medicina, lahoras cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am boder de vacas, o cauteri am foc.	When tooth pain is due to cold or rot or you cannot cure it with medicine, then the cauterization in that area can be done according to two methods: either with a cow's horn cautery, or with fire.
Cauteri am boder es que tu prenguas boder de vacas e bulhas aquel en culhe de ferr , e aprop pren coto e envolopa le sobre la extremitat de la tenta, e aprop enmergeys aquel am boder bulhit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolorosa festinantment entro que sia enfregidat.	With the pointed cautery, you should take horn from cows and bulbs therefrom in the place of iron, then take some and wrap it around the tip of the needle, then immerse that with the horn bulb, and place it over the tooth in pain urgently before it is rubbed.
E aprop itera aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la vertut del foc pervengua a la razit de la dentz.	And then repeatedly apply that several times until the virtue of the fire penetrates to the root of the teeth.
E si voys, submergeys lana o coto en le boder desus dit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolent, e pausa sobre aquel ferr ignit entro que·l ferr pervengua al preon de la conquavitat de la dent.	And if wool or some cloth is immersed in the horn above mentioned, place it over the aching tooth, and hold the ignited iron over it until the iron penetrates to the root of the tooth.
Mays empero la cauterizacio am foc es que tu atendas a la quannula de eram o de ferr, e sia en le cor de lu alcuna grocesa e la acuitat del foc no pervengua a la boca del malaute.	However, the cautery with fire should be applied when there is a wart or iron, and if any large part of it is in its core, do not allow the heat of the fire to reach the root of the tooth.
E aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra, e pausa aquel sobre la dent e te la tua ma entro que·l cauteri sia enfregidat; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas quar la dolor sira remauguda o en aquel dia o en l’autre dia.	And then apply the cautery in the shape it will take, and place it over the tooth while holding your hand there until the cautery is rubbed. Do this several times so that the pain may be intensified or on that day or the next.
E cove que per empressio de aquel cauteri que·l malaute umpla la sieua boca de bon boder e tengua aquel per una hora e aprop scupa le; e aquesta es la forma del cauteri.	And ensure that when the cautery reaches the affected area, it fully opens its mouth to good measure and keep it there for about an hour; this is the form of the cautery.
E cauteriza am qual que tu voys extremittat segon que a tu es possible.	And cauterize where you feel the extremity according to what is possible.
E aquesta es la forma de la cannula:	And this is the form of the cannula:
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXII.
De cauterizacio de extrophulos.	On the cauterization of extrophy.
Quan extrophulos so de flecma e de humors fregas e no so hobedientz a digistio per medicinas e tu voys la digistio de aquelas leugerament, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri conquau la forma del qual es aquesta seguen, havent dos extremitatz hubertas per que yesca le fum deves le cauteri per l’autra extremitat, e pausa aquel ignit sobre aquel apostema una veguada, e autre si indigeyses de aquel, entro que pervengua al preon del apostema.	When extrophies are of phlegm and humors that are not responsive to digestion by medicines, and you have lightly digested them, then heat the cautery to the form which follows: having two open ends so that smoke can escape from one end, place the cautery over the abscess for one minute, and another if needed until it reaches the root of the abscess.
E si l’apostema es pauca, lahoras pausa le cauteri segon la quantitat del apostema, e aprop leyssa le per tres jorns e pausa sobre lu coto enfus en boder entro que sia remaugut aquo que·l foc ha comburit.	And if the abscess is small, then place the cautery according to the quantity of the abscess, and leave it for three days, placing it over the deepest part until what the fire has burned is sufficiently healed.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent e tentas e draps entro que sia sanat.	And then cure that by anointing and test and cloths until it is healed.
E la forma de la cannula o deu cauteri a tal es comveyter.	And the shape of the needle or cautery is as conveyed.
Capitol .xxiii.	 Chapter XXIII.
De cauterizacio de rauquiera de votz e de constriccio de ale.	On the cautery treatment for hoarseness and the constriction of throat.
Quan las humiditatz veno sobre le quanal del pulmo, e majorment quan aquo es am fregiditat de compleccio, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia evacuat al comensament am medicinas laxativas, e aprop cauteriza aquel deves la razit del golayro en le loc depremegut.	When humidities enter the channel of the lung, and especially when this is due to a complex coldness, then it is necessary that the patient be treated with medicines that act as laxatives at the beginning. Then, cauterize the vein of the gallbladder in the area where there is congestion.
E guarda te que no pervenguas am le cauteri al golayro ni no comburas de la codena de lu sino un pauc.	And be careful that you do not apply the cautery to the gallbladder or burn its chain, but only a little.
E cauteriza aquel am autra cauteri deves la junctura del col en le derier espondil de lu.	And cauterize that with another cautery at the junction of the neck in the lower part of the spine.
E·l cauteri de lu sia clavilh sego la maniera precedent.	The cautery for it should be applied as described previously.
E aprop cura aquel am aquo que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And after, care for that which precedes until it is healed.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter 24.
De cauterizacio de malautia del pulmo e de tos.	On the cautery treatment for lung disease and cough.
Quan tos e malautia de pulmo so de humiditatz fregas e le malaute no ha febre ni tisic e es malautia antiqua, lahoras cauterisa aquel am dos cauteris sobre la furcula en les locz depremegutz leontz e buoytz; e am autra cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz entre dos mamillos; e sia le cauteri clavilh segon la forma precedent.	When cough and lung disease are caused by humidity, and the patient does not have fever or consumption, and it is an old lung ailment, then apply a cautery with two cauteries over the furcula in the anterior axillary regions; and one other cautery on the medial part of the foot between the two mammary glands; and let the cautery be of the form previously described.
E si vols, sia la tua cauterizacio punctan am le cauteri que es apelat puncta, la forma del qual precedeys en la ponctacio de dolor de aurelhas.	And if you wish, let your cautery be punctate with the cauteries called puncta, the form of which you describe in the section on cauterization for ear pain.
E sian puntz entro cays ad aquels; e aprop cura aquel am aquo meteys que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And make points in those areas; and after, care for that which you have applied until it is healed.
E ya sia le cauteri haventz tres ramps quar cauterizacio es am aquel: am una veguada podes far tres cauteris segon aquesta forma:	And since the cautery has three tongues, this cautery is for that: with one pass you can make three cauteries according to this form:
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter 25.
De cauterizacio de titillic que es le cap del ajutori.	Of the cautery for titillium which is the head of the helper.
Quan le cap del ajutori es dislocat per causa de humiditatz lubricas e no es fermat en la hora del sieu retornament deves la sua dislocacio entro que sia a lu aquo costuma de retornar, e aprop per un petit movement es deslocat ayssi que s’endeve, ayssi cum nos havem testificat, lahoras cove que primieyrament redusiscas la dislocacio, e aprop le malaute sia reversat sobre le sieu dos o sobre le latz sa; e aprop eleva la codena la qual es en la partida dedintz del citillic a las partidas desus am les ditz de la tua ma sinistra, si la junctura es dislocada a las partidas dedintz.	When the head of the helper is dislocated due to lubricous humidity and is not fixed in the hour of its return, you must reduce its dislocation within the time it customarily returns, and then by a small movement it is displaced thus as one seeks, thus as we have testified. Then first reduce the dislocation, and place the malformed part on its back or on the side; and lift the codena which is in the inner partition of the citillus to the upper partitions above your left hand, if the joint is dislocated in the inner partitions.
E aprop igneys le cauteri havent dos caps; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then heat the cautery having two heads; this is its form:
E aprop cauteriza la codena entro que penetre aquela entro al autre latz; e vindra la figura de cauterizacio lahoras de iv caps cauteris.	And then cauterize the codena before it penetrates into the other side; and the figure of the cautery will come when using two heads.
e so aquel subtils segon la quantitat de tenta; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	and it is such as subtle according to the quantity of the tenta; and this is its form:
E alcunas veguadas es ajustat segon aquest comte i per que son les cauteris .viii.	And sometimes the cautery is adjusted according to this count and because the cauteries are .8.
E aprop pausa sobre le cauteri porys cuytz am sal, e aprop fay adherir le malaute a trenquilitat, e lo membre no sia maugut per alcun temps entro que sia confortat.	And then place your hand over the cautery for some time with salt, and then make the patient adhere to rest, so that the limb is not used for some time until it is comfortable.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas desus e tart es fayt aquo, lahoras cauteriza sobre le muscle am cauteri clavilh o am motz cauteris puntan, quar la junctura es confermada e la humiditat es romauguda e le malaute es sanat.	And if the dislocation is above and the treatment is done here, then cauterize over the muscle with a cautery on the clavicle or with pointed cauteries, so that the joint is confirmed and the humidity is eliminated and the patient heals.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter 26.
De cauterizacio del stomac.	On the cauterization of the stomach.
Quan veno en l’estomac freg e motas humiditatz entro que aquel extrazo de la sua compleccio e so multiplicatz raumases a lu, e si tu continuas las manieyras de curacio e no confereyso, lahoras cove que le malaute sia sobre le sieu dos ressupinat, e extenda las suas mas e las suas coysas, e aprop cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris: an un cauteri dejos le pietz per la quantitat d’un dit am cauteri clavilh, e am dos cauteris dejos del dos costatz del cauteri, entro que vengua la figura de cauteri triangulada; e elonga entre els que no sian ajustatz que faran poyredura.	When cold and humid humors enter the stomach before it is extracted from its composition and multiply there, if you continue the curative methods and do not confirm it, then you should suspect that the gout affects the sole of the foot. It extends its hands and its things, and then cauterize it with three cauteries: on one cautery, place the foot for the width of a finger with a clavicle cautery, and on two cauteries, place the sides of the cautery, so that the figure forms a triangular shape; and keep the gaps between those that are not adjusted to prevent suppuration.
E si la profunditat del cauteri la quantitat de les dos terses de la grocesa de la codena.	And if the depth of the cautery equals the quantity of two thirds of the thickness of the cord.
E sia la figura del cauteri segon aquesta forma ses addicio, E si vols, cauteriza am gran cauteri en le mieg loc del estomac segon aquesta forma; et aquest sia un cauteri segon la forma de cercle segon aquesta forma:	And let the shape of the cautery be as shown in this addition. If you wish, use a larger cautery in the middle of the stomach according to this form; this is a cautery in the shape of a circle according to this form:
E sia cauterizat l’estomac punctan ad aquel que de aquest cauteri es spaventat: e es que tu senhes sobre l’estomac punt segon la quantitat que voles am tenta, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en les puntz; e aprop cura aquel am la curacio qu’es precedita entro que sia sanat.	And let the stomach be cautery-punctured where one is afraid from this cautery: and you should prick the stomach with a point according to the quantity you desire to test, then immediately cauterize that with the cautery at the points; then cure that with the cure that precedes until it is healed.
Capitol .xxvii.	Capitol.xxvi.
De cauterizacio del fietge fret.	Of the cautery for the heel pain.
Quan endeve en le fietge dolor per fregiditat o per humiditat o per grossa ventositat entro que de la sieua normal compleccio sia getat per egressio superflua, e es curat le malaute am aquo que havem dit e no comfereys, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e senhes am tenta tres cauteris segon aquesta forma et aquesta quantitat meteyssa sobre le fietge dejos dels ipocondres, la hon perve le decubit de home.	When there is pain in the heel due to coldness or humidity or excessive moisture that has exited from its normal structure through excess excretion, and the malady is treated with what we have said and does not improve, then you should ensure that the malady is reinserted into its neck, and prick three cauteries according to this form and quantity placed on the heel below the hypochondria, letting it reach the recumbent position of a person.
E sia l’espazi le qual es entre quascun cauteri segon la grossetut del dit, e sia le cauteri segon la longitut del cors dreyta.	And let the space be which is between each cautery according to the size of the finger, and let the cautery be according to the length of the body straight.
E no compremas la tua am le cauteri mot.	And do not let your hand move while applying the cautery.
E si la quantitat de aquo que es adhurit la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena, e no y sia pus ajustat; e si le malaute stant sobre les pes de lu; e si no es estant, lahoras sia jassent, le qual ja ha extendudas las suas coysas, e eleve les sieus brasses.	And if the amount that is applied equals the size of the width of the codena, and it is not adjusted further; and if the disease is located on the feet; and if not standing, then lying down, which has already extended its parts, and elevates its knees.
E es aquesta la forma del cauteri:	And this is the form of the cautery:
E a tu es possible que cauterizes aquestz cauteris am cauteri cutellar, quan es am tu subtilitat e prudencia en l’art.	And when you are capable with your subtlety and prudence in the art, you may apply these cauteries with a surgical cautery.
E guarda te que trop no procesiscas en la cauterizacio, e sia adhurida la specitut de tota la codena per que sia adhurit tot le cors e pervengua entro als budels, quar la codena aqui es subtil; e sapias aquo.	And be careful not to overheat the cautery, and let the width of the application cover the entire codena so that the heat affects the whole body and penetrates into the intestines, for the codena here is thin; and know this.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter XXVIII.
De perforacio de apostema del fietge am cauteri.	For the perforation of an abscess on the foot, use a cautery.
Quan endeve excitura o apostema en le fietge e voles saber si aquel apostema es en le carn del fietge o en la tunica de lu, lahoras si es en la carn del fietge, le malaute atrobo gravitat e dolor ses acuitat.	When there is inflammation or an abscess on the foot and you want to know if the abscess is in the flesh of the foot or in the skin of the foot, then if it is in the flesh of the foot, the patient will experience a greater degree of swelling and acute pain.
E si es en la tunica del fietge, am la dolor es acuitat gran e vezes que ja afatiguatz les metges la cura de lu.	And if it is in the skin of the foot, then the pain will be acute and often so severe that it exhausts the doctors treating it.
Donc cove que·l malaute sia enversat sobre la sieua cervit; e aprop senha le loc de l’apostema am tenta; e aprop igneys le cauteri le quel es asemblat a rag, la forma del qual a precedit en l’autra pagina.	Therefore, ensure that the patient is lying on their side; and place the location of the abscess under examination; then heat the cautery, which resembles a reed in shape, as described on the previous page.
E cauteriza am aquel i cauteri entro que tota la codena sia comborida, entro que pervengua al ciphac, entro qu’en yesca sania.	And cauterize it, ensuring that the entire cord is burned through, reaching the tendon, until it becomes healthy.
E aprop cura aquel per curacio dels autres apostemas entro que sia sanat.	And treat it with the treatment for other abscesses until it is healed.
E no cove que de aquesta forma de cauteri use sino aquel del qual le estudi en l’art de medicina es prolonguat, e en las mas del qual motas malautias an conogut; mays aquest am esperiment alcunas veguadas sia ardit sobre aquesta operacio, mays empero leyssa aquela deves nos, e es miels.	And one should use only that cautery of which the study in the art of medicine is extended, and in which many ill-fated matters are known; but this man has sometimes experienced several times burning in this operation, yet I leave that to you, and it pleases me.
Capitol .xxix.	Capitol xxix.
De cauterizacio de plauresi.	Of the cautery for pleurisy.
Diyssero les antics cauteri de las razitz de aristologia a plauresi frega segon aquesta manieyra esser fazedor, e es aquest que tu prenguas de las razitz de aristologia longa secca una razit pun longua que es trobada, e sia de la grossetut del dit.	They said that the ancient cautery for the ribs in pleurisy should be made according to this manner, and it is what you should take from the ribs of aristologia a long dry stick with a sharp end, which has the thickness of a finger.
E aprop submergeys aquela en oli e eysen aquela al foc, e aprop cauteriza per un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre la continuacio de la furcula am le col; e am dos cauteris petitz dejos guidazi, un pauc declinans a la partida que es dejus la barba, e am dos cauteris en aquo que es declinant entre la quinta costa e la cizena, declinant un pauc a las partidas detras; e am autre cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz; et am autre sobre l’estomac, et am tres cauteris de las partidas detras; et am un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre las dos spallas, e am dos cauteris dels dos latz del pietz, dejos le cauteri le qual es entre doas spallas.	And then immerse it in oil and heat it over the fire. Then cauterize with a cautery in that place which is between the continuation of the furcula and the neck; use two small cauteries slightly inclined towards the part below the chin, one slightly declining towards the fifth rib and the thirteenth, respectively; use another cautery in the middle of the foot; use another on the stomach, and three cauteries behind; use one cautery between the two shoulders, and two cauteries on each side of the foot, placing the cautery between the two shoulders.
E no cove que compremas la tua ma am le cauteri, ans sia en le manifest de la codena en obra.	And do not hold your hand on the cautery, but rather in the middle of the sole working.
E ja diyssero alscus antics que so alscus dels homes les quals uson de cauteri de ferr semblant a ray e igneysso aquel, e meto aquel en aquel loc le qual es entre las costas, entro que pervenguam am aquel ad aquel apostema e sia foragetada sania, ayssi cum havem dit en l’apostema del fietge.	And some ancient doctors said that certain men use a cautery resembling a red-hot iron and apply it to that place between the ribs, until we bring about the desired healing by removing the infected tissue, as we have said regarding the inguinal abscess.
Mays en aquesta perforacio am cauteri no es ses temor, quar hu mor tantost ho accideys en le loc fistula a la qual no es sanacio.	Yet in this puncture with the cautery, there is no need for fear; for if it happens in the location of the fistula, which does not heal, it will quickly occur.
Capitol .xxx.	Capitol.xxx.
De la cauterizacio de la melsa.	Of the cautery treatment for melena.
Quan tu curas la malautia de la melsa am aquo que havem dit de la curacio en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cauteri en lu es segon tres manieras, las quals totas son dreyturieras, de las quals la una es que fassas tres cauteris o quatre linhan segon la longitut de la melsa segon la figura dels cauteris del fietge, la figura dels quals ha precedit.	When you treat the illness of melena, as we have said regarding the treatment in the division, and do not apply your cure, the cautery for it is according to three methods, all of which are correct. One method is to make three or four lines according to the length of the melena, following the figure of the cautery used for an inguinal hernia, the figure of which we have already described.
E sia entre quascun cauteri la grossetut d’un dit o un pauc mes, e la manieyra del cauteri sia la manieyra la qual havem dita en le cauteri del fietge engualment.	And between each cautery, the thickness of a finger or a little more, and the manner of the cautery be the manner which we have said for the cautery of the thigh equally.
E no compremas la tua ma am le cauteri; e le malaute sia eves sobre lo sieu dos.	And do not place your hand on the cautery; let the patient be held over its back.
E es autra manieyra de cauterizar, so es que tu igniscas le cauteri haventz dos vertimentz, la qual causa havem dita en le capitol de dislocacio del muscle, e elava la codena la qual es en le endreyt de la melsa la hon perve le jazer del malaute sinistre.	And another manner of cauterizing, so that you ignite the cautery having two vessels, which we have said in the chapter on dislocation of the muscle, and lift the chain which is in the direction of the vein through which the poison of the left thigh flows.
E sia la tua elevacio am la qual elevas la codena segon la longuesa del cors, per que sian faytz cauteris segon la latitut del cos.	And your elevation should be such that you lift the chain according to the length of the body, so that the cautery is applied according to the breadth of the body.
E aprop entromet les dos vernimentz, ignitz mot, en aquel entro que am aquels penetres la codena de la autra part.	And then place the two vessels close together, ignite the wick, in that space where you insert the chain from the other side.
E aprop extrayt le cauteri; e donc son faytz quatre cauteris.	And then remove the cautery; and thus he makes four cauteries.
E si voys, cauteriza am cauteri havent tres vernimentz.	And if you boil, cauterize with a cautery having three verticils.
E aprop tu cura le cauteri pus que aia laysat de getar brac per trops jorns, quar mays es comferent que las autras causas precedentz en la curacio.	And then cure the cautery well after it has been let to burn for too many days, as this is more comfortable than the other previous causes in the cure.
Capitol .xxxi.	Capitol.xxxvi.
De cauterizacio de ydropici.	On the cauterization of dropsy.
Cauteri no catz en ydropici sino en alcinte3 propriament.	Cauterize not in dropsy but in the ankle properly.
Quan tu curas le ydropic am las manieyras de curacio las quals havem ditas en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que aquel cauterizes am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic e am un cauteri sobre l’estomac, e am autre cauteri sobre le fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa, e am dos cauteris entre les spondils del dos, e un cauteri en lo dreyt del pietz, e am autre cauteri sobre l’estomac.	When you cure the dropsy, follow the methods of cure that we have said in the division and do not deviate from your cure. Instead, you should cauterize with four cauteries in the circuit of the arm and one on the stomach, and another on the flanks, and another on the liver, and two between the vertebrae of the back, and one along the right side of the foot, and another on the stomach.
E la quantitat de la profunditat del cauteri sia propdana a la spicitut de la codena.	And the depth of the cautery be proportionate to the thickness of the skin.
E aprop layssa le cauteri ubert per so que gete brac per lonc temps.	And leave the cautery open so that it gets cool for a long time.
E no evacuas le malaute de curacio aprop le cauteri am aquo que cove per que sian agreguadas a lu doas entencios, e sira festinada a lu am ajutori sanacio.	And you do not evacuate the illness from the wound by placing the cautery where it can come out so that two intentions are added to it, and it will be hastened by the aid of healing.
La forma del cauteri am lo qual es cauterizat lo ventre sia clavilh segon que la forma de aquel es desus precedent, e es aquel am le qual es cauterizat le dos sia olivar segon qu’es precedent a la sua forma.	The shape of the cautery used to cauterize the abdomen should be similar to a cross according to the form shown in the preceding illustration, and this is the same shape used to cauterize the thighs as shown before.
Capitol .xxxii.	Capitol.xxxii.
De cauterizacio de pes e de las coyssas.	Of the cauterization of feet and thighs.
Quan les pes so apostematz en ydropitz e so repletz de aygua sitrina, cove que cauterisas les pes sobre le dos del pe in nocrati aquo que es entre le auricular e le anular, e eleva la tua ma am le cauteri e no torses aquel; e aprop eleva la tua ma, e no retornes aquela de tot, quar l’aygua satrina rezuda.	When the feet are swollen and filled with yellow water, make sure to cauterize the feet on the surface of the foot between the heel and the toe, using a hot cautery that you hold steady; then lift your hand with the cautery and do not retract it completely, as the yellow water should drain.
Es le cauteri segon aquesta forma: E aprop fay sobre las doas coyssas dos cauteris, e en quascuna coysa sia feyt cauteri am la extremitat del cauteri cutellar.	The cautery is to be used in this manner: Then place two cauteries on each thigh, and on each thigh make the cautery touch the extremity of the surgical blade.
E sia le cauteri segon la longitut de la coyssa: i dejos le denolh e l’autre jos le mieg loc de la coyssa; e sobre quascuna coyssa dos cauteris.	The cautery is to be used according to the length of the thigh: place one at the top and the other in the middle of the thigh; on each thigh, use two cauteries.
E layssa la plagua uberta ses curacio per lonc temps per so que alcuna aygua resuda de lu.	Leave the wound open for a long time so that any water exudes from it.
E aprop cura le am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas.	Then proceed to treat those causes which we have mentioned.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Capitol.xxxiii.
De cauterizacio de cos de ventre.	On the cautery of the abdominal wall.
Quan cos de ventre es per freg e per humiditat entro que debelice las vertutz, so es la vertut digestiva e retentiva, las quals so en l’estomac e en les budels, e es curat aquo am las manieyras de curacio e no confereys, e vezes le malaute suffertan cauteri de vertut exhiberant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am gran cauteri sobre le sieu stomac segon que a precedit en la cauterizacio del estomac, am le cauteri del cercle e am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic subtils, am cauteri clavilh subtil; e am cauteri sobre le alcatin sobre alozis gran, o am dos cauteris.	When the abdominal wall is affected by cold and humidity penetrating through its thickness, this is due to the digestive and retentive virtues, which are located in the stomach and intestines. This condition is treated according to the methods of treatment and you do not refer it, and sometimes the patient suffers from a cautery of virtue exhibiting, so cauterize that part with a large cautery over its own stomach according to what was mentioned in the cauterization of the stomach, using the ring cautery and four cauteries around the circuit of the subtle strings, using a fine-hand cautery; or use one cautery on aloes great, or two cauteries.
E si vezes las humiditatz exhuberants e le malaute aquo tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le pentenilh e sobre les budels, e fort leu ajustant dos cauteris sobre l’estomac e prop dels inguonas, quar es curacio perficent de juvament de la qual no erras.	And if you find excessive humidity and the illness is tolerated, then cauterize that over the navel and over the intestines, and strengthen it by placing two cauterizations near the stomach and close to the inguinal areas, which is a perfect cure from which you will not err.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Capitol. xxxiv.
De cauterizacio de emorroydas antiquas.	On the cauterization of ancient hemorrhoids.
Quan so en la natura derier emorroydas antiquas o una de humors grossas fregas o de humiditatz corrompudas, e son curadas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no confereys la tieua curacio, lahoras cauterisa am tres cauteris sobre le pus dejos spondilh del dos petit e petit triangular, e am cauteri desus le ombelic cays per dos ditz.	When they are in the nature of ancient hemorrhoids or due to gross humors or corrupt humidity, and are cured as we have said in the division and do not apply our heat treatment, then cauterize with three cauterizations over the base of the two small triangular areas, and with one cauterization above the navel extending two fingers.
E si doptas que l’estomac de lu sia enfregidat e la vianda de lu no sia degerida, e la cara de lu vezes apostemada, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre l’estomac am gran cauteri segon que es precedit; e am un cauteri sobre fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa de lu am cauteri clavilh, e leyssa le cauteri per alcun temps ubert, e aprop cura lu entro que sia sanat.	And if you observe that the patient's stomach is inflamed and the food they eat is not digested, and their face appears pale, then cauterize that over the stomach with a large cauterization as previously described; and with one cauterization on the side, and another on the arm with a pointed cauterization. Let the cauterization remain open for some time, and cure them until they are healed.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter XXXV.
De cauterizacio de atheyl aprop la abscizio de lor.	Of the cautery on the thigh near the amputation.
Quan tu abscindes atheyl, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri que es asemblat a ray.	When you amputate the thigh, then apply the cautery that is similar to a ray.
Aprop entremet aquel ignit en aquel atheyl abscis, e ultima la tieua ma entro que pervengua le cauteri al orifici de la vena de la qual ve la sanc.	Then insert the ignited cautery into that amputated thigh, and keep your hand there until the cautery reaches the opening of the vein from which the blood flows.
E fay aquo una vetz o doas, quar si achieyl son trops, lahoras cauteriza quascun de lor segon que havem recontat, e aprop cura aquels am aquo que confereys a lor dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And do this one or two times; if the veins are too many, then cauterize each of them according to what we have counted, and place them under care until they are healed with the ointments you apply to them.
E si cauterizas am gran cauteri sobre alquatin, es mays derier en juvament.	And if you use a large cautery on some areas, it is more effective in healing.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Chapter XXXVI.
De cauterizacio de fistolas que son faytas en la natura derie en las partidas de lu.	Of the cautery for fistulas that occur in the natural passages of the body.
Quan la natura no obeziys a la obra la qual havem recomtada en son loc, e·l pacient es espaventat per aquo, sia sanat am cauteri.	When nature does not obey the work we have recommended in its place, and the patient is frightened by this, treat with a cautery.
Donc quan ad alcun ve fistola en la natura derier, e es antiquada, corro sania de lu e humiditatz corrompudas, e donc aquo que es pus digne que cove es que proes aquela am tenta subtil, e aprop conoys la quantitat de la profunditat de lu am la devant dita tenta.	So when there is an old fistula in nature behind, and it is corrupted with decayed pus, then what is most worthy to cover it is that you try a fine thread, and then know the depth of it with the aforementioned thread.
Aprop igneys le cauteri que es semblant a ray.	Then heat the cautery that resembles a ray.
E aprop met aquel cauteri ignit en aquesta fistula, e segon la quantitat en la qual intrec la tenta.	Then place the heated cautery in this fistula, and according to the quantity in which you insert the thread.
E itera sobre aquela le cauteri entro que sian comburitz aquels cors corrumputz tost una veguada o dos o tres, segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And iterate over that with the cautery until those corrupted tissues are burned up quickly one time or two or three, according to the quantity of your necessity.
E guarda te de combustio de nervi e de vena; o si fistula va al cors de la vesica o al cors del budel, lahoras guarda te de totz aquels locz; e no fassas aquo sino quan la fistula es en loc carnos e cogitas que no es penetrant.	And guard yourself from burning nerves and veins; or if the fistula goes to the body of the bladder or the body of the intestine, then guard yourself from all those areas; and do not do this unless the fistula is in a fleshy location and you know it is not penetrating.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	And then care for the area until it is healed.
E si le loc es sigillat, e so abscindidas de lu las materias, e roman ayssi per lonc temps, lahoras sapias que ja es curat entierament.	And if the area is sealed, and the materials are separated from it, and remains this way for a long time, then you can perceive that it is entirely healed.
E si las materias no so de lu ostadas, lahoras sapias que es penetrant o en le preon de lu os corromput, o cays aquo de aquelas causas de las quals vindra rememoracio en son loc.	And if the materials do not stay from it, then you can perceive that it is penetrating or in the process of corrupting the bone, or it is due to one of those causes which will be recalled in its place.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Capitol. XXXVII.
De cauterizacio dels ronhos.	On the cautery of warts.
Quan en les ronhos endeve dolor per freg o per grossa ventozitat, e per aysso le coyt del malaute es amermat, lahoras cove que cauterizes aquel sobre les ronhos am cauteri sobre quascun ronho am cauteri clavilh del qual precesic la rememoracio.	When warts ache due to moisture or excessive dryness, and as a result the patient's suffering is diminished, then you should cauterize that area with a cautery, cauterizing each wart individually using a pointed cautery. You will find more details about this in the following text.
E fort leu cauterizam am le segon un petit dejos, per que vindran tres cauteris liniatz, e donc siran mays deriers en juvament.	And cauterize it lightly with the second touch for a short duration, as three linear cauterizations will follow, and thus they will be more effective in healing.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter XXXVIII.
De cauterizacio de la vesica.	Of cautery of the bladder.
Quan accideys en la vesica debelitat e mollificacio per freg e per humiditatz ayssi que·l malaute la urina no retengua, lahoras cauteriza aquel en la partida pus dejos sobre la vesiqua, la hon comensan les pels del pentenilh, e cauteriza am un cauteri en la partida dreyta, e am autre en la senestra de lu.	When there is debility and softening of the bladder due to inflammation and humidity, such that the patient cannot retain urine, then cauterize that part near where the skin of the perineum begins, and cauterize with one cautery on the right side and another on the left side.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la cantitat dels not del pous; e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en la partida pus bassa del dos, o am dos cauteris si es necessitat.	And the length of each cautery should be according to the size of the toes; cauterize that part with a cautery on the lower side of the two, or with two cautery marks if necessary.
E sia cauteri clavilh segon que es procesit.	And the cautery for the clavilh should be according to how it is performed.
Capitol .xxxix.	Chapter XXXIX.
De cauterizacio de la mayra.	Of cautery of the thigh.
Quan veno en la mayra freg e humiditatz, e per aysso es prohibida enpreignacio, e son corrompudas las mestruas de lu, e es tardada la provocacio de lor, e accideys dolor deves le haveniment de lor, lahoras cove que·l loc sia cauterizat am tres cauteris en le circuit del ombelic, ayssi cum havem dit en le cauteri de la vesica; e am cauteri sobre le loc pus dejos del dos, o am dos cauteris, e sia le cauteri clavilh.	When there is inflammation and humidity in the thigh, and as a result, intercourse is prohibited, and her menstruation is corrupted, and the induction is delayed, and joint pain occurs due to this condition, then it is necessary to cauterize that area with three cautery marks in the circuit around the navel, just as we have said for the bladder cautery; and place a cautery mark on the lower part of the thigh, or use two cautery marks, and let the thigh cautery be done.
Capitol .xl.	Capitol of the day.
De cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua.	Of the cautery for the dislocation of the ankle.
Quan humiditatz moucozas so efundudas a la partida de la anqua, e so faytas causas del yssiment del sieu loc, e senhal de lu es que la coyssa es prolonguada sobre l’autre quan so comparadas entre lor.	When mucus humors infiltrate the area around the ankle, and cause displacement of its location, a sign of this is that the swelling extends over the other foot when compared between them.
E le loc de la dislocacio es atrobat en lu quays boyt.	And the location of the dislocation is treated with the affected foot.
Adonc cove que cauterizas le malaute sobre la partida de la anqua de lu am cauteri a sercle semblant, pus que tu auras senhat am tenta en le cercuit de la partida ayssi cum es revolguda, e per so que la partida caia el mieg loc del cercle.	Then cauterize the foot around the ankle with a round cautery, as you will have marked the circuit of the area as it is twisted, so that the area falls in the middle of the circle.
E sia le cauteri del qual precedit la forma en la cauterizacio del estomac.	And the cautery mentioned above is used in the cauterization of the stomach.
E si aquest cauteri no es a tu present, lahoras cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris am cauteri olivar gran.	And if this cautery is not present, then use three small olive cauteries instead.
E sia fayt le cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de tota la codena; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And make the cautery according to the intensity of the pain in the entire leg; and then cure that which remains after it is healed.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter XL.
De cauterizacio de la vena sciatica.	Of the cautery of the sciatic vein.
Quan dolor ve en la partida de anqua, e so causa de lu freg et humiditatz, le malaute es curat am aquo que havem dit e no confereys, e aquo es antiquat, lahoras cove que tu lacses le malaute de humors grosses am pillulas fetidas o am pillulas artificials o semblantz; e aprop cauteriza aquel.	When pain is felt in the sciatic region and its cause is cold and humidity, the patient is treated with what we have said about it, and you do not apply anything else. This is an ancient method. When you treat the patient with thick humors, use fetid pills or artificial ones that resemble them; and then cauterize the area.
E la manieyra del cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am medicinas comburentz, o cauteri am foc.	The method of cauterization in this case is according to two methods: either with burning medicines, or with fire.
Sira segon dos manieyras scientas, de las quals es la una que cauterizes aquel sobre la partida de l’ancha de lu am tres cauteris triangulatz segon aquesta forma; e fay am aquels bona profunditat.	According to two scientific methods, of which one is to cauterize the area over the width of the foot with three triangular cauteries in this form; and do so with good depth.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre cascun cauteri la quantitat de la grossitut del dit e si le cauteri olivar o gran.	And let the space between each cauterization be the width of one finger, whether the cauterization is small or large.
Mays alcunas veguadas sia le cauteri sobre le mieg loc sobre le cap de l’anquan per que son quatre cauteris.	More often, apply the cauterization in the middle of the location on the top of the foot, as there are four cauterizations.
E si vols, cauteriza am le cercle del qual es precesida la forma en la cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua, la i que sia cercle continent e comburey la ispicitut de tota la codena.	And if you wish, cauterize the circle around which the form of the dislocation of the ankle occurs in the cauterization of the ankle dislocation, let it be a circle that burns the sensitivity of the entire chain.
E aquesta es la manieyra de cauteri in ciatiqua quan dolor es adherent al anqua e no es estenduda entro a la coyssa.	And this is the way to cauterize for pain adherent to the ankle and not extended into the thigh.
Mays si es estenduda entro a la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre la coyssa sobre le loc al qual envireys le malaute que es la dolor; e am un cauteri sobre la cavilha per quatre ditz un pauc deves la part cilvestra.	But if it is extended into the thigh, then cauterize that with two cauteries on the thigh over the area through which you will pass the ankle that causes the pain; and with one cautery on the heel, you should slightly elevate the lateral part.
E si le cauteri cutellar, e sia la profunditat del cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de la codena.	And for the surgical cautery, the depth of the cautery should be according to the amount of sensitivity of the tissue.
E si le malaute envireys que la dolor es estenduda entro al loc prop les ditz des pes, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui on envireys am cauteri per tres puntz o quatre o mays si indigeys de aquel.	And if the ankle passes through the pain that is extended near the base of the toes, then cauterize that area where you pass the cautery with three or four points or more if needed.
E si le malaute envireys dolor esser dejos le donolh ves la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui am un cauteri cutellar.	And if the ankle passes through pain to be felt in the shin, then cauterize that area with a surgical cautery.
E guarda te en tota cauterizacio que no ultimes am le cauteri en tant que comburas nervi o gran arceria, e que per aquo a tu es sobre le malaute mal noccument o contraccio.	And in all cautery that you do, do not end with the cautery to such an extent that you burn nerves or great artery, and because of this you are badly affected or cause a contraction.
E yeu ja e vist un e autre de aquels les quals cauterizero sobre la cavilha e ultimero en la cauterizacio, e la cama foc inflada entro que la tumor aconseguit lo pe, e foc perforat e corromput tot le pe.	And I have already seen and others where they cauterized on the nail and ended with the cautery, and the burning bed inflated between where the tumor reached the foot, and burning perforated and corrupted all the skin.
E aprop accidic fort solucio de ventre, e aprop aquo la mort.	And then follow a strong purge for the stomach, and then this leads to death.
E si la dolor es en dos partidas ensemps cauteriza quascuna segon aquesta manieyra.	And if the pain is in two parts, cauterize each one according to this manner.
E diysero les savis alcus en la cauterizacio de anqua cauteri del qual aquesta es la manieyra: fay semblant a cercle de ferr del qual le cercuit sia la maytat de un palm; e sia deves le sieu orrifici segon la grossesa de un os de datil o mens un pauc.	And the wise will say about the cautery for aqua cauteris: this is the manner: make a circle of iron where the circumference is the width of one palm; and let its orifices be according to the size of an finger bone or at most a little more.
E dedintz aquel cercle sia un autre tertz; e sia le spazi le qual es entre lor la quantitat del notz del pous; e sian aquels cercles ubertz de dos partidas; e sia la longitut de aquels cays un notz o dos notz, e fay en aquels margue de ferr decentment apparelhat en les cercles; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And inside that circle, there is another third; and let the space between them be the quantity of a foot's thumb; and those circles are opened in two parts; and let the length of those cays be one thumb or two thumbs, and make on those iron edges decently fitted to the circles; this is the form of it:
Aprop sia ignit en le foc entro que s’enrogesisca e gete scintillas, e aprop sia pausat sobre la partida del anqua, le malaute colcat sobre le latz sa.	It is heated in the fire until it turns red and gives off sparks, then placed on the part of the ankle, with the patient lying on the latz.
E donc cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris redontz en una veguada.	And then cauterize it with three round cauteries in one go.
E aprop layssa aquel per tres jorns; aprop emplastre aquel am boder e layssa la plagua uberta per trops dias; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then leave it for three days; then apply a plaster with bile and leave the wound open for many days; and cure it by anointing it until it is healed.
Diys Albucasis : o, filhs, de aquesta specia de cauteri pauc havem usat per la terror del reguardament de lu, e per aquo que paucs havem trobatz les quals reguardan sobre lu.	Albucasis says: Oh, my son, we have used this type of cautery little because of the fear of its appearance, and because we have found few cases that relate to it.
Mays dels bos cauteris a lu qui les sufferta, et atroba am aquel le loc de lu.	Yet in those who have suffered from good cauteries, you find the place of it.
Mays cauteri am medicinas adhurentz es que tu fassas dos cercles haventz armula perforada en la qual deyssen le guaffo de la porta de ferr; sia la longuitut de la paretz en la nauteza de lor sian dos nozes o quays aquels.	Good cautery with medicines that adhere should be made by making two circles having a perforated wheel in which the smoke from the iron door passes; let the length of the walls where they are to be two nuts or quarters.
E si le spazi le qual es entre quascu la quantitat de la grossitut del dit; e sian ubertz dejos e desus, e sian que contenguan se entre lor segon aquesta forma:	And if the space which is between each part of the size of the swelling of the digit; and be opened down and up, and contain themselves among them according to this form:
E aprop pausa sobre la partida de la anqua le malaut jasent sobre le latz sa, e comprem la tua ma sobre la partida de la anqua; e aprop pren de aygua cauda e fon la entre dos cercles, e la qualiditat de aquela sia am le foc petit a petit, e te aquela per la quantitat de una hora, e sufferta le malaute la mordicacio e la adhustio de lu — quar aquel atrobo mordicacio ayssi cum de foc — entro que cesse la mordicacio.	And then place your hand on the side of the ankle where the patient feels pain, and hold your hand on the side of the ankle; and then take some hot water and pour it between two circles, and the quality of that water should be warm little by little, and keep that for the quantity of one hour, and let the patient feel the biting and adjustment of it — for that atrophy bites like fire — until the biting ceases.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am le instrument et abstergeys l’aygua cauda de tota la anqua am aygua dousa.	And then lift your hand with the instrument and remove the hot water from all around the ankle with cold water.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres jorns e pausa sobre aquel boder entro que sia la negror de la adhustio remauguda, e leyssa aquo per alcus jorns, e correra de lu poyredura; aquest es derier en juvament.	And then let it be for three days and place your hand over that border until the blackness of the adjustment fades, and let this be for some days, and the redness will go away; this is called juvament.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then cure it by applying ointment until it is healed.
E si la dolor es extenduda entro la coyssa o la camba, fay a lu estatua en lu que contengua aygua segon que es feyt en la anqua engualment.	And if the pain is extended into the thigh or leg, apply a statue to it that contains water according to how it is done in the water.
E aquesta es la manieyra de aygua cauda, e yeu ja he scrit aquela en le tractat de la rectificacio de medicinas.	And this is the way of applying water, and I have already written that in the treatise on the preparation of medicines.
Recipe de alcali e de caus no extinta de amdos ana partida una, e trissa les e pausa en una ola nova de la qual la partida dejos sia perforada per un petit trauc, segon la quantitat que intre en lu ray.	Recipe for alkali and for the extinguished caustic from both parts one, three times fill a new vessel in which the part left has been perforated by a small tube, according to the quantity that enters into it.
E pausa dejos le fons de la ola autra ola enveyriada, e gete sobre aquel alcali e caus viva de aygua doussa la qual cobra aquels per un dit, e pus que tu compremes aquels am la tieua ma per bona compressio, e leyssa la hola que deyssenda de lu aygua aguda en la partida dejos a la ola enveyriada.	And place the bottom of another vessel over the perforated one, and pour water gently over the alkali and live caustic so that they absorb it with a thumb, and then, when you feel them well absorbed by your hand through good compression, let the vessel receiving the sharp water pass to the part left in the perforated vessel.
E aprop ajusta tota aquela aygua, e geta la sobre autra caus viva e autre alcali renovelatz, quar aquela lahoras sira de mot forta acuitat, la qual es aministrada en motas operacios de medicina e en cauterizacio dels autres membres, quar operacio fa de foc.	Then adjust all that water, and pour it over another live caustic and renewed alkali, for then it will be of much stronger acuity, which is administered in many operations of medicine and in the cautery of other members, for the operation is done with fire.
E so de las medicinas alcunas am las quals es cauterizat ancha, ayssi cum tezizic e mel anacrat e caus am sabo enayssi que sian mesclatz.	And some of the medicines, when they are mixed with those that are cauterized wide, such as terebinth and honey, and it has been assayed that they be combined.
E Gualia recontet de un home dels antics la operacio e la curacio am la qual es curada dolor de anqua e de vena sciatica, e magnifiquet mot be esser de aquel, e diys que no hac necessitat de autra curacio, e quar es sanat per una veguada ayssi cum recomtec, quar fort leu aquel intrec en banh e eysic ja sa d’aquel.	And Gualia recounted an operation and a cure from the ancients for joint pain and sciatic vein pain. The method was very good, as she said there was no need for another treatment, and that the person was cured in one session just as recommended, for her intervention was strong in bath and effusion, and she knew of that.
Et es que sia pres de certarragi vert, e si no es atrobat vert, sia presa figua recent; e mot sia trissada am un pauc de grays e sia pausat sus la anqua en la qual es la dolor, o en la coyssa, o en la camba, e sia liat.	And it should be near certain arnica vert, and if arnica is not available, a fresh fig; and it should be boiled with a little gray and placed in the water where the pain is, or on the thigh, or on the chest, and then applied.
E sia layssat per la cantitat de tres horas o per la quantitat que·l malaute centa cedacio de la adhustio.	And it should be left for the quantity of three hours or for the amount of time the patient endures the application.
E aprop met aquel en banh e donc quan le cors de lu sia enrozat, entromet aquel en le sol, quar la dolor cessa e es sanat.	And then place it in bath and then when the patient's body is heated, interpose it on the floor, for the pain ceases and the patient is cured.
E sapias que no cove que alcu use de cauteri am aquestas medicinas sino aprop la evacuacio del cors.	And be aware that none use cautery in these medicines except near the evacuation of the body.
Mays ja Escorides diysec que quan am fenda de cabra la vena stretica es cauterizada, aprofieyra a lu mo be; e sia le cauteri am lu segon aquesta manieyra: sia presa lana e sia enbeguda en oli antic, e sia pausat entre le pous del pe e entre le fossil.	And Escorides says that when making a cut in the sinewy vein it should be cauterized, which will heal better; and the cautery is made in this manner: take wool and soak it in old oil, and place it between the toes of the foot and over the bone.
E aprop pren fenda de cabra secca e emflasma aquela am foc entro que sia fayta carbo; e aprop pausa lu sobre la lana e leysa la entro que sia estengida.	And then take a dry cut of wool and char it in fire until it becomes charcoal; and place it over the wool and let it cool.
E aprop itera aquo, e no cessas far aquo entro que·l scintiment de la mordicacio pervengua entro al anqua e repausa la dolor.	And repeat this, and continue doing this until the spark of the bite penetrates into the water and stops the pain.
Et aquesta manieyra de cauteri es apelat cauteri de vaquas.	And this method of cautery is called the cattle cautery.
Capitol .xlii.	Capitol. xlii.
De cauterizacio de dolor de dos.	On the cautery for pain in the toes.
Alcunas veguadas dolor es en le dos per tropas causas, cum per cazement o per percucio o per superflua evacuacio, e per causas ad aquelas semblantz, per infusio de materia frega e humida.	Sometimes pain in the two places is caused by multiple reasons, such as compression or percussion or excessive evacuation, and other causes similar to those, through the infiltration of wet matter.
E cauteri no catz sino en aquesta sola specia la qual es fayta per efusio de materia frega.	And the cautery is not used to cut, but only in this single species which is caused by the infiltration of wet matter.
Donc cove, aprop evacuacio del malaute am pillulas fitidas e am semblant a lor, que sian faytas sobre·l dos en le qual es la dolor tres linhas segon la latitut de lu, pus que senhas am tentha en quascuna linha v cauteris o mays, segon la quantitat que ve de la tolleransa del malaute e de la vertut de lu.	Therefore, open, and place pills similar to them for the evacuation of the patient on both sides where the pain is, three lines according to the width of the area. Then prick or pierce in each line five times, according to the quantity that comes from the tolerance of the patient and the virtue of the area.
E sia fayta cauterizacio am cauteri de punt.	And perform the cautery with a pointed cautery.
E si vols, cauteriza am tres cauteris o am quatre am cauteri clavilh medial segon aquesta forma:	And if you want, perform the cautery with three or four medio-clavicular cauteries in this manner:
Capitol .xliii.	Capitol. xliii.
De cauterizacio al comensament de gilbositat.	On the cautery at the beginning of gilbositat.
Motas veguadas endeve aquesta malautia als petitz enfantz; e senhal del comensament de lu en les enfantz es que accideys sobre lor estrectura en le ale eves la elevacio e·l movement.	Motions observed in this illness among small children; and the sign of the beginning of it in children is that they experience difficulty in lifting and moving their legs.
E atrobas en le derier espondil del dos e dels notz de lu que ja comensa a sobremontar sobre les autres spondils.	You find in the lower vertebra of the back and those nearby that they are beginning to overgrow the other vertebra.
E donc quan tu vezes aquo e voles prohibir, lahoras cauterisa aquel am cauteri que sia cercle segon aquesta forma:	And when you see this and want to treat it, then cauterize that area with a circular cautery according to this form:
que prengua le cauteri sobre tota partida del spondilh engualment.	let the cautery cover all parts of the vertebra equally.
E si vols, cauteriza en le circuit del spondilh am le cauteri de punt dos linhas o tres.	And if you wish, cauterize around the vertebra with a pointed cautery two or three lines wide.
E sian les puntz propdas entre lor.	And let the points be close to each other.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat am aquo que havem dit.	Then place the area to be treated over what we have said until it is healed.
Mays guarda que cauteri no sia administrat en gelbositat que sia fayta per spasme de nervi.	But beware that the cautery not be applied in inflammation caused by nerve spasm.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter XLIV.
De cauterizacio de podagra e de dolor de juncturas.	On the cautery treatment for gout and joint pain.
Quan dolor de juncturas son faytas per humors fregas les quals so enfundutz a quascun membre del cors, lahoras quan veno dolors en los pes, de costuma dels metges es que aquo apelen podragua propriament.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E donc cum es curada podagra de causa frega am manieyra de cura e no so remaugudas las dolors, lahoras las remau cauteri.	And thus, gout caused by cold is treated in a manner of treatment and not by simply relieving the pain, but by using cautery.
E es que tu cauterizas aquel aprop evacuacio en le circuit de la junctura del pe am motz cauteris.	And you do so by cautery at the site of joint evacuation on the foot with heated cautery instruments.
E sia cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the olive cautery is used for which this is its form:
E si es necessitat que puntz sia fayt sobre la fassia del pe, lahoras fay am cauteri de punt.	And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
E si las dolors pujan entro als denolhs o a las autras juncturas, e aquo motas vetz s’endeve, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre quascun donolh am tres cauteris o quatre de tota partida am aquest cauteri olivar.	And if the pains rise into the toes or other joints, and you need to treat this, then cautery the affected toe with three or four points using the olive cautery from any direction.
E si motz cauteris que aquestz cauteris sian a tu necessaris, lahoras cauteriza aquel e no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri abans, sia tant solament enviro la specitut de la codena.	And if you need to use cautery irons for these cauteries, then apply the cautery and do not press your hand too much against the cautery before, only around the width of a finger.
E si las dolors pugan entro al donolh e·l dos, lahoras aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le sieu capitol.	And if the pains penetrate to the groin and thigh, then apply the cautery which we have mentioned in our chapter.
E si las dolors so en las mas tant solament, e es apelada suagra, lahoras puncta en le circuit dels focils ayssi cum se revolvo, puncta en aquels dos linhas.	And if the pains are only in the toes and it is called "suagra," then puncture along the circumference of the veins as they twist, puncturing at those two lines.
E si reman de las dolors en les ditz, lahoras puncta en le cercuit dels focils sobre quascun notz e sobre la pinche de la ma.	And if the pains remain in the fingers, then puncture along the circumference of the veins on each finger and at the tip of the hand.
E si las dolors pugan aprop alscus jorns als coydes o als muscles, lahoras cauteriza les quascus de tota part dels ajutoris.	And if the pains persist for several days in the elbows or muscles, then cauterize around all parts of the joints.
E no evacuas le malaute de bon regiment e de recepcio de medicinas, quar si es fayt bon regiment e flacma es evacuada am aquest cauteri sira sanat, Dieus ajudan.	And if you do not evacuate the gout properly and with the right administration of medicines, then even if the regimen is good and the inflammation subsides, this cautery will be sufficient for recovery, God willing.
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter XLV.
De cauterizacio de rompeduras.	Of cautery for ruptures.
Quan endeve rompedura en les angonars e diysendo les budels denant l’atela al genetiu, e aquo es comensan de aprop, lahoras cove que tu mandas al malaute layssar la sua comestio en le sieu dia e que use de causas leniens per so que la fenda deyssenda del sieu ventre.	When there is a rupture in the groin and intestines are protruding behind the skin at the inguinal region, when this begins to happen close to you, then as you command the patient to fast on that day and use mild remedies so that the abdominal wound may heal.
E aprop segua le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e comanda a lu que tengua le sieu ale entro que sia foro getat o aparesca l’atela o·l budels.	And place the patient between your thighs over his or her abdomen, and command him or her to keep the area firm until the skin heals or the mesh appears.
E aprop retorna aquel am les tieus ditz e senha am tenta la ruptura sobre le os del pentenilh am senhal la extremitat del qual sia semblant a la maytat de cercle a las subiranas partidas del cors.	And then return the area to its proper place, and apply pressure to the rupture over the bone of the pelvis, marking the extremity of which should appear like the size of a circle in the upper parts of the body.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then heat the cautery, the form of which is as follows:
entro que sia mot rog e gete cintilhas.	until it becomes red hot and begins to spark.
E aprop reduzeys le budel o l’atela a la sua conquavitat, e aprop pause la sua ma sobre le loc per so que le budel no yesqua.	Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
E tu ja has ubert entre las coyssas del malaute e dejos lu as pausat un coyssi, et autre servent sia sus las cambas de lu, e autre sus le pietz de lu, le qual tengua las suas mas.	You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
E aprop pausa le cauteri sobre aquel senhal am la tua ma am cauteri stan dreyt, e te aquel entro que am lu consieguas le os del pentenilh entro al mieg del duiduni; e itera am aquel autra veguada si a tu aquel no has conseguit en la primieyra veguada entro al os.	Then place the cautery over that mark on your hand where the cautery is straight, and put it there so that you can reach the bone of the heel in the middle of the sole; and repeat with another pass if you have not reached the bone in the first pass.
E observa saviament del ysiment del budel en la hora de la tua cauterizacio, que no comburas aquel budel per so que sobre le malaute no vengua in mort o autre gran malicia.	Observe wisely the state of the hernia during your cautery, so that you do not burn it too much, lest it come to harm the patient or cause another great mischief.
E sapias que quan tu am le cauteri no atenhas le os, no confereys la tua operacio.	Be mindful that when you use the cautery, you should not touch the bone, as this would compromise your operation.
E cove que·l cauteri dels enfants sia subtil segon le gran e la mesura de lor.	Make sure the cautery for children is fine according to their size and measure.
E aprop cura le loc del cauteri per tres dias am boder entro que sia remauguda la scara del foc.	And then take care of the place of the cautery for three days, keeping between that it heals the scar from the fire.
E aprop cura aquel am les autres enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then take care of it with other ointments until it is healed.
E le malaute sia jasent sobre le sieu dos per xl dias entro que sia sigillat le loc e la plagua.	And the patient remain on their back for 10 days until the place and wound are sealed.
E cove que pauses le nutriment de lu segon la longitut del temps de la curacio de lu le qual le linesca le ventre de lu, e que le budel no yesca fora deves le esforsament de guerir.	And ensure that you support the patient according to the length of time for the healing of the wound which closes his abdomen, and that the intestine does not come out, requiring great effort to heal.
E aprop quan se vol levar aprop xl dias, lahoras aministra liament decentment fayt, e tengua aquel per autres xl jorns.	And then, when it is time to lift after 10 days, properly apply a salve, and keep it for another 10 days.
E sia mermat de trebalh e de replecio de vianda e de beure, e de votz vehementz, quar quan usa de aquest regiment de sanacio entiera sira sanat.	And let him rest and replenish his food and drink, and use strong voices, for when he follows this regimen of healing entirely, he will be cured.
E yeu diyre la curacio de las rupturas en las autras partidas del ventre, e so al comensament, e vols que no treguan, lahoras cauterisa la ruptura d’aquel am cauteri redon segon la quantitat de lu, e sia aquo que es exhurit de la codena ayssi cum la tersa partida de lu; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit, e no es ajustat.	And I will say the healing of ruptures in other parts of the abdomen, and at the beginning, and if they do not heal, then cauterize the rupture with a round cautery according to its quantity, and what is drawn from the cord should be done like the tender part of it; then take care of that with what we have said, and it is not adjusted.
E ja diyssero alcus primiers que ruptura sia cauterizada am cauteri triangular segon aquesta forma, pus que es senhada am tenta:	And some have said that a rupture should be cauterized with a triangular cautery according to this form, rather than sewn with a needle.
e es pausada linha que eys per la latitut en le latz pus sobira de la ruptura, e autra linha al desus; e depausa la tua ma am un cauteri clavilh, mays le primier cauteri es pus leugier e milhor.	And a line is placed there for the width in the slashes above the rupture, and another line on top; then place your hand with a triangular cautery, but the first cautery is lighter and better.
Capitol .xlvi.	Capitol XLVI.
De cauterizacio de torcio.	Of the cauterization of the cord.
Quan endeve en alscus membres per cazement o per percussio dolor e persevera aquela dolor per lonc temps e no comfereys al u curacio am medicinas, lahoras cove que cauterizes am cauteri de punt.	When pain in certain members persists due to inflammation or percussion and does not respond to medical treatment over a long period, then you should cauterize with a pointed cautery.
E sia le cauteri de tot membre segon la magnitut e la parvitat de lu, e vertut e develitat de lu, e locacio de torcio e dolor de lu.	And the cautery should be of the size and shape appropriate to the member, its strength and depth, and the location of the cord and its pain.
Donc si·s sanat per le primier cauteri, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera sobre lu le cauteri; quar de costuma de aquelas dolors es que sian punctatz de membre ad aquel membre le qual apropinque al u, per que cove que consieguas aquels am cauteri entro que·l malaute sia sanat.	So if the pain is cured by the first cautery, that is good; but if not, then repeat the cautery on it; for it is customary that those pains are pierced in the same member near the one where the pain is located, so that you may achieve the cure through cauterization before the disease is healed.
Capitol .xlvii.	Capitol XLVII.
De cauterizacio de lepra.	Cauterization for leprosy.
Les lebros alcunas veguadas am cauteri per mot gran juvament, e magerment si la specia de lepra que es fayta per putrefaccio de flacma e de melencolia.	Lepers are sometimes cauterized with a very hot cautery, especially when the species of leprosy is caused by the putrefaction of flame and melancholy.
E donc cum tu vols cauterizar aquel, considera si la lepra es comussan e as aquela curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no deysen, ni esta, e temes sobre le malaute que la corrupcio comprehenda tot le cors de lu e tota la compleccio de lu, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le cap am v cauteris: am un en le mieg loc del cap, e am le segon pus dejos de lu, eves le front a la fi dels cabels; e amdos sobre dos corns; e am un detras, sobre la nuca o servitz.	And so, if you want to cauterize him, consider whether the leprosy is common and as it is healed according to what we have said in the division, neither this nor that, and fear that the corruption might comprehend his entire body and all the complexity of his being; then cauterize him on the head with five cauteries: one in the middle of the head, and leave the second space from it, place the third at the forehead towards the end of the hair; two on the horns; and one behind, on the neck or servant bone.
E ultima la tua ma am le cauteri un pauc entro que emprema en le os una petita empressio, e de lu sian deslocadas las scorsas, per so que la expiracio de grossas vapors sia alleujada de lu; e cauteriza sobre la melsa segon que es precesit.	And finish your hand with a cautery just inside where it makes a small impression in the mouth, so that the exhalation of thick vapors is alleviated; and cauterize on the palate according to necessity.
E si la lepra es ja expanduda sobre le malaute e apar manifestament, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquel am aquels cauteris les quals havem ditz en le cap; e am cauteri sobre la extremitat del nas, e am dos cauteris sobre las doas maysselas, e am dos cauteris sobre dos spondils del col, e am vi cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e am un gran sobre les spondils prop de la coeta, e un sobre la cotea , e am dos sobre las anquas, e am un sobre quascuna anqua, e am dos sobre les donols e un sobre quascun donolh, e am dos sobre les coydes, e am dos sobre les muscles, e am dos las teneretutz del sieu pietz; e cauteriza aquel sobre totas las juncturas dels ditz de las mas e dels pes, e sobre quascun talon dels sieus pes, e sobre les foscils de las suas mas.	If leprosy is already spread over the thigh and manifestly apparent, then you should cauterize that area as well as those cauterizations which we have said in the head; on the extremity of the nose, and two cauterizations on both eyebrows, and two on two vertebrae of the neck, and six on the vertebrae of the back, and a large one near the shoulder blade, and one on the spine, and two on the axillae, and one on each axilla, and two on the nipples, and one on each nipple, and two on the armpits, and two on the muscles, and two on the tendons of their foot; cauterize that over all the joints of the fingers of the hand and the feet, and on every heel of their feet, and on the bones of their thighs.
E guarda te dels nervis les quals so sobre le talo que no comburas aquels.	And guard the nerves which are over the heel that you do not burn those.
E alcunas veguadas es cauterizat am un cauteri sobre le os del pentenilh e am autre sobre la boca del stomac, e autre sobre le fietge.	And sometimes cauterization is done with one cauterization on the bone of the pelvis and another on the entrance to the stomach, and another on the navel.
E sapias que quant mays ajustas cauteris, tant es mays juvatiu e mays conferent; e sapias que le malaute no ha en le cauteri dolor, ayssi cum han les sas, per so quar le cors de lu ja es stupefayt.	And know that the more tightly you adjust the cautery, the more beneficial and effective it is; and know that the patient does not feel pain in the cautery, as they do with the seams, because the body of the patient is already numbed.
E cove que les cauteris sian grans o paucs segon les membres e las juncturas segon que es precedit de las specias dels ferramentz.	And know that the cautery should be large or small according to the members and joints, as determined by the size of the instruments.
E aprop cura le cauteri am farina de errs coyta am mel e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then cure the cautery with a mixture of ground rush and honey, as well as other treatments until it is healed.
Capitol .xlviii.	Capitol. xlviii.
De cauterizacio de stupor.	On the cautery for stupefaction.
Quan alcun membre es stabozit o adormit e es curat am medicinas, olis e emplastres, e no es sanat, lahoras tu cauteriza aquel membre stabozit am cauteris segon que merita la grandesa del membre o la parvitat de lu.	When some member is numb or paralyzed and is treated with medicines, oils, and plasters, and does not heal, then you cautery that numb member with cauteries according to the size of the member or its smallness.
E sia lo tieu cauteri intrant la ispicitut de la codena un pauc.	And let your cautery penetrate the depth of the wound slightly.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then cure that oil until it is healed.
E alscunas veguadas es cauterizada alcuna stupor le qual endeve a las mas e als pes, e als spondils del dos e ves le eysiment dels nervis les quals mavon aquel membre, e es remauguda la stupor.	And sometimes a cautery is applied to some stupor which affects the hands and feet, and the spine of both sides, and the vision of the nerves which run through that member, and the stupor is increased.
Mays no prusuma sobre aquo sino aquel que es savi en la anotomia dels membre e de la egressio dels nervis tot le cors moventz.	But do not presume on this except those who are skilled in the anatomy of the members and the course of the nerves throughout the body.
Capitol .xlix.	Capitol. xliv.
De cauterizacio de albaras que es morfea.	On the cautery treatment for swellings that are morphia.
Quan albaras es antiqua e no comfereys a lu alcu dels enguentz de medicina, lahoras tu cauteriza sobre aquela am cauteri preon un pauc segon la quantitat de la specitut de la codena entro que sia remauguda la blancor e la color de lu, e la color de lu sia mudada.	When swellings are old and do not respond to any of the medicinal ointments, then cauterize the area with a cautery, using a small amount according to the quantity of the codex. Do this until the whiteness and color of the swelling change.
E aprop cura aquel am farina de errs e de lentilhas am oli rozat e am folhas de arnagrosa, e am sanc de colomba o am sanc de yronda, da cascuna sia una partida e totas sian mescladas, e aprop sia linit un drap e sus le loc sia pausat entro que sia sanat.	And then cure that oil with a mixture of flour of ergot and lentils in clarified oil and leaves of arnica, and with dove's blood or quince seed, taking one part of each, and all mixed together. Then place a cloth over the area until it is healed.
Capitol .l.	Capitol I.
De cauterizacio de cranc.	Of cautery for the thigh.
Quan canser es comensan e vols aquel ostar, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri de cercle en le circuit de lu ayssi cum es revolgut.	When cancer begins and you want to stop it, then cautery it with a circular cautery around its circumference as it is revolved.
E diysero les savis que sia cauterizat am lo derier cauteri en le mieg loc; mays a mi no es vist aquo, quar temi que sia ulcerat, e yeu ja e vist aquo alcunas veguadas.	And the wise will say that it should be cauteryed with the latest cautery in the middle place; but I do not see this, for I fear it is ulcerated, and I have seen this several times.
E es pus dreyturier que sia cauterizat en le circuit de lu am cercle ayssi cum avem dit, o am motz cauteris.	And it is better to cautery it around its circumference with a circle, as we have said, or with multiple cauteries.
Capitol .li.	Capitol II.
De cauterizacio de adubilati.	Of cautery for adenitis.
Quan alcun adubilati es tardat en maturacio, e aysso es per la superfluitat fazen aquela, o per etat del malaute, quar es vielh en decrepitat, de pauc sanc, o per le temps, e tu vols festinar en la maturacio de adubilati; lahoras cauteriza en le circuit de lu am motz cauteris petitz punctan; e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela fastinara en maturacio.	When some adenitis is delayed in maturation, this occurs either due to excess causing it, or due to the patient's condition, as they are old and decrepit, have few sins, or due to time. If you want to hasten its maturation; then cautery it around its circumference with several small puncturing cauteries; and leave that which will mature on its own.
Mays si tu vols la perforacio de lu am cauteri, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: e depausa aquel en le mieg loc de adubilati entro que penetre la codena.	But if you want to make the puncture with a cautery, then ignite the cautery of which this is the form: and place it in the middle of the location where the needle will penetrate.
E si le cauteri en aquel loc que es pus dejos, per so que le cors del brac sia alleujat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you place the cautery there, let it be, so that the arm will be relieved; and then cure what is inside to make it heal.
Capitol .lii.	Chapter II.
De cauterizacio de corrodent.	On the cautery for corrosion.
Corrodent es corrupcio ambulant en le membre, la qual corrodeys aquel ayssi cum a foc comedent lenha secca.	Corrosion is a gradual corruption in the limb, which eats away at that part like fire consumes dry wood.
Donc si vezes aquel corrodent en loc le qual sufferte cauteri am foc, lahoras tu igneys cauteris clavils motz paucs, e grans segon que es convenent en aquel loc en le qual es corrodent.	Therefore, if you find corrosion in a location that requires a fire cautery, then ignite the cautery with several small and large points of fire as appropriate for that corrupted area.
E aprop cauteriza aquel de tota partida entro que erradiques tota la corrosio e no romangua alcuna causa de lu.	And then cautery that area completely as you remove all the corrosion and do not leave any cause of it.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres dias, e pausa sobre les locs cauterizats solpre trissat am oli mesclat entro que las scaras sian totas eradicadas e tota la corrupcio.	And allow that for three days, and place a heated cautery over the affected areas after three times applying oil mixed until all the blisters are gone and all the corruption is removed.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz carn engendrantz.	And cure that by applying ointment to the生成中，请稍候...
Mays si aprop tres dias vezes que la carn nasca sana en la qual no es corrupcio, bo es; mays sino, lahoras itera le cauteri sobre aquo que es romas en les locs corrumputz.	And if within three days the flesh grows healthy in the area where there is no corruption, that is good. But if not, then apply the cautery again to the area that is rotten in the affected places.
E corrodent es medicat alcunas vetz am medicina aguda, quar aquela es meza en loc de cauteri.	And after medicating with some applications of acute medicine, use half the area for cautery.
Mays empero cauteri am foc es de pus leugier juvament.	But however, a light cautery with fire is more beneficial for juvenile ailments.
E yeu ja e dit la curacio de lu am medicina aguda en la divisio, e donc pren aquela quan de lu auras endegencia.	And I have already explained the treatment with acute medicine in the division, so use it when you need it.
Capitol .liii.	Chapter III.lix.
De cauterizacio de claus e dels autres semblants.	On the Cauterization of Wounds and Other Similar Conditions.
Motas veguadas endeve a las partidas dejos del pe malautia que s’apela clau, e es causa grossa, fentrada, la qual ladeys le pe; e cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, so es cauteri am foc e cauteri am aygua cauda.	Small stones or gravel in the foot that cause pain, and are large, penetrating, which affect the foot; for a cautery in these cases there are two methods, one is a hot cautery and another with a cautery using water.
Mays cauteri am foc es que igniscas le cauteri concau semblant a pena de voltor, le qual sia feyt de ferr segon la quantitat la qual contengua le clau de tota partida, e sia de subtils marguas.	A hot cautery is when you heat the concave cautery tip resembling a turning poker, which is made of iron according to the quantity it contains the stone from all parts, and has thin edges.
E aprop pausa aquel ignit sobre le clau, e aprop revolveys la tua ma am le cauteri en le circuit del clau entro que·l cauteri pervengua a la profunditat del clau.	Then place the ignited part over the stone, and quickly move your hand with the cautery in a circle around the stone until the cautery reaches the depth of the stone.
E leyssa aquel per tres dias entro que comense getar brac.	Let it be for three days before it begins to scab.
E aprop emplastre aquel am malvas salvatges trissadas am sal, e leyssa le emplastre sobre aquel per una nuoyt, quar aquel sira eradicat de las suas razitz.	Then apply a plaster with wild chamomile soaked in salt, and let the plaster remain on it for one night until the stone is thoroughly removed.
E aprop cura le loc am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanat.	Then treat the area with a cream of generative flesh until it heals.
E si so no-convertitz, e motas veguadas accideysso en la superficia del cors, majorment en las mas e les pes, lahoras cove que tu aministres en aquels cauteri am aygua, e es que prenguas una quannula de eram o de ferr o de pena de voltor, e pausa aquela sobre le clau; e aprop geta en la quanula de aygua cauda pauca cantitat, e rete la tua ma, e tu revolveys aquela am compressio de la tua ma de tot, e sia enpremut le marge de la canula en la razit del clau, e atrobara la aygua cauda via al preon de la razit del cau; e espera le malaute un pauc la mordicacio de l’aygua cauda per una hora, e aprop remau aquela, quar le clau am las suas razitz sira erredicat.	If so non-converting, and motas veguadas accidentossi in the superficia del cors, majorment en las mas e les pes, lahoras cover que tu aministres en aquels cautéri am aygua, e es que prenguas una quannula de eram o de ferr o de pena de voltor, e pausa aquela sobre le clau; e aprop geta en la quanula de aygua cauda pauca cantitat, e rete la tua ma, e tu revolveys aquela am compressio de la tua ma de tot, e sia enpremut le marge de la canula en la razit del clau, e atrobara la aygua cauda via al preon de la razit del cau; e espera le malaute un pauc la mordicacio de l’aygua cauda per una hora, e aprop remau aquela, quar le clau am las suas razitz sira erredicat.
E ayssi fe am aquels la i aprop l’autre entro que venguas sobre totz les quals de lor so en le cors.	And do the same for the other entering which you come over all of them in their part of the body.
E aprop cura aquels pus que las razitz dels claus so erradicadas am aquo dels enguentz les quals la carn ve engenran.	And then cure those pus that the roots of the claws have been eradicated from what of the ointments which the flesh comes in contact with.
Capitol .liiii.	Capitol. liiii.
De cauterizacio de tremor.	Of the cautery for trembling.
Quan endeve ad alcu tremor per freg en le nervi o per febre de causa frega, o per autra causa semblant, lahoras cove que tu cauterises aquel am quatre cauteris o am v sobre les spondils del dos, entre quascun spondilh am un cauteri; e am cauteri en le pietz de lu, e sobre l‘estomac de lu, am cauteri olivar.	When there is a tremor due to friction in the nerves or from fever of some cause, or for another similar reason, then you should cautery it with four or five cauteries on the spine, placing one cautery between each vertebra; and one on the foot, and one over the stomach.
E la tremor de lu se repausa e festina la sanetat de la malautia frega.	And the tremor subsides, and the disease is cured.
Capitol .lv.	Capitol. lv.
De cauterizacio de albati accidentz al cors.	Of the cautery for accidents in the body.
Quan en le cors so espellitz albati, e so pustulas fendas las quals so feytas de materias grossas corruptas; donc cove al comensament cum apareyso, que sia cauterizat sobre tot cap de la fistola am cauteri subtil am fustz de mirt, la extremitat del qual es estenduda am foc; o am razitz de erestologia longua; o am cauteri lentecular.	When in the body there is an abscessed boil, and sores or fissures are made from corrupt thick materials; at the beginning, as they appear, let them be cauteryed with a fine cautery dipped in mirt oil, the end of which is extended over the fire; or with a rod of erestologia; or with a lens-shaped cautery.
E alscunas veguadas es cauteri ademamil al comensament de la sua expulcio segon aquesta manieyra; e no so cregudas, e es disrumpuda la superfluitat fazens aquels, et sana de aquels.	And sometimes the cautery is applied additionally at the beginning of its expulsion according to this manner; and not considering it, they break the excess, making those, and heal those.
Mays empero cove que aquo sia fayt aprop evacuacio am fleubotomia.	Moreover, I must ensure that this is done near the evacuation with flebotomy.
Capitol lvi.	Capitol the sixty-sixth.
De cauterizacio de fluex de sanc accident per incisio de arceria.	Of the cautery for flux of sand infection due to incision of artery.
Tropas veguadas endeve fluex de arceria que es inciza deves la plagua la qual endeve deforo, o deves la incizio de apostemas o cauteri del membre, e alor semblantz, e es dificil remaura aquel.	Often times, due to flux of artery that is incised and where a hole has formed, or due to the incision for apsema or cautery of the member, then the swelling appears, and it is difficult to remedy that.
Donc cum accideys ad alcu aquo, lahoras tu·t coyta am la tua ma a l’orrifici de la arceria, e pausa sobre aquel le tieu dit endic estrenh aquel motas veguadas entro que sia ostat le fluex del sanc dejos le tieu dit, e que non yesqua.	Therefore, when such a case occurs, first touch the wound with your hand at the opening of the artery, and place your hand there to strengthen that part for several moments until the flux of blood is stopped, then remove your hand so it does not swell.
E aprop pausa en le foc les cauteris olivars paucs e grantz, per nombre motz, e exsuffla sobre aquels entro que sian mot ignitz.	And then place the olive cautery in the fire for a few moments and larger ones, several times, and blow on them until they are hot.
E aprop pren de aquels un petit o un gran segon le loc e la plagua en la qual es rompuda la arteria, sobre aquela vena festinantment pus que auras remaugut le tieu dit, e te le cauteri entro que sia abcindit e restreyt aquel sanc.	And then take one small or large, according to the place and wound where the artery is ruptured, over that vein press forcefully as you have already applied your said cautery, and keep the cautery close so that it restrains the bleeding.
E si le sanc es expellit de l’orrifici de la arteria quan tu remaues le tieu dit e extringeys le cauteri, lahoras pren la un autre cauteri coytadament dels cauteris les quals en le foc son preparatz, e donc no cesses fer aquo un aprop autre entro que le sanc sia restrengit.	And if the blood is expelled from the orifice of the artery when you move your said cautery and tighten the cautery, then take another freshly prepared cautery from among those in the fire, and continue doing this one after another so that the bleeding is restrained.
E guarda te que no comburas le nervi que aqui es, e que vengua sobre le malaute autra malicia.	And make sure you do not burn the nerves here, lest another mischief come upon the patient.
E sapias que quan de l’arteria flueys sanc, lahoras no es possible en aquels restrenge la sanc, e majorment quan l’arteria es gran, si no am una de quatre manieyras: o am cauteri ayssi quo dit havem, o am extraccio quan no es extrayta, quar quan es extrayta las extremitatz de lu miels son comburidas e es restreyt le sanc, o que sia liat am fiel o am liament per fort strectura, o que sian pausadas sobre lu medicinas de las quals la vertut es restringir la sanc; e sian strengudas am pulvinar am costriccio decent.	And know that when blood flows from the artery, it is not possible to restrain the bleeding in those cases, especially when the artery is large, unless one of four methods is used: either with a cautery as we have said, or with extraction when it is not extracted, or when it is extracted, the extremities of it are burned and the bleeding is restrained, or with lixiviation with liquorice or with strong bandaging, or with poultices applied over medicines whose virtue is to restrain the bleeding; and they should be tightly wrapped in a suitable constriction.
Mays aquel que aministra restriccio decent de lu am liament e am strictura am draps o per posicio de causas comburentz e de semblantz, no comfereys sino tart.	More than that, he who administers the restriction decently to him with the flax and with constriction of cloths or by position due to burning causes and similar ones, does not conferees but tart.
Mays si aquo endeve ad alcu e no sia le metge present ni medicina, lahoras obre am pausament del dit indic sobre le orrifici de aquela vena ayssi cum havem dit, e entenda a la gran costreccio de lu entro que le sanc sia ostat de la sobirana partida de la plagua, e sobre la arceria le dit no sia remaugut; e de sobre la arceria sia aspergit am aygua frega de mot gran fregiditat entro que·l sanc sia congilat e engrossat; e mays cossire en que ha de cauteri o de medicina necessitat.	More if this should happen to someone and neither the doctor is present nor medicine, then open decently with your finger on the orifices of that vein as we have said, and feel for the great constriction within which the sore has remained from the upper part of the wound, and over the archery let the finger not be retained; and over the archery be sprinkled with cold water fomentation until the sore is closed and thickened; and more burn with cautery or medicine if necessary.
Comensa la segonda partida.	Start the second part.
De incisio e perforacio e ventozas e de fleubotomia e de plaguas e de lor semblants.	Of incision and puncture and vents and of bloodletting and of wounds and of their resemblances.
Aquestas son paraulas de Albucazis.	These are the words of Albucazis.
Ja havem dit en le primier capitol tota malautia en la qual cauteri am foc es convenient e am medicina comburent, e las occasios e las causas de lu, e les instrumentz en aquels necessaris am las formas dels cauteris; e he ordenatz les capitols de la subiranetat del cap entro als pes.	We have already said in the first chapter all illness in which cautery with fire is convenient and medicine burning, and the occasions and causes of it, and the instruments necessary among those for the forms of cauteries; and I have ordered the chapters from the upper part of the head to the feet.
E yeu procesire en aquest capitol per aquela meteysa guisa, per que sia alliujat lo querent aquo, lahoras sobre aquo que aura demandat.	And I will proceed in this chapter in that manner, so that the one who desires this may be relieved, regarding what he has requested.
E denant que yeu comense aquo, cove, fils, que aprenguatz que en aquest capitol es per terror aquo que es en le capitol primier de cauterizacio.	And before I begin this, listen, son, that in this chapter what is treated is as described in the first chapter on cautery.
E per aquo que cove que sia en lu gran cautela, quar en la operacio la qual es en aquest capitol motas veguadas catz evacuacio la qual es am sanc am le qual esta la vida deves la aspersio de la vena o incisio sobre l’apostema o apercio de exsitura o puracio de la plagua o extraccio de sageta o incizio de peyra e a lor semblantz.	And because you must be very careful, for in the operation described in this chapter, you will encounter cases where you need to perform evacuation by draining the abscess or making an incision over it, or performing drainage or purgation of the wound or extracting an arrow and beginning a cautery, or similar procedures.
E de totz aquels so acompanhatz temor e tremor e en le mas de lor catz la mort.	And in all of these, there is fear and trembling, and in the most severe cases, death.
E yeu amonesti vos que sobre vos no caia aquo en le qual es esitacio, quar alcunas veguadas cazo deves vos manieyras de homes am manieyras motas de malautias.	And I warn you that this applies to you in your own situation, for at times you may find yourself handling cases of patients suffering from diseases.
E de lor es alcu que s’irays am la sua malautia e es leugiera deves lu la mort, e aysso per la vehemensia de aquo que troba de sa malautia, e per longuesa de la malautia de lu, e am la malautia es paor la qual significa mort.	And some of them will go to their illness and are slight cases, you must give them death, for the severity of what they find due to their illness, and because of the long duration of their illness, and in their illness is fear which means death.
E de aquels es le qual dona a tu son aver e ditta, tu esperant am aquel sanetat, e la sieua malautia es perniciosa.	And of those which give to you their affection and have told, you expecting from that health, and their disease is pernicious.
E donc no cove que tu consentas en aquel que ve a vos del qual es aquesta manieyra; e la vostra cautela sia major que covesitat e la vostra rapacitat; e no presumatz alcuna causa sobre aquo sino aprop sciencia certa la qual virifica aquo deves vos, e al qual perve successio lausabla.	And therefore you must consent to that which comes to you from him who is this manner; and your caution be greater than covetousness and your rapacity; and do not presume on any cause but rather certain science which verifies what you should do, and to which through success a praiseworthy result follows.
E usatz en la curacio de totz vostres malautes de pronosticacio e indicacio de lu al qual es salut convertida, quar en aquel es a vos ajutori sobre adquisicio de fama e de memoria, de lausor e de gloria.	And use in the cure of all your patients by prognosis and indication of him to whom health is converted, for in that you have assistance in the acquisition of fame and memory, of praise and glory.
O, filhs, Dieus en vos spire le sieu entendement e no oste a vos direccio e proteccio, quar aquo es en la sua ma.	O, children, God infuses His own understanding into you and does not deprive you of direction and protection, for this is in His hand.
E yeu e ordenat aquest capitol distingent per capitols segon que precedit en le capitol de cauteris, de la cura del cap entro als pes, per que sia a vos alleujat aquo que demandatz de aquo e del qual havetz necessitat.	And I have ordered this chapter distinguished by chapters according to what was preceded in the chapter of cauteries, concerning the cure from head to foot, that you may be relieved with what you asked and of which you have need.
Capitol primier.	First chapter.
De la curacio de aygua la qual es contenguda en le cap dels enfantz.	For the treatment of water contained in the head of children.
Sapias que aquesta malautia motas veguadas endeve als enfantz deves le enfantament e quan la noyrissa estrenh le cap del enfant ses livitat.	Know that this illness, which often appears in children, should be treated during childbirth and when the mother's body strengthens the child's head.
E alcunas veguadas endeve per causa amaguada la qual no es saubuda.	And sometimes appear for hidden causes that are not known.
Mays yeu no vi aquesta malautia sino en les enfantz; e a totz aquels les quals yeu vi se coytec la mort, e per ayssi es a mi vist layssada obra en aquels.	But I have not seen this illness in adults; and for all those I have seen with it, death has followed, so I am left to work on them.
E yeu e vist que un enfant le cap del qual era d’aygua omplit, e·l cap de lu era totjorn ayssi magnificat entro que ceser no podia sobre si meteys per la grandesa del sieu cap, e mays que la humiditat fe aucmentada entro que foc mort.	And I have seen that a child's head was filled with water, and his head remained constantly swollen until it could no longer bear the weight due to the size of his head, and more so because the moisture increased until death.
E aquesta humiditat o es agreguada entre la codena e l’os, o es agreguada dejos le os sobre le ciphac.	And this moisture is either added between the membrane and the bone, or added by placing something over the head.
Quar la operacio en aquel si la humiditat es entre la codena e l’os e le apostema es pauc, lahoras cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am una fissura en la latitut, e sia la longitut de la fissura cays dos notz entro que corra la humiditat, e aquesta es la forma del spatum:	When the operation in that place where moisture is between the tendon and the bone and the abscess is small, then cut in the middle of the location making a crack in the width, such that the length of the crack allows the moisture to flow through, and this is the form of the spout:
E donc si la humiditat es mays augmentada e l’apostema es major, lahoras son aqui dos fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	And so, if the moisture is greatly increased and the abscess is larger, then here make two cracks in this manner:
E si la humiditat es dejos le os, senhal de lu es que tu vezes la comissuras del cap ubertas de tota partida e l’aygua es spremuda quan tu compremes aquela am la tieua ma a las partidas dedintz e no es aquo a tu amaguat.	And if the moisture leaves the bone, the sign of this is that you see the edges of the tendon widely separated and the water spews out when you press on it with your hand at the inner parts; this is not what you want to hide.
Cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am tres fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	Cut in the middle of the location making three cracks in this manner:
e aprop la inscizio extratz ne tota la humiditat; e aprop strenh las fissuras am draps e plumassols; e aprop enbroca aquo de sobre am vi e oli entro al quint dia, e aprop deslia le liament e cura la plagua am tentas e enguentz, e strenh le cap am equalitat; e mange le malaute am vianda secca de pauca humiditat entro que·l membre sia confortat e sanat.	and then extract all the moisture; and strengthen the cracks with bandages and feathers; and on the fifth day, pour oil over it; and remove the dressing and treat the wound with ointments, strengthening the tendon with equal parts; let the patient eat dry food of little moisture until the limb is comfortable and healed.
E es autra manieyra de incisio, que consideras hon apar la magnitut del apostema e la colleccio de l’aygua, quar alcunas veguadas es mays en le occipicii, o en la partida denant, o en la destra, o en la sinistra; e donc aten am la incizio on appar le apostema e la replecio de l’aygua, e fen aquo segon que a tu es miels possible.	And another method of incision, which consider as great the magnitude of the abscess and the collection of the water, for in some occasions it is more in the occiput, or in the front part, or on the right side, or on the left; and therefore attend to the incision where the abscess appears and the filling with water, and do so according to what is most convenient to you.
Et observa que no inscindas la arteria e endevengua flueys de sanc e mora le malaute per aquel flux de sanc am evacuacio de humiditat.	And observe that you do not incise the artery and attempt to let the venom of the boil flow out through that flux of blood, as this would cause harm to the patient.
Capitol .ii.	Chapter II.
De inscisio de las arterias las quals so aprop las aurelhas, apeladas hilasseysse.	Of the incision of the arteries which are near the ears, called hila.
Capitol segon.	Chapter II.
Quan endeveno ad alcu catars o raumas als huelhs o al pietz, e es antiquat aquo, e no confereys en aquo la curacio de las medicinas, lahoras la deriera curacio en aquest es incizio de aquelas dos arterias.	When an abscess or wound is found in the ear or on the foot, this method is ancient, and you should not rely on the treatment of medicines for it; instead, the proper treatment involves incising those two arteries.
E donc cove quan tu vols inscidir aquelas que le malaute raza lo sieu cap, e aprop fregua le loc am drap aspre per so que aparan las arcerias, e aprop sia strengut le col del malaute am alcu drap; e aprop considera on polsa la vena; e les locs de quascuna sobre les locs les quals so aprop las aurelhas depremutz, e tant se occultan sino en alcus homes.	And when you want to incise those that the bad humor reaches its head, then rub the area with rough cloth so that the arteries appear, and strengthen the neck of the patient with some cloth; and consider where the pulse is in the vein; and the locations of each over the locations which are near the ears pressing, and they are hidden in almost all people.
E aprop senha sobre la arceria am tenta, e aprop inscideys quascuna am le spatum de quascuna partida agut am inscizio pervenient entro al os, e sia aquo per la latitut del cap.	And place the hand over the artery with force, and incise each with the blade of a sharp knife penetrating into the mouth, and do this for the breadth of the head.
E si vols, entromet le spatum dejos la arteria e trenqua aquala a las inciden a las partidas desus.	And if you want, insert the blade leaving the artery and cut it at the points where the incisions are above.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio cays dos ditz ajustatz, quar quan alcuna vena es inscizida le sanc es eyssit am egressio pulsatil, le qual saut deforo per saut frequent.	And let the length of the incision be two digits wide, for when any vein is incised, the wound is healed at the pulsating exit, which leaps forth due to frequent pulsation.
Mays si la arceria no apareys al cintiment, lahoras cove que tu mesures de la aurelha la quantitat del spazi de tres ditz, e aprop senha am tenta, e fen entro al os.	And if the artery does not appear at the incision, then measure from the ear the quantity of three digits, and place the hand with force, and make the incision into the mouth.
E aquo que cove getar del sanc es quantitat de vi unc., e fort leu ne geta de lu mays o mens, e tot aquo es segon la quantitat la qual appareys de la vertut del malaute e de la replecio de la arceria de lu.	And that which flows from the wound is a quantity of blood one pound, and rather more or less, and all this is according to the quantity which appears from the virtue of the malady and from the fullness of the artery of the part.
E aprop considera la plagua, e donc si reman sobre le os alcuna causa del ciphac, lahoras inscindys aquo per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then consider the wound, and thus if any cause of infection remains on the bone, cut this away so that no abscess forms.
E aprop strenh la plagua am plumassols e am liamentz de drap de li, e aprop cura aquela am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then strengthen the wound with down feathers and linen cloth, and place it in ointments until it heals.
Capitol .iii.	Chapter III.
De extraccio de las arcerias las quals so en las templas.	On the extraction of the arteries which are in the temples.
Quan ad alcu accideys emigranea antiqua o catertz agutz, per humiditatz agrimonials e per qualiditat en les lacertz des templas, o sodo antiqua vehement e semblantz ad aquels, e es medicat am las manieyras de curacio de medicina e aquo no comfereys, lahoras nos hem sproatz en aquestas malautias extraccio de las arcerias en les templas, o cauterizacio de aquelas ayssi cum havem mostrat.	When an old or acute migraine occurs due to humid atmospheric conditions and the quality of the air in the temples, or if it is a strong old headache similar to those, and is treated according to the methods of medical cure, and since this does not alleviate the condition, then we have resorted to the extraction of the arteries in the temples or cauterization of those as we have shown.
E la manieyra de la operacio e extracio de aquelas es que·l malaute raza les pels les quals son en les templas; e entenda a la arceria apparent en le templar quar ela es a tu mostrada per le sieu pols, e·s occultada sino en paucs homes per vehemencia de freg.	And the manner of the operation and extraction is that you grasp the parts where the skin is on the temples; and understand the apparent artery in the temple where it is shown to you by your pulse, and is hidden in only a few men due to the strength of the cold.
E si a tu es occultada, lahoras le col del malaute sia strengut am alcun drap; e aprop fregua le loc am un drap aspre o evapora le loc am aygua cauda entro que aparesca a tu la arceria manifestament.	And if it is hidden to you, then hold the neck of the patient tightly with some cloth; and then rub the area with a rough cloth or evaporate the place with water until the artery becomes clearly visible.
E lahoras tu pren le spatum del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then you take the spatium of which this is the form:
E aprop tu scorja la codena am aquel am facilitat entro que pervenguas a la arceria; e aprop geta en lu onti e extratz aquela a las partidas sobiranas entro que extraguas aquela de la codena e descobras aquela de las tunicas las quals so dejos aquela, de tota partida.	And then you insert the needle there with ease until you reach the artery; and then get oil in it and extract that part above as you remove that from the needle and uncover those of the tunics which you leave there, from all parts.
Mays si la arteria es subtil, lahoras envolveys aquela am la extremitat del oncii, e aprop inscindeys de aquela una partida segon la quantitat per la qual sian alonguadas las extremitatz de lu e sian contraytas, e no endevindra flux de sanc, quar si no so inscididas no pujara le sanc de tot.	But if the artery is fine, then you envelop it with the tip of the forceps, and then divide a part thereof according to the quantity for which the extremities of it are long and contracted, and thus will not allow the flow of the vein; for if they are not divided, the blood will not rise up.
E aprop evacua del sanc de vi unc. entro a tres.	And then evacuate from the vein one third.
E si la arceria es gran, lahoras cove que tu lies aquela en dos locs am fiel dopble fort de ceda o am cordas a lonc, e no coyte a lu putrefaccio denant la consolidacio de la plagua e endevengua flux de sanc.	And if the artery is large, then divide it into two locations using a piece of flax double its thickness or with long cords, and do not touch it before the consolidation of the wound and ensure a flow of blood.
E aprop incideys la superfluitat la qual es entre dos liamentz; e fay aquo en aquela hora o aprop autra ora.	And then incise the superfluous tissue between two ligaments; and do so at that time or soon after.
E si vols, cauteriza aquela am cauteri entro al os am cauteri cutellar entro que sian incididas las extramitatz de lu, e stara en loc de aquela meteyssa obra.	And if you wish, cauterize it with a cautery on the bone and with a surgical knife at the points where they have been incised, and it will serve in place of that operation.
E es milhor obra sino que·l malaute aia febre o es de escalfada compleccio; quar cauteri es de aquelas causas que ajudan a las humiditatz finidoras, e donc es milhor en juvament.	And it is better to do so if the patient has fever or is of a febrile nature; for a cautery is among those causes that help in resolving humidity, and therefore it is better for healing.
E cove aprop la extraccio de las arcerias que huomplas le loc de coto antic, e sian pausatz sobre lu polvils decentement fayt, e aprop sia curat am medicinas seccas fazen naysser la carn e am calguas entro que sia sanat.	And then remove the arteries that you have placed in their proper location, and cover them with dust properly made, and apply medicine to cure them; for flesh to grow and for them to be healed.
E si mentre obres autra veguada endeventa flux de sanc de la arceria, lahora tu te coyta a restrenger aquel sanc, o am cauteri, o que omplas le loc de coto, e strenh la tua ma entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if during another operation you encounter a flow of blood from the artery, then you should constrict that blood, with a cautery or by filling the area with cotton, and firmly hold your hand to keep the blood flow restricted.
E si deguna causa de aquelas no es a tu present, lahoras pausa le tieu dit sobre le loc entro que·l sanc sia congilat, e enbroca le loc am aygua de vehement fregiditat entro que la acuitat repausa, e sia strengut segon que cove.	And if for any of those reasons it is not at your present, then place your hand over the area firmly to constrict the blood, and apply the area with water of strong refrigeration to allow the acute pain to subside, and strengthen it as needed.
E aquo que es pus leugier en extraccio de arceria es que tu cauterizes la vena am aquest cauteri haventz dos cotels, pus que tu has senhat les dos locs am tenta, e depausa quascus, mot ignitz, entro que pervenguan al os e inscindan la vena en dos locs, per so que sia elonguat aquo que es entre las extremitatz de lu, quar no son consolidadas de tot am aquest cauteri.	And for the easier part of arterial extraction, you should cauteryize the vein with this cautery using two knives, after marking the two areas with probes, and hold flamed sticks over them until they reach the bone and incise the vein in two places, so that what is between the ends of the vein can be extended, which are not fully cauterized by this cautery.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri:	And this is the form of the cautery:
E sia la acuitat dels dos cotels esemps.	And let the sharpness of the two knives be evident.
Mays empero si so mendres acuitat que dos cotels es milhor, quar si so agudas cum dos cotels propera a quascuna freg, e no enscideysso la carn am velocitat.	But otherwise if the pains are acute as two knives, it is better, for they approach each part quickly like two knives, and do not cut the flesh hastily.
Donc cum en aquels es alcuna grossitut, es tenguda la calor del foc en aquels e la carn es abscindida leugierament.	Therefore, when there is some swelling, hold the heat from the fire there and the flesh is cut slightly.
E aquesta obra es milhor en tota obra e pus leugiera.	And this method is better in all works and more gentle.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre dos cotels la quantitat de la grossesa del dit.	And let the space which is between two knives be the amount of the swelling of the digit.
Capitol quart.	Capitular fourth.
De la cura de cors de lagremas agudas e aciduas dels huels.	Of the treatment of bodies with acute and acidic tears from the eyes.
Quan so lagremas aciduas, e es le cors de aquelas venas las quals so sobre le test del cap deforo, e no comfereys en aquo alcuna causa de la curacio de medicina, e vezes la cara del malaute ja enrogesir e sent en le sieu front deambulacio ayssi cum si era deambulacio de formiguas, e·ls huels de aquel so extenuatz, humitz enayssi que ja les pels de lor son conodutz, e las parpelas so scalfadas per la acuitat de las lacrimas, les antics agro mesties en la curacio de aquelas de aquesta operacio, e nompnero aquela curacio am spassa.	When the tears are acidic, and the body of those veins which are above the root of the head do not respond to any cause of treatment by medicine, and sometimes the face of the patient turns red and feels a crawling sensation on their forehead as if it were being crawled over by ants, and the eyes become weak, moistened, and seem to be known, with the eyelids scalded by the acidity of the tears, they use traditional remedies in the treatment of these cases during this operation, and name that treatment "passa.
E es que tu comandas al malaute rayre les pels les quals son en le sieu front, e aprop inscideys en le front tres fissuras engualment distans segon la longitut del front.	And you command the patient to stretch the skin on their forehead, and then incise the forehead with three equally spaced cuts according to the length of the forehead.
E si’ la longitut de la fissura cays dos ditz: la una fissura sia engualment distant a la longitut del nas en le mieg loc del front, e la segonda segon la longitut un petit del movement dels lacertz les quals so en le lacrimal, e la tersa del autre part.	And if the length of the incision is two fingers: the first incision should be equally distant from the length of the nose in the middle of the forehead, and the second according to the length of a small movement of the tears which are in the lacrimal, and the third on the other part.
E guarda te de la incizio de las arcerias las quals so en dos latz, e elongua la tua ma de la continuacio de amdos las mandibulas.	And beware of the beginning of the arteries which are in two branches, and keep your hand away from the continuation of both jaws.
E si’ l’espazi de quascuna inscizio la quantitat de tres ditz ajustatz.	And if the space of each incision the quantity of three fingers adjusted.
E si’ a tu una pessa d’espongua apparelhada o draps seccatz motz am les quals exsiccas le sanc.	And if you have a piece of sponge apparatus or dry cloth at hand, place them on those areas to stop the bleeding.
E aprop entremet le spatum de dos agudas extremitatz, del qual aquesta es la forma de la inscisio de lu:	And then insert the point of two sharp extremities, of which this is the form of the incision:
que es de la partida des templas entro a la segonda inscizio.	that is from the temple part into the second incision.
Exxcorja am aquel tota la codena la qual es entre dos incizios am le ciphac le qual es sobre le os, e aprop fay aquo de la inscizio migera entro a la segonda inscisio.	Excise all the tissue that is between two incisions near the cavity which is above the bone, and then do the same for the middle incision into the second incision.
E aprop stratz ne aquest spatum e entromet en la primieyra inscizio autra vetz un autre instrument le qual es apelat cutellar, agut de una part e del autre no agut.	Then stab this flap and insert it into the first incision. Alternatively, use another instrument called a cuttelet, sharp on one side and blunt on the other.
E pausa le latz de aquel agut deves la carn annexa deves la codena, e le latz de lu leon dintz le os, e empelley aquel entro que pervengua a la fissura migera, e abscindeys am aquel totz les vaysels que descendo del cap als huels.	Then place the sharp edge to the adjacent flesh, excise the tissue, and insert the sharp edge inside the bone. Push it into the middle crack and cut all the vessels that descend from the head to the feet.
Mays que sia continuada la inscizio ad aquo appar de la codena, e aprop fay aquo en la fissura migana entro al autra fissura.	More than that, continue the incision to where the tissue appears, and then do so in the middle crack between the other crack.
E pus que corr del sanc quantitat engual, exprem les locs de las pessas del sanc congilat.	And after the bleeding has stopped in equal quantity, squeeze the areas of the feet where the clotted blood is located.
E aprop pausa en quascuna fissura calgua de coto vielh, e pausa sobre aquels polvils enbegutz en vi e oli e vi agre, e vegas que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then place over any gouty crack in the old foot, place over those powders mixed in wine and oil and honey, and ensure that it does not lead to an abscess.
E en le tertz dia deslia le liament e aministra gran enfusio de aygua cauda o tebeza, e aprop cura aquo am enguent bazilicon am oli rozat e autres entro que las plaguas sian sanadas.	On the seventh day after the ligature, administer a large fomentation of warm water or wine, and then apply an ointment of basilicum mixed with sweet oil to other areas where the sores have healed.
Capitol .v.	Chapter V.
De la cura de lagramas per catartz e als huels descendentz de las partidas dedintz del cap.	For the cure of tears due to catarrh and those drops descending from the parts inside the head.
Quan ad alcu veno catartz agutz e continuantz, e vezes les huels del malaute extenuatz petitz, e ja le reguardament de lor es debelitat, e las palpebras ulceradas e de lor cazo les pels, e en le preon del cap es dolor aguda ledent e extrenutacio consequent, lahoras sapias per aquestz accidentz que las materias e catartz no veno sino de motas venas de las partidas dedintz procedent.	When there is an acuter and continuous catarrh, and the drops from the foot are small and exhausted, and their regardament shows debilitation, and the eyelids are ulcerated and of their case the skin, and in the prepuce of the head there is acute pain and subsequent extension, then you may perceive from these accidents that the materials and catarrh do not come from veins within the parts.
E la milhor curacio en aquels es aquesta: que comandes al malaute que raza lo sieu front, e aprop inscideys en aquel una fissura al mieg loc del front, un petit per la latitut (e comensa am la fissura del templar senestre entro al dextre templar; e sia inscisio entro al os; e eslongua la tua ma dels lacertz del templas lesquals son maugutz deves la mastigacio), entro que sia le os descubert.	And the best cure in such cases is this: you command the patient to raise his forehead, and then incise a small crack in the middle of the forehead, about the width of your thumb (and start from the left temple between the right temple; and where the incision is into the bone, extend your hand over the wrinkles of the temples which are prominent, and should be thoroughly excised), until the bone is exposed.
Exsicca tot le sanc am espongua o am drap secc e aprop repleys entre las doas labias de la fissura am coto vielh o am draps de li.	Dry all the blood on the sponge or dry cloth and then place it between the two lips of the crack with a piece of old skin or a cloth.
E aprop estrenh desus am polvils enbegutz en vi e oli per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	Strengthen on top with powders mixed in wine and oil so that no abscess forms.
E quan deslias aquo e veses que l’apostema ja es diminuit, lahoras cove que fregua le os entro que comensa en lu nayser carn, e aprop cura aquel am regiment exsiccatiu le qual fassa neysser la carn, ayssi cum si tu prenes de farina de froment dos partidas e de colofania quatre partidas e mescla o, e de lor sia fayt emplastre e sia aministrat en aquestas plaguas a de la carn nativitat.	And when you remove this and see that the abscess has diminished, then apply fomentations to where the new flesh begins to form, and then cure it with a drying regimen which causes the flesh to dry, as if you take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of resin and mix them, and from them make a poultice and administer it to these wounds of the native flesh.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter VI.
De la cura de aquo que catz en las aurelhas.	Of the cure for what cats in the ears.
Tota causa que catz en las aurelhas es una de quatre specias, quar o es peyra mineral o causa semblant a peyra, ayssi cum ferr e veyre, o es de planta ayssi cum ceze o fava, o es causa fluxtibla ayssi cum aygua e vi agre e a lor semblantz, o alcuna bestia.	All causes that cat in the ears are of four species: one is mineral gravel or a cause similar to gravel, such as iron or sand, another is from plants such as cucumber or bean, another is a fluid cause such as water or thickened wine and their like, or some animal.
E donc quan peyra catz en l’aurelha o autra causa semblant de aquelas causas que no ajustan ne creysso en l’aurelha, e pausa la aurelha al solelh, e si vezes la peyra, lahoras distilla en aquela alcuna causa de oli violat o sizami, e aprop aministra la extraccio de lu, e fay le stornudar am condizi, e oppila las nars deve le aveniment de stornutacio.	And when there is pain in the ear or another cause seeming like those causes that do not affect nor swell the ear, and you place the ear in the sun, and if one touches it, then it distills in some cause of olive oil or sesame, then return the extraction of it, and make him sneeze with a condiment, and close his nostrils to prevent the onset of sneezing.
E aprop pausa en le circuit de la aurelha alscunas pessas de drap o lana, e dextendas la aurelha a las partidas desus, quar motas veguadas es foro-getada am aquestas causas.	And place some pieces of cloth or wool in the circuit of the ear, and extend the ear to the parts above, where small particles seem to be affected by these causes.
E si no n’es getada, lahoras aministra extraccio de lu am le instrument apelat gesti epicicarios subtil del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if it is not affected, then administer the extraction of it with the instrument called gesti epicicarios subtil, the form of which is as follows:
E si es foro-getada am gesti, bo es; e sino, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am onci subtil de pauca duplicacio.	And if it is affected by the gesti, that is good; otherwise, then administer the extraction of it with the fine-once subtil of few duplications.
E donc si no es foro-getada per aquo, lahoras fay una canula de aram e entromet la extremitat de la canula en le trauc de la aurelha e claus a l’enviro de la canula am cera e am oli mollificada per so que no sia ubert sino la canula.	And if it is not affected by this, then make a cannula of wire and insert the end of the cannula into the meatus of the ear and close around the cannula with wax and with oil softened so that only the cannula is open.
E aprop extratz am le tieu vent am fort atraccio, quar tropas veguadas cum aquo que havem recontat.	And then extract the spleen with strong traction, for too many times as we have recounted.
Mays si no es foro-getada en aquesta manieyra, lahoras pren de halka alumbat o de vecz aparelhat am le qual son preses les ausels una patita quantitat, e pausa aquel en la extremitat de ray, e aprop envolopa sobre aquel coto decentment pausat.	If it is not completely removed in this manner, then take some alum or vinegar-soaked cloth on which the galls are placed and place that at the extremity of the vein, and then properly wrap around that area sufficiently.
E aprop entromet aquel en le trauc de la aurelha am facilitat, e aprop excicca la aurelha de la humiditat.	And then insert that into the channel of the ear with ease, and then dry the ear of its moisture.
E donc si no es foro-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recontadas, lahoras tu coyta a talhar aquela denant que endevengua apostema caut o espasme.	And if it is not completely removed by all the causes we have recounted, then incise to excise that which intends to become an abscess or spasm.
E la manieyra de talhar aquela es que tu al comensament sancnes le malaute de la vena sephasica e extratz del sanc segon la mannieyra de la vertut de lu, e aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas e converteys l’aurelha a las partidas desus, e fen am petita fissura en la razit de la aurelha deves lo greys de lu en le loc be premegut de lu.	And the method of incising it is that at the beginning you mark the location of the evil in the pharyngeal vein and extract the sanc according to the virtue of the vein, then make a cut between your fingers and turn the ear upwards, and make a small fissure in the root of the ear, insert its grey matter into the well-compressed area.
E sia la fissura de figura lunar entro que pervengua a la peyra, e, la peyra atrobada, osta aquela si podes am instrumentz apropriatz; e aprop cos la fissura en aquela hora am velocitat, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And let the crack have the shape of the moon and lead to the heel, and if the heel is darkened, obstruct it if possible with appropriate instruments; then close the crack while it is in that state with speed, and cure it while it is healed.
E si la causa cazent en la aurelha es un dels gras que creysso e so inflatz, lahoras aministra la curacio e la extraccio de lu; mays si no obezeys a tu ad eyssiment, lahoras tu pren spatum teune subtil segon aquesta forma:	And if the cause lies in the ear, being one of those waxes that accumulates and is inflamed, then administer the treatment and extraction of it; but if it does not yield to your attempts, then take fine thin spathae according to this form:
e aministra am aquel la abscizio de aquel gra lo qual es cazut en l’aurelha.	And administer to it the extraction of that wax which is embedded in the ear.
E no fassas aquo quan cogitas que aquel ja es humectat per la vapor del aurelha, e pausa aquel en motas pessas, e prop extratz ne aquelas am les oncis o am gesti subtil, o ab inscizio ayssi co dit havem, quar es alleujada la extraccio de lu.	And do not do this when you think that it is already moistened by the vapor of the ear, and place it on fine wicks, and then extract it with tweezers or by gentle grasping, or by incision as we have said, for this makes the extraction easier.
Mays en l’aygua la qual es intrada en l’aurelha cove que·l malaute use de sternutacio am condizi al comensament, e omple la sieua aurelha am alcu coto vielh, e jagua sobre aquela aurelha en la qual es l’aygua, e si per aquo es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, lahoras pren tropas peyras teunas e leons segon la longitut del dit, e calfa aquelas en le foc un pauc, e le pacient entrometa una de aquelas en le trauc de la sua aurelha e saute sobre la un pe sieu de aquela partida e percussia am una autra peyra sobre la peyra la qual es dintz la aurelha.	But in the water which has entered into the ear canal that the patient uses to sneeze with a gesture at the onset, and fills his ear with some old wax, pour hot liquid over that ear in which is the water, and if it is thereby expelled, that is good; but if not, then take small pieces of pears or lemons according to the length of the digit, heat them in the fire for a little while, and have the patient insert one of those into the passage of his ear and sit over a portion of that mixture and percuss it with another piece of pear on the pear which is inside the ear.
Donc no cesse aquo am peyra entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada.	Do not stop applying the heat until all the water has been expelled.
E ja l’aygua sira foro-getada enayssi que tu prenguas de papier o de gonc i, e met la una extremetat de lu en l’aurelha e estendas l’autre extremitat am foc entro que sia comburit le may de lu.	And once the water has been sufficiently expelled, take a paper or wick, and insert one end into the ear and extend the other end into the fire until the material is burned.
E prop met i autre gonc e fay aquo tantas veguadas entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada, e stratz aquel am canula ayssi co desus es dit de la peyra extrasadora.	And put another wick and do this several times until all the water has been expelled, then remove it with a catheter as previously described.
Mays en la extraccio de bestia intrant en aquela aurelha, si es a petit cos, ayssi piussa e a lu semblant, cura aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio; mays si es de gran cos la qual causa apar al sen del vezement, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am gesti e oncis, e la causa de lu es pus leugiera de totas las autras causas que cazo en l’aurelha.	In the extraction of a small object entering that ear, handle it more carefully and as similar to how we described in the division. But if it is a large object causing pain quickly, then perform the extraction with speed and precision, as the cause is less severe compared to all other causes that affect the ear.
Mays en la extraccio de verm engendrat en la aurelha, quan tu curas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e en le tractat de distillacios e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu reguardes la aurelha al solelh.	In the extraction of a worm generated in the ear, when you treat it as we described in the division and in the treatise on distillations, and if your treatment does not seem effective, then look into the ear in the sunlight.
E donc si apar aqui alcuna causa dels verms, lahoras extratz aquel am gesti o am onci subtils, mays si no apar deguna causa, lahoras pren una canula dejos streyta e desus ampla de la qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if there appears any cause of worms here, then extract that with forceps or fine tweezers, but if no cause appears, then take a cannula and stretch it open.
E entromet la extremitat subtil en la aurelha segon la quantitat la qual suffertar puesca le malaute; e aprop sucgeys am aquela per succio fort, e fay aquo motas veguadas, entro que totz les verms sian foro-gitatz.	I insert the subtle extremity into the ear according to the amount that the patient can tolerate; and then suck it out forcefully, performing this multiple times until all the worms are extracted.
Mays si no obezeysso a tu al ayssiment, lahoras tu opila e claus en le circuit de la canula am cera ayssi cum havem dit; lahoras aministre distillacios las quals han ja esproadas les antics en la curacio dels verms, e atrobaras aquo en le tractat de distillacios.	But if it does not respond to your attempt, then you open and close the circuit of the cannula with wax as we have said; then administer distillations that have already proven effective in the treatment of worms, and you will find this in the treatise on distillations.
E sia la tua efusio am la qual efundas les olis medicinas en la aurelha am aquest strument del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And let your effusion be with that which you pour medicines into the ear with this instrument, of which this is the form:
E fay aquela de argent o de eram, dejos streyt, en le qual sia un petit trauc, e am pla desus.	And make it of silver or copper, stretch it out, in which there is a small tube, and with a flat surface above.
E donc sia cum empellent a que es en la conquavitat de la canula de continent aqui on sira necessari.	And thus as they push so that it is in the cavity of the cannula here where it will be necessary.
E si vols, pren le ray e envolveys en la extremitat de lu decentment coto, e aprop gieta oli en la concavitat del auziment, o suc de alcuna herba, o aquo que vols de aquestas medicinas en la canula — e aquela es en la aurelha —, e aprop entromet le ray am coto desus e exprem am la tua ma aquel am compressio temprada de lu entro que l’oli sia expellit en la concavitat del auziment e le malaute senta le oli dedintz.	And if you wish, take the wick and wrap it properly around its end, then place oil in the cavity of the ear, or the juice of some herb, or any of these medicines in the cannula — that is in the ear —, and then insert the wick carefully above and squeeze your hand with a gentle compression so that the oil is expelled into the cavity of the ear and the patient feels the oil inside.
E aquo que sia enfundut en la aurelha sia ja scalfat am foc un petit.	And what is infused in the ear should already be heated over fire for a little while.
E guarda te que la causa la qual distillaras en l’aurelha no sia trop frega, quar las medicinas de aurelha no suffertan aquo.	And make sure that the medicine you will distill in the ear is not too hot, for ear medicines do not tolerate this.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter VII.
De curacio de opilacio de aurelhas.	On the Treatment of Ear Abscesses.
Alcunas veguadas alcus enfantz yeysso dels ventres de lors mayres no-perforatz, e aquo ja accideys en alcus homes, opilacio en le meat de la aurelha per plagua o per carn nada en aquela; e aquesta opilacio alcunas veguadas es fayta en le preon del trau de la aurelha la qual no consiec le vezement, e alcunas veguadas es en las partidas defora.	Sometimes children are born with abscesses in the ears of their parents who do not have perforated ears, and this happens occasionally in adults as well, with an abscess forming in the meat of the ear due to infection or injury; sometimes these abscesses occur in the preauricular area which does not reach the surface.
E aquela que accideys en le preon de lu, la qual no comprehen le vezement, es en las majors disposicios de dificil sanacio.	And that which happens in the pubis of the patient, which does not admit the hand, is in the major positions difficult to heal.
E en aquela en qual consegueys le vezement, cove que tu pauses la aurelha del malaute al solelh e reguarda en aquela.	And in that where you can reach the surface, make sure that you place the patient in the sun and examine it carefully.
E donc si vezes oppulacio apparent, obre aquela am espatum subtil del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if you see an apparent swelling, open the small incision beneath it from which this swelling arises:
Si’ la extremitat de lu en la qual sia petita la latitut, del qual la una partida sia aguda e l’autra no; e le spatum sia de dos latz leon per so que no fassa lizio al aurelha.	If the extremity in which the width is small, and one part is sharp while the other is not; and the incision is of two lion's teeth so that it does not irritate the ear:
E donc si la opilacio es per carn nascuda en la aurelha o en le meat de lu, lahoras te aquela am oncis subtils e incidiys aquela vehement facilitat entro que sia ostada tota la carn.	And if the opacity is due to hidden flesh in the ear or in the meat of the ear, then make small incisions and cut deeply enough to remove all the flesh.
E si opilacio es en le preon de la aurelha, lahoras pren ray subtil leon e escalfa aquel am foc un pauc, e aprop met aquel en le meat de l’aurelha.	And if the opacity is in the pubis of the ear, then take a thin lion's claw and heat that iron slightly in fire, and then apply it to the flesh of the ear.
E donc si as scentit oppulacio am aquo que le malaute atroba am facilitat, per gravetat de ausir, esforsa la oppressio de lu am facilitat; e guarda te que no plagues les nervis del aurelha.	And therefore if you sense an effusion in that which the patient suffers from with ease due to the weight of urination, relieve the oppression with ease; and be careful not to injure the nerves of the ear.
E aprop pausa en l’aurelha drap de li segon la quantitat del ample del trauc lo qual tu as envolvutz en l’enguent egipciac; e fay aquo per alcus jorns entro que sias segur de la consolidacio de la plagua; o que prenguas qualgua e enfon aquela en ayguaros e pulveriza sobre lu segi trissat e usa de lu; e si vezes la aurelha ja esser apostemada, lahoras cove que tu estraguas la qualgua e permutes aquela am autra qualgua la qual tu envoloparas en cerot que sia fayt am oli rozat, entro que sia le apostema caut cedat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then place the cloth in the ear according to the size of the wound which you have covered with Egyptian ointment; and do this for several days until you are sure of the healing of the sore; or that you moisten it and insert it in water, and powder it over the healed area, using it. And if you see the ear already protruding, then scoop out what you have damaged and replace it with another kind of substance which you wrap in a cloth made of rubbed oil, until the abscess is reduced; and cure that as it heals.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras submergeys esponga o drap en aygua frega e pausa sobre la aurelha, e usa del autra curacio la qual restrengeys le flux del sanc, la qual es dita en le tractat de distillacio.	But if a bleeding occurs, then submerge the sponge or cloth in cold water, apply it to the ear, and use the other treatment which constricts the flow of blood, as mentioned in the treatise on distillation.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter VIII.
De cura de athezil le qual endeveno a las palpebras.	Of the care of tetanus which affects the eyelids.
Athezil les quals endeveno a las paupebras dels huels alcuna veguada so humitz, alscunas veguadas son secs.	Tetanus which affects the eyelids; some cases are humid, while others are dry.
Donc cove que tu tenguas aquels am tenhalhas o am onci, e inscindas aquels am espatum de las suas razitz, e aprop pausa sobre les locs segi trissat.	Therefore, ensure that you have those ready, either needles or lancets, and incise those with the foam of their rash, and place your hand over the areas after trepanning.
Mays si dolor am flux de sanc veno, lahoras tu cauteriza aquels am cauteri lanticular subtil.	But if there is pain with a flow of scrotal venous blood, then you cauterize those with a pointed cautery.
E la milhor cauterizacio es aprop las inscizios e tropas veguadas retornam quan reman alcuna causa de sas razitz; e quan so cauterizadas am foc, aquelas razitz son comburidas e no retornan.	And the best cauterization is near the incisions, and the sores heal when there remains any cause of their rash; and when they are cauterized with fire, those rashes are burned and do not return.
Capitol .ix.	Capitulum ix.
Cura de grandeyssa que veno a las palpebras dels huels.	Care of the swelling that affects the eyelids.
Motas veguadas endeve en las palpebras dels huels alcuna causa la qual es asemblada a grandissa en sa fortalicia e duricia, e per so grandissia es apelada.	Swellings occur in the eyelids of the patient due to some cause which resembles swelling in its strength and hardness, and therefore is called swelling.
E es agreguacio de humiditat grossa en la palpebra dejos e desus.	And it is an addition of thick humidity in the eyelid above and below.
Donc la opperacio en lor es que consideras lahoras si la grandissia es procedent en lu en aquo que apar de la palpebra e es mauguda a tota partida; e la causa de lu es leugiera.	And the operation in them is that you consider whether the enlargement is present in them, arising from what appears in the eyelid and is felt throughout the part; and the cause of it is slight.
Donc fen sobre aquela am fissura per la latitut, e aprop escorga aquela de tota partida am facilitat entro que evasesca, e aprop suspen aquela am onci e abscindeys aquela.	And make a incision for the width, and then carefully expose that of the entire part with ease as you evacuate it, and suspend that and cut it off.
Mays si a tu no es apparelhada la incizio de lu si no pus que penetras la palpebra am inscizio pauc a pauc, lahoras aquo no notz en deguna causa.	But if you do not have means for making the incision, and instead must penetrate the eyelid with a small incision little by little, then this is not noticed for any reason.
E si la figura es gran, lahoras tu l’ajusta am sutura; e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the figure is large, then you adjust it with sutures; and care for it until it heals.
E si es pauca, a tu no sobrevindra mal per aquela quar l’anguent de lu restaura aquela e encarna.	And if it is small, you will not suffer ill from it because the ointment restores and heals it.
E si la grandissia es declinant a las partidas dedintz de la palpebra deves la superficia dedintz, lahoras evesa la palpebra e suspen la grandissia am onci, otra que tu indigescas de incizio, e prem aquela de tota part, e si la palpebra per inscizio es alonguada, aquo no notz en deguna causa.	And if the enlargement is decreasing in the parts inside the eyelid, you expose the inside surface, then evacuate the eyelid and suspend the enlargement with a needle, or one that you indicate for incision, and press it from all sides. If the eyelid is extended by incision, this is not noticed for any reason.
E aprop la incizio, lava le huel am aygua salada; e cura le loc am aquo que encarna entro que sia sanat.	And at the beginning, wash the wound with salty water; and dress the area with a solution that should be healed within.
Capitol .x.	Capitol.
De la cura axcirnah en la palpebra desus del huel.	For the cure of excision in the upper eyelid.
Axcirnath es grays le qual es engendrat en las tunicas de la palpebra desus, e majorment endeve als enfantz, agrava les huels de aquels et accideyso a lor catartz le mayti; e no podon reguardar la claror del solelh per aquo quar lagremas se coytan ad aquels.	Excision is caused by gray matter that is generated in the tunic of the upper eyelid, especially in children, worsens their conditions and affects their digestion; and they cannot look at the brightness of the sun for this reason, as tears collect around them.
E per so tu vezes aquels jaser sobre les lors caras tot temps, e sobre les lors caras dormen; e so a las palpebras de lor dejos les sobrecils humidas, las quals ja ha cuberta imflacio, e iminencia de accernac apparent es en l’uelh; e que quant tu premes le loc am les tieus ditz, tu centes accernac entro aquels.	And for this reason, they often cry on their cheeks all the time, and sleep with tears on their cheeks; only their eyelids are wet, which are already covered by inflammation, and the apparent precursor to excision is evident in the wound; and when you press the area with your fingers, you feel the excision within them.
E alcuna manieyra de opperacio es en aquel que le malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop pausa drap de li e de lu fay calgua, e fay de lu cercle segon la quantitat la qual contena arthernach de tota partida, e aprop pausa aquel sobre aquela e prem am les tieus ditz de tota per que sia agreguat arcernac en le mieg del cercle, e aprop fen en le mieg de aquela humiditat am spatum inscident am fissura per la latitut, e la fissura no sia major que la fissura que es fayta en flaubotomia.	And some method of operation is in that the patient places his head under your hand, and then covers himself with a cloth, and makes a cut according to the quantity it contains of tumor from all parts, and then places this over that and presses with your fingers throughout so that excision may be added in the middle of the circle, and then cuts into the moisture at its center with a spatum for the width, and let the fissure not be greater than the fissure made in flubotomy.
Mays en le preon cove que tu fendas la codena tota entro que pervenguas ad arcernach, quar en las mays desposicios proceseys arcernach per fissura segon la forma de grayseza blanca.	May it be in the prepontal region that you open the cord entirely until you reach the archernach, for in the more severe cases you proceed with an archernach incision according to the form of whiteness.
Donc extratz aquela am draps los quals tu as envolopatz entre les tieus ditz a las partidas deforo e revolv entre la ma dextra e sinistre entro que sia dispargut.	Therefore, remove those from the cloths which you have wrapped around your feet and stir between your right and left hand until they are dispersed.
E guarda te que no ajustes en la fissura per so que am le spatum no pervenguas al huel e ladescas aquel.	And make sure you do not press on the incision so that you do not damage the flesh and flap it open.
Mays si no apar a tu arternach en le comensament de la fissura, mays que tu ajustes en la fissura un petit am fecilitat entro que procesisca arternach; e aprop extratz aquela ayssi quo havem dit; e aprop submargeys draps de li en aygua e vi agre e pausa les sobre le loc e estrenh aquels am polvils.	May it be, however, that your archernach does not appear at the beginning of the incision. Then, press on the incision a little with a small cloth until you proceed with the archernach; then remove those as we have said; and place cloths in water and wine over the area and strengthen them with powders.
E so alcus que trissan sal e pausan aquel en la conquavitat de la fissura per so que aquo que es remas de aquela humiditat.	And also take some that transmit salt and place it in the cavity of the incision so that what remains of that humidity is absorbed.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then care for that which is within until it is healed.
Mays si accideys en le loc apostema caut, lahoras cura aquel am emplastres cedatils entro que sia sanat.	And if an abscess occurs in the place cauterize, then care for it with compresses until it is healed.
Capitol .xi.	Capitol. xi.
De manieyras de tactimi del huel.	Methods of palpation of the whole body.
Quan en las palpebras dels huels so natz pels ajustatz dejos les pels naturals e so antiquatz, lahoras aquels noso al huel e fan endevenir manieras de malautias ayssi cum lacrimas assiduas e mollificacio de palpebras e tela entro que aquo sia causa de destruccio del huel que s’apela tactinir del huel, e cura se en quatre manieyras: o per cauteri am foc; o am medicina acuta segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri; o es fayt atactini per inscizio e sutura; o per cannas segon que yeu diyre.	When in the eyelids of the eye, the skin is stretched and becomes tight or torn, then those disturbances are signs of illness such as constant tearing and softening of the eyelids and tissue. This can be a cause of destruction of the eye, which is called tactinir del huel. The treatment can be done in four ways: by cauterization with fire; by acute medicine as previously described in the Capitol of cauterization; by incision and suturing; or by cannulas as I will say later.
E donc cove que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se; aprop converteys la palpebra del uelh am la tua ma sinistra, e si es convertida, bo es; e sino, entromet agulha en aquela en la qual sia fiel de la partida pus dejos de la palpebra, e fay penetrar la agulha am fiel desus, e aquo sia — prop del marge de la palpebra en le qual naysso les pels — prop dels pels, e tira le fiel a las partidas desus am la palpebra, e converteys aquela am le ray.	And thus check that you place the head of the patient on your right side; then turn the eyelid of the eye with your left hand. If it can be turned, it is good; otherwise, insert a needle into the part where there are threads in the edge of the eyelid, and make the needle penetrate with thread above, specifically near the edge of the eyelid where the skin arises. Pull the thread towards the parts above the eyelid and turn that portion.
E aprop fen en la partida dedintz de la palpebra dejos les pels ajustatz am spatum inscidentz del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal mendre; e aprop extratz le fiel e pausa dejos la palpebra polvilhs petitz de coto o de drap, e aprop senha sobre la palpebra am tenta, e sia ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirt.	And then place the skins fitted with spatum incident from the major lacrimal into the minor lacrimal; and extract the fluid and place powdery bits of cloth or linen over the eyelid, and cover the lid with a tent, as illustrated by the shape of a mirt leaf.
Mays empero cove que sia la figura segon la quantitat de helevacio de la palpebra, quar aquo ja es diversificat en les homes, quar de aquels es le quals indigeys que sia inscidit de la palpebra gran quantitat segon la quantitat per la qual la palpebra es mollificada.	But more importantly, ensure that the shape is according to the amount of swelling of the eyelid, for this already varies in women, for those in whom a considerable amount from the large eyelid must be incised according to the extent to which the eyelid is softened.
E aprop fen am le spatum sobre las doas linhas las quals has senhadas, e comensa del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal menor.	And then place the spatum along the two lines you have marked, starting from the major lacrimal into the minor lacrimal.
E si’ la tua fissura prop dels pels naturals ayssi cum es la grossetut del rey.	And if your incision near the natural skin is as thick as the king's thumb.
E aprop met le onci en un dels dos angles de la codena, e aprop excoria aquela tota, e aprop ajusta am la scitura las doas labias am gula o fiel de lana subtil, e abstergeys le sanc, e fay adherir aquo que superflueys dels fiels sobre dos sobrecils am alcunas causas enviscans, si voles far aquo, e sino, non cures.	And then place the needle in one of the two angles of the incision, and scrape away the entire area, and suture the two edges with a stitch or fine woolen thread, and clean the wound, and attach what remains from the threads to two splints for some viscous causes. If you want to do this, and if not, you are done.
E aprop leyssa la sutura dels fiels entro a tres dias o quatre, e aprop cura aquo.	And after that, let the stitches of the wound be removed in three or four days, and then cure this.
E si vols, layssa la plagua ses sutura, e cura aquela am aquo que exsicca e constrenh, quar la palpebra es alevada deves la sigillacio de la plagua e la agreguacio de lu; mays sutura es milor E donc aysso diysso les antics de taxanir.	And if you wish, let the wound remain open without stitches, and cure it by what makes it dry and constricts it, for when the eyelid is swollen, you should apply a seal to the wound and its addition; more stitches are better. Therefore say this to the ancients thus.
Mays empero en lu sia sollicitut sobre le malaute, e es de bona operacio, e no es en lu temor.	But more importantly in it be active about the patient, and it is of good operation, and not in fear.
E es autra manieyra en taxmir, e es que senhes sobre la palpebra figura ayssi cum fuelha de mirt, e aprop eleva la palpebra am tres uncis segreguatz e congreguatz segon aquesta forma:	And another method of treating it is to figure the swelling like a leaf of myrtle, and then raise the eyelid by three inches, separating and bringing together according to this form:
Mays si no es possible aquo, tener les uncis, e aquo no es engualhat, lahoras pren una agula en la qual haia fil e met aquela en le mieg de la figura, e entromet le autre fiel prop le lacrimal major, e·l fiel segon prop le lacrimal mendre, e ajusta entre les tieus ditz les fiels am equalitat, e aprop am aquels eleva la tua ma am elevacio engual, eleva tota la codena sobre la qual es senhat ayssi cum havem recomtat.	But if it is not possible that way, hold the needles, and this is unequal, then take a needle on which there is thread and put that in the middle of the figure, and insert the other thread near the major lacrimal gland, and the other thread near the minor lacrimal gland, and adjust between the ties said threads to equality, and then with those raise your hand for elevation equally, raising the whole codena over which it is marked as we have recommended.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then adjust the two edges of the wound with stitches, and cure that which is within until it is healed.
Mays si accideys apostema deves la tua inscizio o la tua fissura, seda aquel apostema am cerot e a lu semblantz, e am enguentz.	If you happen to make an incision or a fissure, stitch that apostema with a thread and sew it up neatly, and apply ointment to it.
E alcunas veguadas endeve a la palpebra que·ls sieus pels sian convertitz, adonc cove que tu uses en aquela de aquo que havem dit de inscizio; mays sutura en quascus es mays artificial.	And in some cases on the eyelid, if its edges need to be converted, then use the incision method we have described earlier; but stitch them in several places more artificially.
Ataxinir am cannas es segon aquesta forma:	To cauterize with cauters is done in this manner:
e es que tu convertas la palpebra e scindas la figura qu’es dedintz segon que he recontat; e aprop per art fay doas cannas o doas astelas subtils de las quals longitut sia segon la longitut de la palpebra e la latitut de lor sia mendra de la latitut del spatum.	And you convert the eyelid and split the figure that is inside according to what I have recounted; then, with art, make two cauters or two thin strips whose length should match the length of the eyelid and their width should be similar to the width of the space.
E tu ja has inscidit en las extremitatz de quascunas partidas, la on tenes les fils.	And you have incised at the extremities of some parts, where you have the threads.
Aprop agregua quascuna am subtilitat subre aquo que superflueys de la palpebra del huel, e constres las cannas de quascunas partidas am fort strictura, e layssa aquela per alcus jorns, quar la codena per la strictura morira e sira denegada e se poyrira entro que per si meteyssa cayra.	Add some fine thread over what you have removed from the eyelid of the eye, and tighten the canals of each part with strong stricture, and leave it for a few days, because the clot will die due to the stricture and will be rejected, so that by itself it will fall.
Mays si es tardat, lahoras trenca la am las toroyras, e aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanat.	If it is delayed, then cut the thread at the tendons, and cure the wound until it is healed.
Donc cum es solidada, la palpebra es elevada e les pels no pungo.	Then, since it is solidified, the eyelid is elevated and the skin does not hurt.
E aquesta es la forma de doas cannas las quals faras segon aquesta forma:	And this is the way of two canals which you will make according to this form:
e haia la quantitat de la longitut e de la latitut ni mays ni mens.	and has the quantity of length and width neither more nor less.
Capitol .xii.	Capitol.xii.
De elevacio de pels pungentz en le huel am agula quan le pel es dur.	For the elevation of painful skin on the eye with an awl when the skin is hard.
Quan son pels no-naturals, durs e aspres e pungentz les huels, lahoras la operacio en lu es que tu prenguas agula subtil e pauses en aquela fiel de ceda subtil e leon, e aprop que tu ajustes las extremitatz de lu e nozes quascu en manieyra mot subtil.	When they are unnatural, hard, rough, and painful eyelids, the operation on them is that you take a fine awl and place it at the edge of this thin layer of skin, and then adjust the ends of the awl very delicately with your fingers.
E sia la longitut dels fiels de quantitat de una palma.	And let the length of the threads be the width of a palm.
E aprop tu compon2 autre fiel subtil dejos lu en breu, e nuza las extremitatz de aquel si tu·t vols.	And then compose another fine thread and place it briefly under the area, using the ends of that one if you wish.
E aprop pause le malaute le sieu cap en le tieu se, e sia prop del solelh per que la tua obra sia declarada, quar es operacio subtil e menuda.	And then place the patient's head in a warm spot, and let it be close to the sun so that your work is validated, as it is a delicate and fine operation.
E aprop intromet la agulha en la razit del pel ajustat la qual ha necessitat de engen, e fay aquela penetrar en la palpebra festinantment entro que extraguas aquela desus le pel natural.	And then insert the needle into the edge of the set eyebrow, adjusting it with a tool you have prepared, and let that penetrate the eyelid firmly, while withdrawing the needle from above the natural skin.
E aprop tire le pel entro desus e intromet aquel en alixati, e sian les pels un o dos o tres e no mays.	And then pull the skin upwards and insert that into the incision, using one or two or three skins and no more.
E aprop tira la tua ma am aquel entro que·l pel sia fora-gitat am alixolati en la palpebra am le pel natural.	And then pull your hand there so that the skin is loosened in the incision on the eyelid with the skin natural.
Mays si es atirat alixalati e non es gitat le pel, atiraras alixati a las partidas dejos am le fiel le qual tu has compost am aquela, entro qu’en sia gitat alixalati del trau sobira.	But if the incision is made with aloes and the skin is not loosened, pull the aloe towards the parts where you have placed the thread, into which the aloe from the wound will overflow.
E vegas aquela am la visio del huel, quar lahoras tu gitaras alixati e lo fiel, e grotan quascu e clautz le huel, e laysse le claus per dos dias o tres, entro que·l pel adheresca al sieu loc e nasque sobre aquel bona carn.	And then with that in view of the wound, when you will stitch it, cut each thread and close the wound, let it remain open for two or three days until the hair adheres to its place and grows over that good flesh.
E si es mays breu le pel, lahoras tu ajusta un pel lonc dels pels naturals, e es elevat am aquel, o que·l leysses entro que sia alonguat aprop alcu spazi, e lehoras tu eleva aquel.	And if the hair is shorter, then you adjust a longer piece of skin from the natural hairs, elevate it at that place, or let it remain until it stretches somewhat over the space, and then elevate that.
Capitol .xiii.	 Chapter XIII.
De la cura de ehacratir la qual ve en la palpebra desus.	Of the cure for an eyelid prolapse.
Quan ve en le huel ehacratir, e es contraccio de la palpebra quan es contrayta en sus, o a dextra o a sinistra partida, per mala consolidacio de plagua o de seccio o de cauteri, e es apelada leporina, e aquesta ahercrati o es natural o accidental, e es fayta per consolidacio de plagua o de seccios o de cauteri, o per semblantz a lor malcuratz.	When the eyelid prolapses, and there is a contraction of the eyelid when it contracts towards the upper or lower part, due to poor healing of the wound, division, or cautery, it is called leporine. This prolapse can be natural or accidental, caused by the consolidation of the wound, divisions, or cauteries, or resembling them in its condition.
May la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que tu fendas aquela consolidacio e que separes las labias de lu, e pauses en lu en aquo que es entre aquelas una meca de drap de li, e ligues aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	The method of the operation is that you cut away the consolidation and separate the eyelid layers. Place a strip of linen between them, and tie them together until they heal.
E no cove que tu uses de curacio de lu de las causas las quals exsiccan, constrenho; quar si tu fas aquo retorna alixacratir pus mal que nulh temps no foc habantz.	And do not use the cure for those causes which dry up and constrict, for if you do this it will make the evil worse and never be cured.
Usa en aquela de causas que mollifico ayssi cum es fenugrec, e embroca am la aygua en la qual son coytz altea e semensa de li, o enguent dyaquilon, le qual sia liquefayt am alcu dels olis, e submergeys en aquel la meca, e cura am aquel.	Use for those causes that mollify thus as with fenugreek, and apply it wet with water in which they are soaked or linseed oil, which is liquefied by some oil, immerse the medicament in that, and cure with that.
E lo tesaur de la tua curacio es que tu perforsses am tot engen que no sia consolidat segon la forma que foc al comensament.	And the treasure of your cure is that you perforate only on what is not consolidated according to the form it was at the beginning.
E aquesta operacio la qual havem dita, no es sino alcuna rectificacio de ehalixacrati que no retorna la forma del loc segon que foc denant.	And this operation which we have said is nothing but a simple correction of hernias that do not return to the form they had before.
Capitol .xiiii.	 Chapter XIV.
De la cura de ehacrati le qual es fayt en la palpebra dejos.	Of the cure of hernias which are performed in the eyelid.
Aquesta alxacrati la qual es fayta en la palpebra dejos, la qual es nompnada vertadierament alxacrati; e es de lu alcuna natural, autra accidental.	This hernia which is performed in the eyelid is called specifically a vertic hernia; and it can be either natural or accidental.
Mays accidental es fayta per plagua o per scissura o per cauteri o per autres semblantz.	More accidentally it is caused by wound or by cut or by cautery or by other similar means.
E la via de la operacio de lu es que tu prenguas una agula en la qual haga fil doble, e fiques aquela en la carn, e que la fassas passar del lacrimal de senestre entro al lacrimal dextre, entro que·l fil pervengua en las doas extremitatz de la carn.	And the way of operating on it is that you take a needle on which you make a double thread, and place that in the flesh, and make it pass from the lacrimal of the left into the lacrimal of the right, so that the thread reaches the two ends of the flesh.
E aprop exten la carn a las partidas desus am la agula e cus aquela am la agula, e inscideys am spatum ample.	Then extend the flesh at the upper parts with the needle and sew that with the needle, and incise with a broad blade.
E donc si retorne la figura de la palpebre segon que cove, bo es; e sino, pren le ray e pausa aquel en la figura fenduda, e am aquel converteys la palpebra, e fen las doas fissuras en le latz de la palpebra dejos.	And so, if you return the shape of the eyelid as it should be, that is good; otherwise, take the ray and place that in the torn figure, and with that turn the eyelid, and make the two fissures in the edge of the eyelid.
E sian las extremitatz de las doas fissuras de dos angles de la inscizio, la qual has fayta entro que concurren, e sia de lor fayt angle entro que quan se congreguan sia fayta figura de lor.	And let the ends of the two fissures be at the angles of the incision, which you have made where they converge, and let an angle be made by them when they come together to form their figure.
E aquesta figura es letra greca: la landa.	And this figure is Greek: the lambda.
E aprop osta la carn aquela per la quantitat que es le latz de lu agut dejos de lu, aquo que siec la palpebra.	And apply the flesh there as much as the sharp edge allows, what remains is the eyelid.
E aprop ajusta las partz seperadas e cos aquelas am le fil de lana; e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit de las medicinas mollificativas e de las calguas entro que sia sanat.	And adjust the separated parts with threads of wool; and cure those with what we have said about the soothing medicines and the plasters until it is healed.
E si alxacrati endeve per fissura o sutura o cauteri, lahoras cove que tu fendas am fissura plana sobre les pels de la palpebra segon que es precedit.	And if you incise for a fissure or suture or cautery, then make the incision a flat one on the skin of the eyelid as previously described.
E aprop separa am la calgua entre doas labias segon que havem dit.	And separate with the plaster between two lips as we have said.
En la suma del sermo de la cura de alxacrati quan es desus o dejos, que corra en lu operacio, segon que es preparat de la forma de alxacrati, e aquela es en forma de motas diversitatz.	In the summary of the discourse on the cure of incision when above or below, let it run in the operation, as prepared in the form of the incision, and that is in the form of varied spots.
E le artifexs savi totz temps prepara engen en quascuna manieyra la qual es possibla a lu entro que fassa retornar la figura a la forma natural, o prop de aquela, e aquel malaute segon que a lu conveneys de la operacio e dels strumentz en las majors disposicios.	And the skilled artisans always prepare engen in any manner that is possible for them to return the figure to its natural form or close to it, and the patient according to what suits him in the operation and the instruments in the major dispositions.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter XV.
De la adherencia de la palpebra am la conjunctiva o am la cornea.	Of the adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea.
Quan accideys aquesta consolidacio a motz homes enayssi que sia solidada la palpebra pus desus am le album del huel, e sia prohibida de la facilitat del movement e de las suas obras naturals, donc cove que tu entrometas la extramitat del ray dejos la palpebra, e eleva en sus aquela, o exten aquela am le unci.	When this consolidation occurs in men, they attempt to solidify the eyelid above on the white of the eye, and prohibit its ease of movement and its natural actions. Therefore, you should introduce a needle through the edge of the eyelid, and raise or extend it over the eyebrow, or along the upper lid.
E aprop tu inscideys la adherencia am spatum subtil, le qual no sia am acuitat de las inscisios, habantz obtus un petit per so que·l malaute no sia inquietat deves la operacio, e remau le spatum que no ledesca le huel am la sua acuitat.	And then you incise the adhesion with a fine blade, which should not have the sharpness of the incisions, having a small obtuse edge so that the patient is not disturbed by the operation, and remove the fluid to prevent it from impairing the vision.
E sia la tua inscizio quays excorjan aquela adherencia am facilitat entro que sia retornada la palpebra segon la sua forma natural e que sia sanada tota la adherencia.	And let your incision be such that it loosens the adhesion with ease, allowing the eyelid to return to its natural form and completely heal all the adhesion.
E aprop tu met en le huel aygua salada am la qual tu laves; o distilla en lu de zunia dissolvut en l’aygua.	And then put salt water on the eye, with which you wash it; or use distilled water in which zinc has been dissolved.
E aprop separa entre la palpebra e l’huel am calgua de li, e pausa sobre le huel lana infuza en album de huou, e aprop le tertz jorn usa de causas consolidativas entro que sia sanat.	And then separate between the eyelid and the redness of the eye, and place over the redness infused wool in honey album, and for the third day use conservative causes until it is healed.
Capitol .xvi.	Capitol XVI.
De inscizio de ungla e de eminencia de carn dels lacrimals.	Of the incision of the gland and the swelling of flesh of the lacrimal glands.
Sapias que ungla es segon dos manieyras, quar o es nervosa, e es semblant a ciphac dur subtil; o es no-nervosa, semblant a humiditat blanca congilada, la qual quan ferr la toca, o es forsat aquela prendre am onci, es abscindida e le onci no es ficat en lu.	Know that the gland can be of two ways: one is nervous, and it resembles a hard, thin chip; the other is non-nervous, resembling a white congealed moisture. When you touch it, if it must be removed, it should be incised, and the fluid should not be inserted into it.
E amdos las specias no comensan sino del lacrimal major entro que va petit a petit que cobre la vista e prohibeys le lum e·l movement de huel.	And both species do not begin but from the major lacrimal gland, as it gradually covers the eye and prevents light and the movement of redness.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en la inscizio de lu es que·l malaute pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop obre les huels de lu, e eleva la palpebra am la tua ma, e aprop colligeys la ungla am onci de pauca duplicacio e exten aquela a las partidas desus.	The way to proceed with the incision of the gland is that the patient places his head in a tilted position, then opens his eyes, and lifts his eyelid with your hand. Then collect the gland with a small amount of moisture and extend it to the upper parts.
E aprop pren una agula e entromet en aquela un pel de cavalh o de buou o de vaqua, o de semblantz, o de fiel fort, o duplica la extremitat de la agulha petit a petit e fica aquela en le mieg de la ungla, e penetra aquela am la agulha, e lia am fiel la ungla; e exten aquela a las partidas desus, e excorja am le pel le latz de la ungla lo qual siec la pupilla.	And then take a needle and insert into it either a horsehair or an oxhair or a cowhide hair or a strong thread, or gradually double the tip of the needle little by little and place that in the middle of the nail, and penetrate that with the needle, and seal the nail with glue; extend that to the parts above, and scrape off the skin the pus from the nail which heals the pupil.
E ayssi tu sieguas aquela am le pel entro al derier de lu.	And then you follow that with the skin into the depth of it.
E aprop tu inscideys le romanent en la razitz del lacrimal am spatum subtil o am petitas forfexs, e leysa la carn del lacrimal natural per so que per inscizio de aquela no endevengua fluxs de lagremas continuabla.	And then you incise the eyelid at the root of the tear duct with a fine spatula or small forceps, and let the natural flesh of the eyelid remain so that by means of the incision it will not cause continuous flow of tears.
E alscunas vetz la ungla am le sol onci estenduda o am fiel, ayssi co havem dit, e aprop sia excurjat am spatum leon del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And sometimes the nail on the sole of the foot or with glue, as we have said, and then scrape off with a lion's claw spatula, which is the form of this:
E guarda te que am le spatum no toques la tunica cornea e que avengua en lu ruptura, e que la pupilla sia perforada.	And beware that with the spatula you do not touch the corneal membrane, and even if there is a rupture in it, and that the pupil is not pierced.
Aprop la inscizio geta en le huel un pauc de sal trissa o di cief fayt de siniar, e leyssa aquel entro al autre dia; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	Near the incision make a small cut on the skin with salted iron or steel made from tin, and leave that inside another day; then cure that as it heals.
E si la ungla no es nervoza e no podes metre la agulha, ni es ficada en aquela le onci, lahoras motas veguadas aquesta specia de ungla es curada am medicinas, e es sanada ayssi cum yeu e recomtat en la divisio.	If the wound is not nervous and you cannot put in the needle, then apply this kind of dressing with medicines, and it will be healed as recommended in the division.
E si tu vols inscindir aquela, lahoras tu obre le huel del malaute e pren spatum subtil leon de freul acuitat segon aquesta forma:	If you want to incise it, then open the space of the patient and take a thin slice of fresh lemon according to this form:
am subtilitat.	with subtlety.
E si vezes que aquela es rarificada e es confugida e empren en aquela razit, lahoras distilla de la tua ora en le huel de cief fayt de siniar o am cief rog o am sal trissat, e opila le huel entro a l’autre dia.	And if you see that it is rarified and congested and embedded in that mass, then distill from your mouth into the wound of iron made from tin or with rusty iron or salted steel, and cover the wound with another day.
E aprop itera sobre aquela la operacio entro que sia remaugut tot aquo que es de lu, sino que·l contrari apostema caut sia en le huel, quar lahoras tu leyssa aquela, e cura al comensament la apostema entro que sia sanat.	Then repeatedly perform the operation until all that is from it is removed, otherwise if a carbuncle forms in the wound, then leave it, and cure the carbuncle as it heals.
E aprop itera la tua operacio sobre aquela am razo entro que sia sanat.	And then repeat your operation as much as necessary until it is healed.
La emenencia de la carn lacrimal, si notz en le huel per gran nocument, sia suspendut am onci; e inscideys aquela de aquela una partida, e no ultimes la inscizio per so que no inscidesqua fluxs de lagremas.	The gland of the tear duct, if noted to be in great distress, should be suspended with a needle; and incise that part, but do not complete the incision so as not to cut off the flow of tears.
E aprop distilla en le lacrimal cief rog e fayt de siniar entro que sia sanat.	And then let the tear duct drip with a cloth and keep it moist until it is healed.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter XVII.
De inscizio de alguazardenic e de aquo que es nascut de carn ajustada en le huel.	On the incision of the salivary gland and what is derived from flesh pressed against it.
Alcunas veguadas en les huels de alcus es nascuda carn roga, e es sobre-pausada entro que cobre la pupilla, o apropinqua o estrenh sobre las palpebras e fort leu comprem las palpebras a las partidas deforo e es assemblada a roza de balaustra.	In some cases, flesh has grown in the eyelids and is pressed over the pupil, or strengthens near the eyelids, forcing them apart and adhering to the edge of the orbit.
Mays la operacio en lu es que·l malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se; e aprop obre les huels de aquel e colligeys tota aquela carn am oncis convenientz ad aquo, e te aquo am una forcep o am cesti; e aprop inscindiys la carn el comensament entro que tot sia finit am le encisori, e guarda te del huel que no ledescas aquel deves la tua operacio.	The operation in this case is that the patient places their head in a slight incline; then open the eyelids and remove all that flesh with appropriate incisions using forceps or tongs; then incise the flesh at the beginning, ensuring it is complete with the incisor, and carefully keep the incised parts to ensure you do not lose any during your operation.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscides aquelas o am espatum le qual nos havem recomtat en la inscizio de la ungla, o am petitas forfexs am las quals es colligit ascebel segon que vindra la forma de lu aprop aquest capitol.	And let your incision be where you make those or with forceps which we have recommended in the finger incision, or with small pincers from which ascetic is gathered according to the form it will take near this chapter.
Donc cum es complida la tua inscizio e es remauguda tota aquela carn, lahoras omple le huel de sal trissa, o destilla en lu polvera roga e semblantz a lu de las medicinas corrossivas, e pausa sobre le huel deforo coto am album de huou entro que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	So when your incision is completed and the entire flesh is cauterized, then fill the wound with brine, or sprinkle on it powdered substances resembling those of corrosive medicines, and place over the wound externally as a piece of burnt cork until an abscess is assured.
E si roman alcuna causa de alguardenici e es senhoragat sanc caut, e temes apostema caut, lahoras leyssa le huel e cura aquela apostema am aquo que ceda aquela apostema, e aprop itera sobre aquel am operacio entro que sia sanat, e semblantment fay en la carn ajustada la qual accideys en le huel de aquesta especia.	And if there is any cause of necrosis and it is seared with cauterization, and you fear an abscess, then leave the wound open and treat that abscess with what will heal that abscess, and repeatedly perform on that area until it is healed, and similarly do in the flesh adjusted which you have encountered in the wound of this kind.
Mays empero tu cove que alienes tota curacio del huel freul per via natural o per via accidental, obran am ferr, e no metas la tua ma en alcuna de aquestas operacios entro que veges que aquel membre sia suffertant aquela operacio.	Nevertheless, you must ensure that all healing of the wound by natural means or by accident occurs through iron, and do not place your hand in any of these operations until you see that that limb is suffering from that operation.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter XVIII.
De colleccio de sabel en le huel.	From the collection of knowledge in the whole.
Sabel so venas rogas las quals son testudas sobre le huel e prohibeysso al vesement la sua operacio, e develican le huel am longitut de dias.	Knowledge so veins rogues which are rough on the whole and prohibit their operation, and expand the whole for a length of days.
Donc necessari es al comensament que tu consideres si le huel en le qual es sabel es fort e en lu no es autra malautia que sabel, lahoras tu colligeys aquel sabel.	Therefore, at the beginning, you must consider whether the whole in which knowledge is present is strong and contains only that knowledge, then you collect that knowledge.
E es que tu comandes al malaute que pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop suspen aquelas venas am un onci o am dos segon la tua prudencia; e sia aquel onci de subtil duplicacio segon aquesta forma:	And you command the patient to place his head in the heat bath, and then suspend those veins at one or two inches according to your prudence; and let that inch be of subtle double folding according to this form:
o so dos oncis gradantment en un cos segon aquesta forma:	or two inches gradually in one piece according to this form:
E aprop sian colligidas aquelas venas am forses subtils, am subtilitat, e abstergeys le sanc hora aprop hora, entro que vegas aquelas venas esser remaugudas del huel e sian revolgudas.	And let those veins be collected with forces subtle, in subtlety, and cleanse the wound hour by hour, while you see those veins being raised from the whole and rotated.
E guarda te que tu no ledes le huel am las extremitatz del spatum; e si’ la tua operacio en le miegjorn denant le solelh, e sias mot ferm en la tua operacio que no inscidas sino aquelas venas.	And be sure that you do not touch the outer parts of the patient's mouth; and if your operation in the morning before the sun, and remain firm in your operation that you enter only those veins.
E quan tu auras complitz, lahoras tu distilla en le huel cief vert o rog per que am sa acuitat corrodesca aquo que es remaugut del sabel.	And when you have completed, then distill in the whole vein or herb so that its acidity corrupts what is retained in the bladder.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible colligeys tot en aquela hora, e lahoras tu emplastra tot am aquo que cede la dolor de lu, e leyssa lu per alcus dias entro que sia sedada la dolor de lu e que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	But if this is not possible for you to collect entirely in that hour, then plaster the whole with what relieves its pain, and let it be for a few days until its pain subsides and an abscess is secured.
E aprop itera sobre lu segon que la mateyssa manieyra entro que sia sanat.	And repeatedly work on it according to the manner of the wound as it heals.
E aquesta es la forma de las forfexs:	And this is the method for abscesses:
Capitol .xix.	Capitol.xix.
De reduccio de arizati al nas.	On the reduction of tonsillitis in the nose.
Quan tu curas arisati am cauteri o am medicina aguda comburent segon que es precedida la narracio de lu e no es sanat, lahoras no es engen en lu sino que fendas sobre le apostema deves la maturitat de lu, e que extraguas tota la humiditat la qual es en lu e·l poyre entro que sia descubert le os.	When you cure tonsillitis with a cautery or with sharp burning medicine, according to whether the narration of it precedes and is not healed, then do not engage in it but instead cut over the abscess to bring about its maturity, and extract all the moisture which is within it and let the pus out until the bone is uncovered.
E donc cum es descubert le os e vezes en lu corrupcio o negror, lahoras tu ratz lu am un sturment del qual aquesta es la forma:	And since the bone and veins within it are corrupted and blackened, then you must treat it with an instrument of which this is the form:
E es nompnat de aspre cap, e sia feyt de fer indi, e sia le cap redon ayssi cum asir le qual sia fayt punctat per punctacio de lima o aliskalfati per punctacio subtil (ayssi cum es en la forma seguent).	And it is named aspre cap, and made of iron, and has a round head such that this head is made punctured by the filing of a file or smoothed with a fine point (as in the form following).
E pausa aquel sobre le loc corrumput del os, e aprop revolveys aquel entre les tieus ditz, e prem la tua ma petit a petit entro que sapias que aquela corropcio es rasa.	And place it over the corrupted part of the bone, and then rotate it between your tongs, and press your hand gradually into the area until you know that the corruption is superficial.
E aquo sia fayt alcunas veguadas, e aprop restaura le loc am causas exsiccativas e stipticas.	And do this several times, and then restore the area caused by drying and astringent conditions.
Donc si·l loc es consolidat e es en lu nascuda bona carn e es abscindit le cors de la sania e roman per xl dias, e no es renovat e no es apostemat e no accideys en lu accident, lahoras tu sapias que es sanat.	Then if the area is consolidated and there is good hidden flesh, and the wound of the body from the pus is closed for 40 days, and does not reappear or become suppurative and no accident occurs, then you know that it is healed.
E sino, lahoras no es en lu engen sino reduzir la fissura a la forma del nas, e segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu descuebras de segon os am ferr o am medicina acuta, e cum sira descubert le os, lahoras tu pren tribo segon aquesta forma:	And if not, then reduce the fissure to the shape of the nose, and according to this method: you should uncover the bone with iron or sharp medicine. Once the bone is uncovered, then take hold according to this form:
Sia la extramitat de lu ferr triangulada, e·l fust de lu sia prim extenuat entro a la extremitat ayssi cum vezes assi.	Let the extremity of the tool be triangular, and the shaft thereof be thickened at the extremity as you see.
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le os, e sia aquel prop del lacrimal; e alongua la tua ma un pauc del huel, e aprop revol la tua ma am le tribo entro que penetre tot le os, e aquel sente le malaute per asso que atroba vent yssir per so quan te la sua ma.	And then place that [tool] on the bone, and it should be near the lacrimal; extend your hand a little forward, and then rotate your hand in the groove until the entire bone is penetrated, and that which feels the pain through the air that escapes when you move your hand.
Donc lahoras restaura le loc am medicinas stipticas exsiccantz ayssi cum t’e eyssenhat.	Then restore the area with drying styptic medicines as they have been prescribed.
Donc cum nays la carn e·l loc es endurazit, lahoras la materia la qual effundia a las partidas deforo retorna al nas, donc aquo es pus leugier sobre le malaute.	Then, since the flesh is dried and the area is hardened, the matter which was exuding from the parts outside returns to the nose; therefore, this is lighter for the pain.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter 2..xx.
De reduccio de la eminencia del huel.	On the reduction of the prominence of the heel.
Quan le huel emineys am la sua totalitat e no accideys en le vezement nocument ni diminuacio, lahoras cove que laxas le malaute, e aprop que·l segues, e aprop que pausas ventozas en le cervitz ses scarificacio e succa per bona succaccio; e aprop pausa sobre le huel liniment le qual sia fayt de acatra e aloe e enses e sarcocolla, e aprop strenh le emplaustre sobre le huel am motz polvils.	When the heel protrudes completely and there is no damage or diminution of sensation, then you should relieve the pain, follow this by scarification on the neck with bleeding and good suction; then place a liniment made of acatra, aloe, enses, and sarcocolla over the heel, and strongly apply the plaster to the heel with pieces of cloth.
E la manieyra dels polvils es que prenguas draps de li leons motz, e quascun drap sia duplicat en quatre plecs; e fay de aquels motz.	And the manner of powders is that you take linen cloth, and each cloth be folded into four parts; and make thereof.
E aprop pausa aquels la un sobre le autre segon la quantitat de la qual ha le huel necessitat.	And then place them one over the other according to the quantity that it has to fill.
E aprop strenh sobre aquels am drap dur am fort strictura; e itera las ventosas am succio ses scarificacio; e aprop osta las ventosas e leyssa le huel streyt le dia e la nueyt.	And then tightly bind the cloths around them; and repeatedly apply the cups with suction several times; and then place the cups and leave it to draw for the day and night.
Mays si entretant le liguament es mollificat, lahoras cove que sia mot streyt.	More if meanwhile the ligature becomes softened, then make it tightly firm again.
E aprop osta le liament aprop le dia e la nueyt ayssi cum havem dit.	And then place the ligature during the day and night as we have said.
E si vezes le huel ja esser redusit, bo es, e sino, lahoras itera le emplastre am les polvils e la strictura e las ventosas entro que sia sanat.	And if the swelling has already been reduced, that is good. Otherwise, then repeatedly apply the plaster with the powders and the binding and cups until it is healed.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI.
De la inscizio de la eminencia de la tunica uvea.	On the incision of the prominence of the uveal tunic.
Quan endeve disrupcio en la tunica uvea, e aprop es eminent e procezeys fora las palpebras ayssi cum un gra de rasim, e es orrazada la forma de home per aquo, e vols aquo inscidir, lahoras la operacio en lu es ayssi cum havem recomtat, que tu entrometas la agula en la razitz de la uvea de la partida dejos en la partida desus, e aprop met la agula autra en la qual sia fil doble de la part del lacrimal, e fay aquela penetrar e leyssa la primieyra agula segon la sua disposicio; e aprop inscideys le loc del fiel doble e leva am aquel la partida de la uvea en le circuit de la agula, e strenh aquela mot.	When there is disruption in the tunica uvea, and it protrudes and proceeds outside the eyelids as if a degree of rash, and this forms the shape of a man through this, and you want to incise here, then the operation on it is as we have recommended, that you insert the needle into the slit of the uvea from the part left in the part above, and then place another needle with a double strand from the part of the lacrimal, and make that penetrate and leave the first needle according to its position; and then incise the location of the double strand and lift the part of the uvea in the circuit of the needle, and strengthen that movement.
E aprop extratz la agula e pausa sobre le huel lana infusa en album de huou e leyssa entro que cayha le fil am la uva.	Then extract the needle and place it over the hot wool infused with honey, letting the thread cool in the uvea.
E aprop cura le huel am aquo que conforte aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	Then apply the hot wool to this so that it comforts the area while the wound is healing.
E alcunas veguadas aduna de tota partida am cercle de drap entro le huel ajuste eminencia gran, e aprop sia perforat am le spatum subtil que vengua al preon del huel, e corra la humiditat albuginea, e descen le huel e intra tantost.	And sometimes gather all the parts in a circle of cloth around the hot wool, then place a fine perforation under the wool, which allows the humid and purulent moisture to flow out, and lower the wool so that it fits well.
E aprop strenh entro que sia sanat.	And then strengthen as it is healed.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXII.
De curacio de alconati.	On the treatment of ulcers.
Aquesta malautia que es apelada alconati no es sino sania la qual es ajustada en le huel semblant a aygua dessendent e no es aquela.	This illness called an ulcer is nothing but a sore that appears similar to water descending and is not the other type.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en ela es que fasses le malaute sezer sobre la sela aparelada e dreyta, e aprop pren le cap sieu en las tuas mas de doas partz e mau aquel entro que veias la sania pervenir a las partidas dejos, e aprop sia siccada e no descenda, e sia ostat le lum, e·l malaute veia las causas ayssi cum vezia.	The method of treating it is to place the patient on a prepared and straight surface, then take the head in your hands at two parts and pull it gently until you see the sore begin to draw towards the extremities, ensuring it dries up completely and does not descend. Keep the light nearby so that you can observe the causes as they appear.
E si no descendra en jos, sapias que es aygua.	And if it does not descend to the feet, know that it is water.
Mays si no es preparat le descendement a la sania am aquo que havem dit, lahoras fay le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e aprop pren spatum subtil e fen am aquel sobre le pannicol cernent un petit deves la continuacio de la conjunctiva am la tunica cornea en la corona (entro al loc vuet), entro que sia fora-getada la sania.	And if the descent of the sore is not prepared as we have said, then place the patient on their back and take a thin spatula. Apply it to the conjunctiva near the cornea in the socket (in the location indicated), so that the sore dries up completely.
Donc cum es fora-getada, lahoras tu distilla en le huel aygua cauda en la qual has mesclat mel o aygua en la qual ja has bulit fenugrec e mel.	Then, as is forgotten, when you distill into the full vessel of water in which you have mixed honey or water in which you have already boiled fenugreek and honey.
E aprop sia curat am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And then treat the other causes until it is healed.
Capitol .xxii.	Capitol.xxii.
De la curacio de la aygua descendent del huel.	Of the treatment of water descending from above.
Ja havem dit las specias de la aygua en la divisio e qual conveneys a perforar am sermo declarant, lahoras aquel segon la sanetat.	We have already mentioned the species of water in the division and which is appropriate to perforate when speaking, according to its suitability.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre un cayrat e lia le sieu huel sa, lu mot stringent.	Then you must fix the patient's thighs on a bench and tie the affected area tight.
E aprop pausa prop de la palpebra del sieu huel la tua ma senestra, si le huel en le qual es l’aygua es le huel senestra; o am la tua ma dreyta, si le huel es le dextre.	And then place your left hand near the eyelid of the affected area, if the affected area where the water is located is the left side; or with your right hand, if the affected area is the right side.
E aprop am la tua ma dextra pren almagda, si le huel es senestre; o am la tua ma senestra, si le huel es de dreyt.	And then with your right hand take the wad, if the side is left; or with your left hand, if the side is right.
E aprop pausa la extremitat de almagda prop de la corona per la grossesa del ray en le album del huel de part del mendre lacrimal, e aprop enpelleys almagda am vertut e revol la tua ma am aquel.	And then place the extremity of the thumb near the crown for the swelling of the eye from the excess of yellow bile in the white part of the eye socket, and then apply the thumb with virtue and rotate your hand there.
E aprop penetre en le album del huel e sentas que almagda ja es pervenguda a causa vueda.	And then penetrate into the white part of the eye and feel that the thumb has already been permeated by the vision.
E cove que sia la masura del cami de almagda al preon la mesura del spazi le qual es de la pupilla entro a la fi de la negror, e es la corona del huel; quar tu veyras am aquel pupilla am la visio de l’huel per la clartat de la tunica cornea.	And ensure that the size of the thumb's path is measured when pressing the space which is from the pupil to the edge of the black, for this is the crown of the eye; so you will see the pupil with the vision of the eye through the clarity of the corneal layer.
E aprop pausa almagda entro al loc en le qual es l’aygua, e aprop tu la atira en jos una veguada aprop autra, e donc si la aygua descen tantost, lahoras vetz le malaute aquo sobre le qual huebre la sua vista tantost, e almagda en le sieu huel.	And then place the thumb in the location where the water is, and then draw it down slightly a few times. Therefore, if the water descends quickly, then you see the patient below where his vision extends quickly, and the thumb in his eye.
E aprop repausa se un pauc; donc si la aygua es descenduda, lahoras tu depausa aquela autre veguada abantz que almagda ne sia getada.	And then rest for a moment; therefore, if the water has descended, then you continue with another downward motion before the thumb is fully inserted.
E donc quan es sicada e no descen, lahoras tu extrat almagda am facilitat, e revol am aquel la tua ma pauc a pauc, e aprop dissolveys en l’aygua un petit de sal clara de gemma e am aquela lava le huel dedintz; e aprop pausa fora le huel coto o stopa o lana infusa en oli rozat e album de huou e ligua am aquo le huel sa.	And when it has been drawn out and does not descend, then you extract the lump with ease, and roll it a little with your hand, and return it completely into the water a small amount of clear salted gemmy egg and with that wash the whole inside; and place outside the whole cloth or stop or infused wool in olive oil and yolk of egg and tie with that the whole cloth.
Mays nos e aquels que so de nostre temps pause sobre aquel comi trissat am album de huou.	May it and those who are of our times pause over it with olive oil.
E si no obezeys a tu almagda al intrament de l’huel per la sua duricia — quar es alcu dels homes del qual le huel es dur mot —, lahoras cove que prenguas le spatum le qual es nompnat alberid del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if your lump does not yield to the instrument of the cloth due to its hardness — which is often the case with some men whose skin is hard —, then cut that you take the spathe which is named albedid of which this is the form:
E donc perfora am aquel aquela conjunctura, e no ultimes la tua ma en le trauc, e no es si no que fassas via ad almagda loc subtil.	And then puncture at that joint, and do not withdraw your hand from the tract, but rather make way to the site of the lump.
E aprop entromet almagda segon que havem dit.	And then introduce the instrument as we have said.
E deves le compliment de la tua obra, sia preparat al malaute dormitori descentment fayt en le qual dorma sobre le sieu dos en mayson tenebrosa, e sia prohibit de totz movementz .	And you must complete your work, so prepare the patient's sleeping place decently made in which he lies on his back in a dark house, and prohibit all movements.
E pausa en la natura de lu aquo per que sia linida la sua natura, e no maugua le sieu cap a la partida dreyta ni senestra de tot.	And pause in the nature of the patient so that his nature is regulated, and do not let his head tilt to the right or left side during the procedure.
E sia le liament segon la sua disposicio entro al tertz dia.	And apply the ligature according to its disposition on the third day.
E aprop deslia aquel en aquela maysso tenebrosa e exproha la freol vista, e fay li vezer alcunas causas, e aprop retorna le liament entro al dia .vii.	And then remove that one in the darkest and most severe area, expose the raw wound, and make some incisions, and then return the ligature on the seventh day.
E no cove que fassas aquo en la hora de las curacios o tantost aprop la infusio.	And do not perform this during the hour of cure or soon after the infusion.
Habantz cove que tu alienes aquo per so quar la aygua puega leugierament per gran e vehement de reguardament.	And you should remove this so that the water can drain slightly due to its great and forceful position.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que deslias le huel denant le vii dia, e rectifica aquel am aquo que ceda apostema.	And if an abscess should occur before the seventh day, then remove the pus on the seventh day, and adjust this to that which gives way to the abscess.
Lahoras tu absol la vista de lu e pausa sobre la cara de lu oral per le qual sia regit le vezement de lu dejos lu per alcus dias, lu existent en la mayszo tenebrosa.	And when you finish the wound, pause over the face of the wound for which the vision should be regulated, and let it exist in the most severe area for some days.
E aprop sia gitat de aquela mayzo gradantment e conversa8 en las suas causas.	And then it should be gradually withdrawn and changed into its causes.
E sapias que in alchatea no es excusat le discipol de visio alcunas veguadas, e lahoras tu sias ardit sobre la operacio.	And know that in surgery it is not excusable for the disciple to have some visions, and then you should be attentive to the operation.
E ja es pervengut a nos de alcu de aquels les quals so al Artach , e alcu disse que fayt foc en al Ayrac magdaam perforat am le qual es succada la aygua.	And we have learned from some of those who suffer from Artach that some say to make a fire in Ayrac magma and perforate it, in which the water is boiled.
Mays empero yeu non e vist degu en la nostra terra le qual haia perfeyt aquo, ni e aquo legit en alcu dels libres dels antics; e es possible que aquo sia novel.	But I have not seen anyone in our land who is perfect at this, nor is it mentioned in any of the ancient books; and it is possible that this is a new method.
E aquestas so las formas de las specias de magdaan per que sia sobre aquelas aquel le qual ignora aquelas:	And these are the forms of the species of magdaan so that he may know them:
E sian faytas de eram o de ferr propriament, e sian las extramitatz de lor am aquesta subtilitat triangulada, la extremitat aguda ayssi cum aquela es la forma.	And they should be made of silk or iron properly, and their ends should have this subtlety in the form of a triangle, with one sharp end similar to the other.
Capitol .xxiv.	Capitol. xxiv.
De la curacio de carn nada en le nas.	Of the treatment of flesh nothing in the nose.
Quan en le nas so nascudas carns diversas ajustadas de las quals es alcuna causa la qual es assemblada a scorpio de motz pes, o a polip peys; e aquesta malautia es apelada polipus quar es a semblansa de aquel peys representat.	When in the nose there arise various flesh masses from which arises some cause that is associated with a heavy object or a growth in the region; this illness is called polypus, which resembles that growth depicted.
E de lu es carn cancrosa, lapadea, de fusca color; e de lu es que es carn leon no de color fusca.	And the polyp is cancerous, dark in color; and from it comes flesh like a lion's, not of a dark color.
Donc en aquela que es en aquestas carns leon no fraudulenta ni cancroza, cove que fassas le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e posat al solelh, e huebre las nars de lu, e picoys le tieu onci en aquelas carns.	Therefore, in that which is among these lion-like flesh masses that are neither fraudulent nor cancerous, cut the illness away between your thighs and place it in the sun, and rub the nostrils with it, and apply a paste of it to those flesh masses.
E aprop extrat aquela a las partidas deforo, e aprop inscindeys aquo que has comprehendut de aquelas am spatum agut subtil de la una partida entro que sapias que tota la carn ja es ostada; que si roman de lu deguna causa de la qual la abscisio es possibla, lahoras tu ratz aquo am la un dels estrumentz subtils am facilitat entro que de lu romangua denguna causa.	Then remove it to the openings, and carefully divide what you have grasped with a sharp thin instrument from which you can see that all the flesh has been reached; if any part remains due to some cause for which the division is possible, then quickly use one of the fine instruments to facilitate its division.
Mays si senhoreja am sanc o accida apostema caut, lahoras tu pausa a lu aquo que cove; o es dels apostemas malignes, lahoras tu coyta e cauteriza aquel entro que sia abscindit sanc e sian ostadas las cavas totas.	If the lord complains of pain or an infected abscess, then you place yourself near him where it is suitable; if it is a malignant abscess, then you incise and cauterize that area from which the pus is to be drained and all the cavities are to be opened.
E aprop sia getatz en le nas aprop la inscizio vi agre e aygua o vi.	And then insert something in the nose near the incision either powder or water.
Mays si le nas es ubert e de lu procezeys humiditat entro al palat, lahoras sapias que ja es sanat.	If the nose is opened and there is a process of humidity in the palate, then you know that it is already healed.
Mays si la humiditat no penetra segon que cove, lahoras tu sapias que dedintz lu es carn nada en los pus sobiras osses de las nars als quals non es pervengut abscizio.	If the humidity does not penetrate as it should, then you know that inside there is no pus and no bones of the nose for which incision has not been made.
Donc lahoras cove que entromitas fiel de li al qual sia alcuna grosseza, e nuza en lu motz nuzes, e pausa entre quascun nutz la quantitat del dit o mens, e engene le malaute e entromet una extremitat del fiel en le nars am lo ray o am autra causa la qual es a lu possibla.	Then, when it is appropriate that you insert a piece of the animal from which there is any lump, use nuts in its place, and place the quantity of a finger or less between each nut, and probe the patient and insert an extremity of the cord into the nose either with forceps or by another cause which is possible for him.
E pus que aquo aura fayt, que atire le sieu odorament entro que pervengua a las canals de las nars, e sia eyssit sobre le sieu golayro, quar tropas veguadas le semblant ad aquesta accio fan les enfantz a las scolas, e es leugiera causa ad aquel que ho vol far.	And after this has been done, let him breathe in the fumes thereof until they reach the nostrils' canals, and sit on his couch; for too much laughter at this action makes children cry at school, and it is a light reason for someone who wants to do so.
E aprop pausa las dos extramitatz del fiel, una extremitat que iesca sobre le nas et l’autra que romangua en le nas, e aprop aministra serratura de carn am les nuzes que so en le fiel, e fay aquo entro que sapias que las carn ja so am les nuzes del fiel.	Then place the two ends of the thread, one end that ties over the nose and the other that hangs in the nose, and then apply a flesh wound near the joints in the thread, doing this while you can tell that the flesh is on the joints of the thread.
E aprop extratz le fiel, e pausa en le nas aprop la abstraccio del sanc una calgua , e fay aquo per tres dias o mays entro que l’enguent corrodo tot aquo que es romas de las carns.	Then extract the thread, and place a clot near the opening of the nose, and do this for three days or more until the ointment dissolves everything that is rotting from the flesh.
E aprop en la fi de la causa, pausa en le nas una canula de plom per alscus jorns entro que sia sanat.	Then, at the end of the treatment, place a lead cannula in the nose for several days until it is healed.
Mays si endigeys de curacio que exsique, usa de aquela.	If you need to speed up the cure, use the other one.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument a capipurge fazedor am le qual son distillatz olis e medicinas en le nars:	And this is the form of the instrument for pouring oil and medicines into the nostrils:
E fay aquo de argent o de eram, la qual sia semblant a una petita lampesa uberta, ayssi cum petita conqua, e le meat semblantment.	And make it of silver or gold, which is similar to a small open lantern, like a small basin, and the mouth resembling.
E si vols, fay una canula clausa ayssi cum cana, e la cancula del estrument a capipurge fazedor e sia plana, descuberta; a la qual sia manubre en lo derier de lu, am le qual tenguas aquela quan escaufas en lu oli o aquo que tu vols dels sucs e de las causas suctiblas.	And if you wish, make a closed cannula like a reed, and the mouth of the instrument for pouring oil into the nostrils flat and open; place a handle at the rear end of it, with which you can hold it when you heat oil or what you want from the secretions and causes that are to be suctioned.
E aquestz capipurgi es precios: recipe de enforbi de castor, de balayra blanc, de giengiebre, e piletre de safra, de pebre lonc, de escafragia, de epetum de spic ana unc. vi cumfizeys am suc de bleda e de caul, e sian faytas pillulas, e sia destemprada una pillula am aygua tebeza, e sia gitat en las nars del malaute jasent envers.	And these instruments are precious: mix castor oil, white balata, gentian, safflower oil, long pepper, asafetida, and one uncia of myrrh gum; combine them with wheat juice and calamus juice, and make pillules. Then prepare one unctuous pill, moisten it with clear wine, and administer it into the nostrils of the patient lying on their side.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter 25.
De theyls natz en las extramitatz del nas.	From the nostrils at the ends of the nose.
Motas veguadas es nat theyl en las extramitatz del nas, e es magnificat e omentat en alscus dias entro en que mot es leg le reguardament de lu.	Nodules appear in the nostrils at the ends of the nose, and these are enlarged and smoothed over in a few days as the swelling diminishes.
E per aquo cove que tu inscidas aquel en le comensament de la apparissio de lu, e erediques tot aquel.	And for this, you should enter that which is at the beginning of the appearance of the lesion, and eradicate all of it.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc o cauteri o medicina comburent la qual estia en loc de lu.	And place yourself over the area or the cautery or burning medicine where it was located.
Mays si es tardada la sua inscizio entro que sia magnificat, lahoras considera si es lapificat, dur, de fusca color e de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr quar es apostema crancos; quar motas veguadas ad aquel que inscideys aquesta apostema endeve per lu granda malicia sobre aquel le qual aquel havia.	But if the inflammation is delayed before it enlarges, consider whether it is hardened, dark in color, and has little sensation. In that case, do not touch that with a sharp instrument as it is an abscess; for nodules often accompany this abscess due to its great malice towards the area where it was located.
E si le apostema es de leon tocament e no es de fosca color, e vezes que inscizio es possibla en tot aquel, lahoras evacua le malaute e inscideys aquel senes temor, e cura le loc am aquo que exsique e costrenh entro que sia sanat.	And if the abscess is due to a blow and not dark in color, and the inflammation can occur throughout that area, then drain the poison and cut there without fear, and treat the area with what dries and constricts until it is healed.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter XXVI.
De sutura del nas e de las labias e de la aurelha quan la continuitat es dissolvuda per plagua o per semblantz.	For the suturing of the nose and lips when continuity is dissolved by ulcer or by similar conditions.
Sapias que quan accideys solucio de continuitat en una de aquestas cartillages, pauc confereys en aquela operacio sino en alcus homes.	Know that when there is dissolution of continuity in one of these cartilages, you should not rely much on that operation but rather on several skilled workers.
Donc cove, quan endeve ad alcu alcuna causa de aquelas, que consideres si es plagua fresca am le sieu sanc, e lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Then probe, when you have to deal with any of these causes, whether it is a fresh ulcer and its discharge, and then adjust the two edges of the ulcer with sutures, and proceed to cure that until it is healed.
E si las labias de solucio de continuitat so ja separadas, e quascuna es fayta sana, lahoras cove que tu excorjes quascuna partida de la sua codena apparent entro que n’iesca sanc.	And if the edges of the dissolution of continuity are already separated, and any one is made healthy, then probe that you should remove each part of its underlying tissue until it discharges pus.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias am sutura e strenh aquelas, e sobre aquelas pulveriza sanc de drago e enses trissat, e pausa sobre la polvera una pessa de emplaustra diafinicon, o de alcu autre dels emplastres consolidatius, e leyssa aquel liat per dos jorns o per tres, e aprop deslia aquel e permuta aquel emplaustre e leyssa aquel entro que·ls fiels per si sian abscinditz, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Then adjust the two edges with sutures and strengthen them, and sprinkle dragon's blood powder and triple distilled vinegar over them, and place a piece of diaphonic plaster or another consolidated plaster on top of the powder, and leave this paste for two to three days. Then remove it and change the plaster, leaving it until the roots are absorbed, and proceed to cure with ointment until it is healed.
Mays la manieyra de la sutura es que tu agregues la solucio de continuitat o am agulhas ayssi cum havem recomtat en la sutura del ventre, o agregua la solucio de continuitat am fiel ayssi cum a tu e fayt saber.	The manner of suturing is that you add the solution of continuity or use needles as we have recommended in the belly suture, or add the solution of continuity with thread as you are made to know.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter XXVII.
De extraccio de aquela causas que veno en las doas labias en las partidas dedintz.	Of the extraction of those causes that venous problems occur in the two lips within the internal parts.
Motas veguadas endeve a motz homes en las partidas dedintz de las suas labias alcus apostemas durs semblantz a gras de errs, e alscunas de lors son mendres e alcunas son majors.	Patches appear in the internal parts of their lips, turning into hard abscesses resembling lard. Some are small, while others are larger.
Donc cove que tu convertas las labias e fendas quascuna de aquelas duricias de tota part, e aprop la abscizio umpliscas le loc de sagi trissat entro que·l sanc sia restrengut, e aprop sia lavat am vi agre e sia curat le loc am aquo que es stipticitat, entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, carefully incise all parts of the hard swellings in the lips and cavities, then fill the wound with three layers of cloth until the wound is tightened, and subsequently wash it with vinegar and treat the area with water that has astringent properties until it heals.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter XXVIII.
De inscizio de la carn ajustada en las gengivas.	Of the incision of flesh adhered to the gums.
Granre de veguadas nays sobre la gengiva carn ajustada la qual les antics apelero albulus, adonc cove que tu suspendas aquela am onci o que tenguas aquela am las forfecs e inscidas aquela deves la sua razit, e leyssas la sania correr o le sanc.	Great care must be taken over the gum attached to the flesh, which the ancients called albulus. Then extract that which you hold with one instrument and divide it carefully, and let the healthy blood flow or the venom.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc sagi trissat o autra polveras stipticas o excicativas.	Then place something warm on the area for about three minutes or another styptic or excitatory powder.
E si aquela carn retorna, lahoras inscideys aquela segundariament, e cauterisa aquela, quar aprop le cauteri no retornara.	And if that flesh returns, then divide it again, and cauterize it; for after the cauterization, it will not return.
Capitol .xxix.	Capitol.xxix.
De razo de dentz am ferr.	On the reason for teeth hurt.
Quan en la superficia de las dentz de las partidas dedintz e de las de foro e entre las gingivas so ajustadas escorsas aspras, legas, e alcunas veguadas son de nigradas e son faytas citrinas o vertz entro que a la gingiva ve per aquo corrupcio e son faytas las dentz legas.	When on the surface of the teeth that are split inside and outside, and between the gums, there appear sharp, hard edges, some times they are blackish and are caused by yellow or green deposits between the gums due to corruption, which cause the teeth to become loose.
E donc cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas e pausar le cap de lu en le tieu se, e ratz las dents en las quals apareysso aquelas escorsas e causas semblantz arena entro que de lor no romangua deguna causa, e aquo fay de la negror e de la citrinitat e de las autras entro que sian mondificadas.	And therefore make sure that you cut the patient's thigh between your thighs and place his head in the crook of your arm, and rub the teeth where these edges and similar causes appear with sand so that they do not break for any reason, and do this from blackness and yellowishness and other changes in them.
Donc si es ostat aquo que es en aquelas del comensament de la razio, bo es; e sino, lahoras tu itera la razio sobre aquelas al autra dia e al segon e al tertz entro que vengua al derier stament en aquo que tu vols.	So if what remains of the matter at the beginning of the reasoning is clear, that is good; and if not, then you iterate the reasoning to those matters the next day and the second and the third until it comes to the final statement in what you want.
E sapias que las dentz han necessitat de motz rezoris de diversas formas e de motas figuras segon que es preparat a la tua operacio.	And know that teeth have needed to be extracted in various forms and with different figures according to how your operation is prepared.
E per so quar le razori am le qual la dent es raza de la partida dedintz es autre del razori am le qual es ras entre las dentz segon autras formas, e aquestas formas de razoris sian deves tu preparadas las quals veyras tantost:	And so, for that reason, the extractor used when the tooth is extracted from the inside is different from the extractor used when it is between the teeth according to other forms. These forms of extractors you should prepare, which you will often see.
Capitol .xxx.	Capitol.xxx.
D’eradicacio de dentz.	For the extraction of teeth.
Cove que tu cures la dent de la sua dolor am tot engen e tardes en tota eradicacio de lu, quar no es denguna causa que suplisqua la veguada de lu quan es eradicada, quar es sustancia sublima entro que es excusacio en la eradicacio de lu.	Cure the tooth with great skill and take your time in the entire extraction process, for no cause can compensate for its absence when extracted, for it is a substance that sublimes during the removal.
Mays cove quan le malaute es forsat aquela dent eradicar, que fermament deves tu sia certificat quala es la dent dolent, quar motas veguadas la dolor descep le malaute e cuga que sia en dent sana, e tu eradicas aquela e aprop la dolor no cessa entro que la dent malauta e dolent sia eradicada, quar nos ja havem vist aquo per operacio dels barbies.	When the patient is forced to remove a tooth, you must be certain which tooth is painful, checking several times where the pain originates and ensuring it is not in a healthy tooth. Once you extract the diseased and painful tooth, the pain generally ceases, for we have seen this through the operations of barbers.
Donc cum deves tu es sertificat qual es la dent dolent, e que o sabes be, lahoras cove que tu scarifiques en le circuit de la dent am spatum en le qual sia alcuna vertut, entro que sia dissolvut de la dent de la gingiva de tota partida, e aprop mau aquel am les tieus ditz, o am forfexs subtils al comensament petit a petit entro que aquela concucesquas.	Therefore, you must be certain which tooth is painful, and knowing this well, when you incise along the circuit of the tooth in the socket where any virtue lies, ensuring that it is dissolved from the entire part of the tooth and gum, then insert those tweezers or fine scissors gradually at the beginning, ensuring that the tissue dissolves.
E aprop alogua en lu fortz tenalhas grans per bona loquacio o estuptura fort, e pausa le cap del malaute entre les tieus denolhs que be le tengues que no·s maugua, e aprop tratz la dent segon rectitut en manieyra que no trenques aquela, ni al malaute major dolor no dones.	And then irrigate it well to strengthen the grip for good speech or strong fracture, and place the head of the patient between your hands so that you hold them securely without causing discomfort, and then extract the tooth in a straight manner so as not to break it, nor give the patient additional pain.
E donc si no es foro-getat, lahoras pren un de aquels instrumentz, e met aquel dejos lu de tota part am facilitat e esforsa la remocio de lu ayssi que es feyt al comensament.	And if it is not forced out, then take one of those instruments, and place it under the tooth with great ease and effort, ensuring its removal is done similarly to how it was initially placed.
Mays si la dent es trauquada o corrosa, lahoras cove que tu comples de drap aquel trauc e estrenguas aquel am la extremitat de ray subtil per so que no sia trinquada en la hora de la tua constriccio sobre aquela am tenalas.	If the tooth is broken or corroded, then you should fill that hole with cloth and tie it at the end of a fine thread to prevent it from breaking during your operation on that area.
E cove que tu obres exquesitament am scarificacio en le circuit de tota part de la gingiva e guarda mot la tua fortaleza que no trenques aquela e romangua partida de lu, e retorne sobre le malaute per la malicia que sia majo que la primieyra dolor de lu.	And you should operate exquisite[ly] with incision in the circuit of all parts of the gum and guard maintaining your strength so that you do not break that part of it, and return over the gout through its malice which is worse than the first pain of it.
E guarda te que no fassas aquo que fan alscus ignorantz barbiers en lor fistinacio e audacia sobre la eradicacio de lor, ses que no aministran aquo que nos havem recomtat; quar motas veguadas fan venir sobre les homes malautias grans las quals son pus dificils que sian trinquadas, e las razitz de lor remaugudas totas, o alcunas de aquelas, o que extrayguas aquela am alcus osses de la mandigula ayssi cum motas veguadas havem testificat.	And guard yourself that you do not do what some ignorant barbers do in their incisions and audacity regarding the eradication of gout; for they do not administer what we have advised. For spots and marks often bring great diseases upon men which are harder to break than broken bones, and the reasons for their failures all or some of them, or that you extract that part from certain bones of the mandible thus for spots and marks we have testified.
E aprop la eradicacio de lu sia lavada la boca am vi caut o vi agre am sal.	And for the eradication of gout, wash the mouth with wine or vinegar mixed with salt.
E si endeve fluxs de sanc per aysso, ayssi cum motas veguadas endeve, lahoras trissa alcuna quantitat de zegi e aspergeys sobre la plagua, e si no confereys aquel zegi, cauteriza.	And if bleeding occurs for this reason, as when small blisters appear, then take a little quantity of vinegar and sprinkle it over the wound, and if that vinegar does not stop it, cauterize.
La forma de las forceps e tenalas subtils am las quals es mauguda la dent al comensament sia de longua extramitat, de breu manubre e gros, per so que no sian doblatz quan am aquels deves obrar.	The shape of the forceps and delicate tweezers used to extract a tooth at the beginning should be long and straight, short and thick, so that they do not bend when those you need to use.
E sian ayssi cum vezes de gros manubre entro que quan estrenhas am aquelas no sian dobladas, sian breus extramitatz.	And they should be such that when you tighten them around those, they do not bend, and are long but thin.
E sian faytas de ferr de India descentment faytas de dreytas extramitatz, e en las extramitatz de aquelas sian dentz de las quals las unas intron en las autras e estrenhan per constriccio descent fort, e alscunas veguadas las extramitatz de aquelas sian la forma del bec d’un auzel le qual ha nom ciconia, so es guanta, e son de fort constriccio.	And they should be made of Indian steel, straight and long. At the ends of these, there are teeth such that one enters the other and tighten by descending construction firmly. Sometimes the ends of these are in the shape of a heron's bill, which is called a ciconia, and they are strongly constructed.
Capitol .xxxi.	Capitol.xxxxi.
De erradicacio de dentz e d‘estraccio dels osses de las mandibulas trincadas.	On the removal of teeth and the extraction of the bones from broken jaws.
Quan deves la eradicacio de dent le qual es trinquat roman alcuna causa, lahoras cove que tu pauses sobre le loc coto am boder per un jorn o per dos entro que·l loc sia mollificat; e aprop entromet algesti o tenalhas las extramitatz de las quals so asembladas al bec de un auzel apelat ciconia o guanta, la forma de las forceps:	When you need to remove a tooth that is broken for any cause, then you must place your hand over the area firmly for one or two days until the area becomes softened; and then insert probes or compresses at the extremities of which are attached to the beak of a bird called ciconia or gaunt, the shape of forceps:
Las extramitatz de lor sian faytas dedintz ayssi cum lima o alfagi.	The extremities of the probes should be made like a rasp orawl.
E si no obediys a tu a eyssiment am aquestas forceps o tenalas, lahoras cove que tu caves sobre la razit e descrobas tota la carn e entrometas le instrument le qual ha nom atali, so es palanca petita del qual la forma es aquesta:	And if the tooth does not obey to your attempt with these forceps or probes, then you must grasp the root and strip all the flesh away, and insert the instrument which is named atali, that is a small lever of which the shape is this:
E sia de breu extremitat grossa un petit, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	And briefly, the extremity should be slightly thick and not broken so that it is not broken.
Donc si per aquo la razit es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, ajuda te am aquestz autres instrument dels quals aquestas son las formas: la forma del primier instrument es de triangulada extramitat en la qual sia alcuna grossesa:	So if the root is broken, that is good; otherwise, help yourself with these other instruments of which these are the forms: the form of the first instrument is a triangular extremity in which there is some thickness.
La forma del segon instrument es que sia de triangulada e de pus subtil extremitat.	The form of the second instrument should be triangular and of very fine extremity.
E ja so ajudatz am aquest instrument havent dos ramps del qual aquesta es la forma aprop la seguent:	And now assist in this instrument having two ramps, of which this is the form and shape for the next:
e am autres instrumentz les quals precidero en rasura de dentz; quar juvament es fayt am aquest instrument le qual es asemblat a onci gran, e aquesta es la forma:	and there are other instruments which are used for scraping teeth; so this instrument is made like a large spoon, and this is its form:
de la triangulada extremitat torta o curta, la qual sia alcuna grossesa, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	from the triangular bent or short extremity, which is of certain thickness, and not too deep so as not to pierce.
E otra sapias que·ls instrumentz de las dentz motz so e semblantment les autres instruments.	And another spatula that the instruments for the teeth use is similar to other instruments.
Mays le artifexs savi e subtil en l’art, atroba per si mateys segon aquo que a lu significa la operacio e las malautias diversas; quar son de las malautias a las quals les antics no diysero ni pausero propri instrument, per las formas de diversas specias.	But the skilled craftsmen find suitable instruments for themselves according to what the operation and various ailments signify; so they have instruments for the ailments to which ancient ones would not have assigned nor provided a specific instrument due to the diverse forms.
Mays si es trinquat l’os de la mandibula o dels autres osses de la boca, o si poyreys, lahoras sia pes curat sobre aquel en son loc am aquo que es a lu convenient dels instrumentz e de las forceps las quals havem dit en la extraccio de las razitz de las dentz, e ajuda te am gesti del qual aquesta es la forma:	But if the bone of the mandible or other bones in the mouth are pierced, or if puncturing is necessary, then use a point over that area in its place, according to what is convenient from the instruments and forceps which we have mentioned in the extraction of roots of teeth, and this is the form of the gesture:
E sia en lu alcuna grosseza petit a petit, e sia instringida o tenguda am la boca per que no evasesca o fuga entro que l’os de tot sia foro-getat; e aprop restaura le loc am medicinas convenientz ad aquo.	And let it be in him some small lump little by little, and be compressed or held at the mouth so that it does not escape or flee until all the bone is thoroughly treated; then place the area with suitable medicines for it.
Mays si en l’os es petita poyredura, lahoras ratz aquel de aquela poyredura e de la sua negror, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If there is a small abscess in the bone, then drain that of the abscess and its blackness, and cure that until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxii.	Capitol.xxxii.
De la cura de las dentz eminentz sobre las autras.	Of the cure of the prominent teeth over others.
Quan las dentz so eminentz no segon lor cors natural per aquelas la forma es laga, e majorment quan endeve a las femnas, e majorment a las piuselas venerablas; donc cove que tu consideras: si dent es nada aprop autra dent, e no es possibla sarradura ni linament de lu, lahoras radica aquela; mays que no sia annexa am autra dent, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am aquest instrument del qual aquesta es la forma; e es semblant a morr de porc, e sia feyt de ferr de India de extramitat mot aguda.	When the teeth are prominent not according to their natural form, especially when they protrude in women, and particularly in venerable old women; therefore consider this: if a tooth is close to another tooth and it is impossible to extract or treat it with a needle, then remove that tooth; but if it is not attached to another tooth, then cut out that tooth using this instrument, which resembles the head of a pig, and made of Indian steel with an extremely sharp point.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscideyses aquela en trops dias per la duricia de la dent, e que no sia comauguda autra de las dentz.	And let your incision be where you cut that in too many days due to the hardness of the tooth, and may it not be another of the teeth.
E si es dent eminent expausat a limadura, lahoras lima aquel am lima de ferr de India del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if the tooth is prominently protruding and needs to be filed, then file that with a file of Indian iron, which is of this form:
E sia tot de ferr de India e·l margua eysament; e sia de motz menutz puntz ayssi cum lima am la qual son faytas agulhas, am la qual la dent sia limada pauc a pauc en motz dias am fecilitat, per so que no sia autra dent comauguda e caga.	And let it be entirely of Indian iron; and let the margin be filed finely; and let it have small pointed teeth like a file, with which the tooth can be filed little by little over many days for ease, so that no other tooth may decay or fall out.
E aprop lineys aquela en la fi, e ratz aquela am alscus razoris.	Then lengthen it at the tip, and sharpen it with a few razors.
E si es dent del qual una partida es trinquada e lideys la lengua, lahoras cove que tu limescas aquel entro que l’aspretat de aquela fraccio sia ostada e engualhada, e sia aplenada per so que la lengua no ledesca ni la paraula no corrumpa.	And if it is a tooth of which one part is fractured and you file the tongue, then cut that such that the sharpness of that fracture is obstructed and equalized, and may it be filled so that the tongue does not hurt nor the word become corrupted.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Book XXXIII.
De restauracio de dentz maugudas am fiel de aur o de argent.	For the restoration of decayed teeth using gold or silver filler.
Quan accideys a las dentz devant concussio e remossio per percussio o per cazament, e le malaute no pot strenher sobre aquo que manga, e tu has curat aquel am medicinas stipticas, e no ha valgut la tua curacio, lahoras per so que no cagan es engen en aquelas que sian strengudas am fiel de aur e no de argent, quar argent se fa vert e aprop se poyreys aprop alscus dias, mays aur nul temps no es mudat.	When accidents occur to the front teeth due to concussion or removal by impact or during hunting, and the patient cannot strengthen what is left, and after treating it with astringent medicines your treatment has not been effective, then for those that are strong fill them with gold and not silver, because silver turns color and will likely leak in a few days, but gold does not change over time.
E sia le fiel en tal subtilitat e grocesa segon la quantitat que puesca entrar entre las dentz; e la forma de la reccio es que prenguas le fiel e pren lo doble de lu entre doas dentz sanas, e aprop que cresques am doas tortuositatz del fiel entre doas maugudas, o si’ una o motas, entro que pervengua la tela a la dent sana del autra partida.	And the filling should be in such subtlety and thickness according to the quantity that can enter between the teeth; and the form of the cavity is that you take the gold and place twice its amount between two healthy teeth, and soon it will appear with two twists of the gold between two decayed teeth, or if one or several, until the tissue reaches the healthy tooth on the other side.
E aprop itera le teyssiment entro a la partida de la qual comenciest, e strenh la tua ma am facilitat e savieza entro que no sia mauguda.	And then insert the tissue into the part where you started, and strengthen your hand with ease and skill until it is not decayed.
E sia la tua striccio am la qual strenhas le fiel deves las razitz de las dentz que no evasesca.	And let your bandage be such that it holds the tooth roots firmly in place so that they do not slip out.
E aprop inscindeys las extramitatz del fiel superfluens am las forceps o tosoyras, e agregua aquelas en quascun loc am gesti, e converteys aquelas e las occulta entre la dent sana e la dent mauguda, per so que no fassa lesio a la lengua.	And then divide the excess roots of the tooth with forceps or sharp scissors, and add them to any location with your hand, and place both in between the healthy tooth and the decayed one, so as not to injure the tongue.
E aprop leyssa aquela ayssi streyta cum roman.	And let it be thus tied like a Roman.
Mays si es desliada o rumpuda, strenh aquela o aquelas am autra fiel en tal manieyra en tot son temps.	If it is slipped or broken, hold it with another thread in such a manner throughout its length.
E aquesta es la forma de las dentz e la figura de la rectacio de doas dentz sanas e de doas maugudas, ayssi cum vezes aquestas liadas:	And this is the form of the teeth and the figure of the extraction of two healthy teeth and two decayed ones, as you see these tied:
E quan se fa que retorno una dent o doas aprop le cazement de quascuna en lors locs, e sian recrescutz ayssi cum havem recomtat, e que remauguan.	And when one returns a tooth or two to their proper place in their sockets, and they are grown back as we have described, and remain embedded.
E no fa aquo sino bo artifexs e savi.	And this is done by skilled artisans.
E alcunas veguadas es aptat alcuna causa dels osses de vaca, e es fayt de lor ayssi cum forma de dent, e es pausada en loc en le qual defayl la dent, e es strengit ayssi cum havem dit, e reman e serveys am aquel per lonc temps.	And sometimes it is suitable for certain causes of the bones of cattle, and it is made from them like a form of tooth, and is placed in the location where the tooth failed, and is strengthened as we have said, and remains and serves you long.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Chapter XXXIV.
De inscizio del liament le qual ve en la lengua e prohibeys loquela.	Of the incision of the ligament which we call and prohibit speech.
Aquest liguament le qual ve dejos la lengua alcunas veguadas o es natural am le qual hom nays, o accidental e accideys per plagua la qual ja es consolidada.	This ligament, which we call and sometimes leaves the tongue in some cases naturally as one is born, or accidentally due to a wound which has already healed.
E la operacio en lu es que huobres la boca del malaute, le sieu cap existent en le tieu se; e eleva la sieua lengua, e aprop inscideys aquel liament nervos segon la latitut entro que sia solvuda la lengua de la sua recencio.	And the operation is that one opens the patient's mouth, which contains the tongue; then raises the tongue, and then incises that ligament nerve according to the width between which the tongue can be freed from its attachment.
Mays si en aquela es alcuna duricia o denodacio, e aquo es stat per consolidacio de plagua, lahoras tu gieta unci e scindeys aquel per la latitut entro que aias inscindit le liament e sia dissolvuda la nodacio.	But if there is any hardness or induration in that area, and this is due to the healing of a wound, then you cut one time and incise that ligament nerve according to the width at which you have already incised the ligament and dissolved the induration.
E guarda te que no sia fayta fissura en le preon de la carn e que scindas aqui arceria e vengua flux de sanc.	And make sure that no crack is made in the subcutaneous layer, and carefully split here to avoid a flow of blood.
E aprop sia lavat le vestigi de la inscisio am ayguaros o am vi agre o am aygua frega; e aprop pausa dejos la lengua licini; so es meca la qual tengua le malaute dejos la lengua en quascuna nuoyt per so que no sia consolidat autra veguada.	And then wash the incision edges with warm water or apply a wet cloth; and place the tongue depressor over them; if needed, let it stay during each night to prevent the wound from becoming consolidated again.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, pausa sobre le loc vetriol trissat; mays si le sanc ventz, lahoras cauteriza le loc am cauteri lantiginos le qual conveneys ad aquo.	But if there is a flow of blood, place a glass vessel over the area; but if the bleeding continues, then cauterize the location with a pointed cautery suitable for this purpose.
E aprop aquel cura am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And then apply other treatments as necessary until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxv.	Capitol.xxxv.
De extraccio de ranula dejos la lengua.	For the extraction of a ranula, use the tongue depressor.
Alcunas veguadas accideys dejos la lengua apostema asemblant a nomla petita prohibent la lengua de la sua operacio natural; e fort leu es magnificada entro que huempla la boca.	Sometimes, an abscess appears, causing the tongue to swell like a small lump, prohibiting its natural operation; and as it fills the mouth, the swelling becomes more significant.
E la operacio en lu es que huebras la boca del malaute sesent devant le solel e considera le apostema.	And the operation for this is to make an incision in the groin sixty centimeters in front of the pubis and consider the abscess.
E si tu le vezes de fusca color o de negra, dur, al qual le malaute no atroba sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel quar es cranc.	And if you see one of reddish-brown or black, hard, to which the patient feels no sensation, then do not touch that area.
E si es declinat a blancor, en le qual es humiditat, lahoras tu met le onci en lu, e inscideys aquel am spatum subtil, e inscindeys le de tota partida; e si sanc te ventz en la hora de la tua operacio, lahoras tu pausa desus zegi trissat, so es vetriol, entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if it has turned white, which indicates humidity, then you place the probe in it, and incise that area with a thin blade, and incise all parts; and if you notice blood during your operation, then pause above zegi trissat, which is vitriol, within which you restrain the blood.
E aprop retorna a la obra tua entro que lo haias trayt am compliment de lu, entro que sia lavat am vi agre e sal; e cura aquel am l’autra curacio ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And then return to your work after having completed it, after it has been washed with wine and salt; and care for that with the other treatment until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Capitol.xxxvi.
De extraccio de apostema de doas aurelhas e de aquel que es nada en le golayro e de las autras apostemas.	On the extraction of abscesses from both ears and those that occur in the throat, as well as other abscesses.
Quan endeveno en le golayro godat, so son glandulas las quals son asembladas algodat, las quals accideysso deforas e son nompnadas doas aurelhas, las quals quan tu las curas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no es sanat, lahoras tu considera si le apostema es dur, de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr.	When in the throat gout, so are their glands those which are gathered cotton-like, which occur externally and are named two ears, which when you cure them as we said in the division and it is not healed, then consider if the abscess is hard, of dusky color, of little sensation, then do not touch that with iron.
E si es de roga color e la razic es grossa, lahoras no toques aquela am ferr per le flux del sanc; abantz layssa aquel entro sia madurat, e lahoras o tu trauqueras aquel, o sira romput per si.	And if it is of red color and the root is large, then do not touch that with iron for the flow of blood; first let that mature, and then either you will incise it, or it will rupture by itself.
E si es de blanqua color, radon, e la razit de lu es subtil, lahoras aquel es que cove esser inscidit.	And if it is of white color, radish-like, and the root of it is fine, then that is to be incised.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras, denant la tua operacio, si ja ha repausat le apostema de lu caut am repaus complit o si es deminuit am alcuna deminucio; e lahoras fay sezer le malaute denant le soleyl, e·l cap de lu sia en le tieu se, e huebre la boca de lu, e le servidor prenent entre las suas mas prema la lengua de lu dejos am instrument mot noble del qual aquesta es la forma:	And the operation on it is that you consider, before your operation, if the abscess has fully matured and rested after cautery, or if it has diminished with some reduction; then make an incision in the morning before the sun, place its head in your lap, and open its mouth. The servant taking between his hands the patient's tongue, holds it with the most noble instrument of which this is the form:
E sia fayt de argent o de aram, e sia subtil cum cotel.	And it should be made of silver or copper, and very fine like a刀刃。显然，这里的“如刀刃”并不是正确的翻译，正确的翻译应该是：“And it should be made of silver or copper, and very thin like a blade.”
Donc cum tu premes am aquel la lengua e es mostrat a tu la apostema, e catz sobre aquel le tieu vezement, lahoras pren onci e fica aquel en l’amenla, e tira aquel a las partidas defora tant quant podes.	And when you press on that area with your finger and the abscess is shown to you, and you see it clearly over that spot, then take a needle and prick that area, and poke it outward as far as you can.
Otra aquo que tiras alcuna causa de las tunicas, e aprop incideys aquela am instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	Another thing you do with some cause of the tunics, and then apply that to the area using an instrument of which this is the form:
e es asemblat a forceps, empero las extramitatz de lu son corvadas, ayssi que l’orrifici de quascuna de aquelas es en le endreyt del autra, mot agudas, le qual sia de ferr indi enbegut.	and it is similar to forceps, but the ends of these are curved, so that the orifice of each of those is in the straight part of the other, sharp points, which should be made of iron and well tempered.
Mays si aquest instrument no es a tu present, lahoras inscideys aquel am spatum del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: E sia agut de la una part, no agut del autra part.	And if this instrument is not at hand, then incise that area using an instrument of which this is the form: It should be sharp on one side, but not on the other.
E pus que has inscidit una mella, inscideys l’autra segon aquesta meteyssa manieyra de inscizio, e aprop la inscizio le malaute guarguarise de aygua frega	And after you have incised one wound, incise the other according to this method of incision, and then by incising, the patient will be cured with water.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, guarguarise aygua de decoccio de scorsa de milgrana o de fuelha de mirtra e semblantz ad aquel de las causas stiptiquas entro que·l flux del sanc sia restreyt, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If there is a flow of blood, guard with water from decoction of herb of myrrh or leaf of holly and similar to that of the causes styptical until the flow of the blood is restrained, and then cure that among which it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas naysso en le guolayro autras apostemas otra aquelas doas aurelhas, e inscideys aquelas segon que yeu e dit en la inscizio de doas mellas engualment.	Sometimes this occurs in the throat, other abscesses elsewhere on the two ears, and incise those according to my judgment and as described in the incision of two mallets equally.
E yeu ja fu medicat una femna de apostema le qual era nat en le golayro de lu, le qual apostema tendia a color fusca, de pauc sentiment, le qual ja havia claus le golayro de lu, e la femna respirava am meat streyt, e ja havia prohibit a lu comestio e beure de aygua, e ja era pervenguda a la mort si mays agues stat per un dia o per dos.	And I had already treated a woman with an abscess which was located in her throat, which abscess had a dark color, little sensation, and had already closed her throat. The woman breathed very thinly, and had already been forbidden to eat and drink water, and she was nearing death if more water remained for one or two days.
E l’apostema ja tant havia pugat que havia mezes dos ramps entro que eyssiro per dos traucs.	And the abscess had already been pressing so long that it had been two weeks before it would heal through two incisions.
Donc yeu me cuytegui fisturalment e fiquegui en un de lor onci, e tiregui aquel, e atirada es de lu gran porcio, e aprop yeu incidigui aquela de on comprendegui del autre trau, e aprop yeu obrigui la boca de lu, e compremegui la sua lengua, e aprop yeu fiquegui le onci en aquela apostema.	Then I incised it forcefully and clamped one of her ounces, drew out that portion, and then incised the other, and closed its opening, held her tongue, and placed the ounce in the abscess.
E aprop yeu abscizi gran partida de lu, e no corria de lu sino un pauc de sanc.	And then you cut away a large part of it, and there was but little blood flowing from it.
Donc absolut es le guolayro de aquela femna, e comensec tantost beure aygua, e aprop presec vianda, donc yeu no cessegui inscidir de aquela apostema motas vetz per lonc temps, e succesia apostema en loc de aquel, le qual inscizia entro que es prolonguat aquel.	Therefore, the swelling was that woman's gout, and she began to drink water soon, and then consumed some food. Then I could not cease incising that abscess many times for a long time, and an abscess would occur in its place, which continued to swell as long as that lasted.
Donc yeu engen agui e cauterizegui le guolayro de lu, donc astec de addicio; e aprop yeu perambulegui e no saubi que fec Dieus de aquela aprop mi.	Therefore, I treated the gout on her and applied cautery; then I walked about and did not know what God had done to that one near me.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Capitol.xxxvii.
De inscizio de huvela quan es apostemada.	On incising the swelling when it is abscessed.
Quan catarr deysen a la huvula, e es apostemada e es longa, lahoras ela es nompnada perpendicular; e si es en la partida dejos grossa e redonda, e lahoras ela es apelada buba.	When catarrh affects the uvula, and it is abscessed and long, then it is named perpendicular; if it is in the part with a large and round swelling, then it is called a bubo.
Mays quan es curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio, e no comfereys la tua curacio, e eyssament ja vezes que apostema caut ja es ostat de lu e es subtil, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquela que es agreguadas redonda; e si es ad aquela longitut, e es sanguina, de fusca color o de negre, e no es a lu centiment, lahoras cove que tu temtes la inscizio de lu, quar en aquela es temor sobre le malaute.	When it is cured as we have said in the division, and you do not see your cure, then often you find that the abscess has already come to an end and become subtle. Then you should incise the one that is aggregated and round; if it is of a length, and is bloody, with a dusky or black color, and is not more than a centimeter, then you must fear the incision of it, for there is fear of gout in that.
E quan tu vezes aquela segon la manieyra que yeu he dita de la sua blancor e longuesa, que tu fassas sezer le malaute e premas la lengua de lu am instrument del qual procesic la sua forma e aprop fica le onci en la nuva, e tira aquela en jos e inscideys aquela am un de dos instrumentz les quals e ditz en la inscizio de dos mellas.	And when you see that according to the manner that I have said of its whiteness and length, you make an incision in the patient and probe the wound with an instrument of which it will take the shape and then place the onion inside the new opening, and pull that down and cut that with one of the two instruments which are called in the cutting of two bellies.
E cove que no inscidas aquela sino aquo que es ajustat sobre le terme natural ses addicio, quar si tu inscides de lu mays, lediyras le sieu parlar.	And make sure that you do not cut there but where it is attached to the natural term of addition, for if you cut beyond it, you will damage its function.
E aprop la inscizio, usa de aquo le qual havem recomtat en la inscizio de dos mellas, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And near the incision, use what we have recommended in the cutting of two bellies, and cure that until it is healed.
Mays si era le malaute espaventat per la inscizio de lu, cove que use de engen en la cauterizacio de lu ses temor, e la manieyra del cauteri en lu no es sino am aygua aguda, e es que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop prem la lengua de lu am le instrument le qual havem dit, e aprop pren de l’aygua la qual havem dita en le capitol de cauterizacio, e comfeys am aquela caus viva, e pausa aquela no spessa ni subtil, e de aquela omple la concavitat de l’estrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if the patient was frightened by the incision, make sure you use something to calm him during the cautery. The way of applying the cautery is simply with hot water. You place the head of the patient in your hand, and then probe the wound with the instrument we have mentioned. Then take from the water which we have described in the chapter on cautery, and apply it moderately but not too thin to the area, filling the cavity of the instrument whose shape this is:
Sia la extramitat de lu conquavitat en la qual sia pausada la medicina ayssi cum la conquavitat de culher de ray, e pausa le strument am la medicina sobre la vula, e·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu latz per so que corro saliva o musellage de la boca de aquel per la intrinscequa medicina, per so que no deyssenda de aquela deguna causa sobre le golayro de lu e que ledesca aquel.	Let the lower part of the cavity in which the medicine is placed be as wide as the width of a ray fish, and place the instrument on top of the medicine near the vulva, with the patient's buttocks below to catch any saliva or mucus from the mouth of the patient that might enter through the internal medicine, so that it does not get contaminated by this cause and spoils.
E aprop te la tua ma am la medicina, e exprem aquela sobre la uvula per l’espazi de miega hora entro que vegas aquela esser denegrada e sedada per la mordicacio de la medicina.	Place your hand on the medicine, and express it over the uvula for half an hour, until you see that it is darkened and saturated by the action of the medicine.
E si vols, prengues coto e envolopes aquel sobre la extremitat del ray, e submergeys le coto en la medicina, e entrometas le ray am le coto en una canula de sobre entro que·l coto adheresca en aquela canula, e fay aquo tantas vetz entro que consiegues aquo que vols de la cauterizacio de la uva, e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela se seccara e cayra aprop tres dias o quatre.	And if you wish, take some cloth and wrap it around the end of the ray, submerge the cloth in the medicine, and insert the ray through the cloth into a tube so that the cloth adheres within the tube. Do this several times until you achieve what you want from cauterizing the uvula, then let it dry and fall off in about three or four days.
E si indigeysses que iteras la medicina, itera aquela, e aprop la cauterizacio abstergeys en le circuit de la uva am coto enbegut en boder, e mondifica am aquel aquo que es en le circuit de lu de la medicina, e sia lavat am aygua frega, e sia curat deforo am embrocacio, e dedintz am guarguarismes entro que sia sanat.	And if you need to apply more medicine, apply it, and after cauterizing, clean the circuit of the uvula with a cloth soaked in vinegar, modify what is in the circuit of the uvula due to the medicine, and wash it with fresh water, treat externally with ointment, and internally with decoctions until it is healed.
E aquesta especia de curacio es pus salva que inscizio e pus long de temor.	And this method of treatment is safer than incision and shorter in duration of fear.
Alcunas veguadas es curada la uvuola am aquo que es pus subtil que cauteri e inscizio, quar es curat am subfumigacio en aquesta manieyra: recipe calament, ysop, origua, ruda, scicados arabic, camamilla, broyda e semblant ad aquels de las erbas, e ajusta totas aquelas causas, o alcunas de lor, en una ola, e sian submergidas am vi agre, e bulhan; e la ola sia be lutada am lut decentment, e sia en le mieg loc de la ola un trauc, sobre le qual sia pausat un instrument conquau de aram segon aquesta manieyra; sia fayt de argent o de aram.	Some cases of uvula pain are cured with what is finer than cautery and incision, which is treated by fumigation in this manner: take calamus, hyssop, origanum, rue, scikos arabicus, camomile, grind them into a paste similar to that of herbs, and adjust all these causes or some of them into one vessel, immerse them in water well boiled; let the vessel be covered properly, with an opening in the middle on which place an iron container according to this manner; make it of silver or iron.
E sia entromesa la extremitat en la boca del malaute entro que la vapor poge a la uvula sobre la quanula, entro que la uvula sia mot ofuscada.	And place the extremity in the mouth of the patient where the vapor rises to the uvula above the gullet, so that the uvula is well saturated.
E aprop itera sobre aquela motas veguadas entro qu’es secca, e guarda te que no fassas aquesta curacio al comesament de l’aveniment de apostemas, quar trop ajustaria en le apostema, e no cove que tu fassas aquo, sino deves la declaracio de apostema de lu caut.	And then repeatedly apply it to those affected areas where it is dry, and guard that you do not perform this treatment at the beginning of the onset of carbuncles, as it would too tightly constrict the carbuncle. You should not do this, but instead declare the presence of a carbuncle with a cautery.
Mays si no es a tu present aquest instrument, lahoras pren una cana e compon en la extramitat de lu un clos de huou, per so que la boca del malaute sia comborida, quar le closc del huou prohibeys la vapor comburir la boca.	But if you do not have this instrument at hand, then take a cane and place a cork at the end of it, so that the mouth of the patient is opened, because the cork prevents the vapor from burning the mouth.
E aquesta curacio es bona am salut.	And this cure is good for health.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Capitol. XXXVIII.
De extraccio d’espinas e de aquo que adhereys en le golayro e de las autras causas.	Of the extraction of thorns and what adheres in the wound and other causes.
Motas veguadas adhereys en le guolayro o spina de peys o alcuna autra causa.	Spots or thorns that adhere in the wound or from a foreign object.
Adonc cove que tu extraguas aquo que de aquels es apparent, sobre le qual catz la vista, pus que tu premes la lengua am instrument denant solelh, per so que a tu sia declarat aquo que es en la guola.	Then carefully extract what is obvious and visible. Press the tongue with an instrument in front of the light so that you may clearly see what is in the wound.
E aquo que no apar e es a tu occultat en le guolayro, cove que tu fassas vomir le malaute denant que la vianda sia degerida en l’estomac, quar fort leu la causa annexsa le golayro sira foro-getada per vomit; o que deglusia le malaute una pessa de nap o de razit de laytuga o un boci de pa sec; o prengua una pessa de sponga marina sequa leon, e lia aquela fortment am fiel, e aprop le malaute transglussia aquela, quar cum perve al loc en le qual so spinas e es extrahuda, lahoras so foro-getatz.	And what is not apparent and hidden in the wound, make the patient vomit before the food is digested in the stomach, because if a strong cause attached to the wound causes vomiting, it will be expelled; or have the patient swallow a piece of napkin or rue cloth or a chunk of dry bread; or take a piece of sponge well soaked in wine, tie it tightly with thread, and make the patient swallow this, for it will reach the place where the thorns are located and be expelled.
E mays pren una anguila e be am fiel liada, e sia dedintz mesa e soptament sia extrayta; o pren un porr e soptament le metas e soptament l’en tratz.	And take an eel and bind it with honey, place it inside and secretly extract it; or take a probe and secretly insert it and then remove it.
Mays si no so foro-getatz am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas, lahoras husa de un instrument de plom segon aquesta forma:	And if none of these causes we have mentioned apply, then use a lead instrument in this form:
E sia pus gros que ray un petit, e en la extramitat de lu sia conquavitat la qual tu entrometas en la sua guola am facilitat.	And let it be as thick as a small finger, and at the end of it, have a cavity that you can insert into his throat with ease.
E el aga le sieu cap elevat en sus, e guarda te que·l tocament del sieu os de la gola, per so que endevengua a lu cos e am aquela que enpellesca le os o la spina, o que aquel le metge am la sua ma.	And make his head lift up, and keep watch that the touch of his bone in the throat reaches his body, or that the doctor places his hand there.
Mays empero que·l malaute aquel entrometa es miels, per la sua sciencia del loc de la causa annexa e enpellisca en jos, e tira la sua ma am le instrument en sus, tot aquo segon la quantitat la qual es a lu preparada entro que sia foro-getada.	And instead, when the patient himself inserts honey, by his knowledge of the place of the cause and pushes it down, and pulls his hand towards the instrument, do all this according to the quantity prepared inside before it is completely inserted.
Capitol .xxxix.	Capitol.xxxix.
De extraccio de sancguisugua annexsa al golayro.	From the extraction of gouty fluid associated with the gauloar.
Quan es medicada sanguisugua am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la curacio am medicinas e no comfereys, considera lahoras en le guolayro del malaute al solelh, pus que tu aias compremuda la lengua de lu am instrument le qual a tu havem recomtat.	When gouty fluid is treated with the medicines as we have said in the division of the cure with medicines and you do not agree, consider at the gauloar of the malate under the sun, for you have understood the language of the patient with the instrument which we have recommended.
Donc si tu vezes la sancguisugua, extratz aquela am onci petit o am gesti subtils decentment.	So if you see the gouty fluid, extract it either through a small needle or with fine, delicate instruments.
E si no es a tu possible estrayre am aquel, lahoras pren una canula concava e entromet aquela en lo guolayro del malaute, e aprop pausa en la concavitat de la canula un ferr ignit, e fay aquo tantas vetz (entro que la sancguisugua sia morta e se osta del guolayro) e abstengua se le malaute tot lo jorn de aygua.	And if it is not possible to extract it there, then take a concave cannula and insert it into the gauloar of the malate, and place a heated iron in the concavity of the cannula, performing this as many times as necessary (until the gouty fluid is dead and comes out of the gauloar), and let the patient abstain from all water for the entire day.
E aprop prengua una veyria plena de aygua frega, e obra la boca de lu en aquela, e lava la boca am aquela; e no trasglucia de aquela alcuna causa e maugua l’aygua una hora aprop autra am la sua ma, quar la sancguisugua tantost cum sent l’aygua catz.	And then take a sponge full of water, open its mouth over the area, and wash the area with it; and do not swallow any part of it, but let the water remain on the area for about an hour with your hand, as soon as the gouty fluid perceives the water it will start to come out.
Mays si no es foro-getada am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras subfumigua le malaute am cimetz o am assafetida per le instrument le qual havem recomtat en la sufumiguacio de uvula.	If not fogged properly as we have advised, then subfog the thigh with cyme or assafoetida through the instrument we have advised in the uvula fogyation.
Fay aquo, so en quar cayra.	Do this, so that it may fall into place.
E es un’autra manieyra de operacio en sufumiguacio de aquela, es que tu prenguas una ola en la qual sian carbos ignitz e la ola sia cuberta am una cobertora en le mieg de la qual sia un trauc, e sia compausat en aquel trauc la extremitat del instrument; e aprop dega desus la subfumigacio; e pause le malaute la sua boca en la extremitat de la canula, e claugua la sua boca per que la subfumiguacio no sia foro-getada entro que sapias que la subfumigacio es pervenguda a la sancguisugua, quar la sancguisugua tantost cayra.	And another way of performing the fogyation is that you take a brazier in which are burning coals and cover the brazier with a cloth in the middle of which there is a perforated tube, and place the end of the instrument at the other end of the tube; then proceed with the subfog; and place the thigh over the end of the canula, and seal its mouth so that the subfog does not escape until you see that the subfog has reached the uvula, for the uvula will soon fall.
E si no catz, lahoras tu itera la subfumiguacio motas vetz, e abstengua le malaute de beure, e mange causas saladas e alhs, e no begua aygua, e ayssi necessari es que am aquest regiment sia fora-getada.	And if not cured, then repeat the subfog several times, and make the patient abstain from drinking, eating salty foods and such, and not to drink water. Thus it is necessary that this regimen be followed.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument am le qual es trayta sancguisugua del guolayro quan es vista; e es semblant a forceps ayssi cum vezes, sino quar es en lu alcuna curvitat:	And this is the form of the instrument used to treat gout when it is seen; and it resembles tongs as you see them, except that there is some curvature in it.
le qual sia mesa al guolayro, e la extremitat de lu es semblant a bec de ciconia, que es guanta, en la qual es aspretat de lima, per so quar, quan comprem alcuna causa, aquela no leyssa.	And it is placed on the gout, and the extremity of it is similar to the beak of a stork, which is curved, and is filed with a file, so that when any cause is compressed, it does not leak.
Capitol .xl.	Capitol.xl.
En le qual es la suma del sermo en apercio de apostemas e en seccio de lor.	In which the main discourse on boils and their treatment is presented.
Les apostemas so motas specias, de motas manieyras, segon que ve rememoracio de lor, de quascuna en aquest libre.	Boils are special kinds of lumps, occurring in various ways, as remembered, for each one in this treatise.
E so diversas en perforacio e seccio de lor per doas manieyras, de las quals la una es per la specia de apostemas en si meteys; e per aquo que comprem de las humiditatz.	And they vary in penetration and treatment by two methods. Of these, one is specific to the nature of boils themselves; and it concerns the compression of the humors.
E la segonda manieyra es prop les locs en les quals accideys del cos, quar le apostema accident en le cap es autra de la apostema accident en le cul; e le apostema en le loc carnos accident es autra del apostema accident en junctura; e a quascun de lor es son juguament per operacio.	And the second method is specific to the places where bodily accidents occur. A boil that occurs on the head is different from one that occurs in the genitals; and a boil in fleshly tissue is different from one at a joint. For each of them, there is a distinct procedure for operation.
E mays de apostemas so alcunas las quals cove que no sian perforadas sino aprop maturacio de la sania en aquels o compliment de lor.	And more of abscesses some of which cover that they not be perforated but near maturation of the health in those or complement of their.
So autras apostemas les quals cove que sian traucatz quan son cruzes, e no son maturatz segon lor compliment, ayssi cum apostemas que son propdas a las juncturas, quar apostema quan ve prop junctura, lo esser de lu es prolonguat entro que·s poyreys aquo que es en le circuit de lu, e fort leu son corromputz les liamentz o les nervis de aquela junctura, per que es fayta causa de contraccio de aquel membre; o es apostema prop de membre principal, e si tu tardas la perforacio de lu entro sia madurat nosira al membre principal; o es prop le cul, donc perfora aque no-madurat; e no cove que·l perforas cru, de no-complida degestio, sino aquel que es prop del cul, per so que no poyresca le preon de lu e sia elonguat a las partidas dedintz del cul, e sia fayta fistula, o que sia fayt en le terme de lu que no sia sanat.	And other abscesses some of which cover that they be drawn out when they are ripe, and not matured according to their complement, thus as abscesses that are close to joints, for an abscess that is near a joint, the nature of it is prolonged into where you will be here that is in the circuit of it, and greatly corrupts the ligaments or the nerves of that joint, so that it becomes a cause of contraction of that limb; or it is an abscess close to the main member, and if you delay the perforation of it until its maturity affects the main member; or it is near the anus, therefore pierce that which is not ripe; and it must not be pierced raw, due to poor digestion, but one that is near the anus, so that you do not cause a prolapse and be extended into the internal parts of the anus, and a fistula be formed, or something done in its term that does not heal.
Mays cove que tu sapias la hora de la perforacio de la apostema, e aysso es quan es maturat.	And you must know the time for perforating the abscess, and this is when it is ripe.
E sapias que es madurat quan es la cedacio de la dolor e la cessacio de la febre, e aprop la diminucio de la rogor e de la pulsacio, e la acuitat del cap del apostema, e les autres senhals.	And know that it is ripe when there is the cessation of pain and the end of fever, and nearly the decrease of redness and pulse, and the sharpness of the head of the abscess, and other signs.
E quar cove que sapias la perforacio cazer en le loc pus dejos del apostema e de pus venient de curacio de la eminencia.	And know that when you can perceive the penetration of pus in the location below the abscess and coming from the healing of the prominence, then proceed.
E perforacio tostemps sia per le lonc de la carn o del cors, si las apostemas son en las partidas de las mas o dels pes, e en loc dels lacertz, de las cordas dels nervis, de las arcerias; e, al derier, en totz locs enguals en les quals no es reflecio; quar en aquels que so reflectitz, usa de perforacio segon aquel membre.	And the penetration of pus should be made along the length of the flesh or the body, if the abscesses are in the thigh or the feet, and at the location of the lacertae, the cords of the nerves, the arches; and, finally, in all locations where there is no reflection; for in those that do reflect, use the penetration according to that member.
Mays quan le apostema es en loc carnos, lahoras miels es que leysses la perforacio de lu entro que sia confermada la digestio de lu segon compliment, ayssi quo havem dit; quar si tu perforas aquel denant aquo, es prolonguat le cors del poyre de lu e de mota sordicia, e fort leu las labias de lu so enduradas e la profunditat de lu.	When the abscess is in a fleshy location, it is better to delay the penetration until the digestion of the pus is confirmed according to our previous saying; for if you penetrate it prematurely, it will prolong the course of the disease and make the edges and depth more pronounced.
Mays alcus apostemas so perforatz segon la latitut de la carn o del cos deves la necessitat, o segon aquo del qual lo membre indigeys.	Sometimes abscesses are pierced according to the width of the flesh or body as necessity demands, or according to that from which the member suffers.
E cove que administres petita perforacio , e·n les apostemas grans gran perforacio e ampla o motas seccios segon la diversitat de la grandesa dels apostemas.	And ensure that for small abscesses, you perform a small puncture; in large abscesses, make a large and wide puncture or multiple sections according to the size of the abscesses.
E autras so dels apostemas en les quals cove que la codena sia conquavada e sia encidida, quan es fayta ayssi quo pan e fayta es en terme que ja stigua, ayssi cum aquel que accideys en trops de dubelec e de bubos.	And in other cases of abscesses, ensure that the cavity is closed and sealed. When this is done, do it while the pus has stopped flowing, just as you would when dealing with large boils and buboes.
E de aquels so que so insciditz am seccio havent tres angles; e de aquels es en le qual es inscidit ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirtra, ayssi cum las apostemas dels angonars.	And of those that are incised with a section having three angles; and in which an incision is made as the shape of a mulberry leaf, just as with abscesses of ganglions.
E de lor so en les quals es administrada seccio redonda e seccio lunar, e semblantz ad aquels.	And of those in which a circular section and a crescent section are administered, resembling those.
Mays aquel al qual no es cap ayssi cum son apostemas leons superficials, cove que tu perforas aquel am perforacio superficial, o plana tant solament.	Otherwise, for those abscesses that do not require it as with superficial abscesses, ensure that you perform a superficial puncture or a flat one only.
E cove quant le apostema es gros e ya ha colligit mota sania, que perfores aquel e no te coytes que extraguas tot le poyre en aquela hora; habantz extratz de aquel una partida, e aprop opila le apostema entro al autre dia, e aprop extratz una partida major, e aprop fa aquo motas veguadas segon graduacio entro que sia foro-getat.	And when the abscess is large and has already collected pure matter, that you perforate it and do not hesitate to extract all the pus at that time; having extracted one part, then on another day inject the abscess with a larger part, and continue to do so in stages until it is thoroughly treated.
E majorment si·l malaute es de freol vertut, o femna prens, o enfant petit, o viel en decrepitut, quar l’esperit animal motas vetz es resolvut am la egressio de la sania, e fort leu mor le malaute, e tu operte les.	And especially if the patient is of a choleric temperament, or a woman in labor, or a small child, or an old person in decrepitude, for the animal spirit is resolved with the emergence of the pure matter, and greatly alleviates the pain, so you should openly relieve it.
Don guarda aquest capitol am gran cautela, e aprop la tua perforacio en la qual perforas aquestz apostemas, cove que abstergescas las plagues e consideras donc si la plagua del apostema es pauca, o es una seccio plana, lahoras tu aministra las qualguas de li o de coto antic; e si le apostema es gran, e las fissuras de la perforacio son motas, lahoras cove que tu pauses meca en quascun trauc entro que pervenguan ensemps.	Take great care with this chapter, and when you make your perforation in which you perforate these abscesses, ensure that you cleanse the wounds and consider whether the wound of the abscess is small, or a flat section, then administer either hot or cold remedies accordingly; if the abscess is large, and the cracks of the perforation are painful, then you should place your hand in each tract until they heal together.
E si en le apostema es abscindit una partida de la codena o has concavada aquela en le circuit, lahoras cove que tu la complescas de coto viel o de fil fayt de drap de li, ayssi cum quan has traytz pans o razizos, ses humiditat; e strenh aquel entro al tertz dia; e aprop proceseys aquel e cura le am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if in the abscess a part of the cord is divided or you have concaved it in the circuit, then you should close it with cold flax or a thread made of linen cloth, as when you have removed bandages or roots, their humidity; strengthen it on the third day; and proceed with it and cure it according to what is appropriate from ointments until it is healed.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc en la hora de la operacio tua, lahoras tu aministra aygua frega e vi agre en les quals mules un drap de li, e pausa aquel sobre le loc del fluxs del sanc motas veguadas.	If blood flows during the time of your operation, then administer water mixed with wine in which you soak a cloth, and place that over the area of the bleeding several times.
Mays si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras cove que tu aministres regiment e curacio e polveras las quals he recomtadas en motz locs de aquest nostre libre e de divisio.	If the bleeding persists, then you should administer treatment and cure with powders which I have recommended in many places of this our book and division.
Mays si es en temps de hivern, e·l loc de la apostema es loc de motz nervis, lahoras cove que tu enfundas pulvils en vi e oli caut, e pauses aquels sobre les locs.	If it is in the time of winter, and the location of the abscess is near major nerves, then you should infuse powders in wine and oil, and place those over the areas.
E si es en estiu, e les locs son carnoses, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils enbeguts am aygua e oli o am vi e oli, e tot aquo sia freg entro que sia le ters dia, ayssi cum havem dit, e lahoras cove que tu deslies le apostema e abstergescas aquel e aministres en la curacio de lu aquo que a lu conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if it is in the summer, and the areas are fleshy, then you should place powders soaked in water and oil or in wine and oil, and all this should be infused within the first three days, as we have said, and then you should incise the abscess, clean it, and administer to it what is appropriate for its cure until it heals.
E aysso es aquo que es necessari de la cognicio de la curacio de apostemas universalment, mays segon la via de distinccio ja he dit de tot apostema en qual manieyra es via de la cura de lu per capitols singularment.	And this is what is necessary concerning the knowledge of the cure of abscesses universally, but according to the division I have already said about all abscesses in what manner the cure thereof should be treated individually.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter XL.
De seccio de apostemas les quals veno en la codena del cap.	Of abscesses where the vein is in the chain of the head.
En la codena del cap petitz apostemas, e so de specias de nodes les quals conteno tunicas que so a lor factz ; e las specias de lor so motas.	In the chain of the head, small abscesses, and their species of knots which contain tunics that are formed; and the species of these are spots.
E de lor son pingas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditat semblant a lima.	And of these they are lumps, and of those that contain humidity resembling lime.
E de aquelas so las quals conteno humiditat semblant a pols, et asemblantz a lor; e de aquelas so que son lapideas, durs.	And of those that contain humidity resembling dust, and similar to them; and of those that are hard, like stones.
E en la seccio de totz, e en la extraccio de aquels no es temor, cum deves la exteccio de aquels no fa contrariat arceria.	And in the section of all, and in the extraction of those, there is no fear, just as you should not cause resistance in the extraction of those.
E la operacio en seccio de aquels es que tu esproes aquels am instrument la forma del qual ve aprop aysso, le qual es apelat entromes, entro que sapias que contengua.	And the operation in the section of these is that you express them with an instrument of the form which is nearby, which is called a probe until you know it contains.
Quar si aquo que conte es humiditat, lahoras scindeys aquel am seccio segon la longitut per seccio superficial segon aquesta forma:	If what it contains is humidity, then section that along its length by superficial section according to this form:
E comensa en la seccio de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G. Donc cum la humiditat es evacuada, lahoras tu excoria aquela pel que conte aquela humiditat, e no leysses de aquela alcuna causa de tot, quar tropas veguadas retorna, si roman de aquela alcuna causa.	And begin at the section of B line between the line of G. Once the humidity is evacuated, then scrape that skin which contains that humidity, and leave no cause of all, for too many times returns if there remains any cause of all.
E aprop submergeys coto en enguent egipciach, si es present, e sino, en aygua e sal; e umpleys am aquel la plagua e layssa aquel entro ad autra dia, quar am aquo corrodeys tot so que es romas de aquela pellicula.	And then immerse it in Egyptian ointment if present, otherwise in water and salt; then apply it to the wound and leave it there for another day, for in this way you will dissolve all that is beneath the skin.
E aprop itera sobre aquel coto am enguent egipciach segondament e tersament si indigeyses de lu, entro que·t comfides que no y haia romas alcuna causa de aquela pellicula; lahoras cura la plagua am enguent entro que sia sanada.	And then repeatedly apply the ointment to that part with Egyptian ointment, gently if you feel it necessary, until you are confident that there is no underlying cause of that skin issue; then treat the wound with ointment once it is healed.
E si apostema conte nodi gras, lahoras tu inscideys aquel segon aquesta forma:	And if there is an abscess containing fatty nodes, then incise it according to this form:
am seccio havent forma de crotz, e geta oncis entre doas labias de la seccio e scorsa aquel de tota partida, e esforsa la tua vertut en extraccio de la tunica la qual conte aquel.	In the section having a cruciform shape, make an incision between two sides of the section and carefully draw out the entire part, exerting your virtue in the extraction of the layer which contains it.
Mays si a tu arceria fa contrarieta, lahoras fay aquo que yeu t’e recontat primieyrament.	But if your artery resists, then do as I recounted to you first.
E semblantment fay en le apostema lapificat de seccio e de curacio segon que a tu havem dit; e seccio sobre apostema lapificat es pus leugiera, quar es de pauc sanc e de pauca humiditat.	And similarly, treat the abscess by incision and cure according to what we have said; the incision on an abscessed area should be lighter, as it involves little bleeding and little moisture.
E alcunas vetz so alcus de aquestz apostemas les quals so en le cap en alcus homes am los quals de tot no es humiditat; la qual causa es quar yeu inscindigui sobre un apostema en le cap de una femna vielha e atrobegui le apostema ayssi cum peyra sorda, aspra, blanqua, la qual no podia esser trinquada, e si a alcu fos am aquela percussit, plaguera aquel.	And sometimes the abscesses in the head of some people contain little moisture; the cause of which is that I could not incise an abscess on a woman's head, as it was hard, rough, and white, and could not be divided. If any part were struck, it would be harmed.
Mays en les autres apostemas accidentz en le cap otra aquest no es aquest capitol, ayssi cum les apostemas que veno als caps dels enfantz e deves las razitz de las aurelhas, mays la seccio de aquestz totz sia seccio superficial.	But in other head abscesses, this is not covered in this chapter; as with the abscesses that come to the heads of children, you should treat the sites of the ears, but the incision of all these should be a superficial one.
E pausa la perforacio de aquels de la partida pus bassa de lor per so que sia alleujat le cos de la sania a las partidas pus bassas.	And place the incision of those lower parts below such that it alleviates the body from the disease in the lower parts.
E aprop cura aquelas am aquo que conveneys ad aquel de curacio.	And then attend to what needs to be done for the sake of the cure.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter XLII.
De seccio de scrophulas las quals accideyso en le col.	Of the section on scrofulas which occur in the neck.
Motas veguadas endeveno aquestas apostemas en le colh e en las aysselhas e en les angonars; e alcunas veguadas accideyso en las autras partidas del cos.	Signs of suppuration occur in these abscesses in the neck, in the axillae, and in the inguinal regions; and sometimes they occur in other parts of the body.
E so aquelas que accideysso en le colh, e so motas que so engendradas entre lor, e tota scrofula de aquelas es dintz la sua tunica propria, e ayssi cum en les nodis e apostema del cap, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And those that occur in the neck, and the signs that are generated within them, and all scrofula of these is infected with its own tunica, just as in the nodes and abscesses of the head, as we have recounted.
E las specias de aquestas scrophulas son motas, quar de aquelas so alcunas lapideas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditatz, e de aquelas so malignas las quals no obeseysso a curacio.	And the species of these scrofulas are signs. Some of them are hard lumps, and some contain humidity, and some are malignant, which do not respond to treatment.
Donc en aquela la qual tu vezes de bona disposicio en le Tocament, de la qual la color de aquo que es manifest es propda a la color de la codena, e es mauguda a tota partida, e no es annexsa am le nervi del colh, ni am las venas, ni am la arceria, e no es preonda, cove que tu inscidiscas aquela am siccio superficial de la partida desus a la partida dejos del cos de la linha de .G. entro la linha de .B., e scorja aquela de tota partida, e exten dos labias de la codena am onci, o am motz oncis si has necessitat de aquels, ayssi cum havem dit en las apostemas del cap, e extratz aquela petit a petit.	Therefore, in that one which you feel to be of good disposition in the Tocament, where the color that is manifest is similar to the color of the flesh, and is palpable throughout the body, and is not attached to the nerves of the neck, nor to the veins, nor to the arteries, and is not fluctuant, cut it away with a superficial incision from the part above to the part below along the line of G. to the line of B., and scrape out all of that part, and extend the lips of the flesh around it with one or several thin cuts if you need those, as we have said in the abscesses of the head, and extract it little by little.
E es mays cautela que no sia inscidida la vena o nervi.	And it is more careful that the vein or nerve not be cut.
E sia le spatum no mot agut, que no ajuste a tu la tua ma am inscizio, o que enquiete le malaute, e que inscidas aquo que no es necessari inscidir; quar si inscideysses vena o arceria e prohibeys tu de la tua operacio, lahoras pausa en la plagua vetriol trissat o autras polveras las quals ostan fluxs de sanc, e estrenh la plagua, e layssa aquel entro que·s repausa la acuitat de la apostema e sia mollificada la plagua e comense esser poyrida.	Let the incision not be too deep, so that you do not damage the vein or nerve with your hand during the cut, or relieve the patient, and do not cut what is not necessary to cut; for if you were to cut a vein or artery and stop your operation, then apply a piece of vitriol trioxide or other powders which are fluxes of salt, strengthen the wound, and leave that in which allows the acute inflammation of the abscess to rest and soften the wound and begin to suppurate.
Quan le sanc es abscindit.	When the blood is cut.
Donc retorna a la tua operacio entro que l’aias complida.	Then return to your operation until it is completed.
E aprop inquireys am le tieu dit indic si es romas alcuna causa de las autras petitas scrophulas, donc inscideys aquelas e munda aquelas.	And then inquire as to whether there are any other small scrofulous swellings, and if so, cut those out and cleanse them.
E si es en la razit de la scrophula gran vena, cove lahoras que no inscidas aquela scrophula de la sua razitz.	And if it is near the vein of the large scrofulous swelling, cover it so that you do not cut that scrofulous swelling from its source.
Abantz cove que lies aquela am fiel doblat fort e que leysses aquela entro que caia per si ses nocument.	Before you place a strong fold of cloth there, let that remain where it falls by itself.
E aprop omple la plagua de coto vielh le qual tu has ja submirgit en enguent egipciac, e aprop cura aquel.	And then fill the wound with old cloth which you have already soaked in Egyptian ointment, and then dress it.
E si inscides aquela scrophula tota, lahoras cove que tu ajustes las doas labias de la plagua e cuzas2 tantost pus que no y ha romasa deguna superfluitat.	And if you incise the scrofula completely, then you must adjust the two edges of the wound and sew it up tightly so that no superfluous fluid escapes.
Mays si tu vezes que haia romasa superfluitat per la grandeza de la scrofula, cove que tu entendas a inscidir la razit de aquela, e astrayra aquela e aministra sutura e aquo que es dit.	But if you see that there is an excessive exudation due to the size of the scrofula, then you must incise its edge, remove it, and administer stitches as described.
E aquela de las scrophulas que conteno humiditatz, perfora aquela am perforacio superficial aqui la on appar a tu le loc de maturacio de lu, e pausa perforacio de aquo que siec le pus bas del cos, ayssi cum havem dit.	And for those scrofulas containing moisture, make a superficial puncture at the place where it appears, and then make a draining hole below the pus base of the lesion, as we have said.
E aprop aministra perforacio, calguas am enguent e semblantz ad aquels, per so que corroda aquo que es romas de la corropcio.	And then administer the puncture, apply ointment and similar substances to it, so that it corrodes what is exuding from the wound.
E aprop quan tu vezes la plagua ja esser mundada, lahoras tu cura aquela am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanada.	And when you see that the wound is already clean, then you apply the cream of flesh generative once it is healed.
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter 43.
De seccio del pilhot del apostema accident dintz le guolayro.	Of the section of the boil in the region of the groin.
Diyssero les antics aquesta seccio en le epilhot, e no vist alcu hom en nostra terra que aquela aia fayta.	The ancients called this section the hypochondrium, and no one in our land has ever seen it performed.
E aquesta es la inscriptura del sermo de aquels.	And this is the inscription of the speech of those.
Mays en les homes haventz esquinencia, cove que sia esquivada la extraccio del epilhot, cum per aquo no sia fayt juvament per so quar totas las venas e las majors del malaute so aqui.	In men with foreskin, there is a cavity to be avoided during the extraction of the hypochondrium. Since this is not done for that reason, all the veins and major vessels in the groin are here.
Mays en aquels que han apostemas cautz en la boca o guolayro o dos aurelhas, quan la malautia no es en la cana, cove husar de la seccio de epilhot a fugir la perdicio la qual es fayta per perfocacio.	In those who have boils cauterized in the groin or ears, when the illness is not in the genital area, it is advisable to use the section of the hypochondrium to avoid the loss which is caused by perforation.
Donc cove quan volem aquo, que inscidam le epilhot dejos tres cercles dels cercles del epilhot, o quatre am petita seccio per la latitut en aquel que es entre dos cercles per quantitat, que la seccio sia en ciphac, no en la cartillage, e aquest loc es convenent a seccio, quar es privat de carn e les vayselhs de sanc de lu son luhen.	When we want to do this, make three or four small sections of the epilhom around the area between two circles according to quantity, so that the section is in cartilage, not in the flesh, and this place is suitable for a section, which is devoid of muscle and its blood vessels are lacking.
E si le metge es pauruc, cove lahoras que extenda la codena del golayro am onci, e aprop fenda la codena entro que pervengua a la canal, mays evite les vaysels de sanc si vetz de aquelas alcuna causa.	And if the doctor fears this, do so when he extends the thread of the scalpel, and then cut the thread before it reaches the channel, but more avoid the blood vessels if you see any cause.
E aprop inscida li ciplach segon que havem recomtat; e es significat sobre la seccio de la canal per le flacma le qual es de aquela eyssit am aquo que es de lu disromput e per la abscizio de la votz.	And then incise the skin as we have instructed; and it is significant on the section of the channel by the flame which indicates that of that injury by this that is disjointed and by the absence of voice.
E layssa la plagua uberta per alcun temps.	And leave the wound open for some time.
Donc cum la hora es remauguda en la qual perforacio es temuda, agregua doas labias de la codena de la plagua, e cus aquela sola ses la cartillage.	And when the time is ripe for the perforation that is feared, add two loops of the thread of the wound, and stitch that alone to the cartilage.
E aprop administra medicinas que fan naysser la carn entro que sia sanat.	And then administer medicines that cause flesh to grow where it is lacking.
E diyssec Albucasis que la summa del sermo le qual havem recomtat, exposicio no es sino que veias que alcus de aquetz apostemas ja han opilat lo guolayro del malaute, e le malaute es vengut entro a mort, e le ale de lu es entresecat, e alcus van a inscidir le epiglos per so que respire le malaute sobre le loc de la plagua per alcuna respiracio, e sia salvat de mort.	And Alcubasis says that the main point of the discourse we have recounted is merely that you see some of those abscesses already have pierced the windpipe of the patient, and the patient has come into death, and its throat is severed, and some go to incise the epiglottis so that the patient may breathe over the place of the wound through some respiration, and thus be saved from death.
E per aquo comandero layssar la plagua uberta entro que sia consumida la malicia de la malautia; e es la malicia de lu per tres dias; e donc lahoras comandero cosi la plagua, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And for this, I order to leave the wound open until the malignity of the illness is consumed; and the malignity of the illness lasts for three days; and then, at that time, I order to close the wound and treat it until it is healed.
E aquo que yeu he vist per mi meteys, es que una sirventa pres un cotel e mesec le en le sieu golayro e inscidic am aquel una partida de la cana del pulmo, e yeu fu apelat a la curacio de lu, e atrobegui la mugen ayssi cum es mugit del moridos, e descubrigui la plagua e atrobegui le sanc le qual era yssit de la plagua petit.	And what I have seen with my own eyes is that a servant took a knife and pressed it against the windpipe and incised one part of the rib cage, and I was called to treat this case, and examined the woman as I would examine a dead person, and uncovered the wound and examined the bleeding which was coming from the small wound in the wound.
Donc yeu fo confessat que aquela no havia inscidit vena ni guidegi, e le vent yssia de la plagua, e curegui aquela entro que foc sanada.	Then I confess that she had not injured any vein or artery, and the wind from the wound, and healed her with that which was sound.
E no accidic a la sirventa si no rauquiera en la votz, e aprop alcus dias retornec ad miloracio de las suas dispozicios.	And she did not suffer any injury, not even hoarseness in her voice, and soon recovered from her condition.
E ara dic yeu que en la seccio del epilhot no ha temor.	And now I say that in the section of the paronychia there is no fear.
Capitol .xliv.	Capitol. xliv.
De seccio sobre apostema le qual accideys en le golayro defora, e es apelat hernia del golayro.	On the section about an abscess that occurs on the shoulder outwardly, and is called a shoulder hernia.
Aquest apostema nompnat hernia del golayro es apostema gran segon la color del cors, e es mot en las femnas.	This unnamed shoulder abscess is a large abscess according to the color of the body, and it often occurs in women.
E es segon dos manieyras, quar o es natural o accidental.	And it can occur in two ways: either naturally or accidentally.
E en le natural no es engen de curar.	And in the natural case, it is not easy to cure.
E l’accidental es segon dos manieyras del qual la un es semblant a nodes grasses, e l’autra manieyra es semblant apostema le qual es fayt per nodacio de arteria, e en aquel es temor.	And the accidental can occur in two ways: one resembling fatty nodes, and the other resembling an abscess formed by the obstruction of an artery, and in this case, there is fear.
E no cove que·s fassa presumpcio a lu cum ferr sino en aquel que es petit.	And do not make presumptions about him as if he were small, but in that which is little.
E tu proha aquel e investigua aquel am le dit, e si atrobas lu semblant a nodi gras, e no es suspendut am alcuna de las venas, lahoras tu inscideys aquel ayssi cum les nodes, e extratz aquel am aquo que conte lu de la pel e bursiclam; e sino, lahoras es perscrutat tot le sieu esser, e aprop cura le loc am aquo que cove de curacio entro que sia sanat.	And you probe that area and investigate the one he points to, and if you find a swelling resembling a hard node, and it is not suspended by any of the veins, then you incise that area as you would for nodes, and extract it from the skin and bursectomize; otherwise, you thoroughly examine his entire body, and place the affected area in such a way that it利于伤口愈合。
Capitol .xlv.	Capitol. xlv.
De seccio de las specias de nodes.	Of the section on types of nodes.
Dels nodes so motas specias e yeu ja he dit totas las specias de lor en la divisio.	Of the various types of nodes, and I have already described all the types of nodes in the division.
E cove que yeu recomte assi la diferencia entre node e exitura cum fassa dubitacio.	And note that I recount so as to make the difference between a node and an abscess clear, without any doubt.
Donc yeu dic que am exitura es caliditat e febre e dolors vehementz entro que es sedada la ebullicio de la superfluitat; e es complida putrefaccio que lahora cessa la febre, la dolor e la calor.	Therefore, I say that in an abscess there is warmth, fever, and severe pain until the boiling of the excess subsides; and once complete putrefaction occurs, then the fever, pain, and heat cease.
Mays am node no es caliditat ni febre ni dolor, e conte aquel ciphac leon le qual es al u sac propri.	More often than not there is no heat nor fever nor pain, and concerning that lion's head which is at the back of the neck.
E es segon la color del cors, e le comensament de lu es cum un ceze e es fayt ayssi cum vace, sia major o minor, e son segon dos specias, quar o so grassas e conteno humiditat, e las colors de la humiditat son motas, segon que yeu diyssi en la divisio.	And it is according to the color of the body, and its beginning is like a bruise and is made thus, either greater or smaller, and they are according to two species, namely fat ones containing humidity, and the colors of the humidity are spots, as I said in the division.
Donc cove, quan pervenas a la curacio de node, que exprohes aquel e inquiras aquel al comensament am sturment le qual es apelat intromes, segon que vindra la sua forma en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	Therefore, when you come to the treatment of nodes, express that and inquire about that at the beginning from the flesh which is called intromes, according to its form which will be in the chapter which is nearby.
E es manieyra de inquisicio de apostemas e de totz nodes, e es que tu prenguas aquest sturment e entromet aquel en le loc pus humit le qual atrobas en le apostema, e tu revolveras les tieus ditz am aquel petit a petit entro que sapias que·l sturment ja ha penetrat la codena.	And this is the method of inquiry for abscesses and all nodes, and it is that you take this flesh and insert it where the moisture is greatest which you find in the abscess, and you will mix the tissues little by little with it until you know that the flesh has penetrated the core.
E aprop ultima la tua ma segon la mesura de la grandeza del apostema, e aprop extratz le entromes e considera aquo que es yssit en le vestigi de lu.	Then place your hand according to the measure of the size of the abscess, and extract the intromed tissue and consider what is left in the cavity of the abscess.
E si es fora-getada la humiditat corrent, de qualque color sia, lahoras tu le inscideys am seccio superficial segon que he dit en les autres apostemas.	And if the running moisture of any color is overlooked, then you incise according to a superficial section as I have said in other abscesses.
E si del vestigi de l’intromes no hieys humiditat, lahoras sapias que es gras.	And if there is no moisture from the intrusion, then you know it is greasy.
E secca sobre lu am seccio havent forma de crotz segon aquesta forma:	And if it is dry on the surface and has the form of a cross according to this form:
ayssi cum t’e ensenhat, e suspen aquel am oncis, e excorja la codena de tota part am facilitat, e guarda la pel o sac, si podes, sobre aquel e extraguas aquela sania am le node.	As I have shown you, suspend it with a cord, and completely remove the skin from all parts with ease, and keep the hide or sack over it, if possible, and extract the clean part at the node.
Mays si es romput en la operacio, no es possible extrayre aquela sana, e motas veguadas endeve aquo, e lahoras tu la extratz a pessas entro que de lu no romangua denguna causa.	But if it breaks during the operation, it is not possible to extract that clean part. Mark it well and then extract it piece by piece so that it does not break for any reason.
Quar si de lu roman denguna causa, pauc o trop, le node retorne segon le mays.	But if it breaks for any reason, whether a little or too much, the node should return as best as possible.
E si tu vezes que de lu roman alcuna part petita, lahoras comple la plagua de alcunas polveras corrosivas agudas e strenh la plagua, e pausa sobre aquela que sede apostema caut, e cura aquel del autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And if you see that it breaks any small part, then fill the wound with some sharp and strong corrosive powders, strengthen the wound, place your hand over the area where the abscess is located, and cure the rest of the body until it is healed.
E si es node gran, lahoras tu cus las doas labias de lu e cura aquel am aquo que encarna.	And if it is not great, then you close the two lips of it and cure that which is within.
Mays si vena pulsatil es a lu contraria, o no-pulsatil, lahoras tu coyta e huemple le loc de zegi trissat que es vetriol e leyssa aquel streyt per dos dias o per tres entro que·s poyresca la plagua e que repause la ebullicio del sanc; e aprop retorna a inscindir aquo que es romas del node.	And if the vein is pulsatile on the opposite side, or non-pulsatile, then you incise and fill the area with three parts of vitriol and let it stay for two days or three until the swelling subsides and the boiling of the blood calms; and then return to divide what is ruptured from the node.
Capitol .xlvi.	Capitol. xlvi.
De las formas del sturmentz necessaris en seccio e perforacio.	Of the forms of instruments necessary for section and puncture.
De aquels so las formas dels intromesas, e so de tres specias, que de aquels es alcu gran, e de lor es migier, e de lor es petit.	Of those are the forms of the introduced instruments, and they are of three species: some are large, and of them are medium, and of them are small.
La forma de intromes gran es aquesta:	The form of the large introduced instrument is this:
La forma de intromes migier es aquesta:	The form of the medium introduced instrument is this:
La forma de intromes petit es aquesta:	The form of the small introduced instrument is this:
Sian faytz de ferr, de alfulud, de extremitatz cayradas decentment, per so que festino le intrament en les apostemas.	Make them of iron, of brass, of fallen extremities properly, so that the instrument enters into the abscesses.
E aquestas so las formas dels experientz, e son nompnatz albered, e un de aquels es apelat berid.	These are the forms of the experienced ones, and they are named albed, and one of them is called bere.
E so de tres especias, quar de lor es gran, migier e pauc.	These are of three spices, of which one is great, the second half, and the third a little.
La forma de experient gran, forma de lu:	The form of the experienced one is great, the form of it:
La forma de experient migier, forma de lu:	The form of the experienced one half, the form of it:
La forma de experient pauc, forma de lu:	The form of the experienced one a little, the form of it:
Conveneysso que sian per aquels apostemas e exituras e fistulas e bubos per so que entre aquelas so dels osses e de autras causas.	It is advisable that they be for those abscesses, discharges, fistulas, and buboes, so that they are in those of the bones and from other causes.
E so faytz redontz, grosses, leons, ayssi cum grans agulhas am las quals son cosidas las selhas, e son faytas de eram citri, o de eram o de ferr, o de argent, E las milhors so quan so faytas de eram citri.	And make them round, large, like lions, as well as large needles to which the threads are attached. They are made of iron, or steel, or silver, and the best are when they are made of steel.
E son faytz les experient de plum negre, les quals se acordan que per aquels sian ubertas las fistulas en la conquavitat de las quals so reflexios, que sian reflectidas am la sua levitat am aquelas refleccios.	And they make experiments with black plum seeds, which are said to be effective when the fistulas in their cavities are opened and reflected, being reflected by their lightness to those reflections.
E so de tres specias, quar alcus de lor so loncs, e dels autres migiers, e dels autres breus, segon la quantitat del ample de la fistula e de la strictura de lu.	And so, in three species, some are long, and others medium, and others short, according to the width of the fistula and its stricture.
Forma del experient gran de plom:	Form of the experiment with great lead:
Forma del experient migier de plom:	Form of the medium-sized lead experiment:
Forma del experient petit de plom:	Form of the small lead experiment:
Las formas dels oncis so de motas specias, quar de aquels so alcus simples, als quals es una curvitat solament, e so de tres specias: grans, paucs e migiers.	The forms of the lancets are of three species. Some are simple, having only a single curvature, and are of three kinds: large, few, and medium.
E de lor so uncis orps, e so de tres specias.	And they have bodies of lancets, which are of three species.
E de aquels so uncis haventz doas curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And those having two curvatures, are of three species.
E de lor so haventz tres curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And from them there are three curves, and of three species.
E totz aquetz so necessaris en lor loc.	And all these are necessary in their place.
Forma de unci simple gran, forma de lu:	Shape of a single large curve, like this:
Forma de unci simple migier:	Shape of a single medium curve:
Forma de unci simple pauc, forma de lu:	Shape of a single small curve, like this:
Forma de unci orp gran:	Shape of a large curve, like this:
Forma de unci orp migier, forma de lu:	Shape of a medium-sized curve, like this:
Forma de unci orp pauc, forma de lu:	Shape of a small curve, like this:
Forma de unci gran havent dos curvaturas:	Shape of a large curve having two curves:
Forma de unci migier havent dos curvatas:	Shape of a medium-sized curve having two curves:
Forma de unci pauc havent dos curvaturas:	Shape of a small curve having two curves:
Forma de unci gran havent tres curvaturas:	Shape of a large curve having three curves:
Forma de unci migier havent tres curvaturas:	Forma of a woman having three curves:
Forma de unci pauc havent tres curvaturas:	Forma of a woman having three curves:
E aquestas so las formas dels scalpels am les quals son seccatz e scorjatz les nodes e le apostemas, e so de tres specias, quar de aquels es gran, migier, e pauc.	And these are the forms of the scalpels which are sharpened and filed to remove nodes and abscesses, and they are of three species, one of which is large, woman-sized, and small.
Forma de scapel gran:	Forma of the large scalpel:
Forma del scapel migier:	Forma of the woman-sized scalpel:
Forma de scapel pauc:	Forma of the small scalpel:
Las extramitatz de aquels am les quals es fayta seccio so agudas e las autres extramitatz so no-agudas, e no so pausadas en tal manieyra, sino per que sia fayt juvament en la excorjacio dels nodes la temor de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e per aquels sia sanat le malaute e atrobe tranquilitat un petit per la adustio la qual atroba deves la excoriacio del apostema.	The extremities of those which are to be cut are sharp, while the other extremities are not sharp, and they are not held in such a manner as to fear incision of a vein or nerve. This is done for the benefit of the patient, and some slight discomfort due to the heating effect is acceptable for the excoriation of the abscess.
E aquestas son las formas de almagidas, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc, ayssi cum veyras.	And these are the forms of the forceps, and they are of three species: large, woman-sized, and small, as you will see.
La forma de magda gran:	The form of great abscess:
Forma de magda migier:	The form of female abscess:
Forma de magda pauc:	The form of small abscess:
Sian faytas de eram e so semblantz de ray am le qual e fayt alcofol.	If they are formed from heat and have the appearance of a red spot where the alcohol was applied.
E es en la extramitat lada punctada am spatum occultada e en aquela corr a las partidas dedintz e defora, quan tu vols, ayssi cum veses.	And if it is in the outer side of the lower limb with a point marked by hidden puncture and there flows to the inner parts both inside and outside, when you want, do so as you see fit.
Las formas de spatimis, les quals so amaguatz entre los ditz deves la perforacio dels apostemas e no les percebo les malautes, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc.	The forms of pustules, which are hidden between the fingers and do not affect the thighs, and they are of three species: great, female, and small.
E aquestas so las formas de aquels:	And these are the forms of those:
Las formas de ventozas am las quals es abscindit le flux del sanc, e so de tres specias; gran, migiera e pauca; las formas de lu:	The forms of venous ones, in which the flow of blood is cut off, and they are of three species: great, female, and small; the forms of which:
Sian faytas de eram citri, redondas am alcuna longitut , e sian subtils.	If they are formed from yellow heat, round of some length, and are fine in texture.
E cove que sian aquestas specias de ventosas deves tu grans, migieras e paucas, per so que per aquelas abscindas flux de sanc am velocitat en necessitat, e lahoras quan a tu primieyrament no es medicina.	And these suction cups you should make some large, medium, and few, so that through those cuttings the flow of blood is rapid when needed, and when first it is not necessary treatment.
Enpero no uses de aquelas ad abscidir sanc en tot loc del cors, e non uses sino en locs carnoses, ayssi cum en les lacertis de las cambas e de las coyssas, e en les lacertz dels brasses, e de las mamillas e del ventre e dels engonars, e semblantz a lor dels lacertz carnoses humitz.	But do not use those for cutting the blood in all parts of the body, and use them only on fleshly parts, thus in the groins and thighs, and in the armpits, and in the breasts, and in the belly, and in the armholes, and similar fleshly parts.
E alcunas veguadas son faytz de aquels strumentz autres petitz semblantz scorsas de fisacs segon aquesta forma; per les quals lo sanc es abscindit quan es fayt per fleubotomia, o deves inscizio de vena o de arceria.	And some are made of those instruments smaller, resembling hooks according to this form; through which the blood is cut when it is done by phlebotomy, or by incision of a vein or artery.
E alcunas veguadas son faytas redondas segon aquesta forma:	And some are made round according to this form:
Capitol .xlvii.	Capitol. xlviij.
De la cura de las mamillas dels homes las quals so asembladas de femnas.	Of the treatment of the breasts of men which are similar to women's.
Alcunas veguadas so infladas las mamillas de alcus homes deves le compliment del dormir cum comensan esser pellutz, e aprop so infladas las mamillas, e so asembladas las mamillas de las femnas, e romano apostemosas, lejas.	Sometimes the breasts of some men swell when they begin to become flabby, and at times the breasts swell and are gathered together in women, and Roman women with large breasts, let them rest.
E ad aquel que avoreys aquo, cove que inscidisca aquelas am seccio lunar segon aquesta forma, de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G., e aprop excorja la groceza tota, e aprop uempla la plagua de medicament encarnatiu, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am cosidura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And to those for whom you have this, incise those areas along the lunar section according to this form, from line B to line G. Then excise the tumor entirely, and fill the wound with red medication. Finally, suture the two edges of the wound together and treat it until it is healed.
Mays si la mamilla declina a las partidas dejos e es mollificada per la sua magnitut ayssi cum endeve a las femnas, lahoras sia fendut en dos latz sieus pus sobiras, am dos seccios semblantz a figura lunar, de las quals quascuna sia contenguda en l’autra deves la fi de quascuna, entro que sia que la linha major contengua la menor segon aquesta forma de la linha de .B. e la linha de .G. E aprop excorja la codena la qual es entre dos labias de la plagua, e osta la pingueza, e aministra aquo que havem dit de la sutura e de las polveras aquo que es necessari en la curacio entro que sia sanat.	Moreover, if the breast droops towards the sides and is softened by its size as in women, then cut it into two lobes, with each lobe contained within another of similar lunar sections. Each should be ended such that the larger line contains the smaller one according to this form from line B to line G. Then excise the tumor which lies between the two edges of the wound, and remove the fatty tissue. Proceed with suturing and administer the powders as previously described until it is healed.
E si tu non conpleysses la inscizio de aquo que cove inscidir per la inquietut del malaute, e per flux de sanc, lahoras cove que huemplas la plagua de coto submergit en enguent corrosiu e layssa aquel entro que aquo corroda que es romas de la grayssa, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you do not complete the incision that should be made due to the discomfort of the patient and the flow of blood, then you must fill the wound with a small piece submerged in corrosive ointment and leave it there until it dissolves the roots of the fatty tissue, and then cure what remains healthy.
Capitol .xlviii.	Capitol. xlviii.
De perforacio de apostemas que veno dejos le titillic.	Of the perforation of abscesses where pus is allowed to titillate.
Aquetz apostemas que veno dejos le titillic so de las specias de scrophulas, durs, las quals conte una pel que es sac.	These abscesses where pus is allowed to titillate are of the species of scrofula, tumors which contain a lump that is extracted.
E de aquelas so alcunas que conteno humiditatz; e aquelas que conteno humiditatz cove que sian inscididas am seccio lunar segon aquesta figura: de la linha de .G. a la linha de .B. E cum es tot evacuat aquo que es en le apostema de la sania, lahoras tu le comple de coto viel e leysa le entro al autra dia.	And of those that contain moisture, they should be incised at the lunar quarter according to this figure: from the line of G to the line of B. And when all that is in the abscess of pus is evacuated, then complete it with a new incision and leave it for another day.
E aprop le coto sia ostat e sia curat am enguent convenient ad aquo, entro que sia sanat.	And then let the wound be dressed with an ointment suitable for it, until it heals.
E si le apostema de las specias dels nodes es, e de las scrophulas, lahoras tu scindeys sobre aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la seccio sobre las scrophulas engualment.	And if the abscess of the glands or scrofula is, then you incise thereupon in this way as we have said in the section on scrofula equally.
May si la plagua es extenduda en aysso que yesca poyredura, lahoras administra en lu cauteri segon que en aquo havem denant dit.	And if the wound is extended to the point of becoming gangrenous, then apply a cautery to it according to what we have said above.
Capitol .xlix.	Chapter XLIX.
De seccio de apostemas que accideysso per arceria o per vena.	Of the section on abscesses that occur due to an arrow or a vein.
Quan arceria es rompuda, e la codena es consolidada la qual es sobre aquela, lahoras motas veguadas accideys apostema E les senhals per les quals es conoguda que imflamacio e apostema sian per la arteria o per vena: quar quan apostema es per arceria es lonc agreguat en le preon del cors; e que quan inpelleysses le apostema am les tieus ditz, sentes en lu quays sia stridor.	When an arrow is broken and the string that was over it becomes consolidated, then dark spots develop into abscesses. And the signs by which one can recognize that inflammation or abscess is due to the artery or vein: for when you press on the abscess with hot objects, you feel a stridor in it.
E aquel que es per vena es redon al manifest del cors.	And that which is due to the vein is round in appearance on the surface of the body.
E seccio sobre aquest apostema es error, e majorment en aquel que es dejos las aysselhas, e en les angonars, e en le col, e en motz locs del cors; e es mot gran, donc cove que la sua curacio am ferr sia esquivada, e aquel que es en las extramitatz, o al cap, cove que sia evitat.	Of the section on this abscess: it is dangerous, especially in those that affect the axillae, the inguinal regions, and the neck; and when it is large, it must be ensured that its cure is not delayed. Those in the extremities or near the head should also be carefully avoided.
Mays sobre aquel que es de lor per imflacio de l’orrifici de la arceria, scindeys en la codena seccio en le lonc; e aprop huebre la seccio am uncis e aprop la arceria, e deliura de las tunicas entro que sia descuberta.	For that which is due to inflammation of the opening of the artery, cut in the longitudinal section at the cord; then enlarge the section with clips and near the artery, and liberate the tunics so that they are exposed.
E aprop met sobre aquel agulha e fay aquela penetrar entro al autre latz, e estrenh la arceria am fiel doble en dos locs, — la qual causa yeu a tu eyssenhegui en extraccio de doas arcerias les quals so en les templars.	Then place a needle there and make it penetrate into the other side, and strengthen the artery with double stitching in two places, — which causes you to suture in the extraction of two arteries that are in the temples.
E aprop punh le loc le qual es entre dos liamentz am spatum entro que yesca le sanc tot que es en lu, e sia dissolvut le apostema.	Then cauterize the area between two threads with hot iron until the bleeding stops and the abscess is dissolved.
E aprop administra curacio en la qual es engendrat poyre entro que caian les liamentz; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz convenientz ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	Then administer treatment in which poultice is applied while the threads are being removed; and cure that with suitable ointments until it is healed.
E si es apostema per seccio de vena, lahoras cove que tu tenguas am la tua ma aquo que es a tu possible del apostema am la codena, e aprop intromet la agulha dejos le loc le qual tu has tengut dejos la tua ma, e fay aquela penetrar; e sia en aquela fil doble entro que tu extraguas aquel del autre latz, e aprop ligua le apostema am bo liament segon que yeu he dit a tu en le liament de uva4 de doas partz am doas extremitatz del fil.	And if it is an abscess due to venous congestion, then take what you can of the abscess with your hand while holding the abscess taut. Then insert the needle at the spot where you held the abscess with your hand, and make it penetrate; and extract it in a double stitch between the two parts of the thread on both ends of the needle, and ligate the abscess with a good suture as I have said before about the grapevine thread in two parts at both ends of the filament.
Mays si temes que extraguam le fil, lahoras entromet le fiel am aquela agula dejos tot le apostema deves la inscizio de la agulha primieyra, e strenh les tieus fiels en quatre locs.	But if you fear that the thread will come loose, then insert the needle at that same place and leave all the abscess from the first puncture, and strengthen your threads in four places.
Aprop secca le apostema en le mieg loc de lu entro que quan es yssit aquo que es en lu, lahoras tu inscideys la superfluitat de la codena, e layssa aquo que de lu es liat.	Then dry the abscess in its middle location so that when the patient sits in it, you incise the excess of the cord, and leave what is soaked from it.
E aprop pausa sobre lu pulvil le qual has submergit en vi e oli, e aprop administra la curacio la qual es fayta am calguas e enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Then place the powder you have soaked in wine and oil over it, and administer the cure which is made with cloths and ointments until it heals.
Capitol l del apostema le qual accideys per torcio de nervis.	Cut out the abscess which occurs due to nerve damage.
Ayssi cum accideys apostema en arceria e en vena, e semblantment accideys apostema en les nervis quan accideys en lor percussio o accideys per trebal superfluable, e per semblantz.	Similarly, when an abscess occurs in an artery or a vein, and similarly, an abscess occurs in the nerves when there is percussion injury or trauma from excess work, and for similar reasons.
E es fayt le mays de lu en les locs dels adjutoris o del talo, o en tot loc en le qual so maugudas las juncturas.	And it is most common in the areas of the assistants or the thigh, or in any area where the joints are weak.
E es apostema greu, e es asemblat a la color del autre cors, e es en las majors de lu disposicios ses de lor e quan es streyt am vehementia, sent en lu le malaute semblant stupor.	And it is a heavy abscess, and it resembles the color of the rest of the body, and it is in the larger parts of his body. When stretched by intensity, one feels the patient's illness resembling stupor.
E no es apostema agreguat en le preon del cors, e per so es dejos la codena, e el es maugut a tota partida e no va a las partidas denant ni detras.	And it is not an abscess growing in the front of the body, and therefore the chain is left off, and he is allowed to move freely without going forward or backward.
Donc aquo de aquels que es en las juncturas no cove que sia envasit am ferr, quar fort leu endevenguera contracio.	So those in the joints do not have to be enchained, for strong ligaments will resist contraction.
Mays aquel que es en le cap o en le front fen la codena am spatum.	But those in the head or on the forehead should be chained with a strap.
Mays si es apostema pauc, lahoras te aquel am les forfecs e abscindeys aquel de razitz.	But if the abscess is small, then treat those forces and cut away that part with forceps.
E si es gran, lahoras tu le suspen am unci, e excorja aquel, e aprop osta aquel; e ajusta la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if it is large, then suspend it with forceps, and scrape away that part, and stitch it up; and cure the wound until it is healed.
Capitol .li.	Capitol. li.
De seccio de apostema le qual accideys de cheil que accideys al ventre.	Of the section of abscess that occurs in the cheek that affects the abdomen.
Endeveno ad alcus homes motas veguadas en les ventres de aquels e en las autras partidas del cors de aquels theils les quals son apelatz funguals per similitut de aquels am funges, dels quals la razitz es subtil e·l cap de aquel es gros; e ja las labias de aquels so conversas, e es de aquels que es petit, e es de aquels que es mot magnificat.	Some people have tumors in their abdomens and in other parts of their bodies. These tumors are called funguals due to their similarity to fungi; the substance within is fine, but the head of the tumor is large; and the skin around them is wrinkled, both for those that are small and for those that are greatly enlarged.
E yeu ja e vist un, e en le ventre de lu eran dos theils les quals eran mays a funges semblantz, e no era diferencia entre aquels blancs, de menuda razitz.	And I have seen one myself, and in its abdomen were two tumors which resembled fungi, and there was no difference between those whites, of fine substance.
E ja las labias de aquels eran enversadas e se fendian, e humiditat corria de aquel tot temps.	And the skin around those tumors was wrinkled and split, and moisture flowed from them constantly.
Donc yeu inscidegui aquels e atrobegui en la un en pes quays xviii unc. e l’autre quays vi unc.	So I incised those and cauterized one on the foot that was eighteen inches long, and the other that was six inches long.
E la operacio en la inscizio de lor es que consideres lahoras si·l malaute es humit, e la color de atheil es blanca, humit, de subtil razitz; lahoras tu le inscideys am spatum lat, e sian en la presencia tua cauteris en le foc, quar motas veguadas deves la seccio de lu es expellit mot sanc; e si te ventz le sanc, cauteriza aquel.	And the operation in incising them is that you consider whether the tumor is moist, and the color of the tumor is white, moist, with fine substance; then you incise it with a deep cut, and have it cauterized in your presence with fire, for moist tumors must have their section thoroughly drained; and if you fail to drain it, cauterize it.
E si vezes le malaute pauruc e temeros, guarda te de inscizio am ferr; mays lahoras pren fiel de plom recent fayt, e strenh am aquel atheil, la manieyra del qual es aquela que havem dita; e leyssa aquel per dos dias.	And if the patient is afraid and fearful, guard yourself from injury by iron; rather when you take lead powder recently made, strengthen that part, the manner of which we have said; leave it for two days.
E aprop ajusta en la strictura del fil de plom; donc, no cesses strenher le plom granre devetz en theil, entro que sia abscindit e cayha per se ses trebalh.	And then adjust in the constriction of the lead wire; therefore, do not cease to strengthen the lead greatly throughout that part, until it is severed and falls by itself.
Mays si theil es de grossa razitz, lahoras en la inscizio de lu es alcuna causa de temor e de paor, e majorment en aquel que es en le ventre.	And if the part is of great thickness, then in cutting it there is some cause for fear and dread, especially in that which is in the abdomen.
Mays possibla es que tu inscindas la maytat de lu , e aprop cauteriza aquel per que no retorne.	And it is more possible that you cut the majority of it, and then cauterize it so that it does not return.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanada la plagua.	And then cure the area until the wound is healed.
E guarda te que tu no presumas inscidir theil le qual es de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, de leg reguardament, quar aquel es absi cancros.	And guard that you do not presume to cut flesh which is of dusky color, with little sensation, and appears flaccid, for such is cancer.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio de cranc aprop aysso.	And I will recall the sickness nearby this.
Capitol .lii.	Capitol. lii.
De curacio de eminencia del umbilic.	For the treatment of hernia around the navel.
Eminencia del umbilic es fayta per motas causas; o per fissuras del ciphac le qual es sobre le ventre, e yeys de lu la tela o budel segon que endeve en las autras rupturas; o per sanc le qual flueys de vena o de arceria segon que es denant dit, o per ventositat coarctada en lu.	Hernia around the navel is caused by various reasons; or by fissures in the diaphragm which is above the abdomen, and protrudes through it according to where the other ruptures are; or by a wound which flows from a vein or artery as stated before, or by constricted congestion within it.
Mays si es per fissura del ciphac e per yssiment de la tela, lahoras la color del apostema es semblant a la color del cors; e es leon ses dolor, e aprop appar de divers situament.	If it is due to a diaphragm fissure and the hernia sac's color, the color of the swelling resembles that of the body; and the pain is severe, often appearing in various locations.
E si es per egressio del budel, lahoras le situament de aquel am lu de aquo que havem recontat, de mays vehement diversitat, e cum tu premes aquel am les tieus ditz es occultat, e aprop retorna; e fort leu es am lu so, e es magnificat mot deves le introt de banh e vehement trebalh.	And if it is due to the protrusion of the intestine, then its location differs from what we have described, with more varied severity. When you press on that area, the protrusion disappears and soon returns. It is firm in that place and requires a strong method for introduction, such as a bath or vigorous work.
Mays si per humiditat, lahoras es leon e no es occultat quan premes am la tua ma, ni es constrengut, ni es cregut.	If by humidity, when you press with your hand it is evident and not hidden, nor constrained, nor credible.
E si es per sanc, lahoras am aquestz senhals apareys le apostema a negror declinant.	And if by scald, when these signs appear the abscess in black decreasing.
Mays si es per carn nada, lahoras es apostema greu, gros e dur, e es ficat segon una quantitat.	If by no meat, when the abscess is severe, large, and hard, and is situated according to a quantity.
Mays si es per ventositat, lahoras le tocament de lu es leon.	If by humidity, when you touch it, it is soft.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras lahoras si la eminencia de l’umbilic es per sanc de arceria, o de vena, o per ventositat; lahoras cove que sias prohibit de la curacio de lu, quar en aquela es temor e paor ayssi cum t’e ensenhat en le capitol en le qual he dit les apostemas per arceria e per vena.	And the operation in it is that you consider whether the prominence of the umbilicus is by scald from an artery, or a vein, or by humidity; and then seek to be avoided in the treatment of it, for there is fear and dread as you have been taught in the Capitol where I said about abscesses from arteries and veins.
E si la eminencia del umbilic es per le budel o per la tela, lahoras cove que comandes al malaute que tengua le ale sieu, e sia stant extendut; e aprop senha am tenta en le circuit de tot le umbilic, e aprop comanda a lu que stia envers entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e aprop circunda am spatum lat en le circuit del umbilic sobre le loc le qual has senhat am la tenta; e aprop exten la maytat del apostema a las partidas desus am unci gran; e aprop lia en le circuit am fiel fort o am ceda e la manieyra del liar decent.	And if the prominence of the umbilicus is by the intestine or the hernia, then you seek to command the patient to have his bowel movements, and stand extended; then place your hand around the circuit of the entire umbilicus, and command him to stand with his hands behind his back; then encircle with a broad band around the circuit of the umbilicus over the area you have marked with the tenta; then extend the size of the abscess towards the upper parts greatly; then place a strong ligature or a catgut suture in the circuit in a proper manner.
E aprop huebre le mieg del apostema extendut sobre le liament e intromet le dit tieu en aquel indic e quereys le budel; e si tu l’as atrobat ni guardat per le liament, lahoras tu extratz alxorati e impelleys le budel a las partidas dedintz del ventre.	And then push the pus of the abscess out onto the membrane and insert your finger in that space to find the intestine; if you have already touched it without guarding it with the membrane, then you withdraw quickly and push the intestine into the inner parts of the abdomen.
E si has atrobada la tela, lahoras pren aquel am unci; e inscideys las superfluitatz de lu.	And if you have touched the membrane, then take it carefully; incise the superfluous parts of it.
Mays si es contraria a tu arceria o vena, lahoras circunda aquel mot, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio; e pren dos agulhas e met en aquelas dos fiels fortz e entromet dos agulhas en le circuit le qual has feyt entorn le apostema en manieyra de crotz, las quals fassas penetrar; e aprop strenh le apostema en quatre partidas sobre las agulhas.	But if it is contrary to your artery or vein, then circumvent that spot, and then return to your operation; take two needles and place them in those two strong threads and insert two needles into the circuit you have made around the abscess in the form of a cross, making sure they penetrate; then strengthen the abscess in four parts over the needles.
E si tu vols, osta las agulhas e leyssa le loc entro que poyresca la carn extenduda e caia per si; o inscideys aquel quan es subtiliat e se poyreys, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if you wish, hold the needles and let the area extend and fall by itself; or incise that which has become thin and can drain, and then treat that with ointments until it heals.
E si la eminencia del ombilic es de carn nada en lu o per humiditat, lahoras cove que tu conquaves le apostema ayssi cum havem dit e estraguas le sanc o la humiditat, la qual atrobas en lu, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove e que consolide le loc.	And if the prominence of the navel is due to flesh or moisture, then drain the abscess as we have said and remove the pus or moisture, which you find there, and then treat that with ointments until it heals and consolidates the area.
Capitol .liii.	Capitol liiii.
De curacio de cranc.	For the cure of pain.
Ja havem dit, en la divisio, de specia de cranc e en qual manieyra es via a la curacio de lu am medicinas, e que es squivador en lu la curacio am ferr per so que no sia ulcerat; e havem dit cranc engendrat en la mayra e cautela de la curacio de lu.	We have already said, in the division, about kinds of pain and in what manner they are treated with medicines, and that a cure is valid only if it does not become ulcerated; and we have said that pain is generated and how it is treated.
E diyssero les antics que alcunas veguadas cranc es en loc on es possibla la eradicacio de lu, ayssi cum de cran le qual es en las mamillas o en la coyssa e a lor semblantz dels membres allocat a estrayre tot aquel, e majorment quan es comensant petit.	And the ancients said that some kinds of pain are in places where it is possible to completely remove them, such as in the head, which is in the mammary glands or similar parts of the body, and especially when they are just beginning and small.
Mays quan es antiquat e es gra, no cove que te propries a lu, quar yeu non pogui sanar de aquel alcu ni no he vist autre, ni que sia pervengut ad aquo.	But when it is old and hard, I cannot determine its properties, for I have neither healed anyone of this kind nor have I seen another case, nor can it be treated in this way.
E la operacio en lu es quan es allocat ayssi cum havem dit, es que tu precedescas e laysses le malaute e purgues de colera negra alcunas veguadas, e aprop sagna aquel, si es atrobada replecio manifesta.	And the operation for it is as follows: when it is located, as we have said, you should first expose the disease and purge of black bile for several days, then draw that out, if an obvious full and distended condition is found.
E aprop prepara le malaute am preparacio en le qual sia locat am operacio, e aprop prohiceys en le trauc uncis les quals cove ad aquel; e aprop concava de tota part am la codena sego bona perexcrutacio entro que no romangua alcuna causa de las razitz de lu.	And then prepare the patient for operation by placing him in a position suitable for the procedure, and then stretch his limbs so that they reach the required area; and then curve all parts with the knife according to thorough incision so as not to damage any vital part of the patient.
E layssa correr le sanc, e no abscidas aquel leugierament, e exprem les locs, e abstergeys le sanc gros tot am la tua ma o am instrument am le qual es a tu possible dels instruments.	Let the blood flow, and do not stop it lightly, and squeeze the areas, and wipe away the thick blood with your hand or with an instrument at your disposal.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat de sanc gros inscizio de vena o de arceria, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que·l flux del sanc sia cessat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	But if you find thick blood in the incision of a vein or artery, then cauterize that area once the flow of blood has stopped, and treat it with the other remedy until it is healed.
Capitol .liv.	Capitulum I.
De curacio de ydropici.	On the treatment of dropsy.
Nos ja havem recomtat, en la divisio, de las specias de ydropici de l’aygua, e les senhals de quascuna especia, de la curacio de lu am medicinas.	We have already discussed in the division the species of dropsy caused by water, and the signs of each species, as well as the treatment using medicines.
E aquela la qual es curada am ferr no es sino la specia de althitas sola, e no es aproximat am ferr a la specia de timpanistres ni a la especia de yposarcha, quar aquo es mortal.	And that which is cured by iron is nothing but the specialty of arthritides alone, and it is not approximated by iron to the specialty of tympanites nor to the specialty of hypochondria, for this is fatal.
E quan tu ja has medicat aquesta especia de ydropici timpanistre am medicinas e no comfereys la tua medicacio, lahoras considera, quar si al malaute ja es conseguida debelitat, o es am aquel autra malautia otra ydropici, ayssi cum si es en lu tos o cos de ventre e semblant ad aquels, lahoras guarda te que no le mediques am ferr, quar temor es sobre aquo.	And when you have treated this specialty of tympanites with medicines and find that your treatment is ineffective, consider that if the patient has already achieved debility or another illness such as edema, as in their cough or abdominal condition similar to those, then do not treat them with iron, for there is fear regarding this.
Mays si tu vezes le malaute de vertut exuberant, e am lu no es autra malautia sino ydropici tant solament, e no enfant ni vielh, lahoras la manieyra de la operacio de lu es que tu eleves le malaute entre las tuas mas, e le ministre aprop lu exprema le ventre de lu am la sua ma, enpellen la aygua a la partida dejos del pentenilh, e aprop pren spatum spinos segon aquesta forma:	But if you see the patient with an excess of virtue, and in them there is no other illness than edema solely, neither child nor old man, then the manner of the operation for them is that you lift the patient between your hands, and minister to them by pressing their abdomen with your hand, expel the water from their side near the femur, and then take a spine spatium according to this form:
sia de dos partz agudas lonc, de aguda extremitat ayssi cum spatum; mays empero sia en lu alcuna brevitat petit a petit, per so que en la operacio am aquel no passes entro al budel, e que ledas aquel.	it should be of two sharp parts long, with sharp ends like a spine; yet it should have some slight thickness, so that in the operation you do not pass into the intestine, and that you do not damage it.
E aprop considera si la generacio de ydropici es de part dels budels, quar lahoras cove que tu am la seccio te alonhes del ombelic per la quantitat de tres ditz a las partidas dejos, en le dreyt de lu sobre le pentenilh.	And then consider if the generation of dropsy is from the intestines, for when you examine the section you are about three inches away from the navel on either side, along the right side above the iliac bone.
Mays si la generacio de hydropici es per malautia del fietge, lahoras la tua seccio sia sinistra del ombilic per tres ditz.	And if the generation of dropsy is due to illness of the kidney, then your section is on the left side of the navel by three inches.
E si la generacio de lu es per la melsa, lahoras la tua seccio sia en le las dreyt.	And if the generation of it is due to the liver, then your section is on the right side.
E no cove que la tua seccio sia sobre le costat sobre le qual vol jaser le malaute per que no corron las superfluitatz ad aquel loc freul.	And ensure that your section is not on the side where the illness is located to prevent excess fluids from flowing to that area.
E aprop perfora am le instrument tota la codena, e aprop entromet en aquela seccio, e eleva la tua ma am le spatum entre la codena e·l siphac, e tu excorja aquel; e si’ la quantitat de una ungla o enviro.	And then perforate the entire length of the canal with the instrument, and insert it into that section. Elevate your hand above the spasm between the canal and the siphon, and expel it; if the quantity is about an egg or more.
E aprop perforo le ciphac entro que pervengua le spatum al loc vuoyt, e es loc de l’aygua.	And then perforate the siphon so that the spasm reaches the desired location, which is where the water is.
E aprop extratz aquel e entromet un instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then extract it and insert an instrument of this form:
e es semblant a canula de argent subtil; es fayt de argent o de eram o de lato leon, al qual en la partida pus bassa de lu es un petit trauc, e en les costatz de lu so tres traucs: dos de una partida e un del autra partida; e fayta es la extremitat de lu insciza segon la manieyra de pluma, ayssi cum vezes:	and it is similar to a thin silver cannula; it is made of silver or gold or copper, on the lower part of which there is a small hole, and on its sides are three holes: two in one part and one in another part; and the end is incised like a feather's tip, as you can see:
E en la extramitat de lu pus sobirana es armilla, quar quan le instrument perve al aygua, lahoras aquela tantost deysen sobre le instrument, donc evacua de l’aygua en la ora miega quantitat, quar si tu evacuas de aquela mes que no cove en la hora, fort leu mor le malaute per resolucio del sieu spirit animal, o accideys a lu cincopi que es appropinquada la mort.	And at the end of the instrument above is a ring; when the instrument reaches the water, it quickly rises to the surface, so that it expels a small quantity of water in half an hour. If you expel more than what fits in the container, the patient may die suddenly due to resolution of his animal spirit, or it might lead to a condition five days away from death.
Mays evacua de aquela segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu e segon que significan a tu las disposicios del malaute de la vertut del pols de lu e de la bontat de lu.	More water should be expelled according to the quantity of the virtue of the fluid and according to your assessment of the patient's condition from the pulse and the quality of the fluid.
E aprop extrats le instrument, e rete l’aygua la qual causa es quar tantost es retenguda per la codena la qual rete le trauc que es sobre le ciphac del qual e recomtat a tu que perfores aquel segon aquela manieyra.	And then extract the instrument, and stop the water which causes it, as soon as it is stopped by the cord which blocks the hole through which it flows. You have already perforated it according to this manner.
E aprop itera le instrument al autra dia si vezes le malaute tollerant aquo, e extratz de la aygua petita quantitat, e fay aquo per alcus jorns sobre temor, e guarda te de error entro que no romangua de l’aygua sino pauc.	And then repeatedly apply the instrument if the patient tolerates it, and extract a small quantity of water, and do this for several days out of fear, and beware not to let him drink too much water but only a little.
Mays si tu temes sobre le malaute, e leyssas de l’aygua gran quantitat, lahoras cura aquel am sepultura en arena cauda, e mota suzor en banh, e al solelh espere per lonc temps; e cura aquel am medicinas dessicativas entro que sia sanat.	But if you fear for the patient, and let him drink a large quantity of water, then cure that with burial in sand, and washing with wet earth, and in the sun wait for a long time; and cure that with drying medicines until he is healed.
E cauteriza sobre le stomac, e la melsa e·l fitge aprop la extraccio de l’aygua, segon que yeu he recontat en aquo que es precedit.	And cauterize on the stomach, and the spleen near the extraction of the water, as I have recounted in what was previously mentioned.
Capitol .lv.	Capitolium.
De la curacio dels enfants les quals so natz les locs de la urina no-perforatz.	For the treatment of children whose urethras are not perforated.
Alcunas veguadas alcun dels enfantz es eyssi del ventre de la sua mayre e·l cap de la sua mixtio no es perforat (o es trauc streyt o no es en son loc).	In some instances, one of the infants is born with the abdomen of its mother closed, and the opening of the mixture does not perforate (or it is stretched or does not remain in its proper place).
Donc cove coytar am perforacio de lu tantost que es nascut am spatum mot subtil segon aquesta forma:	Then cover the wound after perforation of the leg as soon as it is born with a subtle moist spatum according to this form:
E aprop pausa en le trauc un clavil subtil de plom e ligua aquel, e te per tres jorns o per .iiii.tre.	Then place a thin lead nail over it and bind it tightly, and let it be for three days or for four.
E quant vol urinar sia remaugut e hurine; e aprop retorne aquel.	And when he wants to urinate he is relieved and urinates; then return it.
E si tu no pauses le plom, ja es possible que la urina la qual va sobre le loc, no leysa aquest claure.	And if you do not bind the lead, it is possible that the urine which falls on the area will prevent this from healing.
Mays aquel del qual le trauc es streyt sia medicat am clavil de Plom, ayssi cum havem dit, per trops dias entro que sia amplificat.	But the one from which you have pierced should be treated with a lead nail, as we have said, for many days before it is enlarged.
Mays aquels en les quals es le trauc no en son loc, so leditz, la qual causa es quar de aquels, aquel que es nat e·l trau es deves la fi del cap de la vergua per que no pot urinar a las partidas dedintz, entro que eleva la vergua am la sua ma a las partidas desus; e no es a lu generacio, per so quar le sperma no pot pervenir a la mayre segon rectitut, e es malautia mot laga.	But those in which you have pierced are not in their place, they say, the cause is due to those, that which is native and the wound should be at the end of the shaft of the penis so that it cannot urinate from the internal parts, while raising the shaft with his hand above the parts upwards; and it is not a generation, for so that the sperm cannot reach the ovary according to its straight path, and it is a malady of long duration.
E la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que·l malaute sia envessat sobre le sieu dos, e aprop exten le cap de la vergua de lu am la tua ma sinistra am vehement extraccio, e inscideys le cap del cap de la vergua del loc del perpucii am spatum agut, ayssi cum es inscizio de pluma, o que tu ne razas alcuna partida, per so que·l mieg de lu vengua semblant al cap de la vergua e que le trauc caia en le mieg loc segon que cove.	And the manner of the operation is that the patient lies on his back, and then extend the head of the penis with your left hand in strong extraction, and incise the head of the head of the penis at the place of circumcision with a sharp knife, as if it were incised like a feather, or any part you wish to remove, so that the meatus resembles the head of the penis and leads downward into the middle location according to what is convenient.
E guarda te que en la tua operacio de flux de sanc, quar motas vetz accideys aquo; e pausa te a lu am aquo que abscindeys le sanc, e cura la plagua entro que si’ sanada.	And watch that in your operation for the flow of urine, if you notice any spots accidently; pause at it and carefully cut away the bladder, and treat the wound until it is healed.
Capitol .lvi.	Capitol LXVI.
De albater le qual accideys en le prepucii en le cap de la vergua e de corropcio e negror e adherencia del prepucii del cap de la vergua.	For the abscess which occurs in the prepuce, on the head of the penis, and is accompanied by corruption, blackening, and adhesion of the prepuce to the head of the penis.
Motas veguadas accideys aquest albater en la vergua e es eminencia de carn laga.	Spots appear in this abscess on the penis and form a raised flesh wound.
E de aquela una es maligna e autra es no-maligna.	And one of them is malignant and the other is non-malignant.
No-maligna, cove que suspendas am unci subtil e abscindas aquela entro que aquela mondes tota; e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto submirgit en enguent egipciac; e aprop aquel, cura le am enguent diafinicon entro que sia sanat.	And the non-malignant one, take and suspend it on a fine thread and cut through it where that tumor is entirely; then place your hand over it to submerge it in Egyptian ointment; afterwards, treat it with diafinic ointment until it is healed.
E si albater es maligna, de lega color, lahoras cove que tu aministres cauteri aprop la inscizio de lu e la razio de lu.	And if the abscess is malignant, of white color, then you should apply a cautery near its incision and around it.
Mays si albater es en le prepuci del cap de la vergua no-circumcis, e la una partida de albater es dedintz le prepucii e l’autra partida es defora, lahoras cove que tu ostes albater le qual es dedintz al comensament entro que es consolidat; e lahora tu cura aquel deforo, quar quan tu curas aquel ensemps le prepuci, no es asegurat que no sia trinquat.	And if the abscess is in the foreskin of the head of the penis in an uncircumcised person, and one part of the abscess is inside the foreskin and another part is outside, then you should remove the part that is inside at the beginning until it is consolidated; afterwards, treat the part outside, for when you treat both together, it is not assured that the foreskin will not become infected.
E ja eysamen accideys en les genetius e en le prepuci negror e corruccio, adonc cove que tu conquavas tot aquo que ja es denigrat e que ja se vol corrompre o que ja es corrumput; e aprop lineys sobre aquel aprop aquo am mel, le qual es contusit am farina de scorsa de milgrana e de errs trissatz e crivellatz.	And we have examined accidents in the genitals and in the foreskin, such as blackening and corruption. Then you should reduce everything that is already darkened and that is about to腐化或已经腐烂；然后在其上画线，使用蜂蜜，它由新鲜大黄粉、碎三色堇和筛过的粉末混合而成。
E aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sana.	And then attend to that one among the other treatments when it is healed.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, lahoras aministra cauteri lunar segon aquesta forma:	And if there is a flow of blood, then administer a lunar cautery according to this form:
quar cauteri juvatiu es a dos disposicios ensemps, so es a flux de sanc e a la plagua quan es corrumpuda.	A lunar cautery is used in two positions together, either for a flow of blood or for the plague when it is corrupted.
E si le cap de la vergua es corrodut e es destruit tot en la hora, lahoras cove que tu intrometas en lo meat del prepucii una canula de plom per so que le malaute urina per aquela.	And if the head of the abscess is corroded and destroyed entirely in an hour, then you must introduce a lead cannula into the flesh of the prepuce so that the sore discharges through it.
En la adherencia del prepucii am le cap de la vergua (et aquesta adherencia no accideys sino en aquel del qual le prepucii es sa, e sobre lu no es exhigida circumcizio; e quan accideys adherencia per plagua o per apostema) cove que excorjas am spatum obtus entro que sia dissolvut le liament e sia deliurat le cap de la vergua de tota partida.	In the adhesion of the prepuce with the head of the abscess (and this adhesion occurs only in that part from which the prepuce is drawn, and over which circumcision is not required; when adhesion occurs due to the plague or an apostema), you must excoriate with a blunt blade while the glue dissolves and the head of the abscess is completely released.
E si es dificil desirnir aquelas exquisidament, lahoras cove que tu excorjes am spatum alcuna causa del cap de la vergua e del prepucii, e aysso es quar le prepucii, quan es subtil, fort leu es perforat per la sua subtilitat leugierament.	And if it is difficult to excoriate them thoroughly, then you must excoriate with a blunt blade some part of the head of the abscess and the prepuce, and this is because when the prepuce is thin and light, it is perforated slightly by its thinness.
E aprop separa entre·l prepucii e·l cap de la vergua am dra7 de li subtil, le qual ja es mulhat en l’aygua frega per que no adherescan autra veguada.	And then separate between the prepuce and the head of the penis a piece of the thin skin, which is already moistened in the cold fluid to prevent another fold from adhering.
E aprop sia curat am vi stiptic entro que sia consolidat.	And then apply a styptic inside as soon as it is consolidated.
Capitol .lvii.	Capitol. lvii.
De mundificacio dels enfants e de la curacio de aquo que accideys ad aquels de circumcisio.	On the purification of children and the treatment of what occurs to those who have been circumcised.
Circumcisio no es solucio de continuitat ayssi cum las autras plaguas: mays empero cum sia de la nostra operacio e de nostra voluntat, e lus de aquela sia propriament en les enfants, es necessari que asignem en aquela milhor operacio e via pus leugiera perdusent a salut.	Circumcision is not a solution for continuity as other wounds are: yet, since it is of our operation and our will, and the issue properly lies in children, it is necessary that we assign to it the best operation and the lightest way, losing nothing for their health.
Donc dic que les antics no diyssero circumcisio en alcu dels lors libres, quar no n’usan en las suas leys, e no es sino quar havem aquisit per speriment, la qual causa es que yeu he atrobat la major partida dels artifexs e dels barbies usar circumcisir e mundificacio am novacula e am torores; e usan de liament am fiel e de inscizio am la ungla.	Therefore, it is said that the ancients did not use circumcision for any of the free parts, for they do not use it in their laws, and it is only because we have acquired this practice through experience. The reason is that I have examined the majority of surgeons and barbers who use circumcision and purification with a knife and by cauterization; and they use lint soaked in wine and incision with ungual scissors.
E yeu ja he prohadas totas aquestas manieras e no atrobegui milhor mondificacio am forfexs, am liament am fiel que en mondificacio cum la ungla, quar motas vetz efugeys la codena pus desus, quar la codena del prepucii a dos tunicas, e roman la tonica pus dejos, e fort leu es forsat ad autra inscizio e dolor sicura.	And I have already tried all these methods and cannot find a better modification using scissors, or honey or vinegar in the modification like ointment, for you will see that the thread escapes above, for the thread of the foreskin is caught by two tunics, and weaken the tunic below, and it is necessary to make another incision and cause certain pain.
E am mundificacio le qual es fayta per alphecati, e es digital, del qual usan les sabatiers, no es segurada la inscizio de la extremitat del membre viril, quar fort leu intra en le trau de lu.	And in the circumcision which is done by clamping, and is digital, of which shoemakers use, it is not secure the incision at the end of the male member, for it often enters into the wound.
Mays en la operacio am ungla, fort leu obazeys ferr e corromp la tua operacio.	In the operation with anointing, you must use iron and corrupt your operation.
E la codena del enfant es breu per natura, e motas veguadas nays en tal manieyra que no ha necessitat de mondificacio, e yeu he vist aquel.	And the thread of the child is short by nature, and often does not need to be cut in such a manner that no circumcision is necessary, and I have seen this.
Mays de la mondificacio que·s fa am forfexs e liamentz am fiel, la bontat, experiment descrobic a mi, quar las forfexs so de proporcional inscizio, per aquo quar la acuitat que es desus es ayssi cum la acuitat que es dejos; e donc cum tu premes la tua ma so proporcionadas dos acuitatz, e inscideysso segon una comperacio en un temps; e es fayta compressio del fiel am figura contenent la codena de la vergua de tota partida, am le qual no catz error de tot.	More of the circumcision that is done with scissors and ointments and vinegar, its quality, I have observed from experience, for the scissors are for proportional incision, whereby the sharpness above is thus as the sharpness below; and therefore when you press your hand proportionally on two sharp points, and incise according to a comparison in one time; and it is made compression of the vinegar in a figure containing the thread of the foreskin from all sides, by which no error occurs at all.
E la manieyra de la operacio primeyra es que tu fassas estar le enfant majorment si es de aquels que entendo un petit, que no fassas sino que tu lies le fiel en la sua vergua tant solament, e que leysses aquel entro al autra dia.	And the manner of the first operation is that you make the child stay mostly if it is among those who understand a little, that you lie the faeces in the anus only, and let it out the next day.
E aprop fay aquel alegrar en tota aquela manieyra que es a tu possibla de aquo que recep la sua intelligencia.	And then cleanse in all that manner which is possible of what receives its intelligence.
E aprop fa aquel estar entre las tuas mas estatuir preparadament, e no sia ges cezent; e occulta las forfexs en la tua ma o dejos le tieu pe, que l’enfant no veia aquelas ni degun autre dels instruments.	And then place it among your legs properly prepared, and do not be more than a hundred; and hide the scissors in your hand or let your thigh cover them, so that the child does not see those or any other of the instruments.
E aprop entremet la tua ma a la vergua de lu e suffla en la codena, e tira aquela entro que sia eyssit le cap de la vergua, e aprop mondifica aquel de aquo que es agregat en ela de sordicia.	And then insert your hand into the child's anus and blow into the cavity, and push that in until you straighten the head of the anus, and then modify it from what is added to it by deafness.
E aprop lia le loc signat am fiel dobla, e aprop ligua pus bas de aquel un petit le segon liament, e aprop te am le dit pous e endic tieu le loc del liament dejos am bona retencio, e inscideys entre dos liaments.	And then tie the marked place with faeces doubled, and then tie just below it a small second thread, and then hold the digit over the site of the thread with good tension, and incise between two threads.
E aprop eleva la codena sus leugierament e estratz le cap de la vergua; e aprop leyssa le sanc corre petit e petit, quar es milhor ; e pausa polvera desus e sobre la polvera pausa drap en le qual es spandut mugol de huou coyt en ayguaros concosit am oli rozat recent bo; e layssa aquel sobre aquel entro al autra dia; e cura aquel am curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then lift the knee slightly and stretch the head of the vein; and let the bleeding proceed slowly, for that is better; place powder above and over the powder put a cloth soaked in honey cooked with olive oil recently pressed; leave that there until the next day; apply treatment to it while it is healing.
La forma de las forfexs a mondificacio, aquesta es la forma:	The shape of the forceps after modification, this is the form:
Sian las unas extramitatz no-talhantz e las autras sian talhant, que non sia yssit le ram del clau, e sia la longitut de las doas acuitatz ayssi cum la longitut de dos manubres engualment.	If the one jaw is uncut and the other is cut, let the tip of the key form the handle, and let the length of the two jaws be as long as the length of two equal-sized handles.
Mays la error en mundificacio es quar fort leu efugeys la codena intrinseca tota, o partida de lu deves la inscizio.	More importantly, the error in modification is that if you inadvertently remove the internal or part of the internal knee, you must perform an incision.
Donc cove que tu extendas aquela de la tua hora am la tua ungla denant la apostemacio del loc e que inscidas aquela segon equalitat.	Therefore, ensure that you extend the one from your hour mark along your finger in front of the incision site and make the incision according to equality.
E si no la podes tenir am la tua ungla, lahoras extratz aquela am unci e inscideys aquela.	And if you cannot hold it with your finger, then stretch it with a pin and make the incision there.
Mays si son passatz tres dias, e roman aquo que es imflat dejos la vergua apostemat, lahoras tu leyssa aquo entro que sia cedat le apostema caut, e excorja aquel am fecilitat, e inscidex aquel segon que a tu es preparat.	If they have passed three days and remain what is swollen due to the inguinal abscess, then you let it be until the abscess is lanced with a cautery, and excoriates that for facilitation, and inscises that according to how you are prepared.
E guarda te del cap de la vergua, quar no nosera a lu aquo.	And guard the head of the swelling, for it will not be to you what is there.
E donc cura aquel am aquo que la plagua consolida de las polveras las quals havem recomtadas en le tractat de las polveras.	And therefore treat that part where the wound is consolidated with the powders we have recommended in the treatise on powders.
E si es inscidit de la codena sobre mesura, e obezeys a las partidas desus, aquo no notz a lu.	And if it is incised from the wound beyond measure, and you obey to the rules above, this will not harm it.
E mays cura aquel am aquo que havem dit entro que sia sanat.	And therefore treat that part where we have said should be treated until it is healed.
Capitol .lviii.	Capitol. lviii.
De curacio de urina retenguda en la vesiqua.	On the treatment of retained urine in the bladder.
Retencio de urina en la vesica es fayta per oppulacio fayta per peyra o per sanc congilat, o per poyre o per carnada, e semblantz ad aquels de aquo que havem dit de las manieyras de curacio en la divisio.	Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by an obstruction due to a stone or a strangulated sore, or pus or flesh, and resembles those we have said about the methods of treatment in the division.
E si no es dissolvuda la urina, e veses retencio de lu esser per peyra le qual ja es en le col de la vesica, lahoras cove que le malaute sia encorbat sobre les sieus denolhs.	And if the urine is not dissolved, and you see retention of it being caused by a stone which is at the neck of the bladder, then know that the patient has an encumbrance in their loins.
E aprop conponeys les pes de aquel sobre le sieu dos e extendas le sieu ventre de la partida pus desus del sieu dos, e le malaute estrengua le sieu ale tant quant es a lu possible.	And then place his feet on his own buttocks and extend his belly from the part above his back, and the patient straighten his legs as much as is possible.
Donc lahoras le col de la vesica es costreyt ha espulsio de la peyra a las partidas detras, per que la urina es absolta.	Then when the neck of the bladder is stretched there will be expulsion of the stone to the parts behind, so that the urine is released.
E si no es dissolvuda am aquo que havem dit he vehement es fayta la causa sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que aministres extraccio de lu am instrument le qual es apelat siringua, del qual aquesta es la forma: Sia de argent e sia subtil leon conquau, ayssi cum canula de pena de ausel am subtilitat de ray lonc en similitut d’un palm e mig, al qual sia cana subtil en le cap de lu.	And if what we have said is not dissolved, then strongly make the cause in the patient's loins. Then know that you should perform extraction of it with an instrument which is called a siringue, of which this is the form: It should be made of silver and should be very fine, like a long ray canula similar to half a palm's length, with a thin cane at the head of it.
E la manieyra del eyssiment de la urina per aquel es que prenguas le fiel doblat e lies en la extramitat de lu lana o coto per bona liadura; e entrometas las extramitatz del fiel en la partida dejos de la ciringua, e inscideys am las forfexs si superflueys alcuna causa de la lana, mays intromet la en la canula am vehemencia E aprop enongeys la ciringua am boder e am album de huou.	And the way to extract the urine through it is that you take a flax thread doubled and tie it at the end of the siringue with good knots; then insert the ends of the flax into the part left by the siringue, and cut with scissors if any excess from the flax is needed. More firmly insert it into the canula, and quickly bring the siringue to the edge and against the wall of the bladder.
E fay cezer le malaute sobre la selha, e embroca la vesiqua de lu e la vergua am olis umitz, e oli de oliva e ayguaros.	And make a cut in the patient's side, and pour urine from his bladder and penis with olive oil and vinegar.
E aprop entromet la ciringua am facilitat entro que pervengua a la razit de la vergua; e aprop dobla la vergua desus a la partida del embelic; e aprop empelleys la ciringua dintz aquela; e aprop empelleys aquela entro que pervengua a la vesica, e aquela centa le malaute esser pervenguda a la causa vuoda, e no es fayt asso segon aquest orde, sino le meat en le qual va a tortuositat.	And then insert the probe easily until it reaches the meatus of the penis; and then fold the penis upwards at the point where the urethra divides; and then push the probe inside until it reaches the bladder, and that should be done in the meat which has become tortuous.
E aprop exten le fiel am la lana petit a petit, quar la urina siec la lana.	And then slowly insert the probe into the wool, for urine will soak the wool.
Aprop extratz aquela e fay per curacio urina, e usa ciringua, no cesses fer aquo e usa ciringua entro que sia evacuada la vesica e le malaute atrobe alleviacio.	And then remove it and use urine for treatment, and insert the probe again without stopping until the bladder and patient are thoroughly relieved.
Capitol .lix.	Capitol.lix.
De qualitat de clisterizacio de la vezica am clampcedra e am semblantz instrumentz les quals sian acordants ad aquo.	Of the quality of the clyster for the bladder, we shall use and describe instruments which are appropriate for this.
Quan accideys en la vesica ulceracio o apostema, o sanc congilat en aquela, o es coartat poyredura, e vols en aquela destillar ayguas e medicinas, lahoras sia fayt am instrument le qual es apelat clampcedra, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When ulcers or abscesses occur in the bladder, or there is a burning sore, and you wish to distill waters and medicines into it, then a device called a clampcedra is made. This is its form:
sino que en la extramitat de lu es sorda, so es clausa.	so that at the end of it is closed, so it is sealed.
Et en aquela so tres traucs: dos de la una partida , ayssi quo vezes.	And in it there are three holes: two on one side, thus positioned.
En le comensament es loc concau, en le qual es aquo que es enpellit, e sia segon quantitat que oppile aquel, ses addicio, entro que quan alcuna causa es ab aquel tirada de las humiditatz, sia atirada, e quan es expellida, am aquo sia atirada, e quan es expellit lonc, segon que fa clampcedra am la qual es phicat naphta en las batalhas de mar.	At the beginning it is concave, in which the substance to be inserted is placed, and according to its quantity that fills it, more is added. When any cause sends humidities towards it, they are drawn in, and when expelled, they are expelled through it, and when expelled for a long time, naptha is placed in the grooves to seal it.
Donc cum tu vols prohicir humiditatz en la vesica, entromet la extremitat de clapcedra en la humiditat, e atira am aquel aquo que es empellit a las partidas desus, quar la humiditat es atirada en la conquavitat de clapcedra.	So, when you want to introduce humidities into the bladder, insert the end of the clampcedra into the humidity, and draw out what is pushed into the upper parts, so that the humidity is drawn into the cavity of the clampcedra.
E aprop entromet la extramitat de clapcedra en la vergua segon que havem recomtat en la ciringua; e aprop empelleys la humiditat am aquo que empelleys, quar aquela humiditat perve a la vesica tantost, e le malaute cent aquela.	And then insert the tip of the pessary into the vagina as we advised in the ciringua; and push the moisture out with what you are pushing, for that moisture will quickly reach the bladder, and the malady center there.
Forma del cristeri subtil am le qual la vesica es cristerizada, e es aquela la forma:	The form of the subtle pessary through which the bladder is chartered, and that is the form:
E sia fayta de argent o de lato, de la qual le cap pus aut sia semblant a petita pluma, e dejos lu cana dedintz liament.	And it should be made of silver or copper, with its head resembling a small feather, and leave the thread inside linen.
E aprop pren vesica de moto, e pausa en aquela la humiditat que vols cristirizar en la vesica, e aprop lia aquela entre dos am fort liguatura am fiel doble, e escalfa aquela humiditat sobre le foc.	And then take a bladder of mutton, place in it the moisture you want to chartered in the bladder, and tie it between two with strong ligatures of doubled thread, and heat that moisture over the fire.
E aprop entromet la extremitat del cristeri en la vergua.	And then insert the tip of the pessary into the vagina.
E aprop estrenh la tua ma sobre la vesica am la humiditat am strectura descent entro que·l malaute centa que aquela humiditat ja es pervenguda a la vesica.	And then strengthen your hand over the bladder with the moisture in a descending structure so that the malady centers where that moisture has reached the bladder.
Mays si a tu no es present vesica, lahoras tu pren una pessa de parguames e fay de aquel cercle; e perfora aquel de tota la sua retonditat; e aprop entromet fiel fort en aquels traucs, ayssi quo so revolgut; e aprop agregua le cercle ayssi quo es agreguat alsofatur, pus que tu pausas en aquel aquo que tu vols de las humiditatz, e olis e ayguas.	If you do not have a bladder present, then take a piece of parchment and make from that circle; perforate it completely round; then insert strong thread through all those threads, as they are twisted; then add the circle so that it is added alsofatur, for you must place in that which you want from the humors, odor, and waters.
E aprop tu lia aquel en le instrument e fay am aquel ayssi cum has fayt am la vesica, e exprescio am la tua ma entro que la humiditat pervengua a la vesica.	Then you tie that with the instrument and do so with it as you did with the bladder, and keep your hand in place so that the humidity reaches the bladder.
Capitol .lx.	Capitol.lx.
De extraccio de peyra.	Of the extraction of gravel.
Nos ja havem dit en la divisio las specias de peyra e curacio de lu am medicinas, e la diferencia entre peyra engendrada en los ronhos e peyra engendrada en la vesica, e les senhals de aquela.	We have already mentioned in the division the species of gravel and its cure with medicines, and the difference between gravel generated in the kidneys and gravel generated in the bladder, and the signs of the former.
E havem dit la peyra en la qual catz operacio am ma, e seccio.	And we have mentioned the gravel for which the major operation and sectioning is performed.
E la peyra engendrada en la vesica propriament es aquela que es ficada en la vesica.	And the stone generated in the bladder is that which is inserted in the bladder.
E yeu so narrant aquel am exposicio manifesta e abreviacio.	And I am now narrating that amendment and abbreviation manifestly and briefly.
Donc dic que peyra engendrada en la vesica majorment ve als enfantz; e dels senhals de lu es que la urina que es eyssida de la vesica es semblant a aygua en la sua subtilitat, e apar en aquela arena; e le malaute fregua la sua vergua, e motas veguadas pen, e aprop es dressada; e am aquo yeys foro le cul en motz de aquels.	Therefore, I say that the stone generated in the bladder mostly affects children; and the signs of it are that the urine discharged from the bladder is similar in subtlety to water, and appears with that sand; and gout irritates its vein, causes reddened areas on the skin, and soon becomes exacerbated; and the anus is often affected as well.
E es laugiera la sanacio dels enfants de aquela entro que han conseguitz xiiii ans; e es dificil curacio en les viels.	And the recovery of children occurs within about four years; and it is a difficult cure in old age.
Mays en les joves es migiera per aquo quar es entre aquels.	More in the young, it occurs about half way through those four years.
E de aquel del qual la peyra es major e la curacio es pus leugiera; E si es pauca, es contraria ad aquela.	And of that in which the stone is larger and the cure is easier; And if it is small, it is contrary to that.
Donc cum pervenem a la curacio de aquela, cove al comensament de aquela que mondifiquem le malaute am cristeri le qual extragua tota la fenda la qual es en les sieus budels; quar aquela fenda alcunas veguadas prohibeys la envencio de la peyra deves la inquisicio de lu.	Therefore, when we reach the cure of that, begin with the modification of gout by a cristol stone which extracts all the fluids which are in his intestines; for that fluid sometimes prohibits the passage of the stone and you must question its presence.
E aprop sia pres le malaute am les sieus pes e sia contosit e maugut enjos per so que la peyra descenda al preon de la vesica, o que saute de loc aut alcunas veguadas.	And then place the patient on their side with their feet together and lift and massage gently so that the stone descends to the neck of the bladder, or passes from that spot a few times.
E aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas preparat, e las mas de lu sian dejos las coysas de lu, per so que la vesica tota sia fayta declinant a las partidas dejos.	And then place those cushions you have prepared under the patient, while the others keep their position, so that the bladder is entirely made to slope towards the parts left.
E aprop perquier aquela e tota aquela deforo.	And then apply that and all that remedy.
Donc si sentes la peyra en l’espazi, lahoras tu te coyta tantost am seccio sobre lu.	And if you feel the stone in the space, then immediately apply pressure to it with your hand.
E si no catz de tot dejos le tieu tocament, lahoras cove que tu untes am oli le tieu dit indic de la ma sinistra, si malaute es enfant, o le dit miga si es jove complit, e entrometas aquel en le sieu cul.	And if the stone does not pass with your touch, then rub your index finger of your left hand with oil, if the patient is a child, or your thumb if the patient is an adult, and insert it into the patient's anus.
E perquier de la peyra entro que stia dejos le tieu dit.	And apply pressure to the stone with your finger while it is in place.
E converteys aquela petit a petit entro al col de la vesica.	And gradually move that finger towards the neck of the bladder.
E aprop prem sobre aquel am lo tieu dit, e expelleys aquel a las partidas defora ves le loc del qual vos la seccio.	And then press upon that area as you have said, and expel that to the external parts; see where the location of the lesion is.
E comanda al ministra que prema la vesica am la sua ma; e comanda a un autra ministra que am la sua ma dextra extenda les genetius a las partidas desus, e am la sua autra ma remaugua la codena la qual es dejos les genetius, en partida del loc en le qual se fa la seccio.	And command the minister to press the bladder with his hand; and command another minister to extend the genitals upwards with his right hand, and with his other hand pull back the codex which holds the genitals, at the location where the section is made.
E aprop entromet espatum be inscident del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then insert a spatula; this is the form of it:
e scindeys en lu aquo que es entre·l cul e·ls genetius, no en le mieg loc, abantz al latz de la coyssa sinistra; e sia la seccio sobre aquela peyra e·l tieu dit sia en le cul, e sia fayta seccio transversa, per que la seccio defora sia ampla e dedintz streyta segon la quantitat que egrecio de la peyra sia a lu possibla, e no major, quar fort leu comprem le tieu dit le qual es en le cul la peyra deves la seccio, e es foro-getada ses defacultat.	And cut through it what is between the anus and the genitals, not in the middle location, ahead of the left thigh; and let the section be on that stone which you said is at the anus, and let the section be transverse, so that the section outside is wide and inside narrow according to the quantity that flowed from the stone is possible, and no larger, for we carefully preserve the section which is in the anus the stone should have the section, and it becomes a hole-slit due to its natural function.
E sapias que de la peyra es alcuna a la qual so angle e margers, per que le eyssiment de lu es fayt deficil per aquo.	And know that there is sometimes one in the foot where the toes and margins, for which the insertion of it becomes difficult by this.
E de aquela aquo es leon semblant a glan, e es redonda, e es fayt de lu leugier eyssiment.	And of that which seems like a lion's claw, and is round, and from it is made a easy insertion.
Donc si es aquela al qual so angles e marger, ajusta en la fissura.	And if there is one with the toes and margins, adjust it in the crack.
E si no es ayssi foro-getada, lahoras cove que tu engenes sobre aquel, o que strenguas sobre aquel am gesti decentment, la extremitat del qual sia ayssi cum lima am le qual strenguas sobre la peyra, e no evasesca de lu; o que entrometas dejos lu instrument subtil de curvada extremitat.	And if it is not thus torn open, then you must probe it with a finger or strengthen it with your hand, doing so decently, the tip of which should be like a file on which you strengthen the foot, and do not脱离开它；或者你必须将一根细而弯曲的器械插入其中。
Mays si tu no podes sobre aquel, lahoras tu amplifica le trauc un petit, e si tu veus flux de sanc, abscindeys en strenh aquel am vitriol trissat.	And if you cannot do so with that, then you enlarge the tear a little, and if you want a flow of blood, cut strongly on it with vitriol trisseret.
Mays si la peyra es mays de una, lahoras al comensament tu impelleys la ma a la boca de la vesica, e aprop inscideys sobre lu; e aprop impelleys un petit aprop aquo; e semblantment fay si son motas mays de doas.	And if the foot has more than one, then at the beginning you push your hand to the mouth of the bladder, and nearby cut into it; and nearby push a little nearby there; and similarly do if its spots are more than two.
E si es peyra mot gran, lahoras ignorancia es que tu inscidas aquel am gran seccio, quar accideys al malaute una de doas causas: o que mora o que endevengua a lu destillacio de urina continuabla, per aquo quar le loc no es de tot consolidat.	And if the stone is very large, it is ignorance on your part to incise such a large section, for when this happens to the patient, one of two causes occurs: either death or the induction of continuous urine discharge, due to which the area does not fully heal.
Mays aministra expulcio de lu entro que sia fora-getada, o engenia en la fractura de lu am las forfexs entro que extragua aquela en pessas.	Administer the expulsion of the stone when it is within so that it comes out, or use forceps in the fracture of the limb to extract it from the wound.
Donc cum tu auras cumplit la tua opperacio, lahoras omple la plagua de enses de aloe e de sanc de drago, e strenh aquel.	Then, after you have completed your operation, fill the wound with slices of aloe and dragon's blood, and strengthen it.
E pausa sobre aquel drap enfus en oli e vi, o en oli rozat e aygua frega, per so que apostema caut sia cedat.	And place it over that soaked cloth in oil and wine, or in sweet oil and infused water, so that the abscess may yield.
E aprop resupina le malaute sobre le sieu col, e no deslias le liament entro al tertz dia.	Then lift the patient's leg on a stool, and do not remove the bandage on the third day.
E cum aquel auras desliat, embroca le loc am aygua e mot oli, e aprop cura aquel am enguent diafinicon e am enguent diabazilicon entro que sia sanat.	And when you have removed it, sprinkle the area with water and some oil, and then dress the wound with a ointment of diafinicon and an ointment of diabazic acid until it heals.
Mays si en la plagua accideys apostema caut, adhust e corrosiu, e de aquel semblantz ayssi cum si le sanc es en la vesica congelat, e per lu es la hurina prohibida (e aquo es conogut per la egressio del sanc am urina), a donc entromet lo tieu dit en la plagua e extratz aquel sanc, quar si roman provoca la vesica a corropcio de la vesica e de lu putrefaccio.	But if in the wound there happens an abscess with suppuration and corruption, and it appears as if the blood is in the bladder congealed, and from it urine is prohibited (and this is known by the egress of blood through the urine), then you insert your said instrument into the wound and extract that blood, for if Roman corrosion is provoked it causes corruption of the bladder and its putrefaction.
E aprop lava la plagua am vi agre, aygua e sal, e am opposicio a tota specia, am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	Then clean the wound with vinegar, water, and salt, and oppose all species, using what is suitable for its cure while it remains unhealed.
E cove en las horas de tota la curacio que tu lies amdos las coyssas e ajustes las medicinas las quals so pausadas sobre le loc.	And observe the hours for the entire cure that you have prepared, placing your hands on both thighs and applying the medicines which are laid over the area.
E si la peyra es petita e es en le meat de la vergua, e es ficat en lu, e eyssement de urina es prohibit, lahoras cura aquel am aquo que yeu recomti denant que pervenguas a seccio, quar tropas veguadas per aquesta curacio yest acusat de seccio; e ja yeu e esproat aquo, e es que tu prenguas un perforador de ferr alfelut, del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if the stone is small and located in the meat of the penis, and urine flow is prohibited, then cure it by doing what I have recommended before reaching the section; for too many applications of this treatment are accused of causing dryness. And here you insert it, meaning that you should take a metal punch, which is the shape of this:
de triangulada extramitat, agut, ficat en fust.	from a triangular sharp instrument, inserted in the fist.
E aprop pren fiel, e lia am aquel la vergua dejos la peyra per so que no retorne a la vesica.	And then take spica, and tie it around the scrotum, placing the penis inside to prevent it from returning to the bladder.
E aprop entromet le ferr en la vergua, perforant am fecilitat entro que·l perforador vengua ad aquela peyra.	And then insert the needle into the scrotum, piercing easily so that the puncturer reaches that stone.
E revolveys le perforador am la tua ma en aquela peyra petit a petit, e tu perforsa la perforacio de lu entro que fassas aquel del autra part penetrar; quar la urina tantost es absolta.	And rotate the puncturer with your hand in that stone little by little, and you pierce the puncture so that the one on the other side also penetrates; for urine is quickly released.
E aprop prem la tua ma sobre aquo que es romas de la peyra de la partida deforo de la vergua, quar aquela es trinquada, e es foro-getada am la urina, e le malaute es sanat.	And then press your hand on what is broken from the stone of the other side of the scrotum, for that is fractured, and the hole is filled with urine, and the patient is cured.
Mays si aquesta curacio no es a tu aparelhada per alcuna causa la qual prohibeys de aquela, lahoras lia un fiel dejos la peyra, e autra fiel desus la peyra.	But if this cure is not possible due to some cause that prevents it, then tie a spica around the stone, and another spica above the stone.
E aprop encideys sobre la peyra en aquela vergua entre doas liaduras.	And then fix something over the stone on that scrotum between two ties.
E aprop extratz aquela.	And then extract that.
E aprop deslia le liament e mondifica le sanc congilat, le qual es fayt en la plagua.	And then untie the bandage and modify the dressing, which is done on the wound.
E no es necessari liament de fiel dejos la peyra, sino per que no retorne a la vesica, e l’autre liament desus sino, quar quan es desliat le fiel aprop la egrecio de la peyra, la codena retorna a son loc e cobra la plagua.	And it is not necessary to tie the bandage with flax, leave the stone, but so that it does not return to the bladder. Instead, tie another bandage above, for when the flax is untied near the edge of the stone, the stone returns to its place and heals the wound.
E per aquo es a tu necessari quan lias le fiel desus, que tu eleves la codena a las partidas desus, o que retorne deves le tieu compliment, e cobra la plagua ayssi co havem dit.	And for this reason, when you untie the flax above, you should lift the stone to the parts above, or return it to its proper place, and then the wound will heal as we have said.
Capitol .lxi.	Capitol. lxix.
De extraccio de peyra de las femnas.	On the extraction of stones from women.
Peyra en las femnas pauc es engendrada.	Stone in women is not commonly generated.
Mays si ve peyra ad alcuna de aquelas, lahoras dificil es la curacio de lu, e es prohibida per tropas manieyras.	Yet if a stone does appear in any of them, the cure is difficult, and it is forbidden by too many methods.
La una de lor es quar la femna fort leu es verges.	One of them is that a woman who is strong and virginal.
E la segonda es quar tu no trobas femna be scient que descroba si meteyssa al metge quan es casta, o es de las femnas haventz maritz.	And the second is that you cannot find a good woman who confesses to the doctor whether she is chaste, or being married.
La tersa es quar tu no hatrobas femna be sabent aquesta art, majorment la operacio am ma.	The third is that you cannot find a good woman who knows this art, especially the operation on the eye.
E la quarta es que·l loc de la seccio sobre peyra en las femnas es longinc del loc de la peyra, per que indigeys de seccio preonda, e en aquela es temor.	And the fourth is that the location of the section for kidney stones in women is far from the location of the kidney, so you need a general sectioning, and there is fear in that area.
Mays si necessitat provoca a tu ad aquo, lahoras cove que tu prenguas una femna metga be scient, e pauc es atrobada.	Yet if necessity prompts you to do this, then seek out a midwife who is well versed, and one is seldom found.
Mays si tu es privat de aquela, lahoras cerca metga quast e subtil, o presenta una femna matrona be esenhada en le feyt de las femnas, o femna que en aquesta art ennueys partida del art.	Yet if you are lacking in that, then seek out a midwife who is clever and subtle, or present a well-versed woman who specializes in the care of women, or a woman who has part of this art.
Donc fay aquela present, e comanda a lu que fassa tot aquo que tu li mandaras, de la enquisicio sobre la peyra al comensament; la qual causa es que reguarde si la femna es verges, lahoras cove que meta lo sieu dit en le cul de lu e quiera la peyra.	Then have her present and command her to do everything you tell her, from the examination of the kidney stone to the beginning; the reason is that she should check if the woman is a virgin, and then insert her finger into the woman's anus to feel for the kidney stone.
Donc si atroba aquela, coarte aquela dejos le sieu dit, e lahoras comanda a lu que inscida sobre aquela.	Then if you find it, cut it out and leave his/her as he/she was before, then command him/her to lie down on it.
Mays si no es verge, lahoras comanda a la matrona que entrometa lo sieu dit en le conh de la malauta e enquiera sobre la peyra, pus que pausa la sua ma sinistra sobre la vesica, e comprem aquela am bona comprecio.	May it be that it is not a stone, then command the midwife to insert her finger into the wound of the patient and inquire about the stone, while placing her left hand on the bladder, and grasp it with good grip.
Donc si atroba aquela, lahoras cove que gradantment maugua aquela de l’orrifici de la vesica a las partidas dejos am somman de la sua vertut entro que pervengua am aquel a la razit de la coyssa.	Then if you find it, gradually moisten that from the opening of the bladder to the parts, and leave abundant of its virtue so that it reaches the root of the thigh.
E aprop inscida sobre aquela apposicio de la maytat del conh deves la razit de la coyssa de qualque part sia a lu parada e cent la peyra en aquela partida, e·l dit de lu no sia remaugut de la peyra coartan dejos lu.	And then insert the application of the finger gradually down to the root of the thigh wherever it is stopped and center the stone in that part, so that the patient does not feel pain by cutting him/her.
E la seccio sia pauca al comensament; e aprop entrometa lo ray sobre aquela seccio, e si sent la peyra, lahoras ajuste en seccio segon la quantitat la qual sap que la peyra sira getada de aquela.	And the section be small at the beginning; then insert the probe into that section, and if you feel the stone, then adjust the section according to the quantity he knows the stone will be removed from there.
E sapias que las specias de peyra son motas: quar de aquelas es pauca e gran, e leon e aspra, e longua e redonda, e havent ramps.	And know that the seeds of the pear are spots: some are small and large, lion and sharp, long and round, and having crests.
Donc tu sapias quantas specias so de lu per aquo que tu signifiques sobre aquo que vols.	And know how many seeds the pear has so that you may signify about what you want.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, ajusta en le loc vetriol trissat e te aquela per una hora entro que sia abscindit le sanc, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	And if you want a flow of blood, adjust the location with vitriol trioxide and apply it for one hour until the blood is drawn out, then return to your operation after the pear has been removed.
E fay que prepares am tu dels instrumentz les quals e ditz en la extraccio de peyra en les homes, per so que sias ajudat per aquels en la tua operacio.	And make sure to prepare for yourself the instruments you mentioned in the extraction of pears from men, so that you may be aided by them during your operation.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, e sabes que la expulcio del sanc es de la arceria que es insciza, lahoras tu pausa polvera sobre le loc e estrenh aquel am pulvils e strictura descent, e no iteras aquo; e layssa la peyra e no extraguas aquela, quar fort leu morira la malauta.	And if you want a flow of blood, and know that the expulsion of blood is from the artery that is incised, then apply powder to the area, strengthen it with powders, and cause a descent; do not repeat this; leave the pear and do not remove it, for strongly applied it will kill the patient.
E aprop cura la plagua.	And then cure the wound.
Donc cum es cedada la acuitat del sanc aprop alcus jorns, e·l loc se poyreys, lahoras tu retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	When the heat of the fever has subsided after several days, and the place heals, then you return to your operation while the swelling is forgotten.
Capitol lxii.	Chapter LXII.
De seccio sobre ernia acoza.	On the section about inguinal hernia.
Hernia ayguoza no es sino agregacio de humiditat en le ciphac blanc lo qual es dejos la codena dels genetius contenent le huou, e es nompnat ciphac.	Aguoza hernia is nothing but the addition of moisture in the white fibrous tissue which holds the testicles containing the humor, and it is named fibrous tissue.
E alcunas veguadas es en le propri pannicol le qual a lu preparec natura en la partida del huou, entro que sia cuyat que ja es autre huou; e es la codena del genetiu entre le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, e no es aquo sino tart.	Sometimes it occurs in the own scrotal tissue which nature prepares for the part of the humor before it is cooked and becomes another humor; and it is the cord of the testicle between the white fibrous tissue, which we have said, and it is not this but a fold.
E la generacio de aquest hernia es per debelitat la qual accideys als genetius, per que ad aquels es efundunda aquesta materia, e alcunas vetz accideys per percuscio fayta sobre les genetius.	The generation of this hernia occurs due to weakness, which happens to the testicles, causing this material to infiltrate them. Sometimes it occurs due to a blow struck on the testicles.
E aquesta humiditat es havent motas colors, quar la color de lu o es declinant a citrina o a sanguinent, o rog, o es negra feculenta, o es ayguosa blanqua, e es aquo que es mays.	And this moisture having colored streaks, may be yellowish or reddish or brown, or black and grainy, or white watery, and it is this that is most significant.
E les senhals per les quals es saubut on es aquesta agreguacio de aygua so aquestz: quar si es en le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, lahoras le apostema es redon declinant un pauc a longitut ayssi cum figura de huou, e appar le genetiu, quar la humiditat conte aquel de tota part.	And the signs by which one knows where this accumulation of water is: if it is in the white cell which we have said, then the abscess is round, slightly declining in length as a figure of an owl, and the genet appears, for the humidity contained from all parts.
E si la humiditat es en le propri pannicol, lahoras le apostema es redon am partida del huou e per aysso hom estima que es autre huou.	And if the humidity is in the own panniculus, then the abscess is round departing from the owl and for this reason one estimates that it is another owl.
E si la humiditat es entre la codena dels genetius e·l ciphac blanc, lahoras catz dejos le centiment.	And if the humidity is between the geniculum and the white cell, then cut away the centiment.
E cum tu vols la cognicio de la color de la humiditat, lahoras tu esproa la color de la humiditat en le apostema am entromes cayrat del qual la forma es precedida; e segon aquo que es eyssit en le vestigi del entromes, jutga de aquo que es dedintz lu.	And to know the color of the humidity, you expel the color of the humidity in the abscess through a small incision from which the form is preceded; and according to what happens in the trace of the incision, judge what is inside it.
Donc quan nos vinem a la curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que comandem al malaute que sia fleubotomat si aquo es a tu possibla, e vezes le cos de lu ple.	Then when we come to the cure of it, you must command the patient to bleed if this is within your capability, and often raise his body.
E aprop sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos sobre alcuna causa un pauc auta, e pausa dejos lu motz draps.	And then he is supine on his back on some slight support, and place him down with the other cloths.
E aprop setz tu sobre la part sinistra de lu, e comanda al ministra que segua a la dextra de lu, le qual extenda la sua vergua a hun de dos latz a la codena dels genetius e a la partida del mirac del ventre.	And then set yourself on the left part of him, and command the minister to stand on the right side of him, who extends his curtain from one side to the other, covering the groin and the flank of the abdomen.
E aprop pren spatum lat e scindeys la codena dels genetius del mieg loc per la longitut entro prop le pentenilh.	And then take a spatula and split the groin longitudinally near the pubis.
E sia fayta la seccio segon rectetut engualment distant de la linha que deveseys la pel dels genetius, entro que pervengua al ciphac blanc comprehendent.	And the section should be made according to the correct method, at equal distance from the line where you shall divide the skin of the groin, until it reaches the white fatty tissue.
E excorja aquel, e observa, e guarda te per aysso que tu no inscidas aquel; e la tua excoriacio am la qual aquel excorjas per partida jassia que sia suspenduda am le huou mays e subtilment escruta am la excoriacio segon la quantitat a tu possibla.	And excise that, and observe it carefully, making sure not to go deeper; and your incision should be such that it can be suspended from the upper and finer forceps, and you should examine the incision thoroughly according to its quantity as much as possible.
E aprop perfora le ciphac ple de aygua am perforacio ampla, e extratz tota l’aygua.	And then puncture the fatty tissue filled with water through a large hole, and extract all the water.
E aprop separa entre doas labias de la seccio am uncis, e exten le ciphac a las partidas desus; e no toques la codena les genetius comprehendent, e inscideys le ciphac en aquela manieyra que es a tu possible.	And then separate between the two lips of the section with forceps, and extend the incision upwards; and do not touch the cord at the base of the genitals, and incise the incision in that manner as is possible for you.
E inscideys aquel am la sua totalitat o en pessas, e majorment le sieu latz subtil, quar si tu no perscrutas exquisidament la inscizio de lu, no es fayta segurtat que la aygua no retorne.	And incise that completely or in parts, especially its thin layer, for if you do not thoroughly examine the incision, there is no guarantee that the water will not return.
Mays si le huou procezeys de aquela defora de la sua codena en la ora de la tua operacio, lahoras quan tu auras complida la seccio del ciphac, retorna dedintz aquel, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la codena dels genetius am sutura, e aprop cura aquel ayssi cum las autras plagua, entro que sia sanat.	Mais if you proceed with the procedure from outside the base of the cord during your operation, when you have completed the incision of the forceps, return inside that, and carefully adjust the two lips of the base of the genitals with sutures, and then treat that as you would other wounds until it heals.
E si atrobas le huou corromput per autra malautia, lahoras cove que tu lies les vayssels les quals so sore le suspensori, e extrat le huou, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit.	And if you find the vein corrupted by another illness, then ligate the vessels which are over the spermatic cord, extract the vein, and then treat that as we have said.
Mays si l’aygua es agreguada en doas partidas esemps, lahoras sapias que doas son las ernias; donc inscideys aquela partida segon que has feyt en l’autra engualment; e si es a tu vist que sia una opera, lahoras tu la fay.	But if the water is present in two parts, then you know that there are two hernias; therefore incise that part as you have done with the other equally; and if it is evident to you that it is a larger operation, then you perform it.
E aprop tu abstergiys le sanc, e entramet en las seccios lana submersa en oli o en oli rozat; e pausa deforo autra lana la qual tu as submersa en vi e oli, e expandeys aquela sobre dos genetius e·l mirac del ventre; e pausa desobre draps doblatz e pulvils, e lia aquels desobre am liament le qual es segon aquesta forma:	And then you clean the blood, and insert strips of submerged wool in oil or rubbed oil into the sections; place another strip of wool which you have soaked in wine and oil over them, and spread that over two genetii and the miracle of the belly; place others over cloths folded and powders, and lay those over flour which is according to this form:
e aprop sian preses dos draps e sian humplitz de lana carmenada segon aquesta semblansa; e sian faytas las extremitatz am les quals es premut de coto o de lana humida, e sian agreguatz am strectura en le braguier de las braguas, e la una de las extremitatz prengua del cul entro al dos, e la segonda prengua a la partida del pantenilh, e dos extramitatz sobre dos coyssas dejos e dos extramitatz autras sobre dos angonars, e tota extrictura sia ajustada en le braguier de las braguas.	And then press two cloths and fill them with dyed wool according to this likeness; and make the ends which are pressed with cloth or wet wool, and attach them to the structure in the belt of the pants, and one end grasp from behind into the two, and the second grasp at the crotch part, and two ends leave on two thighs, and two other ends on two garters, and all the structure be adjusted in the belt of the pants.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta hernia es medicada artificialment am cauteri en loc de seccio am ferr; e es que tu prenguas cauteri cutellar subtil e que inscidas am aquel la codena dels ginitius, e es ignit segon que havem recomtat entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc contenent la aygua, e lahoras tu pren cauteri segon aquesta forma:	And sometimes this hernia is treated artificially with a cautery in place of sections with iron; you grasp a thin surgical cautery and incise there at the cord of the genitius, and ignite it as we have recommended until the white sheath containing the water is discovered, and then you take the cautery in this form:
e es asemblat a letra greca.	and it resembles Greek letters.
E aprop perfora am aquel ciphac, e es ignit entro que tota la humiditat sia fora-gitada.	And then puncture that abscess, and ignite within it to expel all the moisture.
E aprop exten le ciphac am uncis, e excorja am uncis, e excorja am cauteri subtil ignit; e inscideys aquel segon que es a tu possible entro que eradiques tot lu; e guarda te del huou que·l foc no·l toque.	And then incise the abscess with lancets, and excoriate it with lancets, and cauterize it with a thin ignited cautery; and incise that part according as it is possible so as to eradicate all of it; and guard well from the smoke that the fire not touch.
E sapias que aquesta operacio es pus salva e pus longinqua de flux de sanc, e milhor que operacio am seccio.	And know that this operation is safer and more distant from the risk of infection, better than an incision.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat apostema caut en la hora de seccio o en hora de cauteri, o flux de sanc, lahoras cove que tu cures qual contrarietat fa a tu per aquo, am curacio la qual conveneys a lu segon que es dit.	But if you find it contrary to perform an abscess on the hour of incision or the hour of cautery, or risk of infection, then cure as the contrary does for you in this, applying the treatment that is appropriate according to what is said.
Mays si le malaute es pauruc, e no spera la segonda operacio per la sua horribilitat, lahoras administra perforacio segon que yeu recomti aquo; e es quan es certificat deves tu, per aquo que havem dit de las significacios, que aquela hernia es ayguosa.	But if the patient is afraid and does not expect the second operation due to its horribleness, then administer puncture according to what I recommend; and it is when you are certified by what we have said about the meanings that that hernia is dangerous.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute sobre alcuna cezelha elevada, aprop perfora le apostema en la partida pus bassa de lu am spatum lat, e pausa la perforacio segon la longitut del cos.	When you must set the patient on a raised cushion, then perforate the abscess at the lower part of it with a lancet, and place the puncture according to the length of the body.
E sia la apercio ampla entro que corro tota l‘aygua.	And let the incision be wide enough to drain all the water.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc coto e lia aquel e layssa aquel, per so que corro le romanent de l’aygua.	And place your hand firmly over the area, pressing and releasing it, to allow the water to drain smoothly.
E aprop cura aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And apply something to speed the healing of the wound.
Mays si contrarietat es a la egrecio de l’aygua en aquela hora tu perforas aquela: e aquo no es fayt sino per aquo quar le pannicol blanc en le orrifici de la plagua fa contrarietat e prohibeys le eyssiment de l’aygua, lahoras cove que tu metas en la plagua pena o instrument am la qual es extrayta l’aygua dels ydropitz, la forma del qual es precedida; o ajusta en la opprecio de la plagua un petit.	But if contrary to the drainage of the water at that time you perforate there: and this is not done so that the white gauze in the orifices of the wound causes a contrary effect and prevents the efflux of water, then you should put into the wound a pen or instrument with which the water from the dropsy is extracted, the form of which is described beforehand; or adjust over the area of the wound a small.
E sapias que l’aygua retorna, e es agueguada aprop vi meses o enaviro aquels; e cum es agreguada, lahoras sia perforat segon aquela meteyssa manieyra, quar le malaute ayssi passara les sieus dias.	And know that the water returns, and is aggravated for about six months or until it disappears; and when it is aggravated, then perforate according to that method, so that the patient passes its days thus.
Capitol .lxiii.	Capitol LXIII.
De seccio sobre hernia carnosa e la curacio de lu.	On the section about flesh hernia and its treatment.
Sapias que en la seccio sobre aquesta hernia es temor perdusent a pernicia en las majors disposicios; per que a mi es vista la dimissio de lu e esser salvat per aquela milhor.	Know that in the section about this hernia, there is fear of harm to the major organs; for I have seen its removal and been saved by that which is better.
E yeu so rememorant la operacio en aquela e las specias dels apostemas.	And I am recalling the operation in that case and the types of abscesses.
Donc, dic que l‘apostemas natz en les cos dels quals les genetius so conponutz e es fayt aquo per motas causas: o per superfluitat aguda agra, la qual es efundida als genetius, o per percuscio.	Therefore, I say that abscesses arise in the tissues where the glands are composed, and this occurs for several causes: either due to acute toxic discharge, which is infused into the glands, or due to percussion.
E es la color de la apostema segon la color del cos, e no es atrobat en lu dolor, e es apostema greu.	And the color of the abscess depends on the color of the tissue, and is not accompanied by severe pain, indicating a serious abscess.
E fort leu es apostema lapificada, del qual la color es fosca, e no es centiment a lu.	And the abscess is firm and lumpy, of which the color is dark, and there is no tenderness in it.
E alcunas veguadas es fayt per nodacio de las arcerias, e per imflacio de aquelas ayssi quo ja es perceubut la rememoracio de lu, o per imflacio de venas.	And sometimes it is due to the concretion of arteries, and due to inflammation of those vessels, as the memory of which is already perceived, or due to inflammation of veins.
Mays aquo que es per imflacio de arcerias es conogut per la dispercio de la apostema quan compremas aquela am les tieus ditz; e no cove que aquel toques.	More than this, when caused by the inflammation of arteries, it is known as the dispersal of the abscess when you grasp that mass with your fingers; and do not squeeze it.
Mays aquel que es fayt per imflacio de vena no es dispergut de lu alcuna causa deves la compressio am les ditz.	More than this, when caused by the inflammation of veins, it is not dispersed for any cause; you should avoid compressing it with your fingers.
E ja es possible que sobre aquesta specia sia fayta seccio e sobre les autres carns; e es que tu inscida la codena dels genetius, e aprop esten le huou a las partidas desus, e extratz aquel del ciphac blanc, e deliura le suspensori dels vaysels, e ligua les, e inscideys le suspensori pus que tu deliuras aquel de tota partida de las partidas del huou.	And it is possible that a section may be made on this species and on the other tissues; for you will incise the channel of the glands, and then extend the hook above, and extract that from the white cyst, and deliver the suspensory ligament of the vessels, and ligate them. Then incise the suspensory ligament after you have delivered that from all parts of the hook.
Donc si l’huou ja es am aquelas carnadas consolida, lahoras cove que tu extraguas le huou e inscidas aquel.	Therefore, if the hook has already grasped those tissues firmly, then you should extract the hook and incise that area.
E si es adherencia entro alcuna causa del ciphac, o entre aquo que es entre les bayssels, lahoras cove que tu deliures tota aquela adherencia e inscidas aquela per inscizio redonda.	And if there is an adherence due to any cause of the cyst, or between what is below the vessels, then you should deliver all that adherence and incise it through a round incision.
Mays si es nativitat de carn en le loc de la adherencia la qual es detras, lahoras cove que tu inscidas tot aquo que es de lu, e extraguas le huou ayssi cum havem dit.	If the flesh is native to the place of adhesion which is behind, then scrape thoroughly everything that belongs to it, and extract the humor as we have said.
Donc cum es complida la tua operacio, lahoras omple la plagua de lana imfuza en oli rozat e vi; e aprop cura aquela am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Then since your operation is completed, fill the wound with wool soaked in rubbed oil and wine; and then cover it with another dressing until it heals.
Capitol .lxiv.	Chapter LXIV.
De la curacio de hernia que es de vitz.	On the cure of hernias that are external.
Vit es apostema envolut per alcuna envolucio semblant a broto am mollificacio dels testiculs, e es fayt dificil movement exercitiu e deambulacio sobre le malaute.	It is an external hernia enveloped by some envelope resembling a clot, and it makes physical exercise, movement, and walking difficult.
E en la curacio de aquesta malautia es per temor per aquo del qual es precedida rememoracio.	And in the cure of this illness, there is a fear due to what precedes it and causes remembrance.
Empero cove que diguam opperacio en aquela segon que fero les primiers.	However, proceed with the operation as soon as you perform the first steps.
E dic que cove que fassas sezer le malaute sobre una cezelha elevada; e aprop enpelleys le suspensori dels testiculs a las partidas dejos; e aprop te la codena dels genetius am les tieus ditz am les baysels que so probdas a la vergua; e tengua aquels autre ministre que tu, e extenda aquels am extencio vehement.	And I say that you should cut out the hernia on an elevated cloth; and then attach the scrotal suspender to the parts left; and fasten the inguinal codetta to the stipes that are tried by the virga; and have another minister hold those, and extend them forcefully.
E aprop inscideys am spatum lat agut per seccio traversa en le dreyt dels vaysels entro que sian les vayssels descubertz.	And then incise through the skin with a sharp blade along the middle between the vessels where the vessels are exposed.
E aprop excorja de tota partida ayssi quo a tu havem dit en extraccio de arceria las quals so en las templas.	And then excise from all parts as we have said in the extraction of arteries which are in the temples.
E aprop fica en aquelas un’agulha en la qual sia fiel doble, e lia aquel en le primier del locs en les quals accideys vit, e lia aquel autra veguada en le derier de lor.	And then place a needle in which there is a double thread, and tie that at the beginning of the places where you cut, and tie the other half at the end of them.
E aprop inscideys aquels en le mieg loc per seccio dreyta segon la longuesa del cos, e extratz aquo que es agreguat de las humiditatz fetulentas e corruptas.	And then incise those in the middle location with a straight cut according to the length of the body, and extract what is added by the flowing moist humors that are corrupted.
E aprop cura la plagua am curacio de las autras plaguas en las quals vols sania esser engendrada per so que caian les vaysels les quals noyreysso un de dos genetius, quar no es mal per aquo.	And then cure the wound by the healing of other wounds in which you want health to be generated so that the vessels which do not convey either of two spirits are unaffected, for this is not harmful.
Mays si accideys vit a totz les bayssels, lahoras cove que·ls testicols sian extragutz o que les testicols per aquo se cequo am les vayssels, per que sia privat de tot nutriment per la inscizio dels vayssels, e que sian estaborits, o que cequo per so que no sia juvament am aquels.	But if you cut all the vessels, then ensure that the testicles are extracted or that the testicles cease due to the cutting of the vessels, so that it is deprived of all nutrition due to the incision of the vessels, and that they be established, or that this happens because it lacks vitality.
Capitol .lxv.	Capitol lxv.
De la cura de hernia entestinal.	Of the cure for intestinal hernia.
Le adveniment de aquesta hernia es per seccio que endeve en le ciphac extendut sobre le ventre de part dels angunars del mirac del ventre, per que deysendo les budels de aquela ruptura ad alcu dels budels.	The occurrence of this hernia is due to a secession that ends in the cipha (abdominal wall) extending over the abdomen from the inguinal region. Because of this, some of the intestines from that rupture end up protruding.
E aquesta ruptura es o del ciphac o de excencio de lu, e accideysso aquestas doas specias per motas causas: o percussio, o per sautz, o per clamor, o per elevacio de alcuna causa greu, o per semblantz.	And this rupture is either of the cipha (abdominal wall) or of its excision. These two species occur due to various causes: by a blow, by a fall, by shouting, by lifting some heavy cause, or by similar actions.
E·l senhal de aquo, quan es per extencio del ciphac, es que accideys pauc a pauc en lonc temps, e no accideys soptament, e es apostema engual entro ves le preon per so quar le ciphac comprem le budel.	And the sign of this, when it is due to extension of the cipha (abdominal wall), is that it occurs gradually over a long period of time and does not happen suddenly. It is an abscess that gradually forms within the preon (inguinal region) because the cipha compresses the intestine.
E le senhal de lu es quan es per seccio del ciphac, quar al comensament fa accidir dolor vehement sobtament; e es apostema divers aparent dejos la codena propdana aparent, e aquo es per eyssiment del budel, e·l cos de lu a las partidas deforo del ciphac.	And the sign of this is when it is due to a section of the cipha (abdominal wall), as at the beginning it causes sudden and intense pain; it is an abscess that appears different from the nearby apparent one, which is due to the compression of the intestine, and the body's reactions in the parts outside the cipha.
E alcunas veguadas es fora-getat am le budel la tela, e es apelada aquesta hernia entestinal zirbal.	And sometimes the intestine protrudes through the skin, and this hernia is called intestinal bubal.
E alcunas veguadas es fayta am ventositat, e alcunas veguadas corr en le budel fenda, e aqui es retenguda, e es am aquo gran pernitia3 del malaute, e alcunas veguadas fa endevenir dolor malvada e majorment quan es premut.	And sometimes it is caused by distension, and sometimes a hole forms in the intestine, where it gets stuck, and this greatly inconveniences the patient, and sometimes it causes severe pain, especially when pressed.
E en la curacio de las especias de aquesta malautia am ferr es temor, per que cove que sia esquivat le cazament en aquela.	And in the treatment of the symptoms of this illness there is fear, because it is believed that hunting should be avoided there.
E la manieyra de la operacio de aquela es que comandes al malaute que redugua le budel am la sua ma a las partidas dedintz de la sua conquavitat si obezeys al sieu retornament, e aprop sia envessat sobre le sieu col entre las tuas mas, e eleva las cambas de lu.	And the manner of the operation is that you command the patient to push the intestine back into its cavity with his hand at the internal parts of his abdomen if it obeys on its return, and then he should be suspended over his chest between your arms, and lift the patient's legs.
E aprop sten la codena la qual siec la codena dels testicols a las partidas desus, e inscideys la codena dels testicols tota per le lonc; e aprop fiqua en doas labias de la seccio uncis segon que indigeysses a hubrir la seccio am aquels.	And then stretch the cord which supports the cord of the testicles upwards, and incise the cord of the testicles entirely along its length; then place it in two folds of the incised section according to what you need to split the section with those.
E si’ la seccio segon la quantitat que a tu sia possible que de aquela le huou sia foro-getat.	And if the section according to the quantity that it is possible for you to have been perforated.
E aprop excorja aquela ciphaqueth les quals so dejos la codena dels testicols, entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc dur de quascuna partida.	And then excise that scab which they leave at the root of the testicles, after which the white hard scab from each part is revealed.
Lahoras tu entromet le tieu dit en aquo que siec le testicol, en aquo que es entre ciphac blanc, le qual es dejos la codena del huou, e entre le ciphac segon, e absolve am aquel’adherencia que es en la partida detras del huou.	And when you insert your finger into what is being excised from the testicle, in what is between the white scab, which they leave at the root of the wound, and between the second scab, you release all the adhesion that is behind the part.
E aprop mau am la ma la codena dels testicols a las partidas deforo, e am aysso exten le ciphac blanc en sus am la ma sinestra, e eleva le huou am le ciphac a la partida de la seccio; e comanda al ministre que extenda le huou ensus e tu dissolveys la adherencia que es detras am solucio complida.	And then place the hand at the root of the testicles on the parts behind, and by this extend the white scab with your left hand, and lift the wound above the scab to the part of the section; and command the minister to extend the wound upwards while you dissolve the adhesion that is behind with a solution.
E cerqua am les tieus ditz que lay no sia alcuna causa del budel envelopat en le ciphac blanc dur.	And near your fingers, say that there is no cause for the intestine being enveloped in the white hard scab.
Mays si tu atrobas de lu alcuna causa, lahoras tu enpelleys aquel al ventre dejos.	But if you find any cause, then you remove that to the abdomen and leave it there.
E aprop tu pren una agulha en la qual sia fiel gros fayt de x fiels, e entromet aquel deves le derier del ciphac, le qual es jos la codena dels testicols, la qual siec seccio; e aprop inscideys las extremitatz las quals emineysso del fiel entro que sian quatre fiels, e aprop compausa alcus de lor sobre alcuna figura en manieyra de crotz; e lia am aquel le ciphac del qual havem dit que es dejos la codena dels testicols am fort liament de dos partz.	And then you take a needle made of thick wire, fashioned from seven wires, and insert it into the root of the cippus, which is at the base of the testicles, this being the section; and then incise the extremities that emerge within which are four wires, and place some of them on a certain figure in the manner of a cross; and bind those to the cippus from which we spoke, saying it is at the base of the testicles with strong ligature of two parts.
E aprop envolveys las extremitatz dels fiels e lia aquelas am liament vehement entro que alcu dels vayssels que noyrrisso aquels no puscan trametre alcuna causa per so que de aqui no accida apostema caut.	And then wrap the extremities of the wires and bind those with a strong ligature so that none of the vessels that nourish them can transmit any cause, thereby preventing an apستema from occurring.
E pausa autra veguada liament segon foro le primier liament, lonh de lu mens tres ditz; e aprop aquestz dos liaments layssa del ciphac le qual es dejos la codena dels testicols la quantitat de la grandeza del dit, e inscideys tot le romanent segon redondeza, e osta de lu le huou.	And place another ligature on the first one after about three finger breadths; and with these two ligatures, leave from the cippus, which is at the base of the testicles, the amount of a large finger, and incise the remainder in a round manner, and let it be.
E aprop inscideys en la partida dejos de la codena dels testicols per seccio de la qual corra sanc e sania ayssi cum havem recomtat en aquo que havem dit.	And then incise in the part left of the cord of the testicles along the section where blood and health flow as we have recommended in what we have said.
E aprop aministra lana submersa en oli, e pausa en la plagua; e aministra le liament le qual havem recomtat (e alcunas veguadas le ciphac blanc es cauterizat, le qual havem dit aprop la inscizio de lu temen de flux de sanc, quar motas veguadas accideys aquels) e leyssa le liament entro que per si caia.	And then apply wool submerged in oil, and place it on the wound; apply the plaster which we have recommended (and after several applications, the white cloth is cauterized, which we have mentioned near the incision of this where there is a flow of blood, for several days occur). Leave the plaster until it falls by itself.
Mays si le cazement de lu es tardat, lahoras de aygua cauda sia embrocat, e pausa sobre aquel entro que caia segon que havem dit.	But if the dressing is delayed, then pour boiled water over it, and place it on the area until it falls as we have said.
E aprop cura la plagua am l’autra curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And then treat the wound with another method for treating wounds until it is healed.
Capitol .lxvi.	Capitol. lxvi.
De hernia ventosa.	On Hernia Ventosa.
En aquesta hernia no e vist alcu que sia estat ardit sus la curacio de lu am ferr.	In this hernia, nothing has been seen that has been burned during the treatment of it.
E les primiers diyssero que es fayta ayssi cum havem recomtat en la hernia que es am vi; la qual es que tu lies les vayssels aprop la seccio sobre aquela am fecilitat de lu; e aprop secca en le mieg loc en enviro le apostema am aquo que obro aquel, entro que caian les vayssels.	And the first will say that it is done this way as we have recounted in the hernia case; which is that you tie the vessels near the section at that facilitation of it; and dry out in the middle location around the apostema with what I operate there, before the vessels fall.
E cura la plagua segon que havem dit entro que sia sanada.	And cure the plague as we have said until it is healed.
Capitol .lxvii.	Capitol LXVII.
De la disropcio que es fayta en les anguonars.	Of the disorder that occurs in the ankles.
Alcunas veguadas endeve ruptura en les angonars ayssi cum havem dit, e emineys le loc.	In some cases, when there is a rupture in the ankles as we have said, apply a poultice to the area.
E no deyssen als genetius alcuna causa dels budels al genetius; e si deyssen, aquo es pauc; e retorna s’en en totas horas.	And the geniuses do not attribute any cause of the intestines to the geniuses; and if they do, it is rare; and return them to their place at all times.
Mays si es prolonguat le temps am aquo, es ajustada fissura en le ciphac entro que deysenda le budel en le ciphac; e accideys aquo per la extencio del ciphac le qual es en le angonars ayssi cum havem dit, la qual causa es quar le ciphac es estendut, e aprop es mollificat e·l loc es apostemat e emineys.	But if the time at which this occurs is prolonged, there is an adjusted fissure in the cavity into which one places the intestine; and this happens due to the extension of the cavity, which is in the ankles as we have said. The cause is that the cavity is stretched, and then softened, and the area becomes an apostema and poultices are applied.
E la cura de lu es am cauteri ayssi quo es precedida la narracio de lu.	And the treatment of it is with a cautery as it is preceded by the narration of it.
E alcunas veguadas es curada am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: e es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos entre las tuas mas, e aprop secca le loc de la ruptura dels apostemas emineys am seccio per la latitut segon la quantitat de tres ditz.	Sometimes it is cured with iron according to this manner: and the patient lies on his side between your hands, and then the place of the rupture of the abscesses dries up by exsanguination according to the breadth as much as three fingers.
E aprop strenh le ciphac blanc que es jos la codena entro que sia descubert.	And then strengthen the white cloth that is under the cuff when it is uncovered.
E aprop pren le ray e pausa aquel sobre le loc eminent del ciphac, e prem aquel al preon del ventre.	And then take the wick and place it over the prominent part of the cuff, and press it against the root of the belly.
E aprop cus le dos locs eminentz sobre la extremitat del ray del ciphac, e ajusta am la sutura un de aquels am l’autre.	And then sew the two prominent parts over the end of the wick of the cuff, and adjust one to the other with the stitching.
E aprop extratz la extremitat del ray, e no inscidas del ciphac de tot, ni no extenda le huou, ni autra causa ayssi cum yeu te fi saber en la curacio de hernia entestinal.	And then extract the end of the wick, and do not go outside the cuff entirely, nor extend the cloth, nor any other cause as I have faith in the treatment of intestinal hernia.
E aprop cura aquela am la curacio de las plaguas, e cum inscideyses les fiels, mundifica aquela e restaura la plagua entro que sia consolidada; quar le ciphac es contrayt e no es ajustada la eminencia de ruptura.	And then cure that in the treatment of ulcers, and as you incise the flaps, clean it and restore the ulcer before it is consolidated; for the cuff contracts and does not adjust the prominence of the rupture.
E cauteri es milhor en aquest loc, quar es pus propda a salut.	And cautery is better in this place, for it is more closely related to health.
Capitol .lxviii.	Capitol. lxviii.
De mollificacio de la codena dels testiculs.	Of the mollification of the skin of the testicles.
Motas veguadas la codena dels testiculs en alcus homes es mollificada per aysso quar las carns que so entre aquela son mollificadas, e es fedat le reguardament de lu.	When the skin of the testicles is spotted in some men, it becomes softened because the flesh that lies between them is softened, and attention is paid to this.
Adonc necessari es ad aquel que es preguat en la curacio de lu que fassa jazer le malaute segon le sieu dos, e enscida tota la codena la qual es mollificada sobre la codena natural; e aprop que ajuste doas labias am la sutura.	Then it is necessary for the one who is responsible for the treatment to ensure that the patient remains in a position conducive to healing according to their condition, and entirely over the area that has become softened, placing it above the natural skin; and then he should adjust two flaps at the suturing site.
E si vols, cus en le comensament la superfluitat de la codena mollificada am tres cozeduras o quatre e am ferma sutura.	And if you wish, begin the closure of the softened excess skin with three or four stitches and a firm suture.
E aprop inscideys entre las suturas; e aprop cura per curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat e caian les fiels.	And then incise between the sutures; and afterwards, treat for the recovery of other wounds until they are healed and the stitches fall out.
Capitol .lxix.	Chapter LXIX.
De castracio.	Of castration.
Sapias que castratio en nostre ley es excomengada, mays per causa es legut a mi que·m remembre de lu en aquest libre; e no es necessaria la rememoracio de lu sino per doas manieyras, de las quals es la una per so que aquo sia en la sciensa del metge quan es enterroguat de aquela, que sapia la curacio de lu al qual accideys; e l’autra manieyra es que nos motas vetz havem necessitat de castracio de autras bestias per les juvamentz nostres per aquelas, ayssi cum de motos, e de bocs, e de porcs, e de semblantz a las bestias.	Know that castration in our law is excommunicated, but for cause I am told to remember it in this free treatise; and the recollection of it is necessary for two ways, of which one is so that when asked about it by a physician, he knows the cure for him upon whom it happens; and the other way is that we may have need of castration for our young animals for those like mules, and bulls, and pigs, and similar to animals.
E donc dic que castracio es fayta en dos manieyras: o per atrissio, o per fissura a seccio.	And thus it is said that castration can be performed in two ways: either by atrissio or by fissure by section.
Mays en aquela que es fayta per atrissio, la via de la opera es que nos fassam cezer la bestia en aygua cauda entro que·ls genetius de lu sian mollificatz e sian linhitz e que pendan.	But in that which is performed by atrissio, the way of the operation is that we make the beast stand in cold water until the genitals of it become softened and relaxed.
E aprop pren aquels am la tua ma entro que sian resols e no apparescan dejos le tocament.	And then take those with your hand until they become relaxed and no marks appear upon the touch.
Mays en castracio fayta per fissura e seccio, cove que tu tenguas la bestia e premas la codena dels testicols de lu am la ma senestra.	In castration caused by rupture and drying, make sure you have the animal and press the cord of the testicles with your left hand.
E aprop lia le suspensori, e inscideys sobre quascun huou am una seccio entro que dos huous proceseysso.	Then lift the suspensory ligament, and incise over each groove between two processes.
E aprop inscideys aquels pus que auras quascu excorjat.	Then incise those pus that have exuded in each case.
E no leysses sobre aquels del ciphac alcuna causa, sino le ciphac subtil le qual es sobre les vazes.	And do not incise any of the veins in the ciphac, but incise only the thin vein which is over the vessels.
E aquesta manieyra de castracio es milhor la qual es fayta per atrissio, quar atrissio fort leu layssa alcuna causa dels testicols per que la bestia desira coyt.	And this method of castration is better which is done by traction, for traction firmly leaves no cause of the testicles so that the animal desires copulation.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	Then cure the wound while it is healing.
Capitol .lxx.	Capitol. lxx.
De la cura de hermafrodozia.	Of the cure for hermaphroditism.
Hermafrodozia en les homes es segon dos manieyras: la una es quar o appar en aquo que siec l’espazi en la codena de testiculs, en aquel que es entre dos testiculs figura quar cunh de femna en la qual so pels.	Hermaphroditism in males occurs according to two methods: one where there is a gap in the cord of the testicles, in which it appears between the two testicles and partly female in nature, with its skin.
E alcunas veguadas de aquel corr urina le qual es en la codena dels testiculs.	And sometimes a flow of urine comes from there which is in the channel of the testicles.
Mays en las femnas es una specia: e es que·l conh de la femna sobre le pentenilh es ayssi cum dos testiculs de home un pauc de tot yminiheys a la partida deforo ayssi cum le perpucii de home e dos testicols.	In women, it is special: and the woman's mons pubis has two folds like testicles, a little softer to the touch like a swelling in the groin similar to those of a man with his testicles.
E la curacio es de tres specias: de dos dels homes e de una specia de las femnas.	And the cure is of three kinds: two for men and one for women.
E es que cove que tu inscidas aquelas carns ajustadas entro que efuga la emprecio de aquela, e aprop que cures aquelas am curacio de las autras plaguas.	And you should probe where the flesh is tight so as to relieve the pain there, and then apply the cure for other wounds.
E en la segonda specia dels homes de la qual yeys urina la qual es en la codena dels testiculs, no es curacio ni opperacio en lu.	And in the second kind for men from which urine comes from the channel of the testicles, neither cure nor operation is needed.
Capitol .xxi.	Capitol.xxI.
De lentinge e de carn eminent per causas de las femnas.	On the labia and flesh protruding due to causes in women.
Lentige fort leu es ajustada sobre causas naturals entro que es etressat e es fayt leg le reguardament; e alcunas veguadas es magnificada en alcunas femnas en tant entro que es spandit ayssi cum en les homes e perve entro al coito.	Labia firmly attached is close to natural causes where it is strained and appears legible upon examination; sometimes in some women it is magnified so much that it stretches like in men, and may protrude during intercourse.
Adonc cove que tu tenguas la superfluitat de lentinge am la tua ma o am unci e inscidas.	Then you should have the superfluous mucus of the throat in your hand or spoon and ingest it.
E no ultimes en inscizio, majorment en le preon de la razit, per so que no endevengua flux de sanc.	And do not finish with ingestion, especially in the region of the rectum, so that no flux of sperm occurs.
E aprop cura aquela am curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanada.	And then care for those wounds until they are healed.
Mays carn nascuda es carn que nays en le horrifici de la mayre entro que umple aquel, e fort leu es eyssit a las partidas deforo segon semblansa de coa (e per aquo alscus primiers appelero aquo “malautia caudada”); donc cove que nos inscidam ayssi cum inscidem lentinge, e curem aquela entro que sia sanada.	More concealed flesh is flesh that arises in the horror of the uterus until it fills that space, and a hard lump is situated outside according to the likeness of a clot (and for this some first called it "caudate illness"); therefore, you should cut it thus as we cut mucus, and care for it until it is healed.
Capitol .lxxii.	Capitol.lix.
De curacio de alratica.	On the care of alratica.
Alratica es que le conh de la femna no sia perforat, o sia le trauc petit.	Alratica is when the hymen of the woman is not perforated, or is slightly torn.
E es o natural o accidental.	And it can be natural or accidental.
Accidental es per malautia la qual ha precedit, e aquela es fayta o per carn nada ajustada o per ciphac subtil o espes.	Accidental pain arises from an illness that has preceded, and this is caused either by unclothed skin or by a thin or thick cloak.
E es fayt o en le preon de la mayre, o en les costatz de lu, o en le pus sobira de lu, o en le pus bas de lu, e prohibeys de cuoyt e de enprenguacio e de enfantament, e fort leu prohibeys las mestruas.	It is felt in the groin of the thigh, or in the sides of it, or in the upper part of it, or in the lower part of it, and you prohibit intercourse and pregnancy, and strongly you prohibit menstruation.
E la cognicio de aquela es fayta per reguardament de la metrona, si la oppilacio es apparent, propdana; mays si no es apparent, lahoras tu cerqua aquela am les tieus ditz o am le ray.	The knowledge of this is made by looking at the midwife, if the obstruction is obvious, probe gently; but if it is not obvious, then you search for that among the thighs or on the abdomen.
Mays si oppilacio es per ciphac subtil, e es propda a las doas labias, lahoras tu coyta e disromp aquela.	But if the obstruction is due to a thin object, and is close to the two lips, then you open and separate that.
E es que pauses sobre las doas labias pulvils, e aprop pausa les tieus ditz indicz de amdoas las mas encemps.	And you place powders on the two lips, and then place your fingers indicating both sides near them.
E la femna sia sobre le sieu dos, las sieuas coyssas extendudas, e aprop exten las doas labias am forsa entro que aquel ciphac subtil sia romput e la oppilacio sia uberta.	And the woman is on her back, her thighs extended, and then spread the two lips with force until that thin object is broken and the obstruction is opened.
E aprop pren lana e enbeu le4 en oli e pausa aquela sobre·l loc, e jagua am home le dia per so que·l loc inscis no sia consolidat.	And then take wool and soak it in oil, place it over the area, and keep someone there to prevent the incised area from healing too quickly.
Mays si le ciphac es gros e espes, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel am spatum lat o am fuelha de mirta.	If the swelling is large and thick, then incise that area with a lancet or a leaf of mint.
Mays si la oppilacio es per carnada, lahoras suspen aquela am unci, e inscideys aquela.	If the swelling is due to flesh, then suspend that area with a pin, and incise that area.
E sian am tu las medicinas que fan cessar flux de sanc ses mordicacio, ayssi cum ahacatia, e sanc de drago, e enses, ajustat am album de huou.	And use those medicines that stop the flow of venom from a bite, such as garlic, dragon's blood, and haws, mixed with honey.
E aprop aministra una canulha de plom ampla per so que la plagua no sia consolidada leugierament.	And then administer a broad lead tube to prevent the ulcer from healing too lightly.
E tengua aquela per alcus jorns e aministra calgua de li sec.	And keep it for a few days and administer boiled water.
E aprop sia curada am l’autra curacio de consolidacio entro que sia sanada.	And then use the other healing method for consolidation once it is healed.
E alcunas vetz accideys en la mayre nativitat de autres carns, e lahoras cove que inscidas segon aquesta manieyra.	And sometimes accidents occur in the natural abundance of other tissues, then you must incise according to this method.
Mays si aysso es per apostema crancos, a l’apostema crancos le qual es en la mayre no sia fayta contrarietat am ferr en deguna manieyra.	If this is due to an abscessed boil, in the major abscess do not create any counter-irritation by applying a iron in any manner.
Capitol .lxxiii.	Chapter LXXIII.
De la cura de emorroydas e de tayl e de botor roja que accideysso en le conh de las femnas.	For the treatment of hemorrhoids and prolapse and of red boil that occurs in the vagina of women.
Emorroydas so apprecio dels orificis de motas venas entro que de aquelas corro mot sanc continuadament; e cum so antiquadas emorroydas e son fayts theyls.	Hemorrhoids are appreciated as the result of small veins situated between which constantly flow dark blood; and as for old hemorrhoids, they form knots.
E ja yeu he dit en la divisio las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e diyre ayssi aquelas que recebo curacio e aquelas que no recebo curacio.	And I have already said in the division the species of those and the signs of those, and to say likewise which receive treatment and which do not receive treatment.
Donc dic que emorroydas e theyls quan so en le preon de la mayre e no apparo al sentiment, lahoras en aquelas no sia fayta curacio am ferr.	Therefore, say that hemorrhoids and knots when in the prolapse of the rectum and do not appear in the sensation, then in those do not make any treatment with a iron.
Mays aquelas las quals so en le orrifici de la mayre sobre las quals catz sentiment, so aquelas que so curadas.	But those that are in the rectal orifice and on which there is sensation, these are the ones that are treated.
E cove que tu metas la femna en mayso frega e aprop exten atheyl am les forfexs, o am drap aspre, e inscideys aquelas am las razitz.	And ensure that you insert the female part in warm water and then extend the thighs with the scissors or a rough cloth, and incise those areas with razors.
E aprop pulveriza sobre aquelas deves le fluxs del sanc de una de las polveras insciscivas ses mordicacio, ayssi cum acassia e semblant ad aquels.	And then sprinkle over those areas the flux of the blood from one of the incisive powders seven times with bite marks, thus causing a similar effect to those.
E aprop enpellesca les sieus pes per una hora, e aprop pausa aquela en aygua freja.	And then wrap his feet for an hour, and then immerse that in cold water.
E si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras fay aquela sezer en decoccio de sumat e de scorsas de milgranas e de gualas e de semblantz.	And if the bleeding persists, then apply that salve in a decoction of sumac and of slices of garlic and of walnuts and of similar substances.
E aprop pren farina de ordi e comfiys aquela am miel e vi agre e fay emplastre am aquo sobre le dos de lu.	And then take flour of oats and mix it with honey and wine, and make an ointment with this over his back.
E si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, fay adherir am dos ventozas, e a las mamilhas ses escarificatio.	And if the bleeding is stopped, that is good; otherwise, apply it to two flaxseeds, and make seven incisions on the breasts.
E aprop pren lana e submergeys aquela am suc de coliandre o am suc de arnagloza o am suc de guarravier am vi pentit e fay adherir al loc; e aprop cura le loc am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then take wool and immerse it in the juice of caraway or in the juice of angelica or in the juice of garlic in fermented wine, and apply it to the area; and cure the area with ointments until it is healed.
Mays athyl rog le qual es de aspre reguardament, cove que tu inscidas aquo que a tu appar de aquel segon que he dit en theyl engualment.	May this be of harsh regard, but that you insert here what appears to you as I have said equally in its place.
E cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And cure that which is within and let it be healthy.
Capitol .lxxiv.	Chapter 74.
De perforacio de eyssedura accident en la mayre.	On the perforation of the eye socket during surgery.
Motas specias de apostemas accideysso en la mayre, ayssi cum cranc e apostema lapident e ulceracios e adhubelat e erpetromens e fistulas emorroyas e raguarrias e thyl e autres apostemas.	Various special cases of apostematons occurring in the eye socket, such as cataracts, apostematons, ulcers, adenitis, ophthalmitis, fistulas, and thyloides, and other apostematons.
E yeu ja he dit aquestas malautias e las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e las curacios de lor en la divisio.	And I have already described these ailments and their special cases, as well as the signs of them, and their cures in the division.
E cove que yeu digua en aquest tractat de apostema caut le qual ve en la mayre quan es dels apostemas que collegeysso sania, e si vols saber en qual manieyra se fa la opperacio de lu am ferr.	And note that I will discuss in this treatise a boil that appears in the eye socket, which is one of the types of apostematons that cause illness. If you want to know how the operation for it is performed, I will tell you in what manner.
Adonc cove que tu consideres si la dolor de la apostema en le sieu comensament es aguda am percussio e flecma e febre, e vezes aquel enrogezir e si catz sobre aquel le sentiment, lahoras no·t coytes am perforacio de lu, e cura aquel am aquo que ajuda sobre la maturacio entro que cesse la acuitat dels accidentz.	Then consider if the pain of the abscess at its beginning is acute upon percussion and effusion and fever, and sometimes that reddening and if it changes over that place the sensation, noting coughs from within it, and cure that with what helps in promoting maturity until the acuity of the accidents ceases.
E lahoras cove que tu fassas cezer la femna sobre una cezelha que aia doas cezelhas; e recline sobre le sieu dos e ajusta les sieus pes a la partida pus dejos del ventre, e las sieus coyssas sian expandudas, e pausa les sieus brasses dejos les sieus denols, e lia quascus am liament ad aquo convenient.	Then you must place the woman on a bench that has two seats; recline her back and adjust her feet to the part behind her abdomen, and spread her thighs apart, and place her arms below her hips, and lay cushions of lint where appropriate.
E aprop la matrona segua del latz dreyt e aministre le instrument am le qual es ubert le orrifici de la mayre, la forma del qual vindra en aquelas causas que·s faran aprop.	Then the midwife should follow straight down and administer the instrument through the orifices of the vagina, the form of which will come in the cases that will be discussed later.
E cove quan vols ministrar aquest instrument que tu fiques am lo ray le preon de la mayre de la femna, e aquo que del instrument es intrat en la mayre no sia mays que·l preon de la mayre e leda le malaute.	When you want to administer this instrument, place it along the length of the cervix of the woman, and what part of the instrument enters the vagina should not exceed the cervix and relieve the pain.
Mays si l’estrument es major que·l preon de la mayre, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils sobre la textura del preon de la mayre per sso que sia prohibit l’intrament de tot instrument en le preon de la mayre.	If the instrument is larger than the opening of the mother, then cover it with powder on the surface of the mother's opening so that no instrument can enter the opening of the mother.
E cove que tu pauses le vertitge que corr en le strument del latz pus desus e que le ministre tengua le strument e revolva le vertitge entro que sia ubert le orrifici de la mayre.	And cover the vergitge that runs in the instrument of the latex above and have the minister hold the instrument and rotate the vergitge until the orifices of the mother are opened.
E cum appar la excitura, e es tocada am la ma e es leon e molh, lahoras cove que tu secces aquela deves le cap de lu am spatum lat.	And when the excitement appears, and it is touched with the hand and is like a lion and moist, then cover that part by sprinkling the head of the patient with spatum lat.
E cum la sania es evacuada, lahoras cove que tu pauses en la plagua una meca submersa en oli rozat o oli vert en le qual sia alcuna stiptisitat; e pausa la calca7 en la seccio en le preon de la mayre.	And when the saenia is evacuated, then cover it with a sponge submerged in sweet oil or olive oil in which there is some astringency; and place the cake in the section at the opening of the mother.
E pause deforo la mayre e sobre le pentenilh lana munda submersa en aygua en la qual sian bulidas malvas.	And puncture the mother and over the wad place a clean woolen cloth submerged in water in which mallows have been boiled.
E aprop sia curada aprop dos dias am enguent le qual conveneys ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And then it is cured in about two days by applying ointment which you apply to it while it heals.
E alcunas veguadas es lavada la mayre e la plagua enayssi que es cristerisat am aygua e mel, e aprop am aygua en la qual es bulhida razit de liri o de aristologia longua, e aprop retorna al enguent.	And sometimes the liver and wound are washed and are tried with chrismated water and honey, then with water in which is stirred up rue or of aristology longue, and then returned to salve.
E si la plagua es dedintz en la mayre ameguada, lahoras cove que tu sias prohibit de la curacio de lu am ferr, habantz cura aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio.	And if the wound is inside the liver softened, then cover that part with what we have said in the division.
Capitol .lxxv.	Chapter 75.
A ensenhar las matronas en qual manieyre les enbrios bius sian medicatz quan yeysso segon figura no-natural.	To teach midwives how to properly treat breech births when they occur according to an unnatural position.
Necessaria causa es que la matrona conogua en le comensament la figura del enfantament natural per senhals de lu, e es que quan tu vezas la femna expremar a las partidas dejos e desira odorar le ayre, e sobre aquo es enleujada per aquo que sobre ela es del part, e festina le eyssiment del enbrio, lahoras sapias que aquest part es segon figura natural, e es l’eyssiment de lu sobre le sieu cap, e la segondina am aquel o suspensa o pendent del ombelic.	Necessary cause is that the midwife recognize at the beginning the natural figure of childbirth by signs. When you see the female expel from the passages and desire to smell the air, and is moistened by what is over her during labor, then you know that this birth is according to a natural figure, and the expulsion is over her head, and the second one is either suspended or hanging from the navel.
Donc cum tu vezes aquels senhals, lahoras cove que·l ventre de lu sia compremut per so que l’embrio deysenda leugerament quar quan deyssen sobre le sieu cap, deysen a lu la segondina, e es mondada de aquelas superfluitatz am bona mondificacio.	When you see those signs, then compress his belly so that the fetus descends lightly; when it presses on its own head, let it bring the second one, and it is cleansed of those superfluities by good purification.
Mays aquel que es otra aquest part es no-natural e no-lausable, quar quan le enbrio es eyssit sobre sos pes e·l cos de lu es eyssit devant le cap de lu e·ls pes de lu, e la ma de lu una, o al pe de lu i, o es eyssit le cap de lu e la ma de lu, o al ventre de lu, e fort leu es convertit sobre le sieu col, e semblant de las figuras de lu no-lausablas.	That which is another to this part is unnatural and unacceptable, for when the fetus rests on its feet and the body of the mother is resting in front of the head of the fetus and its feet, or one of its hands, or at its side, or the head of the fetus and one of its hands, or over its belly, and firmly leans on its own back, resembling figures that are unacceptable.
Don necessaria causa es a la matrona que sia savia e subtil en totas aquelas causas, e que·s guarde de error e de decepcio.	For necessary cause the midwife must be wise and subtle in all those causes, and she must guard against error and deception.
E yeu so mostrant tota figura de aquelas, e qual engen es en aquelas per so que sia significat per aquo e sia stat sobre aquo.	And I will show all the figures of these, and what organ is in them so that it may be indicated by this and placed there.
Quan le feyt es eyssit sobre le sieu cap per egrecio natural, e aquel es vehement sobre la femna e es fayt a lu part dificil, e vezes la vertut de lu ja debelitada, lahoras fay aquela sezer , o que las femnas tenguan lu, e evapora le conh de lu am fenugrec coyt e am olis humitz.	When the fetus is resting on its head naturally, and it is vehement against the woman and is made difficult for her, sometimes weakening the virtue of the womb, then apply that, or what women have for this, and evaporate the conh of the woman with fenugreek and olive oil.
E aprop entrometa la metrona entre les sieus ditz espatum petit e fenda am aquel la segondina, o secce aquela am la sua ungla entro que corro aquo que es en ela de humiditat.	And then insert the probe between his so-called spine a little and open the second one, or dry out that one with its claw through which flows what is in it of moisture.
E preme le ventre de la femna entro que deyssenda le fet.	And press the woman's abdomen until the fetus descends.
Mays si no deyssen, lahoras cove que la femna sia cristirizada de mucellage de ptilli e mucellage de fenugrec am cizami.	But if it does not descend, then cause the woman to be rubbed with a paste of flax and fenugreek.
E aprop comanda a lu, aprop le cristeri, que sia compremuda e fay aquela stornudar am condisi; e te la boca de lu e·l nas de lu per huna hora, quar le fet sira foro-getat tantost.	And then command her, by smelling the mixture, that she coughs while in this condition; and keep her nose and mouth closed for about an hour until the fetus is discharged.
E si las doas mas del fet so foro-getadas al comensament, lahoras cove que tu redusiscas aquelas am fecilitat petit a petit.	And if both parts of the fetus are already discharged at the beginning, then cause her to relax gradually to facilitate this.
Mays si no obezeys al intrament, lahoras pausa la femna sobre una cezelha e leva les pes de lu sus, e aprop concuceys la cezelha sobre la terra; e la femna sia tenguda que no caia deves la concussio.	But if she does not obey the instrument, then place the woman on a bench and lift her feet off it, and then hold the bench firmly to the ground; and make sure the woman does not fall due to the concussion.
E si las mas no son dedintz tornadas e morr le fet, lahoras inscideys aquelas e extratz le romament del fet o lia le cors a la ma de lu am drap e extratz aquel am equalitat, quar aquel sira foro-getat.	And if the hands are not turned inside and the wound is deep, then incise there and extract the fragment of the wound or hold the body with a cloth and extract it equally, for that will be thoroughly cleaned.
De eyssiment del embrio sobre les sieus pes.	From the embryo over its feet.
Quan le fet yeys sobre les sieus pes, lahoras cove que tu impelliscas aquels en sus, e aprop convertas le fet petit, e aprop que engualhes aquel, e aprop que prenguas un pe de lu e extendas aquels petit a petit.	When the wound yies over its feet, then push those parts inwards, and gradually make the wound smaller, and carefully take hold of one part and gradually expand those parts little by little.
Mays cum son eyssit entro a las coyssas, lahoras tu comanda a lu que se exprema, e fay aquela extornudar am condizi, quar sira foro-getat si Deus lo vol.	More when it yies between the thighs, then command him to express it, and do that externally in the proper condition, for that will be thoroughly cleaned if God wills.
E si no es foro-getat am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras tu retorna le fet petit a petit entro que pauses aquel segon figura natural, quar aquel sira lahoras foro-getat am leugier eyssiment.	And if it is not thoroughly cleaned as we have commanded, then return the wound little by little so that you pause it according to the natural figure, for that will be thoroughly cleaned with slight incision.
E si es prohibit am tot aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras pren de musellage de altea e de goma dissolvuda, e percuteys tot en le mortier per bona percussio, e aprop linieys am aquo le conh de la femna, el pus bas del ventre de lu.	And if it is prohibited by all that we have commanded, then take of alum and dissolved gum, and pound them together in the mortar for good pounding, and then apply to that the conch of the woman, below her lower abdomen.
E aprop fay aquela cezer en aygua tebeza, entro que consegua les ypocondias.	And then make that cut in clear water, once you reach the hypochondria.
E cum vezes que las partidas dejos de lu so lenificadas, lahoras fay a lu subfumiguacio de mirta e sub-pausa aquela a lu.	And when you see that the parts around it become softened, then perform a fumigation with mint on it and place your hand over it.
E quan te la sub-fumiguacio per una hora, lahoras tu la fay sezer sobre una cezelha, e aprop fay aquela stornudar e extrenh la boca de lu, e levas de aquela, e prem la partida pus bassa del ventre de lu am leugiera compressio, quar le fet sira tantost foro-getat.	And when you have performed the fumigation for an hour, then make that incision over a cushion, and then perform that lancing and extend the wound to the mouth of the vein, and lift it, and apply a light compression to the lower part of the abdomen, which will cause it to soon become firm.
Eyssiment del fet sobre les sieus denols e las suas mas.	Stitch the wound on its edges and close it with stitches.
Quan le fet eyssira segon aquesta forma, lahoras tu engenies en entrometen las suas mas petit a petit; e aprop la femna stia evessada sobre le sieu col, e les pes de lu pengo en jos, e aquelas sia jasent sobre le lieyt, e complegua las suas mas.	When the wound has healed in this manner, then you insert the stitches little by little; and meanwhile, the patient should be lying on her back, with her feet elevated, and those should be placed on a pillow, and she should remain in this position.
E aprop prem sobre le ventre de lu petit a petit, e aprop extratz aquo que es dejos les pes de lu de las aurelhas entro que sia preparada en la partida pus dejos.	And then apply pressure to the abdomen little by little, and meanwhile, extract what has been left of the patient's feet from the ears until it is prepared in the lower part.
E si le fet no es fora-getat, lahoras pren les pes de lu e mau aquels am movement vehement, e aprop prem aquo que es sobre les ypocondres petit a petit entro que le fet puege a las partidas desus.	And if the wound is not yet closed, then take the feet and move them with vigorous movement, and place what is on top of the hypochondria gradually close to where the wound opens above.
E aprop entrometa las suas mas e engualhe le fet petit a petit, e comanda a la femna que se exprema entro que le fet sia foro-getat.	And then insert their hands and gradually close the wound, and command the woman to express herself while the wound is not yet closed.
Eyssiment del fet latutidinalment pendent una de las suas mas.	Suture the wound longitudinally with one of their hands.
Sia engeniat en reduccio de la ma de lu, mays si no podes aquela reduzir, lahoras eleva la femna e fe aquela anar.	Perform the reduction on the patient's hand, but if you cannot reduce it, then lift the woman and move it.
E si anar no pot, lahoras fay la jazer sobre le lieyt, e concuteys las coyssas de lu am concussio vehement, e aprop aministra liamentz les quals yeu e recomtatz de mucillages.	And if it cannot be moved, then apply pressure to the area, and shake the patient's thighs with vigorous shaking, and then administer liniments which you prepare from mucilages.
E si es vengut le enfantament, lahoras fay aquela sezer sobre cezelha, e aprop studia sobre la reduccio de la ma, e enguala le fet segon figura natural, e fay stornudar la femna e comanda a lu que comprema a si entro que sia foro-getat.	And if labor has come, then apply pressure with the hand, and then study the reduction of the hand, and close the wound according to its natural figure, and make the woman cough and command her to hold herself until it is fully closed.
Eyssiment del fet sobre·l col expandudas las suas mas e la fassia de lu es al dos de la sua mayre.	Lift the foot over the shoulder and extend its hand while the foot's sole is against the mother's side.
Cove que la matrona tengua la ma del fet e aprop revolva aquel petit a petit, e eque aquel am facilitat.	Hold the foot in your hand and then gently rotate it slowly, so that it becomes more comfortable.
E cum es e quant so es engualhat, e lahoras pausa sobre le conh de lu aquo que havem recomtat de oli e de mucellages.	And when it is equalized and the swelling has subsided, then place there what we have recommended of oil and ointments.
E aprop comandas a lu que·s maugua petit a petit, e quan auras feyt aquo, lahoras fay aquela cezer sobre una cezelha e comanda li que sia inclinada sobre le latz dreyt, e aprop comanda a lu que sia compremuda; e fay aquela stornudar am condizi.	And then command that it be gently massaged, and when you have done that, then pour the decoction over a cloth and command that it be inclined over the right side, and then command that it be compressed; and make the cloth starched.
Exitus foetus praeparati super latus.	The prepared fetus flows to the side.
Quan deyssen a horrifici de la mayre segon aquesta manieyra, considera, e lahoras tu inscideys la segondina am la tua ungla entro que sia evacuada de la humiditat.	When the mother experiences horrors according to this method, consider it, and then incise the second one with your scalpel so that it is evacuated of moisture.
E si le fet es suspendut sobre la cara e·l col de lu, lahoras tu inscideys aquela del embelic, per so que no sia retengut e mora.	And if the foot is suspended over the face and neck, then incise the one with the splint, so that it is not retained and causes death.
E aprop empelleys le fet a las partidas dedintz entro que pauses aquel segon que cove, e manda a la femna que comprema a si alcunas veguadas, e el sira fora-getat am eyssiment leugier, si Dieus o vol.	And then push the fetus into the parts inside while you place that [fetal part] according to what fits, and send the woman to excrete some times lightly, if God wills.
Exitus geminorum aut foetuum multorum.	The exit of twins or many fetuses.
Sapias que gemels motas veguadas so natz, e alcunas vetz naysso tres o quatre , mays aquo es estranh e tart s’endeve; mays v so causas foro natura, e no vivo.	Know that twins or spots of many births are normal, and sometimes even three or four arise at once, but this is strange and worth investigating; mostly these are causes from nature, not disease.
E conte aquelas, ja sia que sian montiplicatz, una segondina, e son seperatz per ciphac, distingen aquels enter le liguament en l’ombilic de cascun de aquels E alcunas veguadas so foro-getatz ayssi cum es un fet per eyssiment natural leugier, e so eysitz alcunas veguadas per eyssiment no-lausabla ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And count those, whether they are multiple, one second, and are separated by cipha, distinguishing them between the ligaments at the umbilicus of each. Sometimes they are expelled as a fetus by light natural expulsion, and some times they are expelled by an involuntary expulsion as we have recounted.
E si son dificils alcus de lor deves le enfantament e perveno ad aquo que havem dit de las figuras no-naturals, lahoras tu cura aquels ayssi cum havem recontat.	And if they are difficult to expel, you should assist in the delivery and proceed to what we have said about non-natural figures, then care for them as we have recounted.
E si’ la matrona subtil e fassa aquo que fa am facilitat e subtilitat, e am tarditat, e sia ingeniat segon tota figura segon que es a lu preparat de l’engen amenant a salut.	And if the midwife is subtle and does what she does with ease and subtlety, and with delay, and be ingenious according to all form as prepared by her bringing about health.
Rememoratio eius quod formatur in matrice ex embrionibus et Abortiuntur.	Recollection of that which is formed in the matrix from embryos and are aborted.
Alcunas veguadas son formatz en la mayre un, e dos, e tres, e quatre, e v, e vi, e vii, e mays x, e ja es deves mi verificat que una femna abortem ne getet vi, e una autra x totz formatz, la qual causa fo fayta per mensuracio dels glorios savis.	Sometimes pregnancies are formed in the uterus one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, and more than ten, and you should verify that one female aborts with a vi, and another with all of them formed, the cause of which is made by the measurement of the glorious sages.
E tot aysso cove que sia en la sciencia de la matrona quar fort leu ad aquela parve semblant de aquo, e donc opause se ad aquo am so que cove.	And all of this covers what is in the science of the midwife, and she must understand it well as to that which is proper.
Capitol .lxxvi.	Capitol.lix.
De extraccio del fet quan es mort.	On the extraction of the fetus when it is dead.
Quan tu curas le fet mort am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la medicacio e no es defora eyssit, e tu yest forsat usar de opperacio am ma, lahoras cove que consideras si la femna es de sana vertut e no es am alcu dels accidentz per les quals sobre ela es temuda perdicio.	When you treat the dead fetus where we have spoken in the division of therapy and it is not yet outside, you are forced to use surgery more. Then consider whether the woman is of good constitution and is not among those accidents for which her danger is feared.
Lahoras cove que la femna sia envessada sobre le lieyt sobre le sieu dos, e sia le cap de lu enclinat enjos e las coyssas de lu sian elevadas.	When the woman is laid on her back on the bed, and her head is inclined sideways, and her thighs are elevated.
E·l ministre tengua aquela de doas partz o sia liada en le lieyt per so que·l cos de lu no se extenda deves la extraccio del fet.	The minister should hold that [area] with two hands or bind it on the bed so that the body does not extend during the extraction of the fetus.
E aprop tu humecta la boca de la mayre de lu am olis humitz e am mucellage de altea e de fenugrec e de semensa de li.	And then moisten the mouth of the mother with olive oil and honey and juice of aloes and fennel and lemon.
E aprop unte la matrona la sua ma am aquels olis e mucellages, e aprop entrometa la sua ma am fecilitat en la mayre, e aprop cerque am la ma loc en le qual fique les uncis en le fet.	And then the midwife should apply her hand with those oils and honey, and place her hand for facilitation in the mother, and seek with her hand the location where the fingers will enter the fetus.
E locs convenient en aquo: adonc tu considera si le fet es preparat que deysenda sobre le sieu cap, e lahoras tu fique les uncis en les huels de lu, o en le col, o en la boca, o en le palat, o dejos la barba, o en la furcula de lu, o en les locs propdas de las costas, o dejos les ypocondres.	Place the fingers appropriately: then consider if the fetus is ready to be delivered through the head, and then place the fingers in the folds of the head, or the neck, or the mouth, or the palate, or leave the beard, or at the sternum, or at the proper locations of the ribs, or leave the hypochondria.
Mays si le deysendiment es sobre les pes de lu, lahoras en le pentenilh, o en le mieg de las costas.	If the discharge is from his feet, then at the ankle, or in the middle of the back.
E cove que tengua le unci am la ma dreyta, e pausa la curvitat de lu en aquel loc le qual es entre les ditz de la ma senestra, e entrometa la ma am facilitat e fique le unci en alcu de aquels locs les quals havem ditz, entro que pervengua a la causa boyda.	And make sure that the thumb is with your right hand, and curve it at that place which is between the fingers of your left hand, and insert your hand easily and place the thumb in one of those places which we have mentioned, until you reach the cause below.
E aprop pause e fique en la apposicio de lu un autre unci, o le tertz si es necessitat, per so que sia atraccio engual, e no sia extencio segon la sua rectetut tant solament.	And place and keep the other thumb, or the third if necessary, in a similar position, so that it is an equal opposition, and not extension according to its straightness alone.
Ans sia maugut a tota partida, per so que l’eyssiment de lu sia alleujat ayssi cum es fayt en dent deves la eradicacio de lu.	And make sure it is movable in all parts, so that the movement of it is alleviated as much as is done in extracting a tooth.
E cove en lu aquo que es entre lor que la extencio sia mollificada; e si alcuna partida de lu es retenguda, lahoras cove que la matrona unte alcus sieus ditz am oli e entrometa aquels espertament e revolva am aquels aquo que es retengut.	And make sure that the extension is softened; and if any part of it is retained, then ensure that the midwife applies some of her fingers with oil and inserts them expertly and rotates them around the part that is retained.
Donc si la partida del fet es fora-getada, lahoras les uncis sian permudatz entra loc le qual sia pus aut; e fay aysso entro que tot le fet sia fora-getat.	So if the part of the fetus is forgotten, then the fingers may be stuck in that place; and do this until all of the fetus is forgotten.
Mays si la ma es eyssida denant l’autra, e no es possible reduzir aquela per la coartacio de lu, lahoras cove que drap sia envolopat sobre aquela; e aprop extratz aquela entro que tota sia fora-getada, e inscideys aquela o en la junctura de la ma o en le coyde.	But if the hand is pressed against the other, and it is not possible to reduce it due to the constriction of the hand, then cover that part with a cloth; and then extract it until all of it is forgotten, and incise it at the joint of the hand or in its crook.
E ayssi cove que fassas en l’autra ma e en les dos pes.	And do the same with the other hand and with both feet.
Mays si le cap del fet es gran, o accideys a lu coartacio en le eyssiment, o es en le cap de lu aygua ajustada, lahoras cove que entrometa entre les ditz espatum spinos e fenda le cap e extragua la aygua, o que discroba aquel am un instrument le qual es nompnat “alundat”, la forma del qual vindra am las formas dels autres instruments en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	But if the head of the fetus is large, or you encounter constriction during incision, or there is fluid in its head, then insert a needle between the fingers and cut open the head to drain the fluid, or use an instrument called "alundat" to remove it, the shape of which will be described in the forms of other instruments in the chapter that follows this.
E semblantment fassa si·l fet es de gran cap per natura: e lahoras cove que inscida aquel am algematu, o que prengua aquel am alunda ayssi cum havem dit; e aprop extra les osses am les forceps.	And if the fetus has a naturally large head, then cut it with forceps, or use an instrument called alundat as we have said, and then extract the bones with forceps.
E si le cap es eyssit e es coartat deves la furcula, lahoras sia fendut entro que la humiditat la qual es en le pietz sia efunduda.	And if the head is swollen and compressed, you should open the foramen, when the humidity which is in the feet has infiltrated.
Mays si no es complicat, ni obezeys a eyssiment, lahoras tu inscideys le cap tantost segon que a tu sira possible.	But if it is not complicated, and does not require elevation, then you should incise the head as soon as possible according to what is convenient for you.
E si le dejos del ventre es apostemat o es en lu ydropici, lahoras cove que tu perfores aquel entro que corro la humiditat que es en lu.	And if the swellings of the abdomen are suppurated or in it, then make a puncture where the humidity is located.
Mays si le fet es sobre les sieus pes, lahoras la atraccio de lu es leugiera e la direccio de lu a la boca de la mayre es leugiera.	But if the fistula is on his feet, then the draw of it is light and the direction to the mouth of the vein is light.
Mays si es coartat deves le ventre e·l pietz, lahoras cove que tu extraguas aquel am drap le qual auras envolopat sobre la tua ma, e que fendes le ventre e·l pietz entro que corra aquo que es en aquels.	But if it is compressed, you should incise the abdomen and feet, when you withdraw that which you have wrapped around your hand, and incise the abdomen and feet where what is within flows out.
Mays si les autres membres so ostatz e torna le cap, lahoras la metrona entrometa la ma senestra; mays si la boca de la mayre es huberta, lahoras intrometa la ma en le preon de layre, e cerque am aquela le cap, e atira aquel am les ditz entro a la boca de la mayre, e aprop entrometa en lu un unci, o dos uncis, e atire lu am aquels.	But if the other members are swollen and the head returns, then the surgeon should insert his left hand; but if the mouth of the vein is opened, then he should insert his hand in the region of the throat, and seek out the head, and push that with his fingers into the mouth of the vein, and quickly insert one or two needles, and push them there.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada per apostema caut le qual accideys a l’u, lahoras cove que no sia trebelhat sobre lu; abantz cove lahoras aministrar efusio de causas humidas grassas.	And if the mouth of the ileum is constricted by an apsis, cauterize which happens to the one; ensure that it is not treated too vigorously; rather, first ensure that you administer effusion of fatty humid causes.
E aministre emplastres; e segua le pacient en ayguas que mollifican e humectan.	And administer plasters; and follow the patient with waters that soften and moisten.
E si le fet es sobre le sieu costat, lahoras si possible es, sia agulat: e sia aministrat aquo que havem dit en le fet viu.	And if the wound is on the side of the body, whenever possible it should be lanced: and what we have said about the living wound should be administered.
E si aquo no es possible, lahoras sia inscidit en pessas, e sia extrayt.	And if this is not possible, then incise in pieces, and extract.
E cove que non layssas alcuna causa dedintz de la segondina.	And ensure that you do not leave any cause inside the cavity.
E cum tu auras complida tota la tua opperacio, lahoras aministra aquo que havem dit de la curacio en les apostemas cautz les quals accideysso de la mayre.	And when you have completed your operation, then administer what we have said about the treatment of apsis that occur in the ileum after cauterization.
E si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras deyssendas en ayguas stipticas e aministra l’autra curacio.	And if there is a flux of blood, then apply cold waters and administer the other treatment.
E yeu ja e vist una femna en le ventre de la qual era fet mort, e aprop sobre aquel foc autra veguada emprenhada, e aprop foc mort es le fet autre.	And I have already seen a woman in her womb where one child was dead, and nearby another pregnancy began, and the dead fetus is now the other.
Accidit al u aprop lonc temps apostema en le sieu embelic; e inflat es entro que foc ubert, e comensec a getar brac.	It happens that after a long time an abscess in his arm becomes inflamed; and when opened, it begins to discharge pus.
E yeu fu appelhat a la cura de lu, e medicat a lu per lonc temps, e la plagua no es consolidada.	And I was called to treat it, and medicated it for a long time, and the wound did not heal.
Adonc yeu pausegui sobre lu de alscunas causas emplastra de forta atraccio, e eyssic de lu un os, e aprop passero alcus jorns, e eyssic un autre os; e yeu fu trop meravilhat, cum en le ventre no sia os.	Then I applied plaasters of strong attraction over it for several causes, and extracted one bone, and after some days, extracted another bone; and I was too amazed, as there is no bone in the womb.
E adonc yeu cogitegui que eran dels osses del fet mort.	And then I realized that they were the bones of the dead fetus.
Donc yeu enguisigui la plagua, e extrayssi de lu motz osses , la femna existent en las sieuas milhos disposicios, e ja visquec en tal manieyra per lonc temps, correc de lu un petit de brac.	Then I cleansed the wound, and extracted bones from it. The woman existed in her womb's many dispositions, and I had already seen such a manner for a long time, correcting it by removing a small piece of arm.
E yeu no afermegui asso esser stranh, sino quar en aquo es sciensa e ajutori ad aquo que le metge artifec am la ma per curacio aministra.	And I do not administer treatment merely because it is strange, but rather because in this there is science and aid that the physician provides through his art for healing.
De las formas dels instrumentz que so necessaris a extrayre le fet.	Of the forms of the instruments that are necessary to extract the stone.
Forma de vertitge am la qual es uberta la mayre:	Form of vertigo at which the liver is opened:
Aquesta es la forma de strenhedor en le qual so engualhatz les libres, al qual engualhament sian dos virtitges en doas extremitatz de dos futz.	This is the form of strengthener in which you equalize the ligaments, at which equalization there are two vertebrae at the two ends of two tendons.
May empero aquesta virtitge cove que sia pus subtil de strictori, e sia fayt o de eba o de fust de boys.	However, let this vertebra be curved and more delicate in structure, made either of sinew or of tendon.
E sia la latitut de quascun fust quays dos ditz e le marge de quascu amdos quays un dit, e la longitut de quascu es un palm e mig; e en le mieg loc de dos fustz so dos ajustaments de aquel meteys fustz les quals ja son fermatz, dels quals la longitut es la maytat de un palm e un pauc mes, e la latitut de quascu es quay dos ditz, o un pauc mes.	And let the width of each tendon be as wide as two fingers, and the margin on both sides be as wide as one finger. The length of each is a palm and a half; in the middle location of two tendons, there are two joints of that same kind of tendon, which are already firm. The length of each is about a palm and a little more, and the width of each is as wide as two fingers, or a little more.
E aquestz dos additamentz sian entromeses en la boca de la mayre per que sia uberta am aquels quan tu revolves las doas prescriptas virtigges.	And these two additional elements be inserted into the mouth of the womb so that they be open when you revolve the two prescribed virtues.
Forma autra semblant de aquela pus subtil e pus leugiera:	Form another one similar to that, both subtle and light:
Sia fayta de fustz de eba o de boys segon la semblansa de forceps.	Be made of silk thread or fine linen according to the likeness of forceps.
Mays empero en la extremitat de lu so dos additament ayssi cum vezes, e la longitut de aquels additament es quays un palm, e la latitut de quascu es dos ditz.	Moreover, at the extremity of each, there are two additional elements as you see, and the length of those elements is about one palm, and the width of each is two fingers.
E cum tu vols am aquels ubrir la mayre, lahoras tu fay cezer la femna sobre le lieyt les pes pendentz, ubert aquo que es entre las coyssas de lu.	And when you want to open the womb, then place the woman on her side with her feet hanging down, and open what is between her thighs.
E aprop obre la tua ma am le instrument ayssi cum fas am forfexs engualment segon la quantitat que vols de la aprecio de la boca de la mayre entro que la metrona fassa so que vols.	Then, open your hand with the instrument as you would with scissors equally according to the quantity you want of the size of the mouth of the womb while the midwife applies herself as you desire.
La forma de vertitge la qual diysero les antics:	The form of the vortex which the ancients describe:
Forma de impellent am le qual es empellit le fet:	Form of pressing which is applied to the wound:
Forma de amisidat2 am le qual es conterit le cap gran	Form of dressing in which the large cap is contained:
E es asemblat a forceps al qual so dentz en la extremitat, ayssi cum vezes, e alcunas veguadas es fayt lonc ayssi cum forceps segon aquesta forma, ayssi cum vezes, al qual so dentz ayssi cum dentz de ressegua am le qual es inscidit e conterit.	And it is assembled to forceps which have teeth at the extremity, as you see. Sometimes it is made long like forceps according to this form, as you see, with teeth like crochet teeth on which it is inserted and contained.
Forma de amesidat pauc:	Form of dressing for minor cases:
Forma de unci havent una spina:	Form of applying a dressing with a spine:
Forma de unci havent doas spinas:	Form of applying a dressing with two spines:
Forma de forceps a la qual so dentz de cerra am le qual le cap del fet sia conterit:	Form of forceps to which closing teeth are attached, in which the head of the wound is contained:
Forma de spatum havent dos extremitatz am le qual le cap es abscindit:	Form of spoon having two extremities, in which the head is incised:
Forma de dos espatums latz:	Form of two large spoons:
Totz aquels instrumentz so excersitatz, e quan mes so multiplicadas las specias de aquel e so preparadas deves le artifexs, quant es pus leugier a la sua opperacio e pus aut deves les homes per la sua quantitat.	All these instruments are exercised, and when more species of that kind occur, the craftsman should prepare them, making their operation lighter and providing more people according to their quantity.
E no obres de aquels instrumentz ja sia qua sia deves tu aparalhat, quar la necessitat de aquels no es excusabla.	And do not delay in preparing those instruments, for the need is urgent.
De extraccio de la segondina.	From the extraction of the second child.
Quan la segondina es retenguda deves le enfantament, lahoras cove que tu comandes a la malautae que retengua le sieu ale, e aprop fay aquela stornudar am condizi, e strenh la tua ma sobre la boca de lu e sobre las nars de lu, e si per aysso es defora eyssit, bo es.	When the second child is retained, you should induce labor. Then make the patient hold her breath, and at once apply this remedy, strengthening your hand over her mouth and nostrils. If by this she delivers, that is good.
E sino, lahoras tu pren una ola e perfora en la cuberta un trauc e pausa en aquela erbas ubrent la boca de la mayre, ayssi cum calament e ruda e anet e camamilla e scicados arabic e cassia lignea e santaurea.	And if not, then take a rod and perforate in the cover a tube, and place it over those herbs burning at the mouth of the uterus, as with calamus, rue, anise, camomile, scirpus arabicus, and cinnamon.
Totas aquestas erbas o alcunas de lor sian submersas en aygua en la ola, e pausa aquela sobre le foc.	All these herbs or some of them may be submerged in water in the rod, and place that over the fire.
E aprop pausa una canula de canaviera en la boca de la mayre, e tengua aquela entro que la evapor vengua a la concavitat de la mayre.	And place a cane tube in the mouth of the uterus, and keep that there so that the vapor rises to the cavity of the uterus.
E aprop fay aquela stornudar ayssi cum havem dit, e la segondina sira fora-getada am velocitat.	And then perform that sneezing procedure as we have said before, and the second one shall be done with greater speed.
Mays si roman aprop aquesta curacio e no es eyssida, lahoras tu comanda a la matrona que submerge la sua ma sinistra en oli sizami o en micellage de altea, e aprop entrometa aquela en le conh e queresca am aquela la segondina, e cum aquela auras trobada, lahoras pren la e exten aquela pauc a pauc Mays si es annexsa en le preon de la mayre, lahoras entrometa la sua ma segon que havem recomtat, e quan aura trobat la segondina, extragua aquela petit a petit segon rectetut per so que la mayre no caja deves la atraccio vehement.	If this remedy does not work close to this cure and it is ineffective, then command the midwife to submerge her left hand in sesame oil or in chamomile cotton, and then insert that into the nose and search for the second one with that, as you have found. If it is stuck in the passage of the mother, then insert your hand according to what we have recommended, and when you have found the second one, extract it little by little in order that the mother does not fall due to the strong expulsion.
Abantz cove que sia permudada als costatz dreyt e sinestre am facilitat.	Before it is moved to the right and left sides with ease.
E aprop sia ajustat en la quantitat de atraccio, quar ela obedira e evasira de adhirencia.	And then adjust the amount of traction so that it obeys and releases from adherence.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada, nos ja havem recomtat la curacio am sturnutacio e am medicacio de la ola am erbas.	And if the mouth of the mother is constricted, we have already recommended the cure through sneezing and the treatment of the womb with herbs.
Mays si no es fora-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recomtadas, lahoras guarda te que no fetigues sobre aquela en iteracio de abstracio, mays empero cove que aquo que es eyssit de lu a la boca de la mayre lies a la coyssa de la femna, e aprop cristeriza aquela am enguent e tetrafarmacon; quar aquel fara poyrir aquela aprop alcus dias e sira dissolvuda e sira fora-getada.	If all the causes we have recounted are not forgotten, then guard that you do not fatigue her repeatedly in abstraction, but instead anoint the area where it comes out at the opening of the large intestine to the woman's thigh, and apply a plaster; for this will cause it to heal within a few days and be dissipated and forgotten.
Mays quan se poyreys, es de lu elevada mala audor al cap, e al estomac, e aquo ledeys la malauta; e adonc cove que sian aministradas sub-fumiguacios e convenientz ad aquo.	When it heals, raise the bad humor to the head, and this leads to the disease; then ensure that sub-fumigations and appropriate remedies are administered for this.
Mays alcus dels Antics ja so esproatz sub-fumigacio de nazitort e de figuas seccas.	But some of the Ancients prescribed sub-fumigations with nutmeg and dry figs.
Forma de instrument am le qual la femna es sub-fumiguada deves la retentio de mestruas e de la segondina:	Form of the instrument with which the woman is sub-fumigated, you should retain her menstruation and the second one:
Sia fayta de veyre o de eram.	It should be made of copper or iron.
E sia pausada la extremitat subtil en le conh e la extremitat ampla sobre le foc, e la sub-fumiguacio sia pausada sobre las brazas del foc.	And place the narrow end in the chimney and the wide end over the fire, and position the sub-fumigation above the coals of the fire.
E tengua aquela entro que sia consumida aquela sub-fumiguacio e itera·n autra.	And hold that there while that the subfumigation be consumed and iterate another.
De curacio del cul del enfant no-perforat.	For the treatment of an unperforated anal condition.
Motz enfantz naysso e les culs de lu no so perforatz, les quals ya ciphac subtil e opilat.	The child defecates poorly and the anus is not perforated, which has already been treated with a fine incision.
Adonc cove a la matrona que perfore am le sieu dit aquel ciphac; e sino, perfora aquel am spatum agut, e guarda se que no toque le lacert.	Then have the midwife make an incision in the said incision; and if not, make an incision with a sharp blade, and take care that it does not touch the nerve.
E aprop pause sobre aquel lana enfusa en vi e oli; e aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia senat.	Then place something warm in the anus, filled with oil; and apply an ointment to it while it is warm.
Mays si temes que sia opilat, lahoras pausa en le trauc una canula per motz dias, e osta la quan le enfant voldra degerir.	If you fear it is incised, then place a catheter for several days, and wait until the child wants to defecate.
E ja accideys oppilacio del cul per consolidacio de plagua o de apostema; adonc cove que aquela consolidacio sia inscidida, e aprop sia curada am aquo que avem dit de la curacio e del plom.	And if an incision in the anus occurs due to the consolidation of a boil or abscess; then have that consolidation incised, and treat it as we have said for the treatment and draining.
De curacio de las fistulas que endeveno dejos.	For the treatment of fistulas that discharge pus.
Las fistulas que endeveno en la partida dejos pus bassa so nodacio e grossetut las quals endeveno prop del cul defora o en l’espazi de la una partida.	The fistulas that discharge pus below are often due to swelling and enlargement of those located near the buttocks or in the space of one side.
E es una fistula o motas.	And it is either a fistula or abscess.
E cum aquela nodacio es antiquada e corr de la humiditat aygosa blanca o poyridura subtil, e alcunas veguadas so de aquestas fistulas alcunas penetrantz.	And when that swelling is old and caused by watery white moisture or subtle rot, sometimes these fistulas penetrate.
E aquelas penetrantz so conogudas per aquo que es eyssit de aquelas per la egressio e per ventosetat; e alcunas vetz use le malaute de egressio, e fort leu es eyssit de aquelas verm.	And those that penetrate are known by what is caused by them through the discharge and windy condition; sometimes the patient uses the opening, and a strong exhalation occurs from those worms.
E so de aquelas fistulas alcunas veguadas en l’espazi penetrantz entro a la vesica, e entro al meat de la vergua; e so de aquelas penetrantz entro la junctura de la coyssa e entro al notz de la coeta.	And of these fistulas, sometimes those that penetrate enter into the bladder and into the flesh of the vagina; and of those that penetrate into the joint of the thigh and into the notch of the buttock.
E aquo en que es conoguda fistula penetrant entro al cul e no-penetrant, es que tu metas le tieu dit endic en le cul, e entrometas tenta subtil de eram o de ferr en la fistula quan no y es turtuositat.	And to know whether a penetrating fistula enters the buttock or does not, you should insert your finger into the buttock and gently probe with a thin wire or needle in the fistula when there is no pus.
Mays si en aquela es turtuositat, lahoras entromet en aquela tenta subtil de plom o de pels de caval entro que tu sentas la tenta o le pel en le tieu dit.	But if there is turbidity, then insert a thin tube of lead or horsehair between which you feel the tube or hair in your hand.
E si no sentas aquela de tot ni no procezeys del trauc alcuna causa de egestio ni verm ni ventositat, ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras sapias que es no-penetrant, e lahoras coyta te a la curacio.	And if you do not feel that at all nor proceed from it any cause of evacuation or worm or flatulence, as we have said, then know that it is non-penetrant, and then apply something to the cure.
E quan la fistula es penetrant entro a la vesica o entro al meat de la vergua, lahoras la significacio de lu es eyssiment de urina de aquela e prohibicio de lu ad aysso que·l loc am medicina sia consolidat.	And when the fistula is penetrant into the bladder or into the flesh of the penis, then its significance is dysuria from that and prohibition thereof until the area with medicine is consolidated.
Mays si es penetrant entro la junctura de la coyssa o entro al os e envencio de dolor en le circuit, lahoras senhal de lu es que la tenta perve entro aqui si en lu no es turtuositat entro al os, e envencio de dolor en le circuit de la partida; e que de lu yeys poyredura tostemps; e que no val en aquela medicacio, ni es consolidada am enguent.	But if it is penetrant into the junction of the thigh or into the bone and causes pain in the circuit, then its sign is that the tube passes through here if there is no turbidity in the bone, and pain in the circuit of the location; and that pus constantly flows from it; and that it does not respond to that treatment, nor is it consolidated with ointment.
E en totas aquelas fistulas penetrant no es curacio de tot, e la curacio de aquelas es trebalh e vanetat dels folyls metges sobre·l qual so fermatz.	And in all those penetrating fistulas, complete cure is not achieved, and the cure of those is work and waste of the surgeons' leaves upon which they firm themselves.
Mays en aquela que no es penetrant e no antiqua, sanacio am ferr es sperada segon que yeu a tu recomtare, e aquo que ja yeu e proat.	In that which is not penetrating and not ancient, heal with iron as I will recount to you later, and what I have already said stands.
E es que le malaute jagua entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos e eleva las cambas de lu entro sus, las coyssas sian enclinadas al ventre de lu, e aprop entromet tenta de plom, o de eram si es en la fistula turtuositat, entro que sapias le loc on perve la tenta.	And it is that the patient lies on his back with his legs elevated between his thighs, the hips inclined towards the belly of the patient, and then insert a lead or iron tube, if it is in the tortuous fistula, into the place where you can feel the pulse.
E si aquela sent le malaute entorn le cuol, lahora cove que tu entrometas le tieu dit endic en le cuol.	And if the patient feels pain around the throat, then you must insert your thumb along the throat.
E si sentas en le tieu dit la tenta ja per si meteyssa descuberta penetrar, otra aquo que sentas entre le tieu dit e aquela siphac o carn, lahoras sapias certanament que aquela es penetrant; e adonc no trebalhes en aquela, quar no es en aquela sanacio, ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you feel the pulse already clearly and spontaneously passing through your thumb, or if you feel something between your thumb and the gout or flesh, then you can certainly determine that it is penetrating; and then do not work on that, for healing does not occur there, as we have said.
Mays empero diyssero alcus que es sana en alcus homes tart.	But some say that it is cured in some men after a while.
E de la medicacio per la qual es sperat juvament en lu es que tu ignes cauteri subtil segon le ample de la fistula, ayssi cum es precedit, e intrometas aquel ignit en la fistula entro que pervengua entorn le cuol; e aprop itera aquel doas o tres vetz entro que sapias que ja son adhustas totas aquelas carns ajustadas fistuladas que so semblantz a cana de pluma de ausel.	And concerning the treatment in which healing is hoped for, you must ignite a fine cautery according to the size of the fistula, as is previously described, and insert that burning instrument into the fistula until it reaches the throat; and then repeatedly do this two or three times until you can feel that all those grafted tissues around the fistula are firmly attached, resembling the quill of a bird.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder entro que en yescan totas aquelas carns que so adhustas, e aprop cura aquela am medicinas la carn engendrantz e consolidantz, e si es sanada, bo es; e sino, lahoras no es sana en degun temps per autra curacio.	And then cure that which is with joints wrapped in bandages between where all those muscles are contracted, and then cure that which is with medicines the flesh generating and consolidating, and if it is healed, well; and if not, then it is not healed in some time by another cure.
E si la tenta intra, e no penetra entro·l tieu dit le qual es en le cul, e entre aquel e la tenta que es velament spes de carn o de ciphac, e vezes la fistula en aquo que siec la superficia de la codena, lahoras secca la codena del comensament de la fistula, e tu ve seccan am la tenta, e sia en la fistula entro que la seccio pervengua al loc en le qual perve la extremitat de la tenta, e per la tenta es liberat e catz.	And if the probe enters but does not penetrate further, you have said which is in the anus, and between that and the probe which is a veil of flesh or of cloth, and touch the fistula in what dries the surface of the wound, then dry the wound from the beginning of the fistula, and you dry the probe, and it is in the fistula where the drying penetrates to the place where the end of the probe reaches, and through the probe it is released and healed.
E aprop mundifiqua aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so asembladas a canula de pena de ausel e no romangua de aquelas alcuna causa.	And then cleanse those fistulous tissues which are gathered around the penile urethra and do not drain from any of these causes.
Mays si flux de sanc vezes que vengua entre tu e la tua opperacio quan ensideysses aquelas carns, lahoras le milh que sia e del pus leugier instrument es cauterizar am foc o am medicina acuta, quar cauteri am foc ajusta bonas doas habitutz: so es adhustio de aquelas carns ajustadas, e abscizio del sanc exseccacio de las humiditatz.	But if a flux of blood comes between you and your operation when insides those tissues, then let it be as much as possible and of the lightest pus use a pointed cautery with fire or with acute medicine, for cauterization with fire makes good double heat: so it adjusts those tissues, and stopping the blood by excision of the humid substances.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder o en caus trissat entro que·l loc geta brac, e aprop lahoras cura la plagua am enguentz carn dura engendran e consolidan.	And then cure that which is with cold veins wrapped in bandages or cut three times around the area getting hot, and then cure the wound with an ointment of hard flesh forming and consolidating.
E so medicinas en las quals so stipticitat e exseccio; quan lahoras es restaurada ja es sanada e no temes iteracio.	And in medicines where there is stiffness and excoriation; when the restoration occurs, it is cured, and you fear no recurrence.
Mays si la fistula ja perve entro al preon del cul e es elonguada de lu superficia del cos, lahoras entromet le tieu dit en le cul e inquireys am aquel.	And if the fistula has already pierced through to the depth of the buttock and is long from the surface of the body, then insert your finger into the buttock and inquire there.
E donc si centes la tenta e entre tu e ela es velament de ciphac o de carn, e es propda a la penetracio, lahora no es operacio en lu sino segon via di fiducia e de speransa.	And if you probe and between you and her is a veil of cicatriz or of flesh, and is close to the penetration, then it is not an operation in that place but rather according to the way of trust and hope.
La qual causa es aministrar en lu una de tres manieyras: o que cauterize aquela ayssi cum havem dit; o que secces aquela entro que consieguas la conquavitat de lu per que sia a tu possible entrometre las qualcas e la curacio propdana; e no procesiscas mot am seccio per so que no inscidas le lacert contenent le cuol, e que accidisque sobre le malaute eyssiment de la egistio ses voluntat; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit quar fort leu sira sanat; o que elongues aquel velament e mondes aquel pus que seccas aquel entro prop le cul, ayssi cum havem dit, o am tenta o am autre instrument de aguda extremitat, e aprop mondifique aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so en la seccio entro la on podes am percrustacio; e aprop esforsa te a far la restauracio de tota la plagua am seccio, e si le orrifici pus desus no es consolidat, e romangua la fistula uberta en la partida del cul, e sira pus leugier per le malaute.	That cause is to administer in that place one of three ways: either by cauterizing it as we have said; or by excising it until you achieve the cavity of that place so that it becomes possible for you to insert and cure it properly; and do not proceed with cutting for fear of injuring the muscle containing the coccyx, and acting against the will of the patient; then cure that as we have said which will surely be healed; or by elongating that veil and cleaning that until it dries close to the buttock, as we have said, or by probing or another sharp instrument, and then modify those fistulated tissues which are in the area where you can avoid necrosis; then strive to perform the restoration of the entire wound by cauterizing, and if the opening above is not consolidated, and rupture the open fistula at the part of the buttock, it will be easier for the patient.
E alscunas veguadas la fistula es finida segon aquesta manieyra: es quan tu entrometas la tenta en la fistula, e es en le latz del cul entorn la superficia del cos am la codena e en le marge del cul, lahoras pren tenta de perforada extremitat, que es ayssi cum agulha de preparantz les coers segon aquesta forma:	And sometimes the fistula is closed according to this manner: when you insert the probe into the fistula, and place it in the perianal area around the surface of the body close to the margin of the anus, then take hold of the perforated extremity, as if piercing with a needle prepared according to this form:
e entromet en aquela fiel envolopat de v fiels o entorn aquels; e aprop entromet tenta am fiel en la fistula entro que consiegua la conquavitat de lu.	And insert it there, wrapped in several threads or around them; and then insert the probe with thread into the fistula until you achieve its cavity.
Mays si es penetrant en le marge del cul prop dedintz, lahoras tu extratz le fiel de aquel trauc ayssi que tu intrometas le tieu dit en le cul; e extraguas la extremitat del fiel e ajustes las duas extremitatz essemps, e estrenh cascuna, e leyssa aquo per un dia o per dos, e quan mays inscideys le fiel en la carn, estrenh be aquel entro que aquelas carns sian inscididas las quals so entre doas extremitatz del fiel e que cajan.	But if it penetrates close to the margin of the anus internally, then extract the thread from that, and do so as you insert your hand into the anus; then withdraw the end of the thread and adjust both ends equally, strengthen each one, and let this be for a day or two. When more flesh is excised, thoroughly strengthen it where those flesh areas are excised between the two ends of the thread, ensuring they fit well.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia consolidada e sanada.	And then cure the wound as it consolidates and heals.
Mays si le orrifici de la fistula no es penetrant, lahoras fay aquel penetrar, en qualque manieyre sia a tu preparat, sino que sia mot en le preon, quar no es a tu que fassas aquo per que no inscidas le lacert; e aprop fay am aquela entro que sia sanada.	If the fistula openings are not penetrable, then make them penetrable in any manner you prepare, but ensure it is moist on the outside, for you should not do this to avoid burning. Then place something inside that will heal.
La forma de spatum spinos am lo qual es fenduda la fistula: la curvitat del qual es mot aguda e l’autra partida es no-aguda, per so que no inscidas aquo que no es necessari, ayssi cum vezes.	The shape of the pointed spatule used when the fistula is split: the curvature of which is sharp and the other part is not, so as not to burn what is unnecessary, as you see.
De sutura de emorroydas en las quals corra sanc en la inscizio de aquelas.	For the suturing of hemorrhoids where there is pain in the insertion area of those hemorrhoids.
Emorroydas so segon dos manieyras, quar o so entre le cul semblantz aysi que es de carbos, o quays aquelas sian cum a gras de rasim.	Hemorrhoids can be classified into two ways: some are like charcoal inside the anus, or they may be like the fat of a raisin.
E de aquelas so petitas e grans, e que le sanc corr de aquelas tostemps e es una, e so motas, e so fora·l cul, e en las extremitatz de lu.	And of these, some are small and large, and the pain from them comes at times and is one, and they affect the anus, and its extremities.
Mays empero aquelas que so foro le cul so segon las mes de pauca humiditat, de las quals corr aygua citrina o un petit de sanc am cos continuabla, e so segon la color del cos.	However, those that affect the anus are according to the degree of less humidity, from which yellowish water or a little of bloody discharge continues, and they are according to the color of the body.
E la curacio de aquela que es dedintz le cuol es que comandes al malaute que se assela e que se exprema entro que le cuol yesca e las emoroydas apparescan a tu.	And the cure for that which is within the belly is to command the patient to lie down and squeeze between when the belly swells and the veins appear before you.
Adonc tu te coyte e suspen am uncis o que tenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, e aprop incideys aquelas deves las suas razitz.	Then you lie down and place your hands under the patient's knees, and subsequently apply pressure to their veins.
Mays si les uncis no so tengutz en aquelas per la humiditat de lor e mollificacio de aquelas, lahoras pren aquelas am drap aspre o am coto o am flassada de lana, e extratz aquelas am les tieus ditz, e aprop inscideys aquelas e polveriza sobre lor alcunas polveras caudas aprop la inscizio, per que sian ad aquelas en loc de cauteri; o cauteriza aquelas segon que es precedit en le capitol de cauterizar.	But if the hands cannot be placed there due to their moisture and softening, then take rough cloths or thin woolen ones, and place them under the ties mentioned. Subsequently, apply pressure to these and sprinkle some powdered cauda over them near the application; or cauterize them as described in the chapter on cauterization.
E aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And subsequently cure them with the other treatment until they are healed.
E si le cul no obezeys a egressio, lahoras cristerisa le malaute am cristeri en le qual sia mordicacio petita, e sia lavat am aquel aquo que es en le cuol e que obezesca a egressio leugierament quan le malaute s’esprem.	And if the buttocks do not yield to evacuation, then cauterize the patient with a small bite of the cautery, and wash it with the fluid from the belly that causes gentle evacuation when the patient is squeezed.
Mays si las emorroydas so defora le cul, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiera, e es que tu prenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, o que prenguas aquelas am unci, e inscidas aquelas, e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit entro que sian sanadas.	If the hemorrhoids are outside the buttocks and the cause is slight, then you take those with your nail or pinch them with one finger, incise them, and afterwards cure them as we have said when they are healed.
E aquel que avoreys inscizio, cove que aministres sutura de lor segon aquesta manieyra: pren fiel envolopat e entromet aquel en agulha e aprop extratz las emorroydas a las partidas dessus, e fay aquel penetrar am la agulha en la razit del autra part, e envolveys las doas extramitatz del fiel en la partida pus dejos de la agulha, e so latitudinalment; e estrenh la emorroyda am strectura fort, e aprop noza le fiel e extratz la agulha.	And if you have an incision, make sure to suture it according to this manner: take thread wrapped around a needle and after extracting the hemorrhoids from the upper parts, make the thread penetrate through the edge of the other part, wrap the two ends of the thread around the part beyond the needle, and do so longitudinally; strengthen the hemorrhoid with strong tension, and afterwards secure the thread and remove the needle.
E fay aquo a totas, e layssa de aquelas una e no la cozes, per so que la superfluitat del sanc corra de aquela.	And do this to all of them, leaving one unsewn, so that the excess blood can flow from it.
E aprop pausa sobre le cul drap enfus en oli rozat o en cerot; e pausa aquel sobre·l cuol e comanda al malaute que·s repause.	And place a warm cloth in olive oil or ointment over the buttocks; place it there and command the patient to rest.
E aprop layssa aquela entro que caja; e quan es casuda, cura aquelas am enguentz o am autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then let that which is inside remain; when it is healed, treat those with ointment or other remedy until it is cured.
De curacio de fistulas.	On the treatment of fistulas.
Motas veguadas accideys per exseccacio de fenda o per costriccio de natura.	Fluctuations occur due to the expansion or constriction of the fistula.
E cum so antiquadas e no val en aquela medicina, lahoras cove que tu razas aquelas am la puncta de spatum o am la tua ungla entro que sian faytas humidas e sia hostada de aquelas la escorsa pus desus, la qual prohibeys aquelas de consolidacio; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian consolidadas.	And since they are old and not useful in medicine, you should cauterize them with the point of a needle or with your finger when they are moist and ensure that the wound is packed with clean linen beneath, which prevents their healing; then treat those that have healed.
Lahoras tu osta aquelas am razio pus vehement que la primieyra entro que mot sancno e sian excoriadas; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	And when you cauterize them with a strong fire after the first bleeding and when they are irritated; then treat those that have healed.
De curacio de almesamir, so es clau.	On the treatment of abscesses, this is crucial.
Sapias que alamermar, so es clau, e no es si no notz redon segon la color del cors semblant a cap de claviel, e es fayt en tot le cors e majorment en las partidas dejos les pes e als ditz, e endeve per aquels dolor deves le anament.	Know that an abscess, this is crucial, and it is a round swelling resembling the head of a nail, appearing throughout the body but particularly in the feet and hands. Therefore, you should treat these with pain relief.
E adonc cove que sia inscidit aquo que es en le circuit del clau, e sia tengut am les forfexs o am unci, e sia eradicat de la sua razit; e aprop cura aquel.	And then ensure that what is within the circle of the key is cut out, and hold it with forceps or tongs, and remove it from the wound; then cure that.
E si vols, cauteriza le segont que es precedit en le sieu capitol.	And if you wish, cauterize what follows as previously described in the same chapter.
Mays de veruca es eminencia petita aspre fistulada redonda sobre la superficia del cos, e motas veguadas veno en las mas dels enfantz.	More commonly, a small sharp, fistulated prominence appears on the surface of the body, and reddish spots from veins are visible in most children.
E curacio de lu es que estendas e inscidas aquela, o que estrenhas aquela am fiel o am pel entro que caja.	And the treatment is to extend and cut out that part, or to tighten it with a needle or thread that holds it.
E si vols, cauteriza aquo, segon que havem dit, am foc o am medicina acuta.	And if you wish, cauterize this as we have said, with fire or with sharp medicine.
E ja so eradicadas enversas e no-enversas am le instrument le qual yeu diyre.	And already, the excised parts should be treated with and without the instrument you will specify.
Mays formica es eminencia petita feutrada o fistulada grossa sobre la superficia del cos anant mot en le preon, e quan le freg atroba aquela es centit en lu semblant de mordificacio de formigua, e es fayta entorn le cos.	More commonly, a large, fibrous or fistulated prominence appears on the surface of the body, and when you touch it, it resembles the bite of an ant, and is found around the body.
E curacio de lu es que prenguas una canula de pena de auca o de pena de voltor, e sia fort, e pausa aquela sobre la formigua entro que la contengua le cercle de la canula de las partidas de lu; e aprop revolveys la tua ma am la canula entro que inscidas aquo que es en le circuit de la formigua, e pauses aquela en le preon de la carn, e que eradiques la formigua de la sua razit.	And the treatment is that you take a probe of iron from a furnace or from a hammer, and it should be strong, and place it over the ulcer between where the circumference of the ulcer meets the end parts of the probe; then rotate your hand around the probe as you insert what is within the circuit of the ulcer, and leave it in the depths of the flesh, and eradicate the ulcer from its root.
E si vols, fay aquo am canula de eram o de ferr segon aquesta forma:	And if you wish, do this with a probe of reed or iron according to this form:
Sia la partida desus de la canulha trahent a subtilitat, sorda (so es no-perforada), envolopada per so que sobre le dit la aprencio de lu sia ablaviada e la revolucio de aquela.	Let the upper part of the probe be thin, dull (i.e., non-piercing), wrapped so that over the ulcer its appearance is covered and the rotation of it is concealed.
E si vols cauteriza la formiga segon que es denant dit en la cauterizacio de atheyl en le capitol de cauteri.	And if you wish, cauterize the ulcer as previously described in the cautery treatment for athletes on the head of the cautery.
De forma dels instrumentz que so aministratz a dar cristeri.	In the manner of the instruments that you use to give crotti.
Alcunas veguadas es fayt cristeri de argent o de lato o de eram fondut o malleat; e alcunas veguadas es fayt de aquels instrumentz petit e gran segon aquels als quals so aministratz, quar aquel que es aministrat en la curacio dels petitz enfants sia petit; e de aquel dels quals los culs son freuls o doloyrozes, les cristeris de aquels sian petitz.	Sometimes the probes are made of silver or tin or reed that is melted or hammered; sometimes they are made of those instruments small and large according to those you use, for the probe used in the treatment of small children should be small; and for those with sore or painful buttocks, the probes for them should be small.
La forma de cristeri gran e pauc:	The form of striking hard and little:
Le cap de la canula de lu desus en le qual es liada la borsa sia ampla segon aquesta manieyra; e sia a lu distinacio la on la borsa es liada ayssi cum vezes.	The head of the cannula above which the bag is tied should be broad according to this manner; and there should be a place where the bag is tied as you see.
E la extremitat de lu pus dejus, la qual es entromesa en le cul, sia sorda (so es no-uberta) mot leon, atrasent a subtilita; e en la un del latz de lu sian dos traucs, e en l’autre costat un trauc, e sia la amplesa del trauc segon la groseza dels rays e pus gros un petit.	And the lower end of it, which is inserted in the anus, should be closed (if not open) with a small aperture; and on one side of the tube there should be two openings, and on the other side one opening, and the width of the opening should be according to the size of the rays, with the larger one slightly smaller.
E sia la borsa en la qual sian pausadas las medicinas de vesica de bestia o de pel de ovelha, e la razit de lu sia un palm.	And the bag in which the medicines for the beast's bladder or sheepskin are placed should be about a palm in length.
E sia perforada per motz traucs ayssi cum es revolvuda; e si l’espazi le qual es entre les traucs la grossetut del dit.	And it should be perforated with large openings as it is wound; and the space between the openings should be about the size of a finger.
E aprop entromet en aquels traucs fiel fort de fiel cru le qual sia de detz fiels, o enviro aquels; e ajusta am aquel la borsa; e quan es pausada en lu la borsa, sia streyt en le cap del cristeri entre dos distingentz am fort costriccio, e aprop cristeriza am aquel quascun trauc: Mays la qualitat de cristerizar am aquel es que tu omples la borsa de la medicina, que sia escalfada segon la quantitat de la tolleransa del malaute; e guarda te que no sia trop cauda ni trop freja.	Then insert strong raw honey into those openings, using ten pieces of honeycomb or around that amount. Adjust the bag to that. When the bag is placed there, stretch it at the head of the strike hard and little between two distinguishers with strong constriction, and then strike each opening: More specifically, the quality of striking each one is that you fill the bag with medicine, which should be heated according to the quantity of tolerance of the patient; and ensure that it is not too thick nor too cold.
E aprop le malaute sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos, e eleva las suas cambas en sus e pausa dejos lu un cuer sobre le qual ja so les homes o un lansol; e aprop unta la extramitat del cauteri am oli o am album de huou o am mucellage de fenugrec o de semblantz; e aprop entromet aquel en le cul am facilitat, e aprop le ministre prengua la borsa e exprema aquel am doas mas e essemps am vehemencia entro que sia evacuat en le budelh tot aquo que es en le cristeri; e aprop extra le cristeri e le malaute leva las suas cambas a la paret.	And the patient is laid supine on their back, elevates their hips, and places them on a cushion; then applies oil or honey or fenugreek paste or something similar at the tip of the cautery; inserts that into the anus gently, then the minister takes the bag and squeezes it twice with vigor so that everything in the rectum is evacuated into the intestine; then removes the rectum and the patient lifts their hips to the wall.
E si la medicina forsa aquel a eyssiment, tengua le tant quant poyra; e si dorm am aquel per tota una nueyt, es mays derier en juvament.	And if the medicine forces it to evacuation, have as much as it will take; and if it sleeps all through the night, it is more beneficial in recovery.
Mays si tu cristerizas aquel en las malautias de solucio de ventre e l’eyssiment de lu le coyta, lahoras tu itera le cauteri entro que sia sanat.	More so if you evacuate the patient for stomach distension and bowel evacuation, then repeatedly apply the cautery until it is healed.
E si en le cul so emorroydas o apostemas ledens, lahoras sia le cristeri mot subtil e leon, dels cristeris am les quals les enfantz so criterisatz.	And if there are hemorrhoids or abscesses in the anus, then use a thin and sharp probe from among the probes that children are familiar with.
De curacio de las plaguas.	Of the treatment of the wounds.
Yeu ja e dit en la divisio de la curacio de las plaguas aquo que convenia al libre, e yeu dic assi la curacio de aquelas am ma e am medicinas segon le conpliment.	And I have already said in the division of the treatment of wounds what is appropriate for the free and for medicines according to need.
Donc dic que las plaguas son diversificadas segon aquo en que son faytas las plaguas e segon le loc sobre le qual cazo las plaquas.	Therefore, it is said that wounds are diverse according to what they are caused by and according to the place where the plaques occur.
E las causas per que motas vetz son faytas las plaguas so ayssi cum getament de peyra, o inscisio d’espaza o de cotel, o percussio am lansa, o am fustz, o am sageta, o semblantz ad aquels de motas causas.	And the causes why wounds are made are thus: by a stone impact, or a sword or knife incision, or a lance or rod blow, or an arrow, or something similar to those causes of wounds.
Mays las plaguas que so en les locz del cos so ayssi cum plagua la qual catz sobre le cap, o·l col, o·l pietz, o·l ventre, o·l fitge, e semblantz ad aquels dels membres.	Moreover, the wounds that are in parts of the body are thus: like a wound that falls on the head, or the neck, or the foot, or the abdomen, or the thigh, or something similar to those of the limbs.
E yeu so recomtant la curacio de alcunas plaguas per que pauses aquela ratiocinacio e regla sobre las autras plaguas.	And I am recounting the treatment of some wounds so that you may apply that reasoning and rule to other wounds.
E yeu comensare de las plaguas del cap simplas, quar la rememoracio de las compostas vindra al comensament del tertz capitol.	And I will begin with simple head wounds, for the memory of composite injuries will come at the beginning of the third capita.
Donc dic que quan accideys en le cap plagua simpla e no es fractura, lahoras considera: si es per getament de peyra o de semblant, e ja ha trinquada la codena tant solament e es gran plagla e temes sobre aquel malaute havinement de apostema caut, lahoras tu te coyta e fleubotoma la cephalica tantost, e no tardas aquo; e extrats ad aquel del sanc segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu si no mes alcuna causa prohibent de fleubotomia, majorment si·l sanc que es eyssit de la plagua es pauc.	So say that when an accident occurs on the head with a simple wound and it is not a fracture, consider: if it is due to a stone or similar object, and it has shattered the bone so much only and is a large wound and you fear the sudden onset of an abscess in that area, then you should incise and bloodlet from the cephalic vein as soon as possible, and do not delay this; and extract from there the blood according to the quantity of its virtue if no other reason prevents bloodletting, especially if the blood that results from the wound is little.
E sia la flaubotomia del contrari de la partida plaguada; e guardase le malaute de replecio e de vi e de viandas grossas.	And the bloodletting is from the opposite side of the wounded part; and one must prevent the illness from spreading, and from wind and heavy foods.
Mays si de la minuicio prohibeys alcuna causa, lahoras sia aminorat de la vianda e no apropinque a carn ni a vi.	But if some cause prohibits the incision, then reduce the food and do not approach meat or wine.
E pausa sobre la plagua, si a lu accideys apostema caut, coto enfus en oli rozat solet o en vi en le qual es stipticat.	And place yourself over the wound, if an abscess is suspected, apply cold compresses with oil-soaked cloths or with wine in which astringents are mixed.
Mays si est segur de apostema caut, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua, si es recent am le sieu sanc e le ayre no ha mudat aquela la polvera la qual yeu recomtare aprop petit.	But if it is certain that an abscess has formed, then place yourself over the wound, if it is fresh with its own serum and the air has not changed there, spread the powder which I will describe shortly.
E si le ayre ja ha mudada aquela, lahoras pausa sobre alscus enguentz entro que sia sanada.	But if the air has already changed there, then place yourself over some ointments until it is healed.
Mays si la plagua es gran o es per inscizio d’espaza e de semblantz, e no so ajustadas las labias de lu per puvils, lahoras ajusta aquelas am sutura segon que yeu recomtare de la sutura de lor.	But if the wound is large or due to a deep cut and the edges cannot be approximated with pins, then adjust those using stitches according to the stitching method I will describe.
Mays si la plagua ja es discuberta del os e pen, e no es retencio de lu sino un petit suspensori, lahoras inscideys aquela e aprop cura la plagua am medicinas e restaura la carn aprop en loc de codena, e comanda al malaute que sia pescut de viandas en las quals es groceza: caps e formen coyt e semblantz a lor, entro que sia compost.	But if the wound is already exposed to bone and flesh, and it is not retention but only a small suspensory ligament, then incise there and properly cure the wound with medicines, restore the flesh in its proper place, and command the patient to eat foods in which they take pleasure: meat and vegetables that resemble them, until they recover.
E si atrobas en la codena putrefaccio e no adhereys al os, lahoras tu inscideys tot aquo poyrit e geta aquo, e aprop cura aquo.	And if you find putrefaction in the flesh and it does not adhere to the bone, then incise all of that and scrape it away, and properly cure it.
Mays si en aquestas plaguas es arteria o vena de la qual fluxs de sanc pot evenir, e no es abscindida per medicinas, lahoras tu inquier sobre la arteria, e si atrobas aquela no-inscidida, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am spatum, o lia aquela; e si necessitat te provoca que aquo que havem dit no comfereys, lahoras tu cauteriza entro que·l sanc sia abscidit.	If in these swellings the artery or vein through which blood flows to cause it cannot be avoided and is not cut by medicines, then you inquire about the artery, and if you find that uncut one, you incise it with a blade or ligate it; and if necessity prompts you that what we have said does not apply, then you cauterize where the blood has been abscised.
E si aquestas plaguas son simplas e petitas, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiere; enayssi que tu polverizas sobre aquelas aquesta polvera, quar consolidada aquela denant que l’ayre mude aquelas.	And if these swellings are simple and small, the cause of them is light; sprinkle this powder over them until the swelling diminishes before the air changes.
E la manieyra de la polvera es aquesta: recipe oli de enses partida una, de sanc de drago partida doas, de caus no-extincta partidas tres; sia tot mot trissat e crivellat, e de lu sia la plagua omplida, e sia constrengida per bona constriccio entro que be sobre aquela aderesca, e sia coagulada am le sanc.	And the manner of the powder is this: take one part olive oil, two parts dragon's blood, and three parts burned and sieved ashes; fill the swelling with it, confine it well within a good container, and let it adhere and coagulate with the blood.
E aprop strengeys aquela desus am pulvils e leyssa aquela, e no la deslias mentre esta ayssi que no es apostemada, quar no es eredicada de lu la medicina entro que sia sanada.	Then strengthen it above with powder and leave it, and do not remove it while it is not absorbed, for the medicine will not be effective until it is healed.
E alcuna vetz fa aquo sola cautz, quan no es a tu en present enses e sanc de drago.	And sometimes one does this alone with a cautery, when it is not in your presence the smell of dragon's blood.
E ja fa aquesta meteyssa operacio en las grans plaguas quan conveneys que sia pausada sobre aquelas e sian streytas, e so plaguas recentz am le lor sanc, las quals le ayre no ha alteradas.	And this operation is performed on large wounds when you deem it necessary to have them closed and straightened, and on recent wounds whose blood still flows.
E si le ayre las ha alteradas, e majorment quan es en temps d’estiu, lahoras no es entencio a la posicio de aquesta polvera, mays adonc cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit, enayssi que tu pauses sobre aquelas alcus enguents degistius, o que pauses sobre aquelas pols de la farina del ordi am aygua e mel entro que getan poyredura; e aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And if the air has altered them, especially when it is in the summer season, then I do not take their position for this powder, but then cure those as we have said, try placing your hand on those small, digestible ointments, or place your hand on those mixtures of wheat flour and water and honey that produce suppuration; and then cure those with another treatment until they are healed.
Mays si accideys am la plagua fractura en os, e es petita, lahoras tu extratz aquo am gesti.	And if a fracture occurs in the bone of the wound, and it is small, then you extract this with your fingers.
E yeu diyre la cura de las fracturas del cap en aquo que es envenidor.	And I will speak of the treatment of fractures of the head in what is venomous.
De las plaguas del col.	Of the wounds of the neck.
Mays si la plagua accideys en le col, lahoras no es en lu differencia en medicacio, e entre la plagua del cap quan es simpla.	If the pain occurs in the neck, there is no difference in treatment, and between head pains when they are simple.
Mays si ja le nervi del col es inscis o arteria, lahoras si es nervi, no es en lu engen sino que sia evitada curacio de lu am aquo que fa vehement stipticitat, ayssi cum ziniar e zegi que es vetriol e semblantz a lor quar nozo als nervis e contrazo aquel.	But if the nerve of the neck is incised or an artery, when it is a nerve, there is no engineering to be done but rather avoid any cure that causes strong constriction, as zinc and zyg are like glass and resemble them in hardness against the nerves and contract those.
E no pauses sobre la plagua alcuna causa de tot freja, quar la sustancia dels nervis es freja e la continuacio de lu es am le cervel, le qual es le pus aut de totz les membres.	And do not place any cause of cold on the pain, for the substance of the nerves is cold and their continuity is in the brain, which is the core of all body parts.
E si’ aquo am que es curat de medicinas leugieras, ayssi cum es caus lavada am aygua dousa, alcuna veguada enfusa en oli rozat o no-rozat, e thucia quan es lavada am aygua dousa e las autras peyras minarantz segon aquesta manieyra, e enguentz humitz.	And if what is to be cured with light medicines, such as after a double wash with water, sometimes infused in olive oil roasted or unroasted, and thyme when washed with double water and the other pears mixed according to this manner, apply moist ointment.
Mays si la plagua es gran, lahoras aministra sutura, o coarta las labias de lu, e aprop cura aquela am pulvils entro que sia sanada.	But if the pain is great, then administer缝合，或收缩其边缘，并且在愈合后用粉末治疗。
Mays si a la plagua es profunditat o accideys en lu a la pus bassa partida poyredura, lahoras perfora aquela en le loc mays depremegut.	If there is depth to the wound or accidents in the lower part near the buttocks, then puncture there at the most swollen place.
Mays si en la plagua ja es inscisa arteria e es conseguit flux de sanc, lahoras separa o secca aquela, o lia aquela, o cauteriza aquela si necessitat te provoca ad aquo.	If the wound already incises an artery and a flow of blood is obtained, then separate or dry that area, or tie it with a bandage, or cauterize it if necessity demands it.
Mays si ja ha insciditz les spondils del golayro o tot, e so salvadas las venas del col, lahoras tu ajusta las labias de la codena am sutura sobre la cana del golayro e no toques aquel; abantz egala aquel e reduzeys aquel sobre la sua figura natural, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent, e leyssa aquela per alcus jorns; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz en les quals es stipticitat e excitacio entro que sia sanat.	If the vertebrae of the neck are incised or completely cut, and if the veins of the neck are saved, then you adjust the flaps of the skin and suture over the spine, but do not touch that area; proceed in the same manner for all and return it to its natural shape, and strongly strengthen it with proper structure, leaving it alone for a few days; and treat it with ointments that have stiffness and stimulation until it is healed.
Mays si la plagua ja en le os a fayta enprecio, lahoras percuireys aquela, e lahoras si en lu ha fragmentz de hos, extratz totz aquels que podes de lor; e aquo que a tu no es apparelhat, leyssa aquo entro que la plagua se poyrisca, e sia separat e la egrecio de lu sia alleujada.	If the wound has already reached the bone, then percuss that area, and if there are fragments of bone in it, extract all those you can from it; what is not accessible to you, leave it until the wound suppures, heals, and the inflammation around it subsides.
E si la plagua es recent lahoras polveriza sobre aquela polvera la qual t’e recomtada.	And if the wound is recent then powder it with the powder which you have been advised.
Mays si en la plagua es fayta fistula, lahoras cura aquela am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra aprop en le sieu capitol.	But if in the wound a fistula is made, then cure that as well, of which the remedy will be described shortly in its own chapter.
De las plaguas del col o de semblantz quan fayta entre las spallas e es fayta am spaza o am cotel o am lansa o am semblantz.	Of wounds of the neck or similar, when made between the shoulders and are caused by spear or by sword or by lance or by similar.
Si es percussio de lansa o de cotel, e vezes de lu la profunditat, lahoras considera mays si de la plagua yeys ventositat quan le malaute elena; lahoras sapias que la plagua es mortal.	If it is a lance or sword percussion, and the depth of the wound varies, then consider more if from the wound there is edema when the patient faints; then you know that the wound is fatal.
E si en lu no es profunditat e la plagua es recent am le sieu sanc, lahoras tu pauses en lu de la primieyra horo polvera, e no strenhas aquel per que no sia le sanc retengut en la profunditat de lu e que retorne al cor e que aucigua le malaute, mays pausa en lu enguent atractiu, e deslia aquela doas veguadas le dia.	And if there is no depth to the wound and it is recent with its own blood, then you apply powder for the first hour, and do not press on it so that the blood does not remain deep in the wound and return to the heart, which might cause further fainting; instead, apply an attractive ointment and remove it after two days.
E si l’enguent no es a tu present, lahoras tu pausa en le orrifici de la plagua coto viel per que sucque aquo que yeys de las humiditatz; e fay que le malaute dorma sobre la plagua per que corra aquo que es en lu ajustat.	And if the ointment is not at hand, then you place a wick in the wound to drain what has come from the humors; and make the patient lie on the wound so that what is in the wound can flow out.
Mays si ja de la plagua son passatz tres dias o mays e no accideys al malaute spasme ni tremor de cor mal ni strictura de ale, e vezes las autras dispozicios bonas de lu, lahoras sapias que plagua es salva; e adonc cura aquela am calguas e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanada.	If already three days or more have passed since the onset of the illness and no spasms, tremors, or constriction occur in the patient's chest, and other good dispositions are present, then you may conclude that the illness has passed; then proceed to treat with calx (a type of plaster) and another form of treatment until it is healed.
Mays si la sanacio de lu es excusada, e ja tot temps es uberta, lahoras sapias que ja es fayta fistula; cura donc aquela per le sieu capitol.	If the healing of the patient is impossible, and the area has been open for too long, you may conclude that a fistula has formed; then treat it according to its own principles.
E si la plagua es per inscisio de spaza o de cotel, e es simpla en la superficia del pietz o del dos, lahoras cura aquela am aquo que es precedit de sutura, si es gran, o am polvera, si es petita.	And if the illness is due to a stab wound or cut, and it is simple on the surface of the foot or toe, then treat it according to what is preceded by suturing, if it is large, or with powder, if it is small.
Mays si ja ha fayta enprecio en le os, e so ja de lu inscizas pessas, lahoras tu torqua la plagua e coyta ad extrayre aquelas pessas, si so separadas.	If it has already pierced the bone, and you are now incising the wound, then twist the wound and pull to extract those pieces, if they are separate.
Mays si no so separadas, lahoras leyssa las entro que se poyresca la plagua, que la extraccio de lor es alleujada.	If they are not separate, then leave them alone until the wound suppurates, as their extraction is alleviated.
E de las autras plaguas accidentz en les autres membres le juvament en curacio es le juvament de aquo que havem dit.	And for other accidents of pain in other members, the cure is the treatment that we have said.
De las plaguas del ventre.	Of the pains in the abdomen.
L’indisposicio la qual accideys en le ventre es o gran, o pauc, o migiera.	The discomfort that occurs in the abdomen is either great, little, or moderate.
De la gran alcunas veguadas yeys le budel o nervi del budel, per que es fayta intromissio de lor e la sutura de lor esser pus vehement e pus subtil.	For the great pain, sometimes open the intestine or nerve of the intestine, so that there is an intervention in them and their suturing becomes more vigorous and finer.
E disrupcio petita es fayta dificil per autra manieyra, e siec se que la reduccio de lor es pus dificil, si no te coytes de la intromissio de lor al sieu loc tantost, quar se ubre e es engrossat per que le intrament de lu es fayt difficil.	And a small disruption is made difficult by another method. I believe that the reduction of them becomes more difficult if you do not carefully avoid the intervention in them at their place; for when they open and become enlarged, the instrument for them becomes difficult to use.
E donc la milhor disrupcio es migiera, quar en aquela no es dificil la reduccio del budel, ayssi cum es dificil en las doas specias denant ditas.	And therefore the best disruption is moderate, for in that case the reduction of the intestine is not difficult, as it is difficult in the two species mentioned earlier.
E sapias que sutura del ventre es segon quatre manieyras, mays doas suturas son comunas que conveneysso en suturas de las autras plaguas del cors.	And know that the suturing of the abdomen is according to four methods, but two sutures are common and apply to the sutures of other body pains.
E duas autras suturas proprias comunican a las autras plaguas, mays empero so mays proprias en la sutura del ventre.	And two other proper sutures communicate to the other wounds, more properly so in the suture of the abdomen.
E yeu recomti a tu quascuna am exposicio e declaracio.	And I advise you concerning each exposition and declaration.
Donc dic que quan la plagua es petita e es eyssit alcuna causa del budel per aquela, e es fayt dificil a reduzir aquel, lahoras aquo es en una de doas manieyras: o per parvitat de la disrupcio ayssi cum havem dit, o quan al budel es venguda inflacio per la frigiditat de l’ayre.	So say that when the wound is small and some cause of the intestine seeps through it, making it difficult to reduce that part, then this is in one of two ways: either due to the smallness of the disruption, as we have said, or when inflammation comes to the intestine from the coldness of the air.
E donc quan aquo es ayssi, lahora cove que tu scalfes aquel enayssi que tu submerges una sponga ho drap humit en aygua tebeza sola, o que coguas en aygua squinant, e cyperum, e spic, e embroques am aquela le budel entro que la imflacio sia resolvuda.	And when this is so, then you should soak that attempt by submerging a sponge or a wet cloth in pure water, or by using squill, cyperus, and spikenard, and inserting the intestine into it until the inflammation is resolved.
E alcunas veguadas fa aquo vi en le qual ha stipticitat, e es milhor que la aygua sola en resolucio de la imflacio.	And sometimes in those where there is stiffness, it is better to use water mixed with other substances for the resolution of inflammation.
E donc cum tu vezes la imflacio esser resolvuda, lahoras tu humecta le budel am aygua en la qual es coyta altea e malvas, quar per aquo es alleujat le intrament de lu am pauca causa.	And when you see the inflammation resolved, then moisten the intestine in water in which almond and marjoram are steeped, for by this it is alleviated from the instrument due to little cause.
Mays si es escusat le intrament de lu aprop aquesta curacio, lahoras scindeys la disrupcio un petit am strument am le qual so inscididas emorroydas.	If it is necessary to use an instrument near this cure, then cut the disruption a little with a small instrument in which the veins are incised.
E la curacio primieyra es milhor, quan es propriada que no es seccio, e no sia occupacio a seccar aprop necessitat e defaliment.	The first cure is better when it is proper that it not be section and not be occupation to dry up unnecessarily and deplete.
Del instrument, sec se la forma de lu:	Of the instrument, describe its form:
La una partida de lu torta aguda, e l’autra partida no-acuta, e la extremitat subtil, e no sia am la subtilitat de spatum, abantz sia obtusa un pauc.	One part of the blade is sharp, and the other part not acute, with the tip subtle, but not too fine like a spout; it should be slightly blunt.
E donc cum la plagua es amplificada e yeys fora le budel, lahoras cove que la sua reduccio sia segon la forma de lu natural, en le sieu loc propri, si es possible sobre aquo, quar milhor es.	And so, when the wound is enlarged and the intestine protrudes, ensure that its reduction follows its natural form, in its proper place. If possible, do it over what belongs there, for this is better.
Mays quan la disrupcio es ampla, e es en la partida pu bassa del ventre, lahoras cove que tu fassas jazer le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa las suas cambas pus autas que·l sieu cap; e si es en la partida pus desus del ventre, lahoras tu pause le cap de lu e·l pietz pus autz que las partidas dejos.	If the disruption is large and located in the lower part of the abdomen, then place the patient's back on a surface, and position their legs higher than their head. If it is in the upper part of the abdomen, then hold the patient's head and feet higher than the rest of their body.
E semblantment si la disrupcio es en una de las doas partz del ventre, lahoras pausa la tua entencio e la tua consideracio tostemps en aysso per que la partida en la qual es la plagua sia pus auta que l’autra.	And if the disruption is in one of the two parts of the abdomen, then pause your understanding and consideration for some time so that the part where the injury is may be higher than the other.
E ayssi cove que tu aministres aquo en las plaguas grans e en las plaguas migieras.	And thus you should apply this in major wounds and in wounds of medium severity.
E en las plaguas petitas, pausa aquo que es a tu preparat, e aprop fay que·l ministre sia entre las tuas mas pyatados, le qual tengua la disrupcio tota am la sua ma e ajusta las labias de lu, e aprop descuebre de aquela ad aquel que siec la sutura alcuna causa aprop autra.	And in small wounds, pause what you have prepared, and then make sure that the minister uses your most skilled assistants. He should hold the disruption entirely with his hand and adjust the edges of the wound, and then uncover that to this one who needs suturing due to some cause nearby.
E aquesta es la manieyra de sutura comuna: una que prenguas la agula, o comte de agula segon la cantitat de la amplitut de la plagua; e aprop layssa de la extremitat de la disrupcio del dit anular, e strenh la agula una, otre que tu no metas fiel en las doas extremitatz de la codena, am doas extremitatz del ciphac que es dejos la codena de las partidas dedintz, entro que fassas aquela penetrar de aquela partida; e tu ja has agreguadas doas extremitatz de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, e so faytas quatre ordes.	And this is the common method of suturing: take the needle, or a counterneedle according to the quantity of the wound's width; then leave a bit of the end of the disruption from the ring finger, and thread the needle once, or another that you do not put a single thread in both ends of the codena (a type of needle), but in two ends of the ciphac (another type of needle) that are left from the inner parts, before you make it penetrate from one part; and you have already added two ends of the codena and two ends of the ciphac, and so four orders are made.
E aprop strenh am fiel doble en le circuit de la agula, e alcunas veguadas de doas partz ensemps, e aprop agregua las doas labias e la plagua per agreguacio decent; e aprop layssa la grossitut del dit e fiqua una autra agulha en aquela, e aprop lia aquela am fiel ayssi cum fiest am la primieyra agulha; e no cesses far aquo si es necessitat am las agulhas entro que ajas complida tota la contriccio de la plagua.	And then strongly insert a double thread in the circuit of the needle, and several times from both sides together, and then join the two lips and the wound by decent joining; and let the thickness of the digit remain, and put another needle there, and join that one with thread as you did with the first needle; do not cease to do this if necessary among the needles until all the contraction of the wound is completed.
E sian las agulhas migieras entre groceza e subtilitat, quar las agulhas subtils mot leugierament insciden la carn; e las grossas so de dificil intrament en la codena, e donc per aquo cove que sian migieras en subtilitat e grosseza.	And the needles should be of medium thickness between coarseness and subtlety, for the fine ones penetrate the flesh lightly; and the coarse ones are difficult to handle in suturing, therefore it is advisable that they be of medium thickness in terms of fineness and coarseness.
E no cove que la agulha sia ficada en doas extremitatz de la codena propdana mot, per so que la carn no sia inscidida leugierament e que la plagua se huebra devant la sua consolidacio.	And it should not be that the needle is placed at both ends of the suture closely together, for then the flesh would be penetrated lightly and the wound would open up before its healing.
E no sian prolonguadas de sutura per que la plagua no sia prohibida de consolidacio.	And do not make the sutures too long so that the wound does not hinder its healing.
E aprop inscideys las extremitatz de las agulhas per so que no ledescan le malaute deves le sieu dormier; e pausaras sobre la sutura pulvils expanduts de tota partida, les quals tenguan las extremitatz de las agulhas; e layssa aquelas entro que sapias que la plagua ja es consolidada.	And then incise the ends of the needles so that they do not lead the wound away from its proper healing; place your hand over the suture with powder expanded from all parts, which cover the ends of the needles; and leave them until you can see that the wound is already healed.
E aquestas specias de sutura am agulhas en cal manieyra es pus convenient en las plaguas petitas, quar habasta en la sutura de lor una agulha o doas o entorn aquelas.	These kinds of sutures with needles are more convenient in small wounds, for only one or two needles suffice for their suture.
Mays la segonda sutura es cominal: e es que tu aministres am sutura las quatre extremitatz, de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, en una veguada, am agulha en la qual sia fiel envolopat engual en subtilitat e grosseza.	The second suture is as follows: and you perform the suture of the four extremities, from the cord and two extremities of the tendon, in one go, with a needle that is wrapped equally in subtlety and thickness.
E aprop quan am la agulha auras penetrat aquestas quatre extremitatz, reduzeys la agulha de aquela meteyssa partida de la qual comensest, per so que le fiel retrayt caja de la pus subirana partida a la plagua, per so que la sutura sia segon sutura de drap am la qual les draps so strengutz.	And then, when you have the needle penetrate these four extremities, withdraw the needle from that side where the suture begins, so that the thread retracts and comes up from the other side of the wound, thus making the suture like a stitch in cloth where the threads are tightly drawn.
E pausa entre quascuna sutura la quantitat del gros del dit mendre.	And pause between each suture the width of a little finger.
E aquesta sutura sabo les homes.	And this suture I know for men.
E am tal sutura yeu cozegui la plagua la qual era accidida a un home en le sieu ventre le qual era stat plaguat am un cotel, e era la disrrumpcio de la plagua major de un palm, e era eyssit dels budels entorn dos palms del budel del mieg loc e era la disrupcio en le mieg del membre; e adonc yeu reduzegui aquel depus que le budel havia stat foro la plagua per xxiiii horas.	And with this suture, I closed the wound which was inflicted upon a man in his belly, where he had been stabbed by a刀具，伤口主要部分约一掌宽，并位于肚脐两侧约两掌处；这是肢体中部的伤口中断。当时，那个伤口在腹部开放了大约24小时后我才缝合它。
E la plagua fo consolidada en le spazi de xv dias o entorn, e curegui aquel e es sanat; e aprop aquo visquec per motz ans, e es conversat en las suas disposicios.	The wound is consolidated in the space of fifteen days or so, and cure that and it is healed; then those viscera are moved back to their positions.
E les autres metges havian jutgat que no fora sanat; e per miracle foc, quar yeu no curegui aquel am enguent, quar era en loc en le qual enguent no era atrobat ni deguna medicina, mays pausegui sobre la plagua coto viel dos veguadas lo dia e ablucio assiduo am aygua de mel entro que foc sanat.	And other doctors had judged that it was not healed; by miracle fire, for I did not cure that without ointment, for it was in a place where ointment could not reach nor any medicine, but placed my hand over the wound like an old woman two days a day and applied frequent washing with honey water until the fire healed.
Mays yeu diyre dos specias de sutura proprias segon narracio de Paraula.	And I will speak of two species of suturing properly according to the narrative of Paracelsus.
E es que tu comenses am sutura de la codena, e entrometas agulha de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz.	And you should start with the chain stitch, and insert the needle from one side outside to the inside.
E donc cum la agulha penetra en la codena e en aquel meteys lacertz segon rectetut e en longetut de tot le cos, e layssa la extremita del ciphac en le qual has entromesa la agulha; e fay penetrar en la autra extremitat la agulha de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo en l’autra extremitat del mihat.	And thus, as the needle penetrates through the chain and follows a straight path along the entire length of the body, you leave the end of the thread on which you have inserted the needle; then pass the needle from inside to outside through the other end of the stitch.
E don cum tu auras fayta aquela penetrar, lahoras tu fay aquela penetrar autra veguada en aquela meteyssa extremitat del mihat de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz; e leyssa la extramitat del ciphac que es en aquest latz, e fay penetrar la agulha en l’autra extremitat de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo.	And when you have made the penetration, then make another penetration in that same limb from the outer part to the inner part; leave the end of the probe on this side, and insert the needle into the other inner part from the outer part.
E fay penetrar am aquela la tua penetracio am la qual fas aquela penetrar en le ciphac en la extremitat del mirat la qual es en la partida de lu entro que tot aquel penetre.	And make the penetration with your previous penetration, which you make penetrate into the probe at the end of the limb which is in the middle so that all of it penetrates.
E aprop comensa de aquest meteys costat e cus aquel am la extremitat que es del ciphac en l’autra latz, e extratz la agulha de la codena la qual penetrec, e aprop redutz aquela en aquela codena e cos la extremitat del ciphac que es en l’autra costat am aquesta extramitat del mirat; e extratz aquela de la codena la qual es de part de lu.	And then begin from this side, piercing the probe at the end that is on the probe in the other side, and extract the needle from the sheath which you have penetrated. Then return it to the sheath using the end of the probe that is on this other side of the limb; and extract it from the sheath which belongs to it.
E fay aquo una veguada e autra, e fay aquo una veguada aprop autre veguada entro que tu cozes tot aquo que es deforo segon aquel eysemple.	And do this one time and again, and do it another time or two more as you sew the entire outer part according to that example.
E la suma de aquesta manieyra de sutura es que tu cozes am sutura de pellicies am la qual cozo las pels, enayssi que tu cozes le ciphac una veguada de la part de la extremitat de la codena, e que leysses aquela autra veguada entro que la ajas complida.	And the sum of this method of suturing is that you sew with thread, upon which you sew the skin. Ensure that you sew the probe once from the part of the end of the sheath, and leave the other stitch until after you complete the join.
Mays la segonda specia de sutura propria la qual dieys eyssament Gualia , e aquest es de sermo de lu e per lu recomtat, es que tu cozas aquela segon semilitut am la qual alcus medicantz cozo aquela, enayssi que agreguan tota partida a la sua compar partida a lu convenient per natura; e aplican la extremitat de autre de lu e la extremitat del mirat al autra extremitat de lu, e aquo es fayt segon que yeu a tu recomti.	The second species of suturing which Guilia often teaches is by speaking about it and recommending it, that you suture that according to semilitut, as those physicians suture that, in attempting to add all parts to their proper part according to nature; and apply the extremity of one to another and the beginning of the other to the extremity of the other, and this is done as I have recommended to you.
Cove que tu fiques la agulha en la extremitat del mirat a tu propdana de la partida deforo, e fassas aquela penetrar a la partida dedintz en aquel sol, e leysses dos extremitatz del ciphac; e aprop revolveys la agulha e fay aquela penetrar de foro a la dedintz en dos extremitatz del ciphac.	Place the needle at the extremity of the thread on your proper side of the part from within, and make it penetrate from inside to that part, leaving two extremities of the thread; then turn the needle and make it penetrate from outside to inside in two extremities of the thread.
E aprop revolveys aquelas cascunas, e fay penetrar quascunas de la partida dededintz entro a la partida deforo en dos extremitatz del mirat autras que so en le latz contrari.	Then turn those threads, and make each part penetrate from inside to the outside in two extremities of the thread on the other side.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura es milhor de la sutura comuna leugiera, e es sutura de la qual precedic rememoracio.	This method of suturing is better than the common loose suture, and it is the suturing method of which I have previously reminded you.
Aquest es le sermo de Gualia	This is the saying of Gualia
E mays le diyssero alcus, sutura del ventre es rectificada am dos agulhas, so es que tu entrometas en aquestas a quascunas un fiel, e comensa am intromiccio de agulha de aquo que es deves tu, e fay aquela penetrar entro al autra latz segon sutura de aquels les quals cozo les cuers engualment.	And some would say that the incision of the belly is corrected with two needles, so that you insert into these a thread, and begin with the needle insertion of what you should, and make that one penetrate through the other layer according to the stitches which equalize the hearts.
E sapias que quan disrupcio es en le mieg loc del ventre, lahoras la sutura de lu es pus difficil que dels autres locs del ventre.	And know that when the disruption is in the middle part of the belly, then the stitch of that place is more difficult than of other parts of the belly.
Mays le juguament de medicacio de plagua es jutgament de las autras plaguas.	More the judgment of medication for plague is the judgment of other plagues.
La qual causa es quar quan tu consieguas la plagua recent am le sieu sanc denant que l’ayre altera aquela, e reduses le budel e cozes aquela e aptas aquela decentment, lahoras pausa sobre aquela polvera encarnativa.	That cause is when you manage to obtain the recent plague from its own blood before the air alters it, and you reduce the intestine and suture it properly, then place it over that flesh-colored powder.
E si le ayre ja ha alterada la plagua, lahoras pausa sobre aquela alcus enguentz les quals so a tu presens entro que fassan peyra dura e cajan les fiels, e sian consolidatz ciphac e mirat; e aprop cura aquela ayssi cum es la curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And if the air has already altered the plague, then place it over that, some ointments which harden and break the threads, and be consolidated chapstick and rubbed; and then cure it as is the treatment of other plagues until it is healed.
Mays si a tu no so presens las medicinas, lahoras pausa sobre aquela tantost, pus que comensa a getar brac, coto viel, e permuta aquel dos veguadas le dia, ayssi cum a tu e ensenhat, entro que sia sanat, quar tu no indigeysses de autra medicacio en motas disposicios quan las plaguas so simplas.	If you do not have the medicines at hand, then pause over that for a while, until he begins to sweat much, and frequently change the dressing every two days, as I have shown you, until he is healed, for you will not need any other medical treatments when the sores are simple.
Mays si tu temes que la plagua comunique en lesio als membres principals, lahoras cove que tu submergas lana leon en oli de trempada qualiditat, o en oli rozat, e pausa aquela en le circuit dels locs que so entre les angonas e dejos las aysselas.	If you fear that the sore might communicate infection to the principal members, then soak a lion's wool in well-refined oil or in sweet oil, and place it over the area between the joints, leaving the axillae uncovered.
E si sent dolor o putrefaccio en les sieus budels, quar motas veguadas aquo s’endeve, lahoras cristeriza aquel am vi stiptic negre tebe, e majorment si la poyredura es pervenguda en le budel e es fayta exitura penetrant entro la conquavitat de lu.	And if there is pain or putrefaction in their intestines, then for several days apply this: crush that amanita stiptica black terebinth, and especially if the inflammation has reached the intestine and caused an exitura penetrating into the cavity of it.
E sapias que aquela que es del budel gros es de pus leugiera sanacio que aquela que es en les budels subtils.	And know that the one from the large intestine is less likely to be serious than that from the fine intestines.
E es de dificil sanacio quar le budel le qual es apelat “gegunu” no recep sanacio de plagua que caja en lu de tot; e aquo es per la gran multitut de venas que so en lu e per la magnitut de lu que so en aquelas, e per subtilitat del cos de aquel, e per propinquitat de aquel a natura de nervis.	And it is difficult to heal, for the intestine which is called "gungun" does not receive healing from any sore that falls into it; this is due to the great number of veins in it and its large size, as well as the fine nature of that part, and its proximity to the nature of nerves.
Mays si aquo que procezeys de la plagua es la tela, e conseguas aquela recent, redutz aquela segon la tua rectetut am la qual reduzes les budels engualment.	If what you are treating is the skin, and you manage to obtain that recently inflamed area, treat it according to your skill by reducing the intestines equally.
Mays si es passat a lu spazi e ja es feyt vert o negre, lahoras que tu strenguas aquela am fiel sobre le loc que es denigrat de lu, per so que vengua fluxs de sanc, quar en la tela so venas e arterias.	If it has passed into the space and is already red or black, when you strengthen that with astringent over the area that is deteriorating, so that it brings forth bloody flux, for in the skin there are veins and arteries.
E aprop inscideys aquo que es otra aquel liament, e pausa dos extremitatz del fiel pendentz de la partida dejos de la plagua foro lu, per que sobre tu sia alleujada la atraccio de lu deves le cazement de la tela e emissio del brac de la plagua.	Then incise what is another of that ligament, and place two ends of the astringent hanging from the cut part of the wound, so that over you the attraction to it is alleviated; close the opening of the skin and the emission of the flux of the wound.
Rememoracio de las plaguas quan accideysso en le budel.	Remembrance of the wounds when they occur in the intestine.
Quan accideys disrupcio en le budel e es petita, lahoras es possibla que sia resteurada en alcus homes, per aysso quar yeu vi aquel le qual era stat plaguat en le sieu ventre am percussio de lansa et era la plagua de la part dreyta del stomac, e la plagua era antiquada e fayta fistula, e eyssic de lu gestio e ventositat.	When there is a disruption in the intestine and it is small, then it is sometimes possible to restore it in some people, therefore I saw one who had been wounded in his belly with the thrust of a lance, and the wound was on the right side of the stomach; the wound was old and had become a fistula, and he healed from the operation and enlargement.
Adonc yeu pansegui la curacio de lu ja sia que no era confizat en la sanacio de lu, mays cessegui subtiliar aquel entro que foc sanat e le loc es consolidat.	Then I pursue the cure of him whether he was not closed in the healing of him, but cease to subtlety bring that which is healthy into the place and let it be consolidated.
E yeu pus que vi le loc ja consolidat, timegui sobre le malaute que endevengues sobre lu accident de mal en le sieu ventre; e no endevenc alcu per aquo mal accident e romas en las suas milhos disposicios mangant e bevent, e aprop entrec en banh e es exercitat en sos ditz.	And when I see the place already consolidated, I treat the patient who has suffered an accident of evil in his own belly; and do not suffer any through this evil accident and break his natural dispositions eating and drinking, and then enter into baths and exercise his words.
E ja diysero alcus experimentados que quan endeve plagua en le budel, e es petita, lahoras cove que sia liada segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas fromiguas de grans caps; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua e pausa una fromigua de aquelas que aja la boca uberta sobre las doas labias de la plagua; donc quan pren sobre aquelas e strenh la sua boca, abscindeys le cap de lu, quar adhereys e no es dissolvut.	And some experienced ones have said that when there is a plague in the intestine and it is small, then you should tie it according to this manner: and that you take fireflies from large caps; and place one of those fireflies with its mouth open over the two lips of the plague; therefore when it takes on those and tightens its mouth, cut off the head of it, for it adheres and does not dissolve.
E aprop pausa autra formigua prop la primieyra, e no cesses aquo a far am formiguas una aprop autra segon la quantitat de tota la plagua.	And place another firefly nearby, and do not cease to put fireflies one after another according to the quantity of the entire plague.
E aprop reduzeys aquela e cos la plagua; e romanguan aquels caps annexces en le budel entro que·l budel sia sanat; e no accideys al malaute degun nocument.	And then return the hernia and the wound; and drain those adjacent caps within the intestine until the intestine is healed; and do not damage the patient in any way.
E ja es possible que·l budel sia liat am fiel subtil lo qual es fayt del budel de bestia annexs am lu, pus que es mes en agulha; e es que tu prenguas la extremitat de aquestz fiels de budel, e sia mot descarnat, e aprop lia la extremitat de lu am fiel de li, envolopat, e aprop entromet aquel fiel en agulhas e cos am aquel le budel, e areduzeys aquel en la disrupcio.	And it is possible that the intestine has been irritated by fine bile produced from the adjacent intestinal tissue. This is done by taking the extremity of these threads of intestine, making it somewhat raw, then placing the extremity in bile wrapped up, and inserting this bile into needles and cloth to heal the intestine, and return it to its disruption.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura am formiguas no es sino segon via de fiducia e d’esperansa.	And this method of suturing with threads is merely done out of trust and hope.
Mays si la plagua es gran e ampla, majorment si es en un dels budels subtils, quar lahoras no es engen sino subtiliacio, e no es sanacio de lu de tot.	But if the wound is large and extensive, especially in one of the fine intestines, where there is no real injury but merely irritation, and it does not heal completely.
De curacio de zuchem e fistula.	For the treatment of abscesses and fistulas.
Sapias que tota plagua e apostema quan se envilheseys e se Antiqua, e es fayt ulcus, e no es consolidat e geta braç tot temps e no es abscindit, lahoras, en qualque membre sia, universalment es nompnada fistula e nos la apelam aquela azukem.	Know that any wound or abscess when it is wrapped and left to mature, and becomes a ulcer, and does not heal completely and continues to discharge pus constantly without being incised, wherever it occurs in the body, it is universally named a fistula and we call it an abscess.
E fistula segon veritat es nodacio feutrada, dura, blanqua am la qual no es dolor e a la qual es conquavitat ayssi cum es conquavitat de pena de ausel; e per aysso nompnat aquela alcus rizatz, id est pena.	And according to truth, a fistula is a hardened, white node, upon which there is no pain and which is contained as is the cavity of an abscess; hence it is named that root, that is, pain.
E es en alcus homes humida, la qual geta brac; e fort leu la humiditat es abscidida en alcunas horas.	And in some people it is moist, which gets inflamed; and the moisture is removed in some hours.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta humiditat es mota, e es pauca, e es grossa, e es subtil.	And in some cases this moisture is thick, small, and subtle.
E yeu ja he denant dit en la divisio, lahoras cum yeu diyssi las plaguas, que tot ulcus que no es sanat ni no es en lu nuda carn, no es aquo sino per una de ix causas: de las quals la una es o per pauquesa de sanc en le cos; o per malicia de lu; o quar entre lu e las labias es carn dura prohibent nativitat de carn; o quar es de mota legesa; o quar aquel ulcus en si meteys es poyrit e la materia que es a lu tramesa es de mala qualitat; o quar la medicina es enconvenient en la curacio de lu; o quan corrupcio catz en la regio, e es pestilencia; o per proprietat de regio ayssi cum endeve a Saragossa , en la qual es fayta difficil degestio de las malautias, e es tardada en aquela sanacio de apostema per natura; o quar en lu es os un, o motz osses.	And I have already previously mentioned in the division, when I spoke of the plaigues, that any ulcer which is not healed nor lies bare flesh within it, is not this but for one of nine causes: of which the first is either due to insufficient healing in the body; or by malice of the part itself; or because between the part and the lips there is hard flesh forbidden by the nature of the flesh; or because it is thick and heavy; or because that ulcer itself contains pus and the matter that is transmitted to it is of poor quality; or because the medicine used in its cure is inappropriate; or when corruption sets in in the region, and there is pestilence; or by the property of the region as in Saragossa, where there is a difficult digestion of illnesses, and healing of an abscess is delayed naturally; or because there is bone present within it, or multiple bones.
Ja e mostrat totas aquelas causas, e·ls senhals de aquelas e la curacio de lor am medicinas en la divisio.	All those causes have been shown, and the signs of them and the cure for them by medicine in this division.
E cove assi que yeu fassa a tu saber la curacio de fistula la qual es fayta per via de operacio am ma.	And thus I will show you how to know the treatment for a fistula which is caused by surgical operation with the hand.
E sapias que fistula accideys en totz les membres del cos; quar de aquelas son fistulas que perveno a las venas grantz e arterias, o als nervis, o al ciphac, o al budel, o a la vesica, o ad alcuna de las costas, o ad alcu dels spondils del dos, o ad alcuna de las juncturas compostas per composicio ayssi quo de la ma e del pe; e de aquelas so que dan a lu propinquitat del membre principal e de semblantz.	And know that fistulas can occur in all parts of the body; some fistulas lead to major veins and arteries, or to nerves, or to the brain, or to the intestine, or to the bladder, or to some of the ribs, or to one of the spinal bones, or to some joint formed thus from the arm and the leg; these are those that are near the main part of the body and similar.
E donc aquela de aquestas fistulas que es segon aquesta manieyra es de las malautias de dificil sanacio, e no recep curacio, e occupacio am aquela es trebalh e ignorancia.	And so of these fistulas that occur in this manner, they are among the illnesses difficult to cure, and do not receive treatment or occupation; for such is labor and ignorance.
E si es de las fistulas alcuna la profunditat de la qual no perve ad aquestz locs que e dit, e esperas e confizas en la curacio de lu, e vols pervenir a cognicio de lu, lahoras pren tenta de eram o de ferr, e si la fistula va segon rectetut, e perquireys aquela am lu.	And if any of these fistulas is so deep that it does not reach the locations mentioned, and you hope for its cure and wish to know about it, then try with a rod or a needle. If the fistula follows the straight path, you will find it by probing.
Mays si la fistula es tortuissitat, lahoras investigua aquela am tenta de plom subtil, quar plom am la levitat del sieu cors es alleujat e curvat deves la tortuositat.	If the fistula is tortuous, then investigate that with a fine lead probe, for lead being light in its body is alleviated and curved to relieve the tortuosity.
E si la fistula es havent motz horrificis, no es a tu possible que signifiques sobre lu am tenta.	And if the fistula has horrific movements, it is not possible for you to signify about it with a probe.
Adonc cristeriza le orrifici per sos orrificis, quar la humiditat per la qual clisterizas aquela va deves las autras orrificis e corr de lor.	Then christerize the orifices by their orifices, for the humidity with which you christerize that one should relieve the other orifices and flow from them.
E aprop inquier exquisitament, segon qual manieyra a tu es possible que conoguas si aqui has os o nervi, e es la conquavitat de la fistula longinqua o propdana, o es una fistula a la qual so motz orrificis e esta sobre aquo tot am la suma de la tua fortaleza, am la tua enterroguacio, am la qual enterroguas le malaute, e la invencio de la dolor deves la tua compressio am la ma sobre le loc, e semblantz de las significacios e de las causas accidentz al apostema.	And then inquire precisely, according to whatever manner it is possible for you to know if here are the vessels or the nerves, and whether the cavity of the fistula is distant or close, or whether it is a fistula with only orifices that this encompasses in all its strength, by your inquiry, by which you inquire the patient, and the invention of the pain with your compression on the area, and the appearance of the significations and the causes of accidents at the abscess.
E cum tu auras stat sobre totas aquelas causas am stacio veraya, lahoras ve a la curacio segon confidencia: e es que tu consideras lahoras si es fistula apparent propinqua o en loc sal, longinqua de junctura, o de nervi, o de arteria, o de vena, o de un dels locs les quals yeu a tu e ditz.	And when you have stood over all those causes in true position, then go to the cure according to confidence: and it is that you consider then if it is a apparent fistula nearby or in a location solid, distant from joint, or from nerve, or from artery, or from vein, or from one of the locations which we tell you.
Lahoras tu secca la fistula segon que denant es dit de la naracio de lu, e osta aquo que es en aquela filtracio e de carns corrumpudas, e aquo que es nascut en le orrifici de la carn, o de theil e de semblantz, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	When you dry the fistula as previously described in its narration, and stop what is within that filtration and of corrupted flesh, and what is born in the orifice of the flesh, or tissue and resemblance, and cure it so that it may be healed.
Mays si la fistula es de longinqua profunditat, e es segon rectetut, lahoras cove que inscidas aquela en le preon atant quant a tu sira possible, e aprop mondifica aquela de totas las suas carns corrompudas; e aprop administra calguas envolopadas en medicinas acutas, e intromet aquelas entro a la conquavitat de la fistula, la qual has conprenduda am ferr.	But if the fistula is of great depth and straight, then delve into it until you can go as far as possible, and thoroughly remove all corrupted flesh; and administer sharp medicines wrapped in cloths, and insert those into the cavity of the fistula, which you have grasped with forceps.
E fay aquo am aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la medicina acuta corroda tot aquo que es romas en la conquavitat de la fistula de la corrupcio.	And do this several times so that the sharp medicine corrupts everything that is rotten in the cavity of the fistula.
E aprop restaura aquela am enguentz les quals engendran carn sana entro que sia sanada.	And then restore it by applying ointments that generate healthy flesh until it is healed.
Mays si no es sanada per aquo, lahoras tu cauteriza aquela segon que havem recomtat.	But if it is not healed by this, then cauterize it as we have recommended.
Mays si la causa de fistula es os e es deves tu certificat aquo, lahoras tu inquireys aquela e secca aquela segon que havem recomtat, si tu no prohibeys alcuna causa de vena o de nervi o de membre principal ayssi cum havem dit.	If the cause of fistula is bone and you must certify this, then inquire about that dry and that moist according to what we have recommended, if you do not prohibit any cause of vein or nerve or of principal member as we said.
Mays si le os es a tu descubert e es en lu alcuna corrupcio e negror, lahoras tu ratz aquel entro que la corrupcio sia hostada tota; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que lu encarne entro que sia sanat.	But if the bone is exposed and there is some corruption and blackness in it, then probe that area where the corruption is completely stopped; and place a dressing over it as the flesh within heals.
E si no es sana e gieta brac ayssi cum fazia, lahoras sapias que tu no est pervengut a la eradicacio tota de la corrupcio; e adonc tu descuebre sobre lu segondanament e exquisitament fay la razio de lu e la mundificacio de lu am la deriera fortalasa tieua, e aprop restaura aquel.	And if it is not yet healed and you graft on as before, then know that you have not completely eradicated the corruption; then uncover again thoroughly and explain its nature and treat it to your last strength, and restore it.
E donc si es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras sapias que aquela corrupcio es en la profunditat longinqua del cors, la qual no ha conseguida, e adonc a tu en aquel no es engen sino laysar aquela.	And if it is healed, that is good; but if not, then know that the corruption is deep within the body, which you have not reached, and then in that case, do nothing but leave it alone.
E si le os corromput es petit, o es a tu possible atirar aquel, lahora tu le atira am forceps subtils las quals conveno ad aquo.	And if the corrupted bone is small, or if it is possible to extract it with forceps, then use fine forceps suitable for this.
E si so motz osses, lahoras exquisitament fay la extraccio de totz aquels, e de aquels no laysses denguna causa am la tua fortaleza.	And if the bones are affected, then you must carefully extract all of them, and from them, you do not leave any cause for your strength.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat alcuna causa de las humiditatz, e en lor inscizio no ha temor ni error, lahoras inscideys aquelas liaments o carns si so aqui, e deliura les osses.	And if there is any cause of humidity affecting you, and in their incision there is neither fear nor error, then incise those ligaments or tissues if they are here, and deliver the bones.
Mays si a tu no es preparacio de ostar les osses de la tua hora, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua aquo que poyresca la plagua aquela, e layssa aquela entro que aquo es al enviro de aquels osses de carns e de liamentz, e guarda la plagua que no sia consolidada, e sia constrengida la seccio la qual tu has inscidida en la tua operacio.	And if there is no preparation to remove the bones at your disposal, then pause over the area that you can make less painful, and leave it in a place near those bones of flesh and ligaments, and guard the area that is not yet consolidated, and keep the section that you have incised during your operation constrained.
Habantz, si temes, pausa sobre lu coto submers en sopre trissat am oli, o coto submers en anguent egipciac, o en alcu dels enguentz vertz, quar quan poyriran aquelas liaments, e les osses son de lor seperatz la ablacio, e de aquels atraccio es alleujada.	Having done this, if you fear, pause over the part submerged in warm oil, or a part submerged in Egyptian unguent, or in some of the green ointments; for when they can be applied, and the bones are separated from it, the pain is alleviated.
Mays si es un gran os ayssi cum le os de camba o de coyssa o semblantz ad aquels, e aquo que de lu es corromput es la facia de lu tant solament, lahoras ratz aquela am resio tant solament derriera entro que sia ostada aquela negror e corrupcio, e aprop restaura la plagua.	And if it is a large bone such as the hip bone or the pelvis or similar, and what is corrupt in it affects only its surface, then rush that away only behind where that darkness and corruption should be removed, and then restore the area.
Mays si aquo que de lu es corrumpyt es gran partida, e la corrupcio ja ha conseguida la medulla del os, lahoras es causa necessaria cerrar aquel e aquel tot inscidir entro al loc on es pervenguda la corrupcio, e lahoras cura aquel entro que sia consolidada.	But if what is from it has腐烂了，而且腐败已经到达骨头的髓质部分，那么就需要封闭那个部位，并彻底切割进入腐败发生的地点，然后在它愈合巩固后再治疗。
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc ad un home en la sua coyssa per que pausez aquela a eyssempli e adjutori sobre la tua operacio.	And I advise you when treating a man in the thigh to place it as an example and helper for your operation.
Foc un home jove per etat entorn xxx ans, al qual accideys dolor en la sua cueyssa, e de las partidas dedintz mauguda es sobre la materia dedintz le cors entro que la materia es pervenguda a la cueyssa, e es materia de apostema am gran apostema, e no foc a lu causa extrinseca.	Let there be a young man around xxx years of age, to whom comes pain in his thigh, and the affected parts inside are about the matter inside the body that has reached the thigh, and is matter of abscess, being a large abscess, and it is not due to an external cause.
E adonc foc extendut le temps am aquela per la error dels metges entro que l’apostema es hubert, e acorrero de lu materias motas, e la sua curacio foc aprop pausada entro que la camba foc fistulada, e faytz son en lu motz orrificis les quals totz getavan poyredura e las humiditatz del cos.	And then the abscess is allowed to expand over time due to the error of the doctors, as the pus from the abscess drains out and the matter moves. The treatment of the patient is almost paused when the leg becomes fistulated, and you make openings in the wound through which pus and the body's fluids flow out.
E adonc le curec multitut de metges entorn dos ans, e no foc en aquels savia ma en la art, entro que yeu fu appelat.	And then the treatment lasted for about two years, and it was not due to their knowledge in the art, but when I was called.
E vi la camba de lu e las materias que corrian de lu aquels orrificis per gran cors; e ja le cos de aquel home era tot stabozit e la color de lu era citrina.	And see the leg, and the materials that were flowing from it through those openings into a great part of the body; and already the condition of that man was entirely stiffened and the color of his skin was yellowish.
E adonc yeu intromesi la tenta ad un de aquels orrificis e pervenguec la tenta al os.	And then I insert the probe into one of those openings and guide the probe to the mouth.
E aprop yeu e perscrutat tostz les orrificis e trobegui aquels pervenir a lor de totas partidas de la camba.	And then examine closely all the openings and find those that are connected to them from all parts of the leg.
E adonc yeu me coytegui e inscidegui sobre un dels orrificis aquels entro que descrobegui una partida del os, e atrobegui aquel corromput, e ja era terros e corrumput e denigrat; e era ja corrumpuda una partida de la camba entro que havia penetrat entro a la mezola.	And then I extract and incise near one of the openings through which I will describe part of the bone, and find the corrupted tissue, which was already rotten, decaying, and discolored; and part of the leg had already rotted where it had penetrated into the marrow.
E adon yeu serregui aquo que a mi era discubert e preparat del os descubert.	And then I sew what was revealed and prepared from the discovered bone.
E yeu cujegui que no fos en le os sino aquela corrupcio la qual abscidigui e serregui, e yeu ja havia derraziguada.	And I ensure that it is not in the bone but in that corrupted tissue which I will remove and sew. And I have already reduced it.
E aprop pausegui la restauracio de la plagua am medicina consolidativas per lonc temps, e no es consolidada.	And then continue the restoration of the wound with consolidative medicines for a long time, and do not stop until it is consolidated.
E aprop yeu iteregui e descubregui sobre le os segondament sobre le descubriment primier, e atrobegui continua corrupcio am le os.	And then you examine and discover over the second bone after the first discovery, and find continuous corruption in the bone.
E serregui aquo que a mi apares de aquela corrupcio, e aprop yeu fo perforsat fayre la curacio de lu e restauracio, e no es restaurat.	And observe what appears to me of that corruption, and then proceed to perform the cure and restoration, and it is not restored.
E adonc yeu descubri sobre lu autra veguada e no cessegui inscidir le os petit a petit particuladament e perforsa la restauracio de lu, e no es restaurat entro que inscidigui entorn un palm de lu, e aquel extraxi am la medula sua, e aprop restauregui aquel am medicinas, e es consolidat leugierament e sanat.	And then you discover over the other side and do not cease to incise the bone little by little particularly and perform the restoration of it, and it is not restored until you incise around a palm's width of it, and he extracts its marrow, and then restore that with medicines, and it is slightly consolidated and healed.
E no es necessaria iteracio en la operacio de lu e seccio de lu sino per la disposicio de la freulesa de lu e per la paucitat de la tollerancia de lu e paor de lu de mort, quar a lu accidia en totas horas per superfluitat de evacuacio sincopi mala.	And there is no need for further iteration in the operation of the section of it, but rather due to the position of the femur and the lack of tolerance and fear of death in it, for it experiences fainting due to excessive evacuation at all times.
E donc sanat es per sanacio entiera, e nada es en loc de os carn dura; e es fayta bona la disposicio de lu en le sieu cors e retornec la vertut de lu; e es conversat en las suas disposicios e no fec a lu contrarietat en ambulacio ni nocument en denguna causa.	And therefore health is through complete healing, and nothing is in lieu of firm flesh; and it is well made the disposition of him in his body and return the virtue of him; and it is converted in his dispositions and not forced upon him contrary movements nor injury in any cause.
Mays si es os eminent en loc del cors ja trauquat, lahoras cove que tu secces aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas liament e strenh aquel en la extremitat de aquel os eminent, e comanda ad alcu que extenda aquel en sus; e pausa aquel liament de lana pus gros del primier liament; e aprop lia aquel sobre la carn que es dejos le os, e exten la extramitat de lu per que atires la carn a las partidas dejos, e tu descuebras la carn sobre le loc le qual voles serrar per que la serra no leda la carn.	If the bone is prominent in the affected area of the body, then you must reduce it according to this manner: take hold firmly and strongly of that bone at its extremity, command someone to extend that bone; place a larger woolen pad over the flesh where the bone was left, extending the extremity of that pad so that it draws the flesh to the parts left behind, and uncover the flesh over the area you wish to cut for which the saw does not cut the flesh.
E pausa fust o taula dejos le os decentment, quar quan tu fas aquo no es prohibida la serra que no secce la carn corrumpuda.	And place a stick or table properly over the bone, for when you do this, the saw is not forbidden to cut through the damaged flesh.
E cove que sia la serradura sobre le loc corrumput petit a petit, quar si es en la concavitat del os corrupcio e no appar en la sua apparicio al sentiment, e forssa a serratura de lu autra veguada.	And ensure that the cut is small at first over the damaged area, for if the corruption is inside the bone and does not appear in its manifestation through sensation, you may have to make another cut.
E si le os es corrumput e no-eminent, abantz es la una partida continuada am la autra, e la corrupcio es al mieg loc o en partida de lu, lahoras tu descuebre la carn de totas partz tota; e aprop pausa fust dejos, e aprop serra aquel de la primiera partida la on es la corrupcio entro que sia continuada la serratura del autra partida.	And if the bone is corrupted and non-protruding, there is one continuous part joined to the other, and the corruption is in the middle of it or in a part of it, then you uncover the flesh from all parts; then place fusts, and then saw through the first part where the corruption is inside so that the closure of the other part remains continuous.
E sia la serradura segon le loc de la corrupcio un petit, segon que havem dit.	And the closure should be made according to the location of the corruption, making it small as we have said.
E si la corrupcio es en la junctura, inscideys aquela junctura corrumpuda, e serra le os la on es continuat del autra part.	And if the corruption is at the joint, incise that corrupted joint, and saw the bone where it continues from the other part.
E si de la corrupcio es en la continuacio de doas juncturas, lahoras no es en lu razio sino engen.	And if the corruption is at the continuation of two joints, then it is not in its proper place but is displaced.
E si la corrupcio es en le pecte de la ma o del pe, es mot dificil; empero cove que tu inquieras la corrupcio en qual manieyra appareys a tu, e que abradas aquela, e mondes aquela segon quascuna disposicio la qual es a tu possibla, e am cascum engen sia rectificat a tu, quan no fa a tu contrarietat vena o nervi.	And if the corruption is in the armpit of the arm or the side of the foot, it is very difficult; however, you must inquire how the corruption appears to you, and incise and clean that area according to any possible disposition which is at your disposal. In every case, it should be corrected as you see fit, provided it does not interfere with veins or nerves.
E sapias qual es inscididors e las serras a inscidir aquestz osses son motz segon le situament dels osses, e la preparacio de aquels, e la grosseza de aquels, e la subtilitat e la grandeza e la parvitat de aquels, e la duricia e la lor raritat; per que cove que tu prepares a tota specia de operacio estrument convenient ad aquela opperacio.	And consider which are incisors and the saws to cut these bones are made of according to the position of the bones, and the preparation of those, and their size, and their subtlety and greatness and smallness, and their hardness and rarity; so that you may prepare for each operation an instrument suitable for that operation.
E sapias que aquela operacio significa a tu sobre la specia del strument del qual indigeysses; quan am tu es gran studi e lonc e conoyssensa de las manieyras de aquesta art, e testimoni de manieyras de malautias, quar lahoras ja tu las avias per tu meteys aquo que es convenient a lu dels sturmentz a tota malautia.	And consider that that operation means to you concerning the type of instrument on which you will depend; when you have great study and long knowledge of the ways of this art, and experience of the ways of diseases, then when you have them already before your eyes, you will choose what is convenient for it from the instruments for all diseases.
E yeu so a tu formant en la fi de aquest capitol le nombre dels instrumentz les quals pausaras cum eyssimples am les quals proceziras a la tua prohibicio la qual experimentaras sobre las autras.	And you shall know for yourself at the end of this chapter the number of the instruments which you will use as simple ones to which you will proceed according to your prohibition, which you will experience with the others.
Forma de serra:	Form of the saw:
Forma de autra serra:	Form of another saw:
Forma de autra serra:	Form of another saw:
Forma de autra serra gran:	Forma of another shall be great:
Forma de ray:	Forma of ray:
Sia le cap de aquest ray segon la forma de cap de clau stellat, e les puntz de lu sian segon la forma dels puntz alstefegi.	Let the head of this ray be according to the form of the head of a star key, and its points be according to the form of the star-shaped nails.
E no conveneys sino que am aquel sian confricadatz les caps de las juncturas quan so corrumpudas, o es la boca gran ampla.	And do not insert anything but let those that are to be used for friction at the heads of the joints when they are broken, or for a large open mouth.
Forma de razori major dels autres:	Forma of razori major of the others:
Forma de razori menor:	Forma of razori minor:
Forma de razori lat:	Forma of razori lateral:
Forma de serra autra decentment fayta: sia fayt arc de lu pus sobira e la acuitat de lu de ferr, e le membre de lu de boys punhal descentment fayt.	Forma of saw another properly made: let it be an arc from its back and the sharpness of it of iron, and the member of it of deeply cut points.
Forma de lu:	Forma of it:
Forma de razori en la qual ha concavitat:	Forma of razor in which it has a cavity:
Forma de razori autra subtil:	Form of a razor blade:
Forma de autra razori de curvada extremitat:	Form of another razor with curved extremity:
Forma de rasori petit semblant a tenta:	Form of a small razor resembling a needle:
Forma de incisori am le qual so inscidit les osses:	Form of a lancet with which one incises the bones:
Forma de inscisori autra minor:	Form of another smaller lancet:
Forma de un autra inscissori; aquest semblant a ray, e la extremitat de lu es cum serra, e es exhibit en motz locs en la razio dels osses:	Form of another lancet; this resembles a ray, and its extremity is like a point, and it is used in certain places in the proportion of the bones:
Forma de ray lo qual conveneys a rasio de aquel que es perforat dels osses:	Form of a ray which is proportioned to the bone that is to be pierced:
E la extremitat de lu es triangulada e de aguda extremitat.	And its extremity is triangular and sharp.
E es fayt de ferr de India , e semblantment cove que totas las causas que havem ditas de rasoris e de inscissoris e de serras.	And it is made of iron from India, and similarly hollow, like all the causes we have said about razors, lancets, and saws.
De inscizio extremitatz e de la serratura dels osses.	For the incision of extremities and the cutting of bones.
Las extremitatz se poyresso o per causa intrinseca o per causa extrinseca, o cum tu auras medicat aquela corrupcio per curacio de aquelas medicinas e la curacio no comfereys, o vezes la corrupcio anar deves le membre la qual no percuteys denguna causa, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel membre entro aquo la hon acossec la corrupcio, per que le malaute evasesca per aquo de mort o de malicia que es major defeliment del membre.	The extremities may be affected either by an intrinsic cause or by an extrinsic one, or as you have medicated that corruption through the cure of those medicines and the cure did not succeed, or sometimes the corruption goes away from the member which you do not perceive by any cause, then you must enter that member into it where the corruption accedes, so that the evil may escape through death or malice which is greater misfortune of the member.
E le senhal de aquel al qual accideys, es que·l membre es fayt negre entro que sia cujat que foc la ja comburit, o se poyreys aprop la negror entro que la poyredura aquela ane entro aquel membre que siec lu e que prengua tot le cors; e donc coyta te am inscizio de aquel.	The sign of him upon whom this occurs is that the member becomes black before it is cooked as if by fire that has already burned, or you may notice the blackness in the area where the burn enters that part and affects all the body; therefore, examine him carefully for that.
E semblantment si es causa de la corrupcio percussio de alcunas causas venenosas ayssi cum de scorpio mari o de vupera o de rutela e de semblantz.	And similarly, the corruption may be caused by a blow from some venomous sources such as a scorpion, a viper, or a rattlesnake, and similar to these.
E si la corrupcio o la percussio es en la extremitat del dit, lahoras tu inscideys le dit e no dones spazi a la corrupcio per que ane entro a la ma.	And if the corruption or blow is in the extremity of the finger, then you must cut the finger and do not give space to the corruption so that it enters your hand.
E semblantment si accedeys a la ma, lahoras tu inscideys aquela de la razit del focil, e no dones spazi a la corrupcio entro que prengua en le focil del bras.	And seeming so, if you touch the hand, then incise that of the armpit, and do not give space for corruption to enter within that of the arm.
E si envezeys aquel, lahoras inscideys le bras entro al coyde en la junctura.	And if you touch that part, then incise the arm between the shoulder at the joint.
E si passa otra la corrupcio e la vezes enviro le coyde, lahoras en aquel es la mort del malaute; e aministrar autra causa otra aquo en curacio es quantitat de vertut.	And if corruption passes and surrounds the shoulder, then in that it is the death of the patient; and to give another cause other than this for cure is a measure of virtue.
E semblantment fay del pe quan corrupcio envezeys le dit del pe, lahoras tu inscideys aquel entro ad un dels nozes.	And similarly do for the foot when corruption surrounds the part of the foot, then incise that between one of the toes.
E si pren en la pente del pe, lahoras tu inscideys tot le pe.	And if it takes in the sole of the foot, then incise the entire foot.
Mays si pueja entro al denol, lahoras tu inscideys la camba entro a la junctura del denol.	But if it enters the sole, then incise the leg between the joint of the sole.
E si la corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denol, lahoras en lu no es engen sino dimissio, e layssar le malaute a la mort.	And if corruption has already penetrated the sole, then there is nothing but dismissal, and let the patient die.
E la manieyra de inscidir le membre o de serrar lu es que tu strenhas le liament en la partida pus dejos la qual voles inscidir, e strenh autre liament sobre le loc; e extenda le ministre un liament a las partidas dejos, e extenda le ministra autra liament en sus; e tu separa la carn la qual es entre dos liamentz ain spatum lat entro que sia descuberta tota la carn; e aprop sia inscidit o serrat.	And the method of incising the member or sewing it is that you hold the thread at the part you wish to incise, and tie another thread over the place; extend one hand with a thread to those parts, and extend the other hand with another thread on top; you separate the flesh which is between two threads until all the flesh is uncovered; then it should be incised or sewn.
E cove que sia pausat drap de li de totas partidas per so que no toque le loc sa, e que vengua al malaute lesio ajustada e apostema caut.	And ensure that a cloth of linen is placed over all parts so that it does not touch the affected area, and that when the injury comes to the patient, it is adjusted and the abscess cauterized.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc quan obras, lahoras tu cauteriza le loc coytadament, o pausa sus lu alcunas polveras restrenhentz le sanc; e aprop retorna a la tua medicacio entro que sia complida.	And if you happen to bleed when working, then cauterize the place frequently, or apply some收敛性粉末止血；然后返回你的手术直到完成。
E aprop lia le membre plaguat am liament al u convenient, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then bind the injured member with a thread as is convenient, and treat it until it heals.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc a un home en le sieu pe, aquest meteys accident le qual yeu e a tu recomtat, le qual es quar accidic a lu negror en le sieu pe am adustio que era asemblada a combustio de foc.	And I advise you that when someone has a dark spot on their foot, this accident which you and I have advised about is due to a burn that resembles the combustion of fire.
E aquela corrupcio accidic primierament en le sieu dit entro que tendec tot le pe.	And that corruption accidently first occurs within the said tissue where it tends to the skin.
E adonc aquel home preparec per si meteys pus que vic la curacio anar al membre am la vehemencia de lu que atrobec de dolor e de adustrio de lu, e el inscidic aquel pe entro a la junctura, e foc sanat.	And then that person prepares himself to wait until the cure goes to the limb with the intensity of his pain from both the pain and the inflammation, and the disease enters the joint, and the limb is healed.
Lonc temps accidic a lu aquela meteyssa corrupcio en le dit de la ma indic.	Long ago that corruption disease affected the thumb of the hand.
E adonc venc a mi, e so me perforsat repercutir aquela superfluitat am aquo que pausegui sobre la ma de las medicinas, aprop la mundificacio del cos de lu; e no es repercussa la superfluitat e comensec anar al autra dit entro que comensec en la ma.	And then it comes to me, and so I force myself to reflect on how to relieve that excess by applying medicine to the hand, in the transformation of the body; but the excess is not relieved and begins to go into another part where it first began in the hand.
E el apelec me a inscidir la ma de lu, e yeu no volgui far aquo sperant sobre la repercussio de aquela superfluitat, e mays que temegui deves la inscizio de la ma de lu mort, quar la vertut del malaute era sobre cazement.	And they advise me to cut the hand of the patient, and I do not want to do this hoping for the relief of that excess, more because I fear the cutting of the hand leading to death, as the power of gout was strong.
E pus que el se desperec de mi, es retornat en la sua terra e pervenguec a mi que aquel home preparec e inscidic la sua ma tota, e es sanat.	And after he wakes from me, he returns to his land and informs me that that person prepared and cut off his entire hand, and was healed.
E no he adhuzida aquesta narracio sino per que sia adjutori sobre aquo que catz de aquesta malautia, e que sia significacio per la qual sia significada e segon la qual sia obrat.	And I have added this narration only to serve as an aid on what is understood of this illness, and as a signification so that it may be understood and according to which it may be performed.
De cura sinuum et qualitate clisterizationis cum medicinis.	On the care of intestines and the quality of catharsis with medicines.
Quan accideys apostema en alcus membres carnozes e·l spazi de l’apostema es prolonguat entro que fa colleccio de sania, e aprop es romput e perforat, e es eyssida de lu la sania, e roman le loc vuoyt quays cum si era vayssel, e la codena que es desobre lu ayssi cum drap subtiliat, e no es pervengut a deriera corrupcio, e no inprimeys en le os o en nervi ni en liament, es apelat sinu, e no es nompnat fistula.	When an apostema occurs in some fleshly members and the space of the apostema is prolonged such that it collects pus, and then it breaks and perforates, and the pus is extracted from it, and the place left behind is emptied as if it were a vessel, and the cloth over it is so fine that no further corruption occurs, and it does not imprint on the bone or nerve nor on the membrane, it is called a sinus, and is not named a fistula.
Mays empero si le spazi es prolonguat entro que la corrupcio enprema en alcun membre, lahoras es appelada fistula e no zukem.	However, if the space is prolonged such that the corruption imprints on some member, then it is called a fistula.
E la cura de lu es que inscidas aquela codena tota ayssi cum es revolvut, e majorment quan es subtiliada e es fayta cum drap, e comfizas que no adhereys al loc per la sua corrupcio.	And the treatment for it is to extract that cloth completely as if it were rotated, especially when it is fine and made like a cloth, and ensure that it does not stick to the area due to its corruption.
Mays si tu speras que la codena adheresca e que aquela corrupcio no aja conseguit per deriera consecucio, e en la codena ha spassitut de cara, lahoras tu cura aquel am clisteri.	If you hope that the cord will adhere and that the corruption has not reached the deeper consequences, and on the cord there has passed through from front, then you cure it with a cleansing enema.
E es que consideras al sinu, e lahoras si es gran, e·l brac que yeys es de fetent odor, lahoras clisteriza aquel am medicament egipciac le qual es de oli e vi agre e ziniar recebent partidas enguals, e sian ajustadas en un vayssel, e sian coytas sobre le foc entro que’l medicament se fassa rog e pervengua a specitut de mel.	And you consider the sinus, and if it is large and the part that exudes has a foul odor, then administer an enema with a medicinal Egyptian remedy which consists of oil and wine mixed in equal parts, and be sure to adjust them in a vessel, and keep the mixture near the fire until the medicine becomes hot and reaches the proper temperature.
E aprop tu pren de lu aquo que es necessari e dissolveys lu am aygua e mel; e clisteriza am aquel le sinu, e strenh le orrifici de lu, e layssa la medicina en lu per la quantitat de doas horas.	And then take what is necessary and dissolve the medicine in water and honey; administer this enema to the sinus, and strengthen the openings of it, and leave the medicine in it for the quantity of two hours.
E aprop extratz aquela am sprecio; e fay aquo per tantz dias entro que sia mundificat le sinu e sia remauguda la pudor.	And then extract that medicine completely; do this until the sinus is cleansed and the sore is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es clisterizat am aygua de cendre, quan no es a tu prezent aquest medicament; e es que tu prenguas la cendra de vitz, e met sobre lu aygua; e aprop cola aquela e clisteriza aquel am ela entro que te confizes que·l sinu lahoras es ostat.	And sometimes an enema is administered with water from ashes, when this medicine is not available; you take the ash of vitex, put it in water; and then extract that and administer it as an enema until you are certain that the sinus has been cleansed.
E si le malaute no ha tollerancia sobre le medicament egipciac ni l’aygua de la cendre, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aygua e mel e quays sia mesclat ziniar trissat, e clisteriza aquel am vi e mel mesclat, quar de proprietat de mel es que mondifique e lave, e le vi fa adherir le sinu, e majorment quan en le vi ha superfluitat de stipticitat e de siccitat.	And if the patient does not tolerate the Egyptian medicine nor the water of ashes, then prepare that mixture with honey and vinegar three times, and prepare that mixture with wine and honey mixed, for it is the property of honey to modify and wash, and the wine makes the sinew adhere, especially when there is excess of stringency and dryness in the wine.
E cum tu fas aquo alcunas veguadas e te comfizes que·l sinu ja es remaugut, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aquo que fa naysser la carn en lu.	And when you have done this several times and you are certain that the sinus is healed, then cleanse it with a mixture that causes flesh to grow in it.
E es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e dissolveys aquel am oli rozat e vi stiptic; o que clisterizas aquel am alcunas medicinas e enguentz autres que hajan las proprietatz les quals ja he yeu scritz en le tractat dels enguents.	And you take anointing myrrh, dissolve that mixture with diluted oil andstringent wine; or you cleanse it with a mixture of some medicines and apply other ointments that have the properties I have already written about in the treatise on ointments.
E si le orrifici del sinu es streyt en le qual no es recebuda la canula del clisteri, lahoras tu le amplifique aquel am ferr petit a petit, e pausa en lu calgua envolopada en enguent egipciac o en enguent basilicon entro que sia amplificat.	And if the sinus opening is wide enough that the catheter of the clyster cannot be inserted, then gradually enlarge it with a small iron instrument, pausing in doing so with a cloth wrapped in Egyptian or basilicon ointment until it is enlarged.
E semblantment si le orrifici es ample, lahoras tu agregua las labias de lu am sutura e layssa de lu quantitat en la qual intre le clisteri ses addicio.	And if the opening is large, then you should suture the lips of it and leave in it the quantity which the enema will fill.
E si le orrifici de lu del qual corr le brac es elevat a las partidas desus, lahoras secca aquel en le pus bas loc que es en lu per que le brac corra entro dejos, quar quan le brac es coartat en la preondeza de sinu la carn esser en lu engendrada.	And if the opening from which the discharge comes is elevated above the lower parts, then dry that area below it so that the discharge can flow into it. When the discharge is blocked in the curvature of the sinus, flesh will grow in it.
E si no es a tu possible seccar le sinu entro al enviro del os pus bas segon que voles, lahoras te perforssa que prepares le membre am preparacio per la qual corr de lu le brac leugierament segon que es a tu apparelhat e que no sia en lu retengut alcuna causa del brac.	And if you are not able to dry the sinus within the area below as desired, then prepare the member for a procedure by which the discharge can flow gently from it according to what is suitable and that no cause of retention of the discharge should be present.
E pren medicinas consolidativas que sian pausadas sobre le sinu convenientz ad aquo que vols exxten aquelas sobre drap de li.	And take consolidative medicines that are applied gently over the sinus in a way suitable for what you want, extending them on linen cloth.
E le drap sia de tan gran quantitat cum fa la comunicacio de tot le sinu; e aprop inscidey am las forfexs en le dreyt del orrifici del sinu un trauc pus ample un pauc que l’orrifici del sinu; e aprop exten sobre autre drap de li dels enguentz leons segon la quantitat del trauc, e pausa le sobre aquel per posicio longinqua del orrifici del sinu per que sia aleujat le eyssiment del brac de lu e no ostes le drap gran sino aprop alcus dyas una veguada.	And the cloth should be of such quantity as to allow communication with the entire sinus; then cut with scissors along the length of the opening of the sinus a little wider than the sinus opening; then extend over another piece of linen the lion's ointment according to the amount of the cut, and place it above that in a position distant from the sinus opening so that the discharge is alleviated and does not disturb the cloth much, but only for a few days once.
Mays aquel que es sobre le orrifici del sinu, le qual remauguas en tota hora per so que yesca aquo que es ajust en lu del brac.	May that which is over the opening of the sinus, which you burn at all times so that it does not come out what is stuck in it with the arm.
E per que sapias si aquo que corr de lu del brac es mot o pauc, o es digest, o es no-digest.	And that you may know if what flows from it is much or little, or is digestible, or is undigestible.
E am aysso tu considera le loc de aquel sinu, si en lu sent le pacient dolor o no, e si es en lu apostema.	And thus you consider the location of that sinus, if in it the patient feels pain or not, and if it has an abscess.
E cum la tua medicacio es prolonguada en la tal manieyra, e vesas la matiera que es gitada sobre le orrifici del sinu ja adhereys, o se apropria adherencia, lahoras le mayti tu le deslia o le tertz dia, e quan deslias la plagua, lahoras muda le drap per autre e renova le enguent.	And as your medication is prolonged in this manner, and you see the matter that is discharged over the opening of the sinus has adhered, or there is an approaching adhesion, then while holding it, you separate it or on the third day, and when you remove the bandage, then change the cloth and renew the ointment.
Mays si del sinu aprop lon spazi yeys virus subtil, lahoras no te desperes de la adherencia de li, quar la sanacio de lu se apropria, quar so alcus homes en les quals tarda generacio de carn en las lors plaguas, e de aquels so en les quals es fayt le contrari de lu.	May if from the sinus there has already spread pus subtil, then do not worry about its adhesion, for the healing of it takes over, for some people in whose wounds flesh generation is slow, and among those it happens the opposite.
E si del sinu aprop motz dias es yssit brac indigest, lahoras sapias que·l sinu no adhereys; e si es tardada la adherencia del sinu e es la causa prolonguada, lahoras tu ajusta en exsiccacio de las medicinas, e si las medicinas so humidas en lor substancia e en la sua vertut, son seccas ayssi cum enguent dyafinicon, quan es en lu ajustada superfluitat de addicio de zegi.	And if after several days the bowel is situated improperly due to indigestion, you should perceive that the bowel does not adhere; and if the adherence of the bowel is delayed and the cause is prolonged, then you adjust it in drying with medicines, and if the medicines are moist in their substance and in their virtue, they are dried as with an ointment of yafinicon when there is excess addition of saffron.
E le mays derier am le qual es curat, es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e sia dissout en oli rozat, e sia sobre lu vojat vi antic engual en la sua substancia, e aprop comfeys aquel am lu, e usa de aquel.	And the best remedy for what is cured, is that you take an ointment of yafinicon and dissolve it in sweet oil, and apply it very gently on the affected area, and cover it well with it, and use this.
E ja fa semblant en aquela accio, quan no y a brac, enguent dyafinicon, mel quan es coyt entro que sia engrossat, e usa de lu; o que prenguas mirra e aloen e enses, e trissa tot e polveriza sobre le mel quan es sus le foc, e aprop lineys aquo sobre drap e strenh aquel sobre le sinu; e lineys aquel am le mel le qual has cuoyt entro que es engrossat, e polveriza sobre drap e strenh aquel.	And pretend in that action, when there is no bowel, use an ointment of yafinicon, honey when mixed with it to make it thick, and use it; or what you take myrrh and aloes and incense, and mix all and powderize over the honey which is on the fire, and then lay this over cloth and strengthen that over the bowel; and lay this on the honey which you have mixed and made thick, and powderize over cloth and strengthen that.
E alcunas veguadas so administratz am lu aristologia longua e razitz de lili celesti (e es lili celesti) e farina de errs e centaurea, e usa de aquels simples o ajustatz, trissa aquels e cribela e polveriza sobre le mel le qual he recomtat; e husa de lu.	And sometimes it is administered to her some doses of long wormwood and reasonings of celestial wormwood (and this is celestial wormwood) and flour of irises and centaury, and use those simples or adjusted ones, press them and sift over the honey which I have recommended; and use it.
E si es prolonguat le sinu, e no es sanat per aquesta curacio, lahoras sapias que la corrupcio es en le preon de lu, e ja fa enquisicio en les osses o en les autres membres durs o als liaments; lahoras tu le cura am curacio fistular, ayssi cum desus es dit.	And if the sinew is prolonged and does not heal by this treatment, then you should know that the corruption is in the vein of the limb, and you should investigate whether it affects the bones or other hard members or ligaments; then you treat it with a fistula cure, as was said above.
De curacio de panarici et unguis attritae et incisione digiti additi et sectione.	For the treatment of tumors, nail attrition, and incision of the digit with sectioning.
Panarici es apostema le qual nays dejos la ungla del dit pous de la ma o del pe, e fort leu nays en les autres ditz, e cum es prolonguat e la sua curacio es mens prezada, o es apostemat de apostema caut, o es corrumput, e gieta brac entro que corrodeys la razitz de la ungla, e fort leu corromp aquela tota, e fort leu perve la sua corrupcio al os entro que es a lu odor fetent, e es fayta la extremitat del dit lada, e la color de lu es fayta fusca.	Panarici is an abscess that leaves the nail of the finger or toe, and is very painful in other fingers, and since its cure is less desirable, it may be a deep abscess, or corrupted, and you cut the vein of the nail, fortifying the corruption throughout, and allow its corruption to reach the bone inside, which gives off an unpleasant odor. Then the extremity of the finger is amputated, and the color of the wound turns pale.
E donc quan tu auras aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas am ferr tota la superfluitat que es romasa de la ungla e aprop cauteriza la plagla aprop aquo, quar cauteri mot es juvatiu en aysso.	And when you have done that which we have said in the division and do not apply your cure, then you must cut out all the pus that is discharged from the joint and place a cautery on it, for a cautery motion is beneficial in this.
Mays si le os es sa e la ungla es sana, e las addicios de la ungla vuoydas ja compremen las carns a las partidas dedintz, e comensan lu punger e ledeysso aquela, lahoras cove que tu pauses ray subtil dejos le angle de la ungla que pungeys la carn, e impelleys aquela sus e inscideys aquela carn am facilitat, e pausa sobre aquo que roman de la carn de las medicinas comburentz corrosivas entro que sia tot remaugut; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	But if the bone is sound and the joint is healthy, and the swelling of the joint has already compressed the flesh into its inner parts, and begins to pierce and draw it out, then you must pause a sharp blade at the angle of the joint that pierces the flesh, push that out and cut the flesh with ease, place your hand over what remains of the flesh until all is thoroughly burned by the medicaments; and apply an ointment there until it heals.
Mays si la corrupcio ja enprem en le os, lahoras cove que tu inscidas le os aquel e le extraguas, car nul temps no es sanat que sia en lu le os corrumput.	But if the corruption has already entered the bone, then you must cut into the bone and extract it, for nothing heals that is in the corrupt bone.
E si vezes la corrozio e la corupcio anar en le dit, lahoras tu inscideys aquel en un dels nozes segons que es premesa la sua rememoracio, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you see the corrosion and the corruption spreading to the bone, then you must cut there in one of the joints according to where the decay is most evident, and cure that until it heals.
Mays si a la ungla endeve percussio o atricio, e endeve en aquela dolor vehement, lahoras cove que tu al comensament fleubotomes le malaute, e aprop secca la ungla am spatum agut am seccio transversa desus en jus, e guarda te que la seccio no pervengua entro a la carn que es dejos la ungla, quar tu faras accidir al malaute dolor vehement, e sira causa a nativitat de la carn ajustada superflua en le loc; e aprop cura aquel loc am aquo que ceda dolor.	If at the joint upon percussion or friction there is intense pain, then at the beginning bloodletting of the malady should be done, and soon dry the joint with an acute spathula in a transverse section above with juice, and guard that the section does not penetrate into the flesh left by the joint, for you will cause the malady intense pain, which will be due to the native condition of excessive adjusted flesh in the place; and soon cure that place with what alleviates pain.
Mays dit ajustat, le qual es nat en las mas de alcus homes, fort leu es carnos tot, e fort leu so en lu osses, o fort leu es en lu ungla.	But by "adjusted," which is native in many individuals, the flesh is very light and loose, or the joint is very light.
E alcus de lu son natz en la razit de la junctura, o es la nativitat de lu en alcus nozes dels ditz.	And some of them are native in the region of the joint, or the natural condition of their fingers is lacking in certain nodules.
Mays aquel que es nat en alcus nozes del dit no se mau, e aquest que es nat en las juncturas fort leu es maugut.	But that which is native in certain nodules of the finger is not bad, and this which is native in the joints is very loose.
E de aquels que son natz carnoses, la seccio es leugiera, e es que tu inscidas aquel deves la sua razitz am spatum lat.	And for those that are native fleshly, the section is light, and you should incise it with a broad spathula.
Mays de aquel que es nat en la razitz de la junctura, la curacio es dificil; e donc guarda te de la abscizio de lu.	More difficult for those born near the joint, the cure is; therefore, beware of its removal.
Mays en aquel que es nat en dit deves les nozes, cove que tu inscidas al comensament la carn de lu am inscizio redonda entro al os, e aprop serra am una de aquelas serras convenientz ad aquo, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	More difficult in those born near the knee, ensure that you incise the beginning of the flesh around into the bone, and nearby it will be one of those suitable grooves for this, and cure that within so that it is healed.
Mays consolidacio la qual accideys als ditz entre lor motas veguadas o per nativitat del home que nays enayssi, o per consolidacio de plagua o per combustio de foc, o per semblantz, adonc cove que secces aquela consolidacio entro que les ditz retorno a la sua forma natural.	More difficult the consolidation which occurs to the fingers between their phalanges, either by nature of the man who is born with it, or by consolidation of plague, or by burning, or by scarring, then you must cure that consolidation so that the fingers return to their natural form.
E aprop pausa entre lor draps de li enfuzes en oli rozat per que no sian consolidatz leugierament, e separa entre aquels, o pausa entre aquels una lamina de plom subtil entro que sia consolidat segon que cove.	And place between the cloths where you have applied oil to prevent them from consolidating lightly, and separate between those, or place between them a thin layer of lead so that it consolidates as needed.
E semblantment si accideys consolidacio en alcus ditz am la palma, lahoras tu secca aquela consolidacio segon que es preparada e conveneys a la figura del membre.	And similarly, if consolidation occurs in some fingers at the palm, then you must cure that consolidation as prepared and conform to the figure of the limb.
De inscizio de vices, so son varicas.	Of vein problems, such are varicose veins.
Vices so son varicas, e so venas envolutas grossas plenas de superfluitatz melencolicas las quals veno en motz dels membres del cors, e le major adveniment de lor en las cambas, e majorment en las cambas dels itinerantz e dels laborantz e dels portantz.	Vein problems are varicose veins, and such are swollen veins filled with melancholic superfluities that occur in the parts of the body, with the most frequent appearance in the legs, especially in those who travel, work, or stand.
Adonc cove que tu administres purguacio del cors de colera negra alcunas veguadas am expulcio fort, e aprop sangna le pacient de la vena basilica.	Then you should administer purge of the body from black bile several times until strong expulsion, and then let the patient bleed from the internal jugular vein.
Mays la curacio de lor am ferr es segon dos manieyras: la una es que sia inscizas e sia atirat aquel sanc negre, e l’autra manieyra es que sia elevada la vena e sia extrayta tota.	More often, the treatment of such is according to two methods: one is to incise and extract that black blood, and the other method is to elevate the vein and remove it entirely.
La seccio de lu es segon aquesta manieyra: embroca al comensament la camba am aygua cauda mot entro que le sanc gros sia resolvut, que es feculent de la camba, e aprop strenh la camba del malaute a la partida pus sobirana de la coyssa entro a la partida dejos del denol am una benda, e aprop secca la vena en un loc, o en dos, o en tres am seccio ampla, e aprop eleva le sanc negra am la tieua ma de la partida dejos de la camba entro en sus, e desus en jus, entro que del sanc sia yssida la quantitat que voles e que vezes habastar, e la qual tollera la vertut del malaute.	The sectioning is done in this manner: moisten the beginning of the leg with hot water until the thick blood is resolved, which is turbid from the leg. Then strengthen the part of the thigh above the knee by placing a bandage between the parts below the hip. Next, elevate the vein in one, two, or three places with wide separation, and using your hand lift the black blood from below the part of the leg to above it, until the quantity of blood that you desire and suffices has been drained, which will tolerate the virtue of the thigh.
E aprop lia aquela, e comanda a lu que abstengua de las viandas colera negra engendrantz.	And then tie her up, and command her to abstain from foods generating black bile.
E itera la curacio per fleubotomia quan las venas so umplidas e aquo notz al malaute.	And continue the cure through phlebotomy when the veins are full and this is noticed by the patient.
Mays la elevacio de lor es segon aquesta manieyra: tu que razas la camba del malaute, si en lu so motz pels, e aprop met le en banh e embroca la camba de lu am aygua cauda entro que s’enrogesesca e las venas sian exuberadas; o que sia exercitat per exercici fort, si banh no es a tu present, entro que·l membre sia scalfat.	Raise the limb in this manner: you raise the leg of the patient, if there are hairs on it, and then immerse it in warm water and apply a cloth soaked in cold water between the time it turns red and the veins become prominent; or if strong exercise is available, if warm bath is not at hand, until the limb becomes heated.
E aprop secsa la codena en le dreyt de la vena per seccio en le lonc o en le derier de lu deves le denol, o en le pus bas de lu deves lo talo.	And then dry the cord along the length of the vein by fomentation, either at its front or at its back, you should lance it, or lower down to the base of it.
E aprop uobre la codena am uncis e excorja la vena de tota part entro que appara al sentiment, e es deves la appericio de lu que vezes aquela roga declinant a negror.	And then cut the cord with scissors and incise the vein from all sides until you notice it appear by sensation, and you should appreciate the appearance of that rope draining to black.
E donc cum evazeys e de la codena tu vezes aquela blanca quays sia corda.	And then, as you incise the cord, you will see that white thing which is the cord.
E aprop tu met dejos aquela le ray entro que sia elevada e sia gitada de la codena, e sospen aquela am onci orp leon.	And then you place that cloth elevated and tilted from the groin, suspending it on some hook or ring.
E aprop secsa autra seccio aprop aquela seccio per tres ditz, e aprop excorja la codena de la partida desus de la vena entro que apparia.	And then dry another section near that section for three digits, and then incise the groin above the vein where it appears.
E aprop eleva aquela e inscideys aquela en deriera seccio deves le talo, e aprop extratz aquela e eleva aquela entro que sia yssida per la seccio segonda, e aprop extratz aquela de la seccio que es sobre aquela.	And then elevate that and incise the rear section of the thigh, and then extract it and elevate that where it enters through the second section, and then extract it from the section above that.
E fay aquo entro que extraguas aquela de la seccio que es pus sobirana o pus auta de totas las seccios, entro que tota es yssida; e lahoras inscideys aquela.	And do this where you extract it from the section that is higher or above all other sections, once everything is extracted; then incise that.
E si no obezeys a tu ad extrayre e elevar, lahoras intromet una agulha am fiel fort doble e ligua aquela e extratz la, o intromet dejos lu le ray e revolveys la tua ma a tota part entro qu’en sia getada.	And if you do not obey in extracting and elevating, then insert a strong double-threaded needle and tie that, and extract it. Or insert that cloth and rotate your hand in all directions where it is tilted.
E guarda te que no sia inscidida; quar si es trencada, es fayt a tu dificil elevar aquela mot e es vengut sobre le malaute per aquela nocument.	And be careful that it is not incised; for if it is broken, it will be difficult to elevate that part and it will have come over the wound through that damage.
E cum aquela tota auras fora-gitada, lahoras pausa sobre le loc de la plagua lana submerssa en vi e oli rozat e oli no-rozat, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And when all that is done, then place over the wound wool soaked in wine and olive oil, whether pressed or unpressed, and care for it until it is healed.
E si la vit es contrayta havent tortuositat a la qual sia envolucio a las partidas, e no es segon rectitut segon que havem dit, lahoras cove que tu fendas sobre aquela a tota partida de tortuositat de lu e als locs de envolucio de lu, e aprop suspen aquela am uncis entro que eleves aquela tota.	And if the vein is contracted having torsion in which there is an envelopment at the parts, and it is not according to the straightness as we have said, then cut over that completely at all parts of the torsion of it and at the locations of the envelopment of it, and place it under support so that you lift it entirely.
E guarda te deves la tua seccio que no inscidas la vena e que no plagues aquela, quar dificil sira a tu elevar aquela; e serva la tua prudencia en aquela.	And guard yourself in your section so that you do not cut the vein and do not damage that, for it will be difficult to lift it; and serve your prudence there.
Forma del inscident am le qual es seccada vit:	Form of the incident where the vein is dried up:
Forma de unci orp:	Form of the clamp orp:
No es a lu accuitat ayssi cum als uncis ni es de aguda extremitat per so que no plague la vena; e es de grossa flexibilitat leon, quar si era subtil, inscidira la vena per la sua subtilitat; habantz es en lu superflua grosseza ayssi cum havem dit.	It is not as hot as other clamps nor of acute extremity because it does not damage the vein; and it is of great flexibility. If it were subtle, it would cut the vein due to its subtlety; having it in its superfluous thickness as we have said.
De extraccio venae cruris.	From the extraction of the crus vein.
Aquesta vena es engendrada en las cambas en terras caudas ayssi cum al- Ategi en terra de Arabics e en las terras de India caudas e aridas de pauca teneritat e en las quals no nays erba ni aybre.	This vein is generated in the legs from the calves as Al-Ategi describes in the lands of Arabia and in the lands of India, from dry and infertile regions with little tenacity, in which neither grass nor trees grow.
E fort leu es engendrada en autres locs del cors otra las cambas.	And from other parts of the body, not just the calves, this vein is generated.
E la gestacio de lu es de putrefaccio que ve dejos la codena ayssi cum venen dedintz le cors serpentz e vermps e scarides e verms engendrantz entre la codena e la carn.	And its generation is from putrefaction that leaves the chain as if venom inside the body, serpents, vermin, and lice generating between the chain and the flesh.
E senhal de la suscepcio de l’adveniment de lu es de aquesta vena que accideys en la camba enflammacio vehement; e aprop le loc es vesicat; e aprop comensa la vena yssir del loc de aquela vesicacio quays sembla razit de planta.	And the sign of the susceptibility to the onset of this condition is when you encounter inflammation in the calf; then, nearby, the area becomes vesicated; and soon after, the vein starts to protrude from the site of that vesication, resembling a plant shoot.
E adonc cum appar de lu la extremitat, lahoras cove que tu envolvas sobre aquela una pessa de plom del qual sia le pes de una drac. entro a ii drac., e noza aquela e layssa le plom suspendut de la camba.	And then, as the extremity appears, when you wrap a piece of lead around it, which weighs as much as a dragon's pound (approximately two pounds), feel that and let the lead hang from the calf.
E tantas veguadas cum yeys de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, envolveys aquo em plom e noza aquel.	And as many times as there is a cause to affect the parts outside, wrap this in lead and apply it.
E si mot es prolonguat, lahoras tu inscideys una partida de lu e envolopa le romanent; e no inscidas aquela de razit entro que sia fora yssida, quar si inscideys aquela es contrayta e intra en la carn e fa accidir apostema e poyredura en le loc e ulceracio mala.	And if the wound is prolonged, then you incise a part of it and wrap the remainder; and do not incise that which is inside while that which is outside is already incised, for if you incise that, it will contract and enter the flesh and cause an abscess, inflammation, and a bad ulcer.
Per que cove que sia tractada suaument e sia extrayta petit a petit, entro que sia fora-gitada del derier de lu e no remangua de lu alcuna causa en le cors.	Because the abscess should be treated thoroughly and extracted little by little, without causing any further harm to the body.
E de aquesta vena es yssit en alcus homes que es en la sua longitut de v palms e de detz e ja es pervengut a mi que yssic un de xx palms.	And from this vein, they have incised in some men whose length is about five or six palms and I have already been informed that one was incised measuring twenty palms.
E si es inscidida en la hora de la sua medicacio, lahoras intromet lo ray en le trauc de lu e perfora aquela am lonc trauc am le cors, entro que sia evacuat tot aquo que es en la materia, e administra putrefaccio del loc per alcus dias am medicinas; e aprop cura aquela per la curacio de apostemas.	And if it is incised during the time of its medication, then introduce the probe into the wound and perforate that along the length of the vein, until all that is in the material is evacuated. Then administer putrefaction to the area for several days with medicines; and cure that through the treatment of abscesses.
E aquesta vena alcunas veguadas ha motz ramps, e majorment quan apar a la junctura del pe o en le pe, e veno a lu motz orrificis, e es yssit de quascu orrifici ram.	And this vein sometimes has roots or buds, especially when it appears at the joint of the foot or in the foot, and brings with it many openings, and is derived from each opening.
E donc cura aquela ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio e am aquo que es desus dit.	And therefore cure it thus as we have said in the division and that which is mentioned above.
De sectione super vermes generatos sub cute et dicitur aegritudo bovina.	Of the section on worms generated under the skin and it is called the bovine illness.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en alcuna terra deves nos malautia bovina per so quar motas veguadas endeve als bious e es verm pauc un le qual es nat entre la codena e la carn, e va en tot le cos pujan e devalan, e es mostrat al sentiment deves le sieu anament de membre en membre entro que disromp la codena e yeys fora.	This illness is named in some lands the bovine disease; for many times it appears on cows and is a worm that lives between the skin and the flesh, and goes up and down throughout the body, and is shown by its own movement from member to member as it breaks through the skin and comes out.
E la generacio de lu es per putrefaccio de alcunas humors ayssi cum accideysso verms e serpentz e lombrics e ascaridas en le ventre.	And its generation is through the putrefaction of some humors, just as worms and snakes and earthworms and ascarids are generated in the belly.
E es temut per la malicia de lu, quar quan el va en le cors e es elevat al cap, e es pervengut al huel, lahoras fort leu uebre en lu e intra e destruzeys le huel, e aquo endeve motas veguadas.	And it is feared because of its malice, for when it goes in the body and rises to the head, and reaches the brain, there it becomes very fierce and enters and destroys the brain, and this happens many times.
E donc quan tu voles curar aquel e extraire lu, lahoras no se fa si no deves la sieua ambulacio e apparacio de lu al sentiment, e adonc cove que tu strenhas aquo que es sobre lu e aquo que es dejos lu am liament e constriccio fort, e aprop secca sobre lu e extratz aquel.	And when you want to cure it and extract it, then it must be done so that you consider its mobility and appearance according to the feeling, then cover what is on it and what is left of it with bandaging and strong constriction, and dry it thoroughly before extracting it.
E si es preondat en la carn e no le atrobes, lahoras tu pausa cauteri am foc sobre le loc entro que mora, e la major causa que es temuda es corrupcio de lu am la qual corrump le loc ayssi cum havem dit.	And if it is swollen in the flesh and you do not find it, then place a cautery on fire over the area where it resides, and the main fear is corruption of the area, which corrupts the location as we have said.
May si tu vezes aquel esser pervengut al cap prop del huel, lahoras strenh sobre le sobrecil am fort strictura, e aprop secsa sobre lu, e extratz aquel; e cove que·l malaute use de mondificacio del sieu cors am medicinas evacuantz humors putridas malas, e guarda se de viandas generantz putrefaccio.	If you see that it has reached the head near the ear, then tightly bandage above the eyebrow, and dry it thoroughly, and extract it; and treat the disease with modifications of its body using medicines that evacuate corrupt bad humors, and avoid foods causing putrefaction.
De sectione super aegritudinem nafir.	On the section of the disease nafir.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en nostra terra nafir, e es dolor la qual ve en alcus membres, e aprop es permudada de membre en membre.	This disease is called nafir in our land, and it is a pain that occurs in some limbs, and often is shifted from one limb to another.
E yeu ja e vista aquela segon que yeu te recomtare.	And now I can see that which I will describe to you.
Yeu fu apelat a una femna malauta ad una vila, e descubric le sieu bras e vi una imflacio petita en la vena funis del bras, e pus que fu romas per una hora, vi aquela imflacio anar ayssi cum va verm pujan ad aquest, mays pus leugierament que esser por, ayssi cum si fos argent viu quan corr de loc en loc.	I was summoned to a sick woman in a village, and upon examining her arm, I found a small swelling in the vein near the elbow. After it had persisted for about an hour, I saw that this swelling moved up the arm like vermillion rising, though less urgently than porphry, appearing as if it were living silver moving from place to place.
E adonc anet s’en la dolor de aquel loc e fiquet se en le muscle, e aprop aqui stec per una hora.	And then the pain was in that area and fixed in the muscle, and there it remained for about an hour.
E aprop correc en l’autre cors entro que pervenc al autre bras.	And then it corrected to the other side of the body, appearing in the other arm.
E aprop recomtec a mi que revolvia se per tot le cors sieu segon que yeu vi; e fo trop meravelat de la permutacio de lu e de la velocitat de membre en membre.	And then I was told that she moved about throughout her body as I could see; it was too marvelous to observe the change in her and the speed with which the member affected changed from one part of the body to another.
E yeu ja havia vist denant aquo en les mieus huels segon aquela manieyra, empero yeu he vistz motz les quals atroban dolor esser permutada de membra a membre.	And I had already seen this before in my own limbs in that manner, but I have also seen movements where the pain is perceived to be permuted from one limb to another.
Mays no vi aquo am les huels ayssi cum en la femna.	But not all have such heels as in the woman.
E yeu no cogiti esser aquo sino que es per aquo quar la femna era de viela, on so de secs cors e de venas descubertas, e en aquesta apparec al sentiment aquela ventositat permutada.	And I do not consider it to be so, but rather because the woman was of slender body, with dry organs and exposed veins, and in this appearance there is a sensation of that distension changed.
E es necessari que no apparesca segon aquesta retro-curacio en aquels que son delicioses e am cors humitz de venas ameguadas.	And it is necessary that this backward curvation not appear in those who are delicate and have moist organs with enlarged veins.
E cum tu voles la curacio de lu, e le pacient sent aquela dolor, lahoras no es a tu aparent al huel ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras tu strenh sobre aquel e dejos lu leugierament e secse sobre aquel entro que sia yssida aquela ventositat coartada, e cauterize le loc.	And since you want the curvation of the heel, and the patient feels pain, if it does not appear as apparent as we have said, then strengthen that area and let it slightly and gently rest over it while the distended part is inserted, and apply a cautery to the area.
Mays si tu no la vezes am los tieus huels, alhoras tu cura aquel am excussio del cors e am aquo que expelleys ventositatz, e carmina aquelas am pillulas fetidas e am pillulas de serapi e semblantz.	But if you do not see it in the swollen heels, then cure that by releasing the body and by what you expel the distension, and purge those with stinky pills and with snake root pills and similars.
De extraccio de sagetas.	From the extraction of arrows.
Sagetas son diversificadas segon las specias, e segon les locs dels cors en les quals cazo, quar la lor diversitat es que de aquellas so que han grans puntas, e petitas, e concavas, e sordas, so es solidas; e de lor so que han tres angles, e de aquelas a las quals so que han lenguas; e de aquelas a las quals so astelas.	Arrows are diverse according to the species and according to the places of the body in which they lodge, for their diversity is that some have large points, small, concave, and dull, being solid; and some have three angles, and of those to which belong tongues; and of those to which belong feathers.
E aquela que es segon les membres e las pessas en las quals cazo es segon dos manieyras: quar les membres o so membres principals concaus, ayssi cum le cervel, le cor, e·l fitge, e le pulmo, e les ronhos, e les budels, e la vezica, e a lor semblantz; e donc quan catz en alcu de aquestz membres e aparo a tu senhals de mort, la qual causa yeu recomtare aprop, lahoras cove que tu evites extraccio de aquela sageta en aquels quar la mort siec aquel en le qual en las majors disposicios, e quan a tu no appareysso aquestz mals senhals, e la sageta no es amaguada en la profunditat del membre, lahoras tu extratz aquela e cura la plagua.	And that which is according to the members and feet in which they lodge is according to two manners: for the members or are principal causes, thus as the brain, the heart, the liver, the lungs, the intestines, the bladder, and their like; and therefore when it lodges in any of these members and appears to you signs of death, which cause I will discuss shortly, then beware that you avoid extraction of that arrow in those where death would occur if the major dispositions were present, and when to you do not appear these evil signs and the arrow is not obscured in the depth of the member, then you extract it and cure the wound.
E dels senhals del servel es quan catz en lu sageta, e trespassa le os, e es yssit del cyphac le qual es sobre le cervel, quar accideys per lu soda vehement, e scotomia, e vertige, e rogor en les huels, e imflamacio e rogor de la lengua, e spasme e permixtio de entendament e vomi de colera, e fort leu es abscindida la paraula e es destruida la votz, e es yssit del loc de la plagua humiditat blanca semblant a pols, e yeys de lu semblant ad aquositat de la carn.	And of the signs of the arrow is when it lodges in the brain, passes through the bone, and is situated above the ventricle which is over the brain, for it happens by strong saline discharge, scotoma, vertigo, redness in the eyes, inflammation and redness of the tongue, spasms and confusion of understanding, and vomiting of bile, and greatly the speech is cut off and the voice is destroyed, and situated at the place of the wound a white moisture resembling dust, and from it resembling the humidity of flesh.
E donc si appareyso a tu aquestz senhals, lahoras tu abste de la curacio e de la extraccio de la sageta, si non es fora.	And if you observe these signs, then abstain from the cure and extraction of the arrow, unless it is outside.
Mays les senhals de la sageta quan catz en le cor, so que ela es prop de la mamila senestra, e sent am aquela quays sia ficada en causa dura, e no es causa vueda; e fort leu le movement de la sageta es semblant a movement del pols, e corr de la plagua sanc negra, e siec aquel fregiditat de las extremitatz, e suzor freja, e sincopi; e donc sapias que la mort descen ses tot dopte.	And the signs of the arrow when it has pierced the heart are that it is near the left nipple, and one feels at that place where it has been lodged in a hard manner, and the wound is not visible; and strong movement of the arrow seems like the pulse, and the flow of the black blood, and the area around it feels cold, and there is moisture from the effusion, and fainting; and therefore you would know that death descends upon him totally.
E les senhals quan la sageta ha plaglat le pulmo so eyssiment de sanc spumos de la plagua, e les vayssels que so prop del col so apostematz, e es mudada la color del malaute, e expira sperit gran aut, e demanda atraccio de ayre freg.	And the signs when the arrow has wounded the lung are frothy bloodiness from the wound, and the vessels near the neck are constricted, and the color of the patient changes, and he exhales a great spirit or sighs for air.
E si catz la sageta en le velament le qual es en le pietz, e la dolor lahoras es prop de las costas petitas, e es fayt le ale gran am vehement dolor e am sospir, e no so maugutz totz les membres dels muscles.	And if the arrow has pierced the periosteum which is in the foot, and the pain at that time is near the small bones, then it causes a great and violent pain and heavy breathing, and not all the members of the muscles are affected.
E si catz la sageta en le stomac, lahoras fort leu yeys de la plagua vianda alcuna indigesta.	And if you see an arrow in the stomach, then remove some undigested food from the wound.
E si catz la sageta en le ventre, e es ficada en lu, yeys alcuna fenda de la plagua, o la tela, o budel le qual es disromput, e no es speransa en la curacio de lu extraccio de la sageta.	And if you see an arrow in the belly, and it is embedded in it, remove some opening of the wound, or the tissue, or the intestine which is ruptured, and there is no hope for its cure by removing the arrow.
E si la sageta catz en la vesica, e es yssida defora urina, e procesesca de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, e fort leu es dolor sobre le malaute, lahoras sapias que es mortal.	And if the arrow strikes in the bladder, and it penetrates causing urine to leak, and there is any process from it to the parts outside, and much pain occurs in the wound, then know that it is fatal.
Mays les autres membres ayssi cum es la cara, le col, e·l golayro, e las spallas e le adjutori, e les spondils del dos, e la furcula, e la coysa, e la camba e a lor semblantz dels membres, son salvatz segon las majors disposicios quan la sageta no atroba vena ni arteria e no es sageta venenosa.	But for the other members such as the face, the neck, the shoulder, the auxiliary muscles, the vertebrae of the back, the furcula, the hip, and their corresponding parts of the body, they are saved according to the major disposals when the arrow does not find a vein or an artery and is not a venomous arrow.
E yeu recomtare aquo a tu que he vist del esser de aquestas sagetas, per que signifiques per aquo sobre la curacio tieua.	And I will recount to you what I have seen about the nature of these arrows, so that you may understand this regarding their treatment.
La qual causa es, quar en un home cazec sageta en le lacrimal del huel de lu en la razitz del nas, e yeu extrayssi aquela a lu del autra partida, dejos le grays de l’aurelha de lu, e es sanat, e no accidic en le huel de lu nocument.	The cause is that in a man an arrow struck the lacrimal gland of his eye in the root of his nose, and I extracted it from one side to the other, left his ear gray, and he recovered, and was not injured in his eye at all.
E extrayssi autra sageta a un Juzeu la qual cazec en lu en lo grays del sieu huel, dejos la palpebra pus dejos, e la sageta ja era occultada e no so conseguit de aquela sino una petita extremitat am la qual adhereys al sieu fust, e era gran sageta de las sagetas agudas dels Turcs , am ferr leon en la qual no havia aurelhas.	And I extracted another arrow from a Jew which struck him in the gray of his eye, leaving the eyelid but not the arrow, for it was hidden and could only be removed by a small extremity attached to its shaft, and it was a large arrow among the sharp arrows of the Turks, embedded in iron where there were no ears.
E senat es le Juzieu , e no accidic en le sieu huel mal accident.	And the Jew recovered, and was not injured in his eye at all.
E extrayssi una autra sageta a un home Crestia la qual era cazuta en le golayro, e era sageta arabica, e es aquela a la qual so aurelhas; e adonc yeu inscidegui sobre aquela entre doas guidegi, e ja era submersa en le golayro de lu; e adonc yeu so subtiliat am aquela, e aprop extraxi aquela, e es sanat le Crestia .	And I extracted another arrow from a Christian man who was struck in the groin, and it was an Arab arrow, and that which had ears; then I incised over it between two bones, and it was already submerged in his groin; then I dissected around it, and soon extracted it, and the Christian recovered.
E extraxi autra sageta a un home la qual era cazuta en le sieu ventre, e cogitegui que moris per aquela; e donc, pus que foro passatz xxx dias e no es mudat sobre lu alcuna causa de las suas disposicios, inscidegui sobre la sageta e engenagui sobre aquela, e es sanat, e no accidic a lu accident mal.	And extracted another arrow from a man which was lodged in his abdomen, and observed that he died of that; therefore, after thirty days had passed and no change occurred due to his disposition, incised upon the arrow and extracted it, and he recovered, and no ill happened to him.
E vi mays un home en le qual cazec una sageta en le dos de lu, e consolidada es la plagua sobre lu, e pus que foc aprop set ans, yssic la sageta en la razitz de la coyssa.	And there was a man in whom an arrow had pierced his side, and the wound had healed over. After approximately seven years, incise the arrow near the hip.
E vi una femna a la qual cazec sageta en le sieu ventre, e la plagua es consolidada dedintz lu, e no es mudada en las suas disposicios en re, e la femna no atrobec nocument en alcunas de las suas opperacios naturals.	And there was a woman in whom an arrow had pierced her abdomen, and the wound had healed inside her, and no change occurred in her disposition over time, and the woman did not experience any inconvenience in any of her natural operations.
E vi un autre home al qual cazec sageta en la sua cara e consolidada es la plagua e romas la sageta, no atrobant aqui mota dolor, e motz semblantz ad aquestz.	And there was another man in whom an arrow had pierced his face, and the wound had healed, breaking the arrow in the process. He did not experience much pain, and appeared similar to others.
E extrayssi la sageta del home dels princeps del rey que era cazuda en le mieg loc del nas sieu e ja havia declinat a la partida dreyta un petit, e occultada era tota la sageta.	And extracted the arrow from the king's prince, who had an arrow wound in the middle of his nose, and it had slightly declined to the right side, with the entire arrow hidden.
E yeu fu appelat a la curacio de lu aprop le cazement de la sageta entro a tres dias.	And I was called for the treatment near the wound within three days.
E adonc yeu atrobegui la plagua de la sageta mot streyta; e adonc yeu inquirigui aquela am tenta subtil, e no sentigui aquela; mays el la sentia puncio dejos la aurelha dreyta, e adonc speregui que aquela punccio era per la extremitat de la sageta.	And then you should locate the wound from the arrow; and then you should inquire about the one that feels slightly tender, but does not feel it; however, he felt it when you pressed with your right ear, and then you should suspect that this press was at the tip of the arrow.
E amplastregui le loc am emplaustre en le qual es vertut atrectiva e digestiva, confizant de mi que·l loc se apostemes per que appares a mi le loc de la sageta, per que secces sobre aquela.	And apply a compress in the area that is attractive and digestive, confident that by placing it there, I will find the location of the arrow, which will dry up over that area.
E no accidic en le loc accident significant que la sageta hagues conseguit aquel loc; e yeu continuegui am le emplaustre sobre lu per motz dias e no accidic accident; e consolidada es la plagua entretant, e romas le malaute de la extreccio de lu per spazi de motz dias entro que un jorn sentic la sageta dintz le sieu nas e recontec aquo a mi.	And do not miss the significant location where the arrow hit that place; and continue applying the compress over it for several days without missing any spot; and the wound consolidates during this time, and you remove the bad part of the extraction over a period of several days until one day you feel the arrow inside its sheath and tell me so.
E adonc yeu pausegui sobre la plagua medicina acuta corrosiva per motz dias entro que foc ubert, e am la tenta yeu assagegui aquel, e atrobegui la extremitat de la sageta subtil, la qual adhereys al fust.	And then place a corrosive acute medicine over the wound for several days until it opens up. And by probing with your finger, you should locate the tip of the arrow, which adheres to the shaft.
E aprop yeu ajustegui en la apersio de la plagua per aquela medicina acuta entro que apparec a mi visiblament la extremitat de la sageta, e passec a mi temps am aquo per le spazi de temps entro quatre meses.	And then you adjust in the opening of the wound with that sharp medicine where the tip of the arrow appears visibly to me, and pass it through the space of time between four months.
E aprop pus que la plagua foc amplificada, e foc a mi possible entrometre las forfexs en lu, e remaure aquela, e no obezic ad eyssiment, lahoras yeu no cessegui subtiliar e ingeniar sobre aquela am manieyras de engen, entro que comensegui un dia sobre aquela am manieyras de engens pendre lu am forceps descentment faytas, segon que vindra la forma de aquelas en la fi del capitol, entro que extraxi aquela; e aprop restauregui aquela plagua.	And then, when the wound is enlarged and I can possibly insert the forceps into it, I remark that, without further ado or delay, I continued to subtletize and ingenious about those methods of engineering until one day I managed to grasp that with descending forceps made, as will come at the end of this chapter, from which I then extracted it; and then restored that wound.
E alcus metges jutgavan que la cartillage del nas no es restaurada, e yeu restauregui aquela e la plagua es consolidada, e sanat es le malaute per sanetat entiera, e no noguec en lu en deguna causa.	And some doctors judged that the cartilage of the nose is not restored, but I restored it and the wound was consolidated, and the patient recovered completely, with no trace left in any way.
E yeu recomti a tu la qualitat de extraccio de alcunas sagetas per que pauses aquo regla e significacio sobre aquo que no he dit, quar las partidas de aquesta art e las difinicios de aquela no so conprehendudas am narracio ni no comprehen aquelas le libre.	And I recount to you the quality of extracting some arrows, so that you pay attention to this rule and meaning of what I have not said, for the parts of this art and the definitions of those are not understood in the narrative nor do they comprehend those freely.
E le artifexs savi compara am pauc sobre mot; e am aquo que es present sobre aquo que es absent; e atroba operacio novela e instrument novel deves le descendement de las causas extranhas del art quan accideysso.	And the wise craftsmen compare a little about motion; and what is present about what is absent; and find new operation and new instrument for the descent of foreign causes when they occur.
E donc yeu dic que sagetas no son fora-gitadas dels membres en les quals son ficadas sino segon dos manieyras: o per atraccio del loc en le qual intrec; o per le contrari de la autra partida.	And therefore I say that arrows are not ejected from the members in which they are inserted but according to two manners: either by attraction of the place in which they enter; or by the contrary action of the other part.
E aquela que es gitada per le loc don es intrada, o es sageta procedent en loc carnos, e es atirada e fora-gitada.	And that which is ejected by the place where entry was made, or the arrow penetrates into a fleshly location and is then shot out.
E si no obezeys a eyssiment de la hora en la qual catz, lahoras cove que tu la laysses per alcus dias entro que poyresca la carn que es al enviro de lu, e sia alleujada l‘atraccio de lu e la sua egressio.	And if it does not respond to the impression of the hour in which it was inflicted, then you should leave it for a few days until the flesh around it can heal, and reduce the attraction to it and its exit.
E semblantment si es ficada en os e no obezeys a tu a eyssiment, lahoras layssa aquela per alcus dias e itera aquela am atraccio e mocio en quascun dia, e ja es fora-gitada.	And similarly, if it is inserted into bone and does not respond to your impression, then leave it for a few days and repeatedly apply attraction and motion on any given day, and it will eventually be ejected.
E si no obezeys a tu eyssiment aprop alcus dias, lahoras cove que tu perforas en le circuit de la sageta en aquel os de tota partida am taravel subtil entro que·l loc sia amplificat de la sageta, e aprop extratz aquela.	And if you do not obey your intention for several days, then it is necessary that you puncture in the circuit of the arrow at that place of any part moving subtly where the area is enlarged by the arrow.
E si la sageta es ficada en le os del cap e ja ha procezit en un dels ventres del cervel, e apparo en le malaute alcus de aquels accidentz les quals yeu e ditz, lahoras abste de la extraccio de la sageta e layssa aquela entro que·l sieu esser sia equat aprop alcus dias; quar si la sageta perve al ciphac, lahoras la mort no es a lu prolonguada.	And if the arrow is lodged in the bone of the head and has already pierced one of the ventricles of the brain, and appears in the malaise after some of these accidents which you call, then refrain from extracting the arrow and leave it there until its being equated takes place for several days; or if the arrow reaches the marrow, then death is not prolonged to it.
E si la sageta no es ficada sino en le cors del os tant solament e no passa entro al ciphac, e roman le malaute per alcus dias, e no accideys a lu denguna causa de aquels accidentz, lahoras tu engenia en la atraccio de la sageta e en la atraccio de lu.	And if the arrow is not lodged in the bone of the body merely and does not pass into the marrow, and remains causing malaise for several days, and you do not incur any cause of these accidents, then you should proceed with the extraction of the arrow and its removal.
Mays si es mot ficada e no obezeys a tu a extraccio, lahoras tu aministra taravels en le circuit de la sageta ayssi cum havem recomtat, e aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	But if it is firmly lodged and you do not obey your extraction, then you administer travels in the circuit of the arrow as we have recommended, and proceed to cure the area until it is healed.
Mays si la sageta ja es amaguada en le loc del cors, e es amaguada del sentiment, lahoras tu inquireys aquela am tenta, e si tu sentas aquela, lahoras atira aquela am alcus sturmentz les quals so convenientz a la atraccio de lu.	But if the arrow is already hidden in the place of the body and hidden from sensation, then you inquire about that area carefully, and if you feel it, then remove it with some instruments which are suitable for its extraction.
E si no podes sobre lu per la constriccio de la plagua e per la longitut del preon, e aqui no es os ni nervi ni vena, lahoras tu fen sobre la plagua entro que sia amplificada e que sia possible extrayre la sageta.	And if you cannot reach it due to the size of the wound and the depth of the arrow, and here there are neither nerves nor veins, then you cut into the wound so that it can be enlarged and the arrow can be extracted.
E si so a lu aurelhas am las quals sia tenguda, lahoras tu deliura la carn en la qual es ficada de tota partida am tot le engen que poyras far; e ingenia sobre aquo, si no podes sobre la evasio de la carn en la fractura de las aurelhas e en torssio de aquelas entro que obezesca.	And if it is in the ears where it is held, then you release the flesh in which it is embedded from all sides with whatever means you can; and use your skill, if you cannot remove the flesh around the wound in the fracture of the ears and in the torsion of those areas that must yield.
E quan tu administras la extraccio de la sageta en quascun loc on sia, lahoras tu usa am torcio de la tua ma am forceps a totas partidas entro que fassa aquela obezir; e subtilia am deriera subtilitat que la sageta no sia trencada e que sia fayta a tu dificil atraccio de lu e de aquela extraccio.	And when you perform the extraction of the arrow in any place where it is, then you use your handkerchief and forceps from all sides so that they make it yield; and with great subtlety ensure that the arrow is not broken and that it can be easily extracted.
E si no podes sobre aquela de la tua hora, lahoras tu layssa per alcus dias entro que se poyrescan las partidas que so en le circuit de lu, e aprop itera aquela quar lahoras es alleujada.	And if you cannot do this at your hour, then you let it be for some days until the parts that are in the circuit of him heal, and then again iterate that which is alleviated.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat flux de sanc, lahoras tu administra aquo que havem dit de curacio en le sieu capitol.	And if it makes him the contrary condition of having blood, then you administer what we have said for cure in its chapter.
E guarda la tua vertut de inscizio de vena o de nervi, o de corda, e aministra engen en tota manieyra a tu possibla de la evasio de la sageta; e fay aquo am facilitat e tranquillitat e tarditat e fermetat ayssi cum yeu e a tu recomtat.	And preserve your virtue in the incision of vein or nerve, or cord, and administer engen in every manner for the avoidance of the arrow; and do this with facilitation, tranquility, tardiness, and firmness as you have been taught.
E donc que fassas contrayre la sageta per so que·l malaute sia segon la figura segon la qual foc deves le cazement de la sageta en lu, quar es mays juvatiu.	And so that you contract the arrow by itself that the patient be according to the figure according to which fire you should place the head of the arrow in him, for this is more advantageous.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible, lahoras tu aministra aquo que es a tu possible per las figuras.	And if this is not possible for you, then administer what is possible according to the figures.
Mays las sagetas que son fora-gitadas per le contrari del autra partida, o que ja de lu procezeys alcuna partida a las partidas de fora, o fa gilbositat la extramitat de la sageta per sentiment de la partida pus desus de la codena propdana e vezes aquela eminent; adonc tu secsa sobre aquela; e sia la seccio segon la quantitat en la qual prenguan las forceps; e aprop atira aquela, quar ela es fayta leugiera a eyssiment.	And if the arrows that are extravasated contrary to the other part, or that already have proceeded some part to the parts of outside, or cause distention at the extremity of the arrow by sensation from the part more above the groin; then you dry over that; and let the section be according to the quantity in which the forceps take hold; and then withdraw that, for it is made light and evisceration.
Mays si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu tortz lama segon contrarietat entro que la sageta enprema en le os, e amplifique a si meteys, e aprop extratz aquela.	If it is retained in the joint, then twist the limb according to the opposite direction where the arrow presses into the joint, and amplify this movement, and then extract it.
E sino, layssa aquela per alcus dias, e aprop itera aquela entro qu’en yesca.	If not, let it remain for a few days, and then repeat it where the pain is located.
E si le fust de la sageta es en aquela, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am lu.	If the root of the arrow is there, then push it toward it.
Mays si le fust es cazut e voles aministrar inpulsio, lahoras tu intromet e aquela, si es sorda, sturment concau per so que intre la concavitat de lu en la coa de la sageta e aprop impelleys aquela am lu.	If the root is lost and you want to administer an impulse, then insert it there. If it is obstinate, stir it with a curved instrument so that its cavity enters the channel of the arrow, and then push it toward it.
Mays si la sageta es concava, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am sturment fort intrant en aquela, quar la sageta es alleujada per aquela.	If the arrow is concave, then push it with a strong stirrup entering into it, so that the arrow is straightened by it.
E si la sageta es entoxiguada, lahoras cove que tu concaves tota la carn en la qual es le vere, si es a tu possible aquo, e aprop cura aquela am aquo que si conveneys.	If the arrow is embedded deep, then make sure you concave all the flesh in which it is located, if possible, and then extract it using whatever method is appropriate.
E si la sageta catz en le pietz, o en le ventre, o en la vesica, o en le costat, e es propinqua per so que tu tocas aquela am la tenta, e es a tu possible secsar sobre aquela, lahoras secsa sobre aquela e guarda te de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e extratz aquela, e aprop cos la plagua si indigeys, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the arrow hits the foot, or the abdomen, or the bladder, or the side, and is nearby such that you touch it with your hand, and it is possible to extract it there, then extract it there and carefully avoid cutting a vein or nerve, and after extracting it, properly dress the wound until it heals.
Forma de forceps am las quals so atiradas las sagetas:	Form of forceps with which arrows are extracted:
Sian las extremitatz de lor cum a bec de ausel que son faytas cum serra quan prendon sobre la sageta per so que no la layssen.	If the ends are formed like the beak of a bird and are made such that they grasp the arrow when applied.
E de aquelas son faytas motas specias, grans, paucas e migieras, segon la quantitat de la grandeza de la sageta e de la sieua pauqueza, e de la amplitud de la plagua, e de la constriccio de lu.	And from these, special hooks are made, large, few, and medium-sized, according to the size of the arrow and its smallness, and the width of the wound, and the shape of it.
Forma de impellent concau de aquesta extremitat conquava ayssi cum pena de ausel per so que sia alleujat le intrament de la sageta en lu, e impulcio de aquela sorda:	Form of the concave handle at this end shaped like a bird's claw so that it facilitates the removal of the arrow from the wound, and impels the latter.
Forma de impellent de sorda extremitat:	Form of pressing a silent extremity:
ayssi cum ray per so que sia alleujat le intrament de lu en la sageta concava e es impellida am aquel.	Thus, in order that the instrument in the concave groove may be eased and pressed thereunto.
De fleubotomia de las venas.	Of phlebotomy of the veins.
Las venas de fleubotomia de las quals corr costuma de fleubotomar so xxx, de las quals so en le cap xvi, so es doas venas pulsatils las quals so aprop las aurelhas, dic alhasisain; doas herbas que so en les dos templars apparentz; e doas venas que so en dos lacrimals de dos huels que son appeladas aspicientz; e la vena preparada en le mieg loc del front, e la vena que es en la extremitat del nas; e doas guidegi que so al col; e doas venas que so en la labia desus; e doas venas que so en la labia dejos; e — aquestas so las venas que so appeladas algelic —; e so doas venas que so dejos la lengua.	Of phlebotomy of the veins. The veins from which phlebotomy is customarily made are xxx, which are in chapter XVI. These are two pulsating veins near the ears, called by Avicenna; two herbs that are on the temple bones apparent; and two veins that are in the tear ducts of the eyes, called aspirant; the vein prepared in the middle part of the forehead, and the vein that is at the extremity of the nose; two jugular veins at the neck; two veins in the upper lip; and two veins in the lower lip; — these are the veins called algellic; — there are also two veins behind the tongue.
Mays las venas que so fleubotomadas en les brasses so v; quar de aquelas es una cephalica, e es deves le latz silvestre; e le poble appela “la vena del cap”, e sorda, e es vena migiera, e es composta de un ram de la basilica, e de autre ram de la cephalica; e nomna aquela le poble “vena de tot le cors”, e basilica es vena la qual es pausada en le latz domestic, e es nomnada “citillar”, e nompnan aquela les vulguars “vena del ventre”; e funis del bras, e es pausada sobre le focil, e es aquela en la qual es fleubotomat, e es aquela que appar sobre le poutz per apparicio manifesta; e salvatella, e es la vena que es entre lo dit auricular e·l pus petit dit, e so en lu dos ramps.	But the veins that are phlebotomized in the arms are v. Of these, one is cephalic and comes from the wild laurel; the people call it "the vein of the head," and it is a median vein composed of a branch of the basilica and another branch of the cephalic. They name the latter "the vein of all the body," while the basilica is the vein that comes from the domestic laurel, called "citillar," and the vulgar people call it "the vein of the belly." From the funis branch, which is placed over the axillary, and it is this one on which phlebotomy is performed; it appears above the armpit due to its obvious appearance. Savallleta, which is the vein between the aforementioned auricular and the smaller one, and it has two branches.
E en le pe e la camba so tres venas; la una de aquelas es que es dejos la curvatura del denolh del latz silvestre; e la segonda es sophena, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz domestic; e la vena sciatica, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz silvestre; e en la camba son autras venas semblantz ad aquelas.	In the foot and thigh there are three veins; one of them is that which gives the curvature to the horn of the wild goat; and the second is sophena, and its place is given to the thigh of the domestic animal; and the sciatic vein, and its place is given to the thigh of the wild animal; and in the thigh there are other veins similar to those.
Le juvament de las venas que so aprop las aurelhas es a cataris antics e emigranea e sahafati e ulceracios del cap malas antiquas.	The condition of the veins that are near the ears is catarrh and migraines and scrophula and old ulcers of the head.
E la qualitat de sagnar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: es que sia ras le cap del malaute, e sia freguat le cap del malaute en le occipiti en le loc de amdoas las venas am drap ample am bona fricacio; aprop strenha le malaute le sieu col am una benda entro que apparan las doas e les locs de lor so aprop las aurelhas en dos locs depremegutz del cap; e quereys aquela am le tieu dit, e si tu sentes le pols de aquelas am le dit tieu, aqui senha am tenta.	And the quality of sowing those is according to what I will recount to you: it is that you lay the patient on their back, and rub the patient's head at the occipital region where both veins are located with a wide cloth in good friction; then firmly press the patient's neck with a band where the two locations near the ears are found on two pressed areas of the head; and when you feel those at your own finger, here is where you sow them.
Aprop tu pren la lancea cutellar, e es aquela que es inscident, e aprop tu intromet aquel dejos la vena en la codena entro que·l fleubotomi vengua al os.	Then you take the surgical lancet, and that is the one that will be inserted, and then you introduce it into the vein between which the phlebotomist will reach the artery.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am la vena e la codena a las partidas desus e inscideys la vena am inscizio inscident.	And then raise your hand to the vein and its parts above and incise the vein with an incident incision.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio la quantitat de dos ditz ajustatz o entorn de aquo; e fay yssir del sanc atant quant voles.	And let the length of the incision be the width of two fingers adjusted or around that; and let the blood flow out as much as you want.
E aprop strenh am pulvils e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	And then sprinkle some powder there and leave it until it is healed.
E ja e precedit en le comensament del libre la inscizio de aquelas e de lor la cauterizacio.	And already it was mentioned at the beginning of this book about the incision of these and their cautery treatment.
Mays de las doas venas arterias que so als templars le juvament de la fleubotomia es a emigranea antiqua e sode malvada e obtalmia assidua e cors de superfluitatz acutas effusas als huels.	More of the two arteries, which supply the temples with the vitality of bloodletting, are aemigrena (hemicrania) antiqua and some evil amblyopia caused by frequent use and body of acute superfluous humors in the heels.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: constrengua le malaute le sieu col mot entro que apparan las doas venas al sentiment per appericio manifesta e sia demonstrat le pols de lor dejos le tieu dit; e lahoras tu senha am tenta.	And the quality of bleeding those is according to what I recommend to you: compress the patient's thigh with your hand so that the two veins appear by palpation and it is evident, and demonstrate the pulse of their location by your finger; and then you can feel.
E aprop tu eleva la codena desobre la vena a las partidas desus am le tieu dit indic, e intromet le fleubotomi inscident dejos, e eleva la vena en sus; e inscidey aquela ayssi cum has fayt en las doas venas autras; e fay correr del sanc segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And then you elevate the knee above the vein at the parts above as you have already said, and insert the flebotomy incidiently, and elevate the vein in them; and cut that as you have done in the other two veins; and let the blood flow according to the quantity of your necessity.
E aprop deslia la coartacio del malaute, e pausa le tieu dit sobre la vena per una hora, e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto e pulvils e strenh aquela desus am fort constriccio, e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	And then release the constriction of the malaise, and place your hand over the vein for an hour, and then place a cloth and powder there with a strong constriction, and leave it until it is healed.
E ja es precedida la rememoracio de lor, e de aquelas la inscizio, e la atraccio en le comensament del libre.	And already the recollection of them has preceded, and after those, the incision, and the cutting at the beginning of the wound.
E donc le juvament de fleubotomia de la vena del front es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a las malautias antiquas de la cara e a emigranea e rogor e ulceracios fetidas.	And thus the treatment of bleeding from the vein in the forehead is close to the bleeding from the cephalic vein for ancient illnesses of the face and headaches, as well as swelling, ulcers, and foul-smelling sores.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es segon que yeu recomti a tu; so es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col am una benda entro que apparesca la vena; e aprop pren le insturment le qual es nompnat fossori del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the quality of the bleeding from the forehead is as I will recount to you; it is that the malaise presses its side with a bandage where the vein appears; and then take the instrument which is called a fossor, of which this is the form:
Pausa la puncta eminent la qual es al cap del fossori sobre aquela vena e percuteys sobre lu am penche o am autre causa en la manieyra de lu, e layssa lo sanc correr segon la quantitat la qual voles; e aprop deslia la perforacio del malaute e strenh aquela entro que sia sanada.	Pause the puncture at the spot where it is at the top of the drain hole above that vein and hit it either from above or as suited by the method, and let the blood flow according to the quantity you desire; then remove the perforation in the thigh and strengthen it so that it may be healed.
E alcunas veguadas es uberta am fleubotomi lat, empero no cove que·l fleubotomi sia de acuta extremitat ayssi cum les autres fleubotomis, abantz sia de lada extremitat, e fleubotoma aquela segon le tranvers, quar le os es propda e fort leu trencaria en lu le fleubotomi quan es subtil.	Sometimes the space is opened with a large incision for bloodletting, but I do not know if the bloodletting incision should be of acute extremity as in other bloodlettings, or before it should be of lateral extremity, and make the bloodletting according to the transversal, because the bone is nearby and strong; a thin bloodletting would break through the bone.
Mays le juvament de las duas venas que so als lacrimals de dos huels per scabia del huels per rogor e sebol en les huels, e a las malautias de la cara.	More the juvenile state of the two veins that are at the lacrimal glands of the eyes through the groove of the eye by inflammation and abscess in the eye, and for facial ailments.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia es que·l malaute strenha le col sieu am una benda, e aprop fleubotoma aquelas, e tu sias stant sobre le cap de lu.	The quality of the bloodletting is that the thigh strengthens its own color with a bandage, and then make the bloodletting there, and you stand over the thigh.
E sia fayta la fleubotomia segon le transvers a longitut un pauc am fleubotomi pauc, quar en le loc no es carn; e si le fleubotomi es subtil, fort leu la extremitat de lu es trencada.	And perform the femoral incision according to the transverse length a little, making a few femoral incisions, for in that place there is no flesh; and if the femoral incision is fine, strengthen the extremity of it by breaking it.
E aprop fay correr del sanc atant quant es a tu necessari, e pausa sobre aquelas coto, e strenh aquelas per una nueyt, e aprop deslia aquelas.	And let the bleeding continue as long as necessary, then place your hand over those wounds, and strengthen them with a new bandage.
Mays le fleubotomi de la vena del nas es conferent a febre acuta e a soda vehement, e a las malautias de la cara e emigranea e rogor que accideys en la cara, e majorment quan es antiqua.	More so, the femoral incision of the vein of the nose is appropriate for acute fever and intense swelling, as well as facial illnesses, migraines, and redness that occurs in the face, especially when it is chronic.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col e aprop te le sieu nas am la tua ma sinistra, e pren le fleubotomi subtil lonc e fica aquela en le mieg loc del cap del nas segon rectitut, quar la vena no appar al sentiment aqui, e quar le sanc comensa a fluir tantost.	And the quality of the femoral incision for it is that the patient strains his neck and then places his nose in your left hand, and make the fine incision along the middle of the nose according to the proper direction, for the vein does not appear here, and the bleeding begins to flow soon.
Cove que tu ultimes la tua ma am le fleubotomi petit a petit e fassas correr del sanc segon la tua necessitat; e aprop lia aquela per una nuoyt, quar aquela es restaurada leugierament.	Cover your hand with the incision little by little and let the bleeding occur as needed; then place it for a night, for that is quickly restored.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de las doas guidegui a constriccio de ale e a comensament de lepra e a motas malautias e inpetige e malas ulceracios corrosivas ayssi cum herpotromeno.	May the youth of the femoral incision lead to constipation and the beginning of leprosy and various ailments and corrosive bad ulcers as well as erysipelas.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que el malaute strenha dejos quascuna en le sieu col am liament; e estia le artifexs sobre le cap del malaute, e le malaute sia sezent sobre una sezela.	And the quality of the femoral incision is that the patient feels each cut in his side with a stick; and the surgeon is over the head of the patient, and the patient lies on a bench.
E aprop fleubotoma la vena al lonc am fleubotomi ample petit a petit; e aprop extratz de sanc segon temprada quantitat o segon aquo que vezes de necessitat que es ad aquo; e aprop fay semblant del autra vena.	And gradually open the vein along its length with a small and gradually larger incision; and extract blood according to the season in quantity, or according to what is needed as necessary for this; and make a similar incision on the other vein.
E aprop deslia le liament e strenh las doas venas am strictura migiera per so que·l malaute no sia prefocat, e laysa entro al mati quar la plagua es sanada.	And remove the stick and strengthen both veins with a mid-stral ligature so that the patient is not overheated, and leave room in the flesh for the plague to heal.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de las venas algerich, comfereys a petitas apostemas e pustulas de la boca e corrupcio de las gengivas e malas ulceracios e fissuras, e a malas ulceracios que so en le nas e en le circuit de lu.	And the benefit of the femoral venesection for ager-related conditions, it provides relief from small abscesses and pustules in the mouth, corruption of the gums, bad ulcers, and fissures, as well as bad ulcers that occur in the nose and around it.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que fases cezer le malaute denant tu, e strenh le col de lu am una benda, e aprop revolveys las labias de lu e reguarda a doas venas de las quals la una es de la dextra de la labia e la segonda de la senestra; e la demonstracio de quascuna es per la negror de quascuna de amdos, e aquo mays es quar en le circuit de aquelas so venas menudas negras; e adonc inscideys cascuna per inscizio inscident.	And the quality of the femoral incision is that you make a cut in front of the malalus, strengthen its neck with a bandage, and then rotate the lips and look for two veins, one on the right side of the lip and the second on the left; the demonstration of each is by the darkness of each of both, and this more so in the circuit of those small dark veins; then incise each by an incisive incision.
Mays si dubitacio es dejos tu, e no sabes qual es de aquelas, lahoras tu enten a inscisio de la major de aquelas, e de la pus manifesta de aquelas.	And if doubt exists, you leave it, and if you do not know which is which of those, then you incise the largest of them, and the most obvious one.
E fay le semblant de las doas venas que so en las labias desus.	And make the appearance of the two veins that are in the upper lips.
Mays costuma corr mays a inscidir las doas venas que so en la labia dejos.	And it is customary to incise both veins that are in the lower lip.
Mays de doas venas que so dejos la lengua le juvament es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a prefocacios que so en le guolayro, a la malautia de la uvula, e a malautias de la boca.	And the treatment for both veins that are left near the incision of the cephalic vein is close to the condition of the uvula, in the disease of the uvula, and diseases of the mouth.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es que segue le malaute entre las tuas mas denant le solel, e eleva la lengua de lu, e reguarda dejos la lengua, de la un latz de lu vena e del autre latz vena, e la color de quascuna es declinant a negror.	And the quality of making an incision there is to follow the patient's thighs in front of their navel, elevate the tongue, and observe the tongue, from one side of its vein and the other side of its vein, and the color of each is declining to black.
E adonc fleubotoma quascuna; e guarda te que no ultimes la tua ma en fleubotoman aquelas, quar dejos aquelas so arterias.	And then make an incision there; and keep in mind that you should not complete your hand in making an incision there, for those are arteries.
E las tuas venas que so fleubotomadas en le coyde so en las quals corr costuma en totz les homes, e la fleubotomia de lor es fayta segon dos manieyras, o pongen am le fleubotomi mirtilat o olivar a subtilitat declinant; o secsar am fleubotomi cutellar, e apelha si alnessil, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And your veins that are incised in the groin are those in which blood flows customarily in all men, and the incision of them is made according to two methods: either they place a thorn or olive needle of subtile thickness; or with a surgical knife, and call it a lancet. This is the form of it:
E aquest alnessil es que conveneys a seccio e de aquels so specias latz e subtils segon la amplitut de las venas e segon la strictura de aquelas.	And this lancet is that you adjust its thickness and the width of its blade according to the size of the veins and the structure of those.
Forma de fleubotomi mirti:	Form of thorn incision:
sia le latz de lu ayssi cum vezes, e conveneys a obrir las venas concavas plenas procedentz apparentz grossas, e ad aquelas que conteno sanc gros torbat.	Let the wound be like this you see, and it is necessary to open the concave veins full of apparent large branches, and those that contain thick turbid blood.
E aquesta es la forma de fleubotomi olivar:	This is the way to perform an olive flebotomy:
E aquest fleubotomi es de menor latitut e de pus subtil extremitat, e conveneys a fleubotomia de venas subtils que conteno sanc subtil citri.	And this flebotomy is of lesser breadth and finer extremity, and it is suitable for flebotomizing thin veins that contain fine yellowish blood.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena basilica la qual es una de tres venas: quar extratz le sanc de las malautias que so dejos le guolayro e·l col, e de aquo que siec le pietz e·l ventre.	More appropriate for the flebotomy of the basilic vein, which is one of three veins: from this you extract the blood of the maladies that affect the knee and the groin, as well as what concerns the foot and the abdomen.
E conveneys al fleubotomador, quan fleubotomia aquela, que guarde be aquela e sia sobre-temor en aquela, quar dejos lu ha arteria, e si erra e ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi, inscidira aquela arteria e accidira fluxs de sanc, per so que cove que no fleubotomes aquela am fleubotomi pungent, abantz sia sectant cum alnessil.	And it is fitting for the flebotomizer, when performing this flebotomy, to be well aware of it and to show great caution, for if he misses and adjusts improperly in the puncture of the flebotomy, he will cut that artery and cause flows of blood. Therefore, you must not perform a deep flebotomy before cutting as with a lancet.
E si no appar la basilica per apparicio manifesta, lahoras cove que tu laysses aquela e que tu mudes a la autre, o que cerques alcun ram sieu; o que fleubotomes en loc de lu finis del bras, quar aquela es manifesta; e secsa aquela am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the basilica does not appear by obvious appearance, then you should leave that one and change to the other, or seek some vein there; or perform a bleeding at the end of the arm where it is manifest, and dry out that one with bleeding as we have said.
Mays si tu voles la fleubotomia de lu meteyssa, lahoras cove denant la strictura del bras que toques le loc entro que conogues le loc dels pols, e aprop senha sobre lu am tencha; e aprop lia le bras e secsa la vena am seccio concava am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit; e guarda te que caja la percussio per alcu spazi del loc de la arteria.	And if you wish to perform the bleeding at the elbow, then before the constriction of the arm, touch the location where you know the pulse site, and place your hand over it; then lift the arm and dry the vein with a concave section for bleeding as we have said; and guard that the percussion does not occur in any space of the artery's location.
E quan tu vezes, cum strenhes le liament, imflacio en le loc que has senhat am tencha, lahoras aquela inflacio es inflacio de la arteria, e donc squiva aquela.	And when you press, as you strengthen the ligament, inflammation occurs in the location where you placed your hand; that inflammation is due to the artery, so avoid that area.
E si vezes le sanc fluir en la fleubotomia ayssi cum aurina de enfant, e·l sanc es subtil rog, lahoras sapias que es del sanc de la arteria; e lahoras tu coyta e pausa le tieu dit sobre aquel per lonc spazi; e aprop osta le tieu dit, e si lo sanc es abscindit, quar motas veguadas es abscindit, lahoras tu strenh le bras e layssa aquel.	And if you see the blood flow in the bleeding as it appears from a child's wound, and the blood is thin and rosy, then you know it is arterial blood; then lift and place your hand over that area for a long space; and move close to that area, and if the blood stops flowing, where motas (small blood vessels) have stopped, then strengthen the arm and leave that.
E guardes le malaute de la moccio de lu, e sia sobre-temor de lu e no maugua aquel per alcus dias entro que sia sanat.	And keep the patient warm, and avoid cold for several days until it is healed.
Mays si le sanc no es abscindit, e vezes que deves tu no es present medicina ad aquo, lahoras tu inscideys la arteria, si appar a tu; quar la extremitat de lu es contrayta, e es abscindit le sanc; o que prenguas scorsa de fistic, e fen aquela, e pren la una maytat e strenh aquela sobre le loc de la vena am strictura descent am liament e am pulvils entro al autra dia.	If the bleeding is not stopped, and sometimes you must not use the medicine for that, then when you incise the artery, if it appears to you; for the extremity will be contracted, and the bleeding will stop; or that which you take from a fistula, and perform that, and take one half and strengthen that over the place of the vein with stricture descending on linseed and powder between the other day.
E lahoras si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, lahoras cura aquel am aquo del qual es precedit a la rememoracio del loc de las polveras abscindentz flux de sanc.	And if the bleeding is stopped, that is good; but if not, then cure it with that of which it was preceded in the remembrance of the place of the powders stopping the flow of blood.
E la abscizio del sanc de lu es dificil en motas disposicios per le loc petit de la plagua e la possibilitat del liament del bras.	And the stopping of the bleeding from it is difficult in minor wounds and the possibility of the linseed.
Mays de la vena fusca la fleubotomia es juvament que extratz lo sanc de la partida subirana del cap e a la partida dejos del cors; per aquo quar es composta de ram de la basilica e de ram de cephalica, ayssi cum havem dit.	And for the dark vein, phlebotomy is beneficial that extracts the blood from the part above the heart and from the part below the body; therefore, it is composed of a branch of the basilica vein and a branch of the cephalic vein, as we have said.
E cove al fleubotomant aquela que sia sobre-temor en la fleubotomia de lu, quar dejos aquela es un nervi; e adonc si ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi e atroba le nervi, accidira a lu stupor, e es difficil la sanacio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot, E aquest nervi motas veguadas apar al sentiment; e si es ocultat ad alcus homes e es subtil e no es monstrat, lahoras cove que tu pauses le fleubotomi am le qual tu fleubotomas am seccio de alnessil, e evita le nervi am la tua fortalesa.	And carefully avoid the nerve that is over-sensitive during the phlebotomy of the patient; for if you leave it there, it will be a nerve; and then when you adjust in the puncture of the phlebotomy and find the nerve, it will result in stupor, and the recovery is difficult, and rarely is it completely cured. This nerve manifests sensations in waves; and if hidden to some people and subtle and not shown, then stop the phlebotomy at a section of alnessil and avoid the nerve with your strength.
E si la vena es entre dos nervis, lahoras tu fen la vena en la longitut.	And if the vein is between two nerves, then cut the vein along its length.
Le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena cephalica es que atratz le sanc del cap e comfereys a las malautias dels huels.	The purpose of phlebotomy of the cephalic vein is to draw blood from the head and relieve illnesses of the feet.
E cove en aquest propriament, si vols que la fleubotomes pungen am fleubotomi olivar o am fleubotomi mirti; quar es la pus salva de totas las venas, quar no es dejos lu arteria ni nervi.	And carefully do this if you want to make a phlebotomy at an olive phlebotomy or a mirti phlebotomy; for it is the pure blood from all veins, and neither the artery nor the nerve is left.
Mays empero conveneys a tu deves la fleubotomia que guardes que am le fleubotomi no punguas le cap del lacert tant solament, e cerques le loc pus leugier, e no notz a lu, si no es atrobat am la percussio primieyra que sia sobre aquela am fleubotomia alcunas veguadas.	Moreover, however, you should perform the veneflebotomy carefully, ensuring that you do not puncture the upper part of the vein solely, and seek the location slightly lower, and do not rely on it alone, but rather on the primary percussion which is over that area several times during the veneflebotomy.
Mays empero fort leu es apostemat en alcus homes, quan no es fleubotomat en la primieyra percussio, mays no notz en re aquel apostema.	Moreover, however, abscesses are more prevalent in some individuals, when not treated with veneflebotomy in the primary percussion, but do not ignore them again.
Mays la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquela e les accidentz de lu so motz, en les quals te cove cogitar en lor rectificacio.	Moreover, the quality of the veneflebotomy and the accidents related to it are matters that you should consider in their correction.
Le primier de lu es del qual cove que sapias que fleubotomia no es aministrada sino en conservacio de sanetat e per speransa de lu e cautela de aveniment de malautias, e que sia fayta fleubotomia en la una de las venas que so en le coyde, so es: cephalica, fusca e basilica; e que sia fayta fleubotomia al comensament de primaveyra, sobre dejun en primaviera e autunppne, e en invern aprop la comestio, quan apparo significacios de replecio.	The first of these is that you should know that veneflebotomy should be administered only for the preservation of health and with hope and caution regarding the onset of illnesses, and that the veneflebotomy should be performed on one of the veins in the thigh: cephalic, basilic, and femoral; and that the veneflebotomy should be done at the beginning of spring, fasting in spring and autumn, and in winter before meals, when signs of repletion appear.
E sia fayta fleubotomia e le tertz dia o al primier pus que del jorn siran passadas tres horas.	And perform a fistulotomy and let three hours pass after the first time of the day.
Mays fleubotomia que es aministrada, mays quan provoca convenencia e necessitat ad aquo, o de nuoyt o de dia, en tota hora e en tot temps.	The more fistulotomy that is performed, the more when it provokes convenience and necessity at what time, day or night, at any hour and in all times.
E cove que efant no sia fleubotomat entro que aja xiiii ans, e femna que sia prenhs no sia fleubotomada sino del quart mes entro al sete, e les viels no sian fleubotomatz les quals ja han passatz lx ans.	And let a child not be fistulotomized until it has four years, and a woman who is pregnant should not be fistulotomized except in the fourth month between the seventh and eighth months of pregnancy, and old women should not be fistulotomized those which have passed their fifteenth year.
E cum alcu vol esser fleubotomat per qualque manieyra sia, cove que mondifique les sieus budels denant la fleubotomia am clisteri leon, si en aquels ha mota fenda retenguda, per so que las venas no atiro las superfluitatz en la fleubotomia dels budels, que son puridas, e que no noguan als membres principals.	And when anyone wishes to be fistulotomized in any manner whatsoever, let their intestines be modified before the fistulotomy by using a lion's glycerin enema, if there is a mota (a small mass or clot) of retained feces, so that the veins do not carry superfluous matter during the fistulotomy of the intestines, which are cleansed, and do not harm the principal members.
E no sian fleubotomatz les pascientz naucea sacertiva e crapula, ni evasent de malautia ni de ebretat entro que aquo sia remaugut aquo de lor, ni malaute de ydropici, e mays que fleubotomia sia temuda aprop colica passio e aprop vomit, e aprop cos de ventre, e aprop multiplicacio de coyt e de trebal e de exercici de dejunis o de vigilias e de tota causa que dissolveys la vertut, o sia corpore28 o animal.	And do not fistulotomize patients who are nauseated, intoxicated, or in a state of debility or drunkenness until this condition is remedied for them, nor in cases of dropsy, and more that fistulotomy be delayed near colic pain, near vomiting, near abdominal issues, near multiplication of coitus and work and exercise before or after fasting or vigils, and near any cause that dissolves virtue, whether physical or animal.
E aprop considera en subtiliacio de humos denant aquo si le sanc es gros, am viandas e beures, e am medicinas si aquo es a lu possible ad aquo.	And then consider in subtlety of humors before this if the pain is great, with foods and drinks, and with medicines if this is possible for him.
E aprop intre en banh si alcuna causa no prohibeys, o sia excersitat per alcun exercici per so que·l sanc sia subtiliat.	And then enter the bath if any cause does not prohibit it, or exercise for some that the pain be subtlety alleviated.
E pausa la fleubotomia de lu en le pietz del dia, so es enviro la hora de tercia, ayssi cum havem dit.	And place the phlebotomy on the feet of the patient, so at the hour of the third, as we have said.
E perforsa te que·l pietz de aquel sia guardat en aquel dia de totz mals accidentz animals, ayssi cum es angustia, ira, temor, e de totz accidentz corporals, ayssi cum es trebal e pena superflua e coyt e semblantz a lor.	And I assure you that the feet of that patient should be guarded on that day from all bad animal accidents, as when there is anxiety, anger, fear, and from all bodily accidents, as when there is hard work or unnecessary pain, intercourse, and things like them.
E a la sua sezelha fassa esser presentz las causas en le us de la qual corr costuma dels homes am aromaticitat e odorament e am bals e semblantz ad aquels segon la cantitat de possibilitat.	And at her side, have prepared the causes in the use of which custom among men is based on aromaticity and odor, and with balsams according to their quantity and possibility.
E segua le fleubotomador sobre un coyssi que sia pus aut que·l coyssi de aquel que deu esser fleubotomat.	And follow the phlebotomist on a cushion that is higher than the cushion of the one who is to be phlebotomized.
E aprop extragua le sieu bras, e fregue aquel am la sua ma le fleubotomador doas o tres veguadas; e aprop strenha le liament am correia e involva aquel doas veguadas.	And then extract his arm, rub that area with your hand using the lancet two or three times; and tightly bind the wound with a bandage and wrap it twice.
E sia la strictura temprada, quar la strictura quant no es engual, o la strictura es am superfluitat, lahoras prohibeys de fluxs del sanc; o es am mollificacio, e lahoras prohibeys le cors del sanc eyssament.	And if the stricture is tempered, for when the stricture is not equal, or the stricture is due to excess, then prohibit the flow of blood; or due to softening, and then allow the body to expel it accordingly.
E aprop la strictura, cove que aquel que deu esser fleubotomat fregue las suas mas ensemps entre lor entro que las venas sian imfladas, e sian declaradas al sentiment.	And when approaching the stricture, have those who are to perform the lancet massage their hands together between them as the veins become swollen and their presence made evident.
E aprop le fleubotomador unte le sieu fleubotomi am un pauc de oli antic propriament; e aprop pausa le sieu di indic de la ma senestra sobre aquela vena, dejos le loc del qual vol la fleubotomia, per que la vena fuja un pauc, e la percussio sia sessada quar de las venas es la qual atrobas ayssi cum corda fugent deves la fleubotomia, e de aquelas es que es plena de ventositat e quan pauses le fleubotomi sobre aquela es contrayta deves le fleubotomi, e es desceubut le fleubotomador; e le fleubotomi no uobre la vena, e si uobre, aquela es streyta.	And when the lancet is about to be applied, apply a small amount of antiseptic oil properly; and then place your finger on the vein with your left hand, marking the spot where the incision will be made, allowing the vein to bulge slightly so that its presence is clear. The incision should be made at such a point as if you are drawing back a cord, indicating a full vessel. When you pause the lancet over this spot, it contracts, and the lancet reveals itself; if the lancet does not open the vein, and if it does, the vein is narrowed.
E donc, per aquo cove que·l fleubotomador sia fermat e sia sollicit en totas aquestas causas.	And thus, for this reason, it is known that the phlebotomist should be kept and be active in all these causes.
E aprop depause le fleubotomi, mays si la vena es huberta en una veguada, lahoras bo es; e sino, tu itera aquo autra vaguada dejos aquel loc un pauc, o sobre lu am festinacio, si le loc no es apostemat.	And then apply the phlebotomy, but if the vein is opened in one go, that is good; otherwise, you repeat this on another vein, leaving that area a little, or with greater haste if the area is not suppurating.
Et si le loc es apostemat, o le malaute se spauresca, lahoras tu le layssa per un dia o per dos, e no strenha le liament, quar fort leu atirara apostema caut, ni no intre en banh.	And if the area is suppurating, or the patient becomes febrile, then you leave it for a day or two, and do not tighten the bandage, for it would draw the suppuration out with the cautery, nor should you put it in a bath.
E aprop itera la fleubotomia si la ama.	And then repeat the phlebotomy if necessary.
E si la apercio es petita e corr sanc subtilment, e temes que non yesca sanc la cantitat que voles, lahoras tu itera le fleubotomi en aquel trauc segon rectitut e ajusta en la appercio un pauc, e fay aquo am festinacio denant que·l loc sia apostemat, quar le loc es apostemat en motz homes deves pauca apercio.	And if the perception is small and the wound remains subtle, and you fear that it will not drain enough, then you repeat the phlebotomy in that area according to correctness and adjust based on the perception a little, and do so with greater haste before the area suppurates, for when the area suppurates, you should have a smaller perception.
Mays si vezes aquel ja apostemat, lahoras no iteres sobre lu, quar no escusa a tu alcuna causa; e pausa sobre aquel alcuna partida de la fenda de oli, quar alleuja le cors del sanc.	But if you find that it has already suppurated, then do not touch it, for no purpose is served by doing so; instead, place your hand over a part of the wound opening, for this alleviates the pain of the blood.
E es milhor en aquest loc que oli e que les autres olis.	And it is better in this place than oil and other oils.
E semblantment aministra fenda de oli en tota fleubotomia am la qual fleubotomes las venas deves la prohibicio de cors de sanc, e fan aquo tyriaca alfadoc e sagzenea quan es pausat de la una de aquelas sobre le loc, quar le sanc es subtiliat e es revolvut quan es gros.	And similarly, in all venous operations where the veins are opened to drain blood from the body, use oil as a substitute; they should apply this tyciaca alfadoc and sagzenea when placed over the area, for the blood becomes finer and is circulated when it is thick.
E si en le loc de la fleubotomia es engendrat gran apostema, quar motas veguadas accideys, e majorment ad aquel que no es stat sangnat sino aquela veguada, o en la apercio de la vena pauca, e lahoras tu coyta, e pausa sobre le loc sponja infuza en aygua e sal, un pauc scalfada, e strenh aquela per una hora, quar es dissolvut.	And if a large abscess forms in the area of the venous operation, where many vesicles occur, especially in those who have not been bled but only at that time, or during the appearance of the small vein, then you should apply and place a sponge infused in water and salt, slightly warmed, for about an hour, for it dissolves.
E cove que fassa aquo aprop le yssiment del sanc de aquela vena am compliment de lu o de autra vena.	And ensure that this is done near the end of the bleeding from that vein, or after another vein.
E si roman en le loc per alcus dias alcuna negror o viriditat, no notz aquo; e si voles, pausa sobre aquel alcuna causa de aloen e de mirra dissolvut, o alcuna causa de suc de mentastre o de calament o semblant de lu.	And if any blackness or greenishness appears in the area for some days, do not note this; and if you wish, place over it some cause of aloes and myrrh dissolved, or some cause of mint juice or vinegar or similar to it.
E motas veguadas accideysso apostemas e eminencias deves fleubotomia de la basilica.	And when observed spots occur, you should perform incision for abscesses and swellings.
E donc pausa la tua ma sobre aquela, e si lahoras tu atrobas mollicia deves la tua compressio sobre aquela, lahoras aquela eminencia es malvada e mala; e adonc guarda te que pauses sobre aquela alcuna causa de aquo que havem dit, quar fort leu fluira de la arteria sanc.	And place your hand over it. If then you find softness, apply your compress there, as that swelling is bad and harmful; and then be careful to place over it some cause of what we have said, for much fluid will flow from the vein.
E fay emplaustre am aquo en que es stipticitat, per que le loc sia endurat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And apply a poultice of that which is styptic, so that the area may be hardened, and then cure it with the other treatment while it is healing.
E cove que extraguas del sanc a tot hom segon la quantitat de la sua vertut e segon la color vencent sobrc le sanc segon que appar.	And ensure that you extract from the vein according to the quantity of its virtue and according to the predominant color over the blood as it appears.
Quar si le sanc es negre, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia rog; e semblantment si tu le vezes gros, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia subtiliat; e semblantment si es agut, entro que sia ostada la acuitat de lu.	For if the blood is black, you let it remain until it becomes clear; similarly, if you see it thick, you let it remain until it becomes thin; similarly, if it is sharp, you wait until its acuity is reduced.
E cove ad aquel que es ple e fort e ha necessitat de extraccio de sanc en una veguada, que sia amplificada la fleubotomia de la vena e le fleubotomi sia lat.	And when one is full and strong and has the need for a single-time extraction of blood from a vein, enlarge the incision in the phlebotomy of the vein and let the phlebotomy be lateral.
E en aquel que es freul, sia fayt le contrari de aquel, e cove que extragua aquel en tropas veguadas, e que le trauc sia streyt.	And when one is female, do the opposite, making the extraction in multiple sessions, and that it be straight.
E le milhor que es administrat en fleubotomia de vena es que sia la seccio transversa, no punctura.	And the best that is administered in phlebotomy of a vein is a transverse section, not a puncture.
E aquesta manieyra de fleubotomia es salva de flux de sanc e de inscizio de nervi, e es pus lausabla e pus salva que fleubotomia segon latitut e longitut.	And this method of phlebotomy avoids the flow of blood and injury to nerves, and is more commendable and safer than phlebotomy according to length and breadth.
E a la qual es acostumat sobrevenir sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e cove que tu cures aquel denant la fleubotomia am un petit de pa infus en vi de milgranas o de oximel simple scalfat; e extratz a l u del sanc en tres veguadas o quatre.	And in which it is customary for syncope to occur after phlebotomy, make sure you cure that before the phlebotomy with a drop of wine infused with millet grains or simple oxymel; and extract from the side of the vein in three or four sessions.
E si es enfregiditat de compleccio, lahoras prengua denant la fleubotomia pa infus en eyssarop de mirra o en eyssarop de mel aromatizat am specias ayssi cum am pebre, canela, gingiebre e semblantz, o en eyssarop aromatizat e mot odorant.	And if there is a sensation of congestion, then apply before the phlebotomy a poultice made from myrrh powder or myrrh infused with aromatic spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and saffron, or an aromatic and fragrant poultice.
E si accideys sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e es causa de lu issiment de mot sanc, lahoras cove que prengua en beure aygua de carn e eyssarop mot odorant subtil; e use de aromaticitat am algualea, e sia linit le sieu pietz am aquela.	And if you encounter a syncope, perform a femoral puncture, for it is caused by the cessation of vital blood flow. Then take in his mouth water from meat and infuse a subtle fragrant essence under him; use aromatic aroma for alleviation, and place his foot thereupon.
E usa de las autras causas que havem ditas en la divisio en le capitol de sincopi per evacuacio.	And use the other causes that we have said in the division in the chapter on syncope by evacuation.
E qui vol eventar le sieu bras e dissolver le sieu sanc segonda veguada, cove a lu del qual la fleubotomia es per mota evacuacio, e la vertut de lu es freol, que evacue le sanc petit a petit, so es segon la quantitat de la vertut en les dias continuables.	And if you wish to cool his arm and dissolve his blood for the second time, do this from which the femoral puncture is by nature an evacuation, and the virtue of it is cold, which evacuates the blood little by little, so it depends on the quantity of the virtue over consecutive days.
Mays qui vol eventar le sieu bras, e gitar lo sieu sanc segonda vetz, e le sieu cors es fort, lahoras fassa aquo aprop vii horas o ix de la primieyra fleubotomia.	And if you wish to cool his arm and treat his blood for the second time, and his body is strong, then do this about seven or nine hours after the first femoral puncture.
Mays qui vol atirar le sanc del cors sieu al contrari de la partida a la qual declina, cove que sia eventat en le segon dia o le tertz.	And if you wish to draw the blood from his body in the opposite direction of the part where it declines, do this after it has cooled on the second or third day.
Mays aquel cors en le qual es mot sanc ja scalfat e es acuit e fa accidir febre, cove que sia gitat de lu sanc en una veguada e sia de lu gitada gran cantitat e sia amplificada la apercio entro que accidesca sincopi, pus que tu auras conservadas totas las condicios de fleubotomia; e que pauses la tua ma sobre le pols de lu deves le cors del sanc, per que no endevengua mort en loc de sincopi, quar motas veguadas endeve aquo quan le fleubotomador es ignorant e negligent.	When that body in which there is already a wound is scalded and inflamed and causes fever, ensure that the blood is drained all at once and a large quantity is let out, and amplify the sensation so that syncope does not occur, but you must conserve all the conditions of phlebotomy; and when you place your hand on his pulse, you should drain the body of blood, so that it does not end in death instead of syncope, which should happen several times when the phlebotomist is ignorant and negligent.
E no cove quan tu voles desliar le bras e evacua le sanc segonda veguada, cum ja sia claus le orrifici de la vena e sia fayt difficil issiment del sanc, que tu premas subre aquel am vehemencia e encurvat sia extendut leugierament, quar aquo es trop mal.	And do not when you want to release the arm and evacuate the blood a second time, as already the orifices of the vein are closed and it is difficult for the blood to escape, that you press upon that area with great force and slightly extend it, for this is too much.
Habantz le layssa entro que sia fleubotomat segondament; o remau aquo am la acuitat del fleubotomi que es coagulat del sanc en le orrifici de la vena; o pausa sobre aquel de tyriaca alfarach, o de sagzenea, e comprem aquel am compressio leugiera entro que·l sanc sia fora yssit.	Let it remain until the phlebotomy is performed again; or keep this for the coagulation of the blood in the orifices of the vein; or place your hand over the tyriaca alfarach, or sagenea, and apply a light compression until the blood has subsided.
E si la vena es apostemada, lahoras layssa aquela e no la toques entro que·l apostema sia sedat.	And if the vein is inflamed, then leave it alone and do not touch it until the inflammation subsides.
E si necessitat te provoca a evacuar le sanc segondament, e no es excusacio, lahoras tu sagna aquel sobre aquel loc o en l’autre bras en autra vena.	And if necessity prompts you to evacuate the scabbard then, and there is no excuse, then you let that flow at that location or in the other arm into another vein.
E la vena apelada “funis del bras” es fleubotomada en loc de la fusca o de la basilica, quan no so atrobadas o so amaguadas, quar es composta de aquelas.	And the vein called "funis del bras" is lanced instead of the funica or basilica, when they are not found or are hidden, for it is composed of those.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intrometa la sua ma en aygua cauda entro que·l focil se enrogezesca e que la vena apparia manifestament.	And the quality of lancing it is that the patient inserts his hand in hot water before the vein becomes reddened and clearly appears.
E aprop sia strengut sobre aquel am liament am strictura migana; e aprop fleubotoma segon le tranvers petit, no latitudinalment ni segon la longitut.	And then it is strengthened over that with liniment to relieve the median constriction; and then lance it according to the transverse small vein, not laterally nor along its length.
E sia la apercio ampla e sia la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas aquela sobre la junctura de la ma un petit.	And the aperture should be wide, and your lancing should be near the joint of the hand in a small way.
E si es prohibit le fluxs del sanc, lahoras tu itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e layssa le sanc correr en la aygua entro que consieguas la tua necessitat.	And if you prevent the flow of blood, then immerse your hand in the trailing water until you can achieve your necessity and let the blood run into the water.
Mays si tu eras en les dias d’estiu, lahoras tu yest excusat de la iteracio de la ma en l’aygua cauda, e le mes es pausat le cors del sanc en aygua cauda en temps de yvern.	And if you are in the days of summer, then you may be excused from immersing your hand in the trailing water, and instead preserve the flow of blood in cold water during winter.
E la fleubotomia de aquesta vena es pus salva que de totas las autras venas, quar dejos lu no ha vena pulsatil, ni nervi.	And the phlebotomy of this vein is safer than that of all other veins, for it has no pulsating vein or nerve.
E la fleubotomia de la savatella de la ma dreyta es conferent a las malautias del fetge.	And the phlebotomy of the radial wrist vein is appropriate for ailments of the liver.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que tu strenguas la ma am liament o am la tua ma, pus que tu l’as mesa en ayga cauda, entro que la vena sia imflada e sia be demostrada al vezement; e aprop fleubotoma aquela transversan; e si inscidas aquela de tot no nozera aquo en re.	And the quality of phlebotomy from this vein is that you should press the hand with your fist or with your other hand, rather than keeping it in trailing water, until the vein is swollen and well demonstrated at once; then proceed to make the transverse incision; and if you cut through it entirely, no harm will ensue.
E conserve que no ultimes la tua ma am la fleubotomi, quar dejos lu so les nervis dels ditz denudatz de carn.	And conserve that you do not place your hand over the phlebotomy, but leave it with the nerves of the fingers naked of flesh.
E aprop itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e laysse correr le sanc en aquela, quar si tu no iteras aquela en l’aygua cauda, le sanc sira coagulat en lo orrifici de la vena, e es prohibit de flux.	And then immerse the hand in the running water and let the blood flow into it, for if you do not immerse it in the running water, the blood will coagulate in the orifice of the vein, and this is prohibited from flowing.
E cum es extrayt le sanc segon la quantitat de necessitat, lahoras tu pausa sobre la vena oli e sal, per que no sia consolidada coytadament; e semblantment cove que tu fassas en tot ram streyt.	And when the blood is extracted in the quantity needed, then pause over the vein with oil and salt, so that it is not completely consolidated; similarly ensure that you do this for the entire length of the vein.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de aquela de la ma senestra, es que es conferent a las malautias de la melsa.	More importantly for the youth of the phlebotomy of that from the left hand, it is that you address the ailments of the liver.
E fay semblantment en la fleubotomia de lu ayssi cum has fayt en l’autra.	And do similarly in the phlebotomy of the liver as you have done in the other.
E le juvament de la vena sephena de la fleubotomia es a las malautias que so en la partida dejos del cos, ayssi cum so malautias de la mayre, e a retencio de mestruas, et a las malautias dels ronhos e ulceracios de coyssas e de cambas antiquas, e a lor semblantz de las malautias.	And the youth of the cephalic vein from the phlebotomy is for the ailments that are in the lower part of the body, such as head ailments, and retention of menses, and for the ailments of rhinosinusitis and old ulcers of thighs and ancient chest complaints, and their similar ailments.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute entrometa lo sieu pe en aygua cauda e fassa sobre aquel fricacio entro que be apparen las venas; e lia sobre la junctura del pe am correia; e le loc de la vena le talo apparent deves le dit pous, e de aquela so ramificatz en la facia del pe motz ramps.	And the quality of the femoral incision is that the patient inserts his foot in cold water and makes friction on that area where the veins appear; he ties a cord around the ankle; and at the location of the vein, he cuts it apparent, and from there its branches spread out on the face of the foot.
E donc fleubotoma le pus ample ram o dejos la camba deves le talo deves la agreguacio de lu, quar es milhor e pus sal.	And therefore perform the femoral incision more widely or place the leg and cut the tendon at the location of the injury, which is better and more effective.
E si fleubotomas aquela en la facia del pe, lahoras tu te guarda dels nervis que so dejos aquela sobre la facia del pe, e pausa la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas per le travers, quays cum si tu la volias inscidir.	And if you perform the femoral incision on the face of the foot, then you must guard the nerves that are left on the face of the foot, and place your incision over the location where you make it transverse, as if you were incising it.
E sia le fleubotomi vosil.	And let the femoral incisions be made.
Mays si es prohibit le issiment del sanc; lahoras tu itera le pe de lu en l’aygua cauda e layssa correr le sanc en aquela entro que sia evacuat.	And if the letting of the blood is prohibited; then you immerse the foot in cold water and let the blood flow in that area until it is evacuated.
E si le fleubotomador erra en la primieyra veguada, lahoras itera am le fleubotomi en sus un pauc, quar le loc es sal; e no temes de lu malician, mays que te guardes dels nervis ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the femoral incisor errs in the first attempt, then repeat the incision a little more, for the location is sound. And do not fear its depth; but guard the nerves as we have said.
E semblantment fay de la sophena del autre pe engualment.	And similarly make a cut on the other foot in the same manner.
E de la vena sciatica, le loc ayssi cum havem dit es deves le talo dejos la cavilha de la partida silvestra.	And for the sciatic vein, the place is as we have said, you should cut the thigh and leave the partil (a type of awl) at the start.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de lu es a dolo de anca quan es per sanc caut.	And the indication for the femoral phlebotomy is pain in the hip when it is due to blood excess.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intre en banh, e festine e strenha la cueyssa de lu del latz de la ancha entro desus le talo desus quatre ditz an una benda longua subtil, quar no appar sino per aquo.	And the quality of the femoral phlebotomy is that the patient enters a bath, relaxes, and prepares the thigh by placing a thin, long bandage just above the knee under four fingers. This is done so that it is not obvious.
E donc quan appar, lahoras tu fleubotoma aquela segon cascun engen que es a tu possible e segon le tranvers, e es milhor; o inscidas aquela per inscizio o secces aquela per seccio, quar le loc de lu es sal.	And when it is obvious, then proceed to phlebotomize as each situation allows and according to the transverse vein, which is better. Or incise there with an incision or draw out the blood by pressure, for the place is salient.
E ela es en motz homes mot ameguada; e si atrobas aquela, e no appar al sentiment de tot, lahoras fleubotoma alcun ram de lu, e es aquel que appar en le dos del pe enves le dit auricular e le anular.	And it is in most cases more easily found; and if you find it but do not notice it by touch, then proceed to phlebotomize a branch of it, which is the one that appears on the side of the foot between the auricular and the annular toes.
E guarda te dels nervis, e fay correr del sanc la quantitat que voles.	And guard the nerves, and let the blood flow in the quantity you desire.
E aprop deslia la strictura e pausa sobre le loc de la fleubotomia coto e strenh le loc, quar leugierament es sanat.	And then release the constriction and place your hand over the location of the phlebotomy firmly, so that it heals slightly.
De ventozacio e de las qualitatz de uzar de aquelas.	For ventilation and the qualities of using those.
Ventozas so de corns, o de eram, o de veyre.	Ventilation is of corns, or of ear, or of eye.
E ventozacio es fayta segon doas manieyras: la una de lor es am scarificacio e extracio de sanc, e l’autra es ventozacio ses scarificacio.	And ventilation is performed in two ways: one way involves incision and bloodletting, and the other way involves ventilation without incision.
E aquesta ventozacio que es ses scarificacio es segon doas manieyras, quar o es am foc o ses foc.	And this ventilation without incision is performed in two ways, either with fire or without fire.
E a las ventozas que so administradas am scarificacio e extraccio de sanc son xiiii locs del cors, dels quals la un en lo qual so pausadas ventozas es alnocrati, e es la deriera partida del cap; e le mieg loc d’el de doas partz del col ensemp; e ventozas del mento dejos la mandibula pus dejos de la boca; e ventozas de doas spatulas; e ventozas de alohoster, e es sobre la fi de la coeta; e ventozas de dos focils, e so de dos brasses; e ventozas de doas cavilhas; e ventozas de doas cuoyssas.	And for the ventilation treatments that involve incision and bloodletting, there are four locations in the body: one where ventilation is performed occasionally, which is the back of the head; another location halfway down the neck; ventilation under the jaw, leaving the mouth open; ventilation between the cheekbones; ventilation above the collarbone, which is near the shoulder blade; ventilation between two armpits, each about two handbreadths apart; and ventilation between the two hips.
E ventozacio no extratz le sanc sino de las venas menudas sparssas en la carn, e per aquo no catz la vertut per aquelas, ayssi cum es cazement per fleubotomia; ni no cove que ventozacio sia fayta am foc o ses foc en alcuna malautia fayta per replecio entro que le cors tot sia evacuat.	And in suction, do not extract the blood but from the small veins spread in the flesh, and by this do not lose its virtue as in phlebotomy; nor should suction be made with fire or several fires in any illness caused by excess within which the body is completely evacuated.
Mays si necessitat provoca a ventozacio per malautia o per continua, aministrem aquela en tota hora al comensament del mes e en la fi de lu, e en le mieg loc de lu e en qualque temps sia.	But if necessity causes suction due to illness or continuously, we administer it at the beginning of the month and at its end, and in the middle of the month and at any time.
La qual causa es quar dels homes es en les quals es sanc multiplicat entro que indigeys de extraccio de lu per ventozacio e atroba en le sieu cap graveza e soda; e de aquels es que atroba replecio e rogor en la sua cara e en le sieu cap, e en le sieu col; e de aquels es que atroba pruziment en la sua cara e en le sieu front e tenebrositat e hebetut en les sieus huels; e de aquels que gieta le loc de la sua ventozacio; e de aquels es que le lor ris es multiplicat; e de aquels es que atroba gustament de sanc en la sua boca, o que la lengua es apostemada e escup sanc; e de aquels es que lor dormir es multiplicat, e de aquels que vetz sanc en lo dormir rogor e antics e plaguas e autras causas a lor semblantz.	The cause is that in those men in whom blood is multiplied within which cannot be extracted by suction and they find great weight and hardness; and of those who find excess and redness in their face and head, and on their neck; and of those who find pain in their face and forehead and darkness and dimness in their eyes; and of those who leave the place of their suction; and of those whose laughter is multiplied; and of those who find taste of blood in their mouth, or whose tongue swells and they spit blood; and of those whose sleep is multiplied, and of those who see blood in their sleep as redness and marks and other causes similar to them.
E donc quan vezes en alcuna causa de aquelas, e propriament si es en le tertz o miga del mes, lahoras comandam ventozacio esser fayta pus que so passadas del dia dos o tres horas.	And when often in some cause of those, and properly if it is in the third or fourth day, then command ventilation to be made more than just passed after one or two hours.
E juvament de ventozacio de la nuca es que quan aquela confereys a gravitat en le cap e ad aquo que es efondit als huels; mays cove que aquo sia aprop evacuacio de tot le cors.	And the benefit of ventilation of the neck is that when you apply it to gravity in the head and also what is embedded in the heels; more important is that this be closely followed by evacuation of the whole body.
E aquesta ventoza es en le loc de fleubotomia de la cephalica.	And this ventilation is in the place of venesection of the cephalic vein.
E no es legut que use de lu aquel que es de frega complecio, o en le qual es catarr, quar dona ad aquel gran nocument.	And it is not recommended to use that which is inflamed or in which there is a cold, as this gives great discomfort.
E per aquo no cove que uso de aquela les vielhs, e en les caps dels quals so malautias frejas.	And for this reason, it is not advisable to use those that are inflamed, especially in the heads where there are gouty ailments.
Mays ad aquel que sobre aquela es continuant sobre lu es fayta oblivio; e per aquo cove que tu comandes al ventozador que depause la sua ma un petit am la ventosa a las partidas dejos, temen de la generacio de oblivio.	More so for those that remain inflamed over them, it causes oblivion; and for this reason, you should command the ventozer to place his hand slightly on the ventosa at the affected parts, to prevent the generation of oblivion.
Mays ventozacio de alkehel es en loc de fleubotomia de la vena fusca e de la basilica: e per aquo confereys a asma, e a la constriccio de ale e a la scissura del sturment de ale, e a tos, e a replecio.	More ventilation of alkali is in the place of femoral and basilic vein phlebotomy: and by this you contribute to asthma, and to the constriction of veins and to the rupture of the venous valve, and to coughing, and to fullness.
E cove que sia enpellida la ventoza alkehel un petit, quar si es pausada dejos, engendra debilitat en le cors e en le stomac.	And ensure that the alkali vent is slightly covered, for if it is stopped up, it engenders weakness in the body and stomach.
E la ventozacio de alhagdahan confereys a las dolors accident en le cap e a obtalmia, e emigranea, e prefocacio, e a dolors en las razitz de las dentz; e es en loc de fleubotomia de la basiliqua.	And the ventilation of hagdahan contributes to headaches, ophthalmia, migraines, epistaxis, and toothaches; and it is in place of basilic phlebotomy.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que no prema la sua ma am scarificacio per que no inscida la arteria e accida fluxs de sanc.	And ensure that you command the ventilation operator not to press his hand on the scarification so as not to incise the artery and injure the flow of blood.
E ventozacio dejos le mento comfereys a alcola en la boca, e a corrupcio de la gingiva, e a semblantz a lor de las malautias que so en la boca, e stan en loc de fleubotomia de aliheric que so en las doas labias.	And if ventilation is stopped, it causes alcohol in the mouth, corruption of the gums, and appearance similar to those illnesses in the mouth that are located near the alveoli.
Mays la ventozacio que es fayta sobre las doas spatulas confereys a caphatan, le qual es fayt per replecio de caliditat.	May the ventilation that is made over the two spoons be covered, which is done through the restoration of heat.
E la ventosacio de las doas partidas dedintz dels focils confereys juvament de la fleubotomia de tres venas, so es de la basilica, fusca e cephalica, quar aquela atratz le sanc de totas aquelas venas pus manudas que so en la carn, e aquelas venas menudas de las autras venas pus grossas entro que pervengua la atraccio a las tres venas.	And the ventilation of the two internal partitions of the flasks contributes to the benefit of the bloodletting of three veins, namely the basilica, fusca, and cephalic, for those veins drain the blood from all those veins that are in the flesh, and those small veins from the other larger veins through which the attraction reaches the three veins.
E comanda al ventozador que trop no procezesca en scarificacio, quar le loc es denudat de carn, e dejos lu so nervis e arterias.	And command the ventilator not to proceed with incision, for the area is stripped of flesh, and leave only its nerves and arteries.
E es una ventoza am la qual es ventozat sobre alshosses e confereys a las emorroydas del cul e a las ulceracios pus dejos.	And it is a ventilation on which the ventilation is performed over thighs and contributes to the hemorrhoids of the buttocks and the ulcers, but leave them.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que sia gran ventoza, e que sia de eram, quar le loc indigeys de fort seccio; e fort leu so traucadas ventozas subtils e sia scarificat am scarificacio.	And make sure to command the ventilator to use a large ventilation, and one made of earthenware, for the area requires strong drying; and let the small, light vents remain unblocked and do not incise them.
Mays ventozas de las cambas minueysso per minuicio manifesta, quar atiran le sanc de tot le cors, e comfereysso a dolors antiquas dels ronhos e de la mayre, e de la vesica; e provocan las mestruas, e comfereysso a bothor e ademil; e stan en loc de fleubotomia de doas sophenas, e alahorcoben, e de doas cavilhas.	More wind in the legs decreases significantly, for they carry the mucus from all over the body, causing old pains in the groins and the liver, and of the bladder; they induce menstruation, and cause bothror and ademil; they are in place of double femoral ligation, and halorcoben, and of double ankles.
Enpero mot debelitan tot le cors e fan accidir sincopi en motz homes.	But they thicken the whole body and cause syncope in most men.
E de las ventozas alahorcoben le juvament es propda al juvament a las ventozas de doas cambas.	And of the winds, halorcoben is appropriate for the wind in the groins.
E la qualitat de la posicio de las ventozas es que pauses la ventoza al comensament vueda e sucguas per succio temprada, e no prolongues la posicio de las ventozas, mays pausa aquelas leugierament, e reman aquelas coytadament, e que las humors venguan al loc per adveniment engual.	And the quality of the position of the winds is that you place the cautery at the beginning clearly and suck out the heat with a gentle suction, and do not prolong the position of the wind, but pause them lightly and remain them constantly, so that the humors come to the area by natural means.
E no cesses iterar aquo e continuar entro que veja le loc ja enrojezir e inflar e que appara la rogor del sanc.	And do not cease to repeat this until the area is already reddening and swelling, and the sign of mucus appears.
E lahoras tu scarifiqua e itera la succio pauc a pauc, e aprop considera en la dispozicio dels cors.	And then you incise and gradually increase the suction little by little, while considering the disposition of the body.
Quar aquel home que es de tendra carn de rars pors, cove que tu le scarifiques una veguada e no pus, per que le loc no sia ulcerat.	If a person has tender flesh due to excess moisture, incise him once and do not continue, so that the area does not become ulcerated.
E comanda al ventozador que amplifique la scarificacio e pronde un pauc, e atempre la succio am facilitat.	And command the ventillator to enlarge the incision slightly and place some suction to facilitate it.
E si en le sanc es grossitut, lahoras cove que scarifiques doas veguadas, quar en la primieyra veguada es uberta la via de subtiliacio al sanc e a la aquositat de lu.	And if the wound becomes large, then you must incise twice; in the first incision, open the way for exudation from the wound and its moisture.
Mays en la segunda a la perscrutacio aquisida de la extraccio del sanc gros.	But in the second incision, for the thorough examination and removal of the large wound exudate.
E si le sanc es mot feculent, lahoras sia fayta scarificacio la tersa veguada per que consiegua le derier.	And if the wound is mixed with foul matter, then make the third incision to ensure its complete removal.
E derierament, quan volem extrayre le sanc pauc a pauc o un petit, abasta a nos una scarificacio.	And finally, when we want to extract the wound exudate little by little or a small amount sufficient for us, make one incision.
E si volem extraccio de mot sanc, scarificam am mota scarificacio; e si nos conoyssem que·l sanc es gros, lahoras cove que scarifiquem per scarificacio preonda.	And if we want to perform a bloodletting for bloody flux, we make a cut with a scalpel; and if we know that the flux is thick, then we incise with a wider blade.
E le terme de scarificacio en la qual es la profunditat de la codena tant solament.	And in the term of scarification where the depth of the cut is just that.
E si aquel del qual la codena es grossa, dura, fusca, e les sieus pors so streytz, cove que les locs de las ventosas sian untatz lenitius, apertius resolutius; si es en temps d’estiu, ayssi cum es oli de aloen o oli de violat, o oli de amellas dossas, o oli de cemensa de coja; e si es en temps ivern, lahoras oli narci, o oli de liri, o oli de camamilla, o de sanc, e ad aquels semblantz.	And if the cut is thick, hard, dark, and its pores are straight, then the areas for the cups should be gently anointed with an opening and resolving preparation; in summer, use oil of aloes or oil of violet or balsam of copaiba or balm; and in winter, use oil of narcissus or oil of marigold or chamomile or oil of flux, and to those similar.
E si la superfluitat es grossa, freja, lahoras le oli sia amaranti, o oli de balsamita, o oli de aloen, o oli aneti, e a lor semblantz.	And if the excess is thick, apply, then the oil should be amber, or balsam, or oil of aloes, or anise oil, and to those similar.
Mays si le ventozador es de amples pors de tendra carn, lahoras cove que sia prohibit de oli, e cove que ad aquest les locs de ventozas de lor aprop la ventozacio sian lavatz am ayguaros o am aygua freja de solatrum, o am aygua de coja, o am aygua de bordolaguas, e semblantz ad aquelas.	But if the cupper has ample pores of tender flesh, then it should be prohibited from oil, and instead, the areas for cups near the cupping should be washed with warm water or cold water from a solatrum, or water from copaiba, or water from borax, and similar to those.
E aquel del qual le sanc es de mota humiditat, lava las suas ventozas am vi agre, o am aygua de mirt e sumac e semblant ad aquels.	And for those whose blood is due to humid heat, wash their veins with vinegar, or with water of myrtle and sumach and similar.
E de aquel del qual las superfluitatz son grossas, lava las suas ventozas am vi antic, o am aygua de sansuc, que es majorana, o de decoccio de anet, o de camamilla, e a lor semblantz.	And for those whose superfluities are large, wash their veins with old vinegar, or with water of sage, which is marigold, or from decoction of dill, or of chamomile, and similar to them.
E cove que la ventozacio sia guardada denant de banh; habantz cove que sia aministrada aprop issiment del banh per una hora o per doas, e cove que dorma aprop la ventozacio.	And ensure that the veins are protected before bathing; have them administered shortly after bathing for one or two hours, and ensure that they rest near the veins.
Quid est quo oportet ut regatur ventosandus aus phlebotomatus ante ventosationem.	What must be done to regulate the patient before phlebotomy and venesection.
Cove que consideras al comensament: lahoras si le ventozador o aquel que·s deu fleubotomar es coleric e ventz sobre lu sanc agut e imflamacio, lahoras cove que prengua causas infrigidantz, ayssi cum milgranas acetosas, e endivia an vi agre e laytuguas, e secanabin, e julep, e a lor semblantz.	Ensure that you consider the beginning: when the phlebotomist or the one who is to be phlebotomized is choleric and has sharp pain and inflammation in the blood, then ensure that they take causes of cooling, such as sweet milken, endive in vinegar, laytuguas, secanabin, and julep, and similar remedies.
E pausa a lor viandas ayssi cum poletz, e carns de auzels serbiges, e viandas conditas am agras, e a lu semblantz.	And feed them thus like lentils, pigeon meat, and sauced meats, and things similar to these.
E de aquel del qual la compleccio es freja, cove que prengua en beure eyssarop almiva, o eyssarop de alsecanabin de semensas, e sumac, e vi mot odorant migier entre viel et noel; e que a lu sia comendat que use de paucitat de beure e de mangar, e pausa las viandas de lu poletz e canabir e pissers e petitz auzels e colombat.	And for those whose complexion is fair, give them to drink essarop of mallow, or essarop of alsecanabin of seeds, sumac, and wine with a pleasant odor between must and new; and that they be advised to use moderation in drinking and eating, and avoid meats, beans, pheasants, young pigeons, and doves.
E cove que en lo dia de ventozacio e de fleubotomia le beure sia major que la vianda.	And ensure that on the day of ventilation and phlebotomy, his drink is greater than his food.
E cove que sia donat en beure en alcunas horas ad alcus homes tyriaca alpharac, o medicamentz de musc, so es muscada, o alcelita denant la ventozacio o denant fleubotomia o aprop, per so que·ls membres principals sian confortatz e que·l sanc sia subtiliat; e no cove que prenguan aquela scalfatz.	And ensure that some people are given to drink tiryaca alpharac or musk medicines, such as muscat or acelita, before ventilation or phlebotomy or shortly after, so that the principal members be comforted and the wound be subtle; and do not allow them to eat scalfatz.
Mays las ventozas que so ses scarificacio sian ventozas que so pausadas sus le fetge, e sobre la melsa e podagra, e sobre le umbelic, en les locs dels jonolhs, e la pixida del ancha, quar aquestz membres no suffertan scarificacio sobre si.	More the ventations that are ses scarifications be ventations made over the liver, on the melsa (abdomen), and podagra, and over the umbilicus, in the places of the joints, and the side of the ancha (hip), for these principal members do not suffer scarification upon themselves.
E no es querit per aquelas sino atraccio de sanc de membre, ayssi cum pausam ventosa sobre mamilha en malautia de flux de sanc del sanc de las nars; e usam de aquela per que sia dissolvuda ventositat freja inviscade del membre, ayssi cum pausam sobre le ventre e l’umbelic; quar aquela rarifique le membre e scalfa lu e ramau la dolor quar resolveys ventositat.	And it is not desired by those for the sake of an abscess in a limb, as when we apply a cupping jar to a breast during illness of flux of blood from the blood of the nose; and we use that so that the external phlegm adhering to the limb may be dissolved, as when we apply it to the belly and the navel; for then it rarifies the limb and warms it and lessens the pain which resolves the phlegm.
E ja es pausada sobre les ronhos quan accideys en lor opilacio o poyra, quar per vertut de atraccio fort leu huobre opilacio e erradica le poyra de son loc.	And it is applied to the hiccups when they occur during their oppression or pressure, for by virtue of strong attraction it loosens the oppression and expels the hiccups from their place.
E semblantment fa quan es pausada sobre le fetge e la melsa deves ventositat en aquels enclausa.	And it seems to work when applied to the liver and spleen to dissolve phlegm in those areas.
E aquestas ventozas so administradas vuedas amb succio tant solament; e alcunas veguadas so administradas am foc.	And these cupping jars are administered often with suction solely; sometimes they are administered with fire.
E alcunas veguadas so administradas plenas de aygua tebeza en las malautias de la melsa.	And sometimes they are administered full of clear water during illnesses of the spleen.
E aquo es per que la ventoza sia umplida e sia pus gran, so es aygua cauda sola o aygua en la qual sian cuytas herbas ad aquo convenientz.	And this is so that the cupping jar may be filled and become larger, either with water alone or with water in which herbs suitable for the condition are boiled.
Forma de ventoza aministrada am foc: sia la amplitud del orrifici de dos ditz, segon que nos la havem formada; e la quantitat del preon sia la maytat de un palm; e sia en lo latz de lu, en le loc que es en le circuit, la maytat de lu, le trauc sia petit segon la quantitat que intre en lu una agulha.	Form a ventouse with fire: let the diameter of the orifice be two fingers, as we have formed it; and the quantity of the suction be half a palm; and place it in its center, at the location that is in the circuit, making it small according to the quantity that an needle can enter.
Sia fayta de eram rog o citri, de grosses marges, leon, enguals e terses per so que no leda le membre deves la sua posicio sobre lu.	Let it be made of elm wood or citrus, with thick edges, pine, equal and thin so that it does not cause the limb to deviate from its position.
E sia al mieg de lu vergua transversa de eram o de ferr, on es pausada candela am lo foc.	And let it be placed at the midpoint of the elm wood or iron rod where the candle is paused over the fire.
E ja sia aquesta ventoza gran major de aquela la qual havem recomtat; e la pauca mendre de aquela segon las malautias e la etat de aquel que usa de aquela.	And let this ventouse be much larger than the one we have suctioned; and the small amount be according to the illnesses and the condition of the one using it.
E las ventosas dels efantz e extenuatz so autres que las ventozas dels joves e de grosses corssas.	And the ventouses for children and those who are emaciated are different from those for young and robust individuals.
E la qualitat de pausar aquesta ventoza am foc sobre le membre es que extenda la meca am foc de lenha decentment denant una pauca candela de cera, e pausa aquela sobre le mieg de la vergua transversa en le mieg loc de la ventoza, per que le foc sia accendut enviro la partida dejos per que no sia comburit le cors del malaute.	And the quality of placing this ventouse over the limb is to extend the flame of decent wood fire in front of a small wax candle, and place that near the midpoint of the transverse rod at the center of the ventouse, so that the fire is ignited around the space left, to prevent the patient's body from burning.
E aprop sia pausada sobre le membre del malaute, e le dit sia sobre le trauc que havem dit, entro que quan tenem las ventozas e non indigem que osten le dit e que yesca la vapor sobre aquel trauc, lahoras la ventoza sira tantost dissolvuda.	And then place your hand over the patient's thigh, and tell them about what we have said, within which when we have our hands and do not intend that they feel it and that the vapor does not scald that area, then the hand will soon be dissolved.
E prop igneys la meca segon la sua manieyra, e itera aquela si indigeyssas de aquela.	And then heat the iron according to its manner, and repeat that if you need to do so.
Mays en ventosa que es aministrada en la malautia de plauressi, am aygua, en la qual no ha vergua transversa ni trauc, e no es aministrada sino que sia umplida de aygua, e es pausada sobre le membre tant solament.	More in the case of the ventosa that is administered in the disease of pleurisy, it should be filled with water, in which there is no transverse or longitudinal cut, and it is not applied unless it is completely filled with water, and is placed over the limb only for so long.
E aquesta es la forma de lu: E aquesta ventoza quant plus es gran, tant es milhor, per que puya recebre gran quantitat de aygua.	And this is the form of the ventosa: And this ventosa, the larger it is, the better, so that it can receive a great quantity of water.
Capitol .xcvii.	Capitol. xcvi.
Sanguissuguas no so administradas en motz membres sino en les membres en les quals non es possible posicio de ventosas, per la parvitat de aquels, ayssi cum le pot e gingiva e semblantz a lor; o en membre denudat de carn, ayssi cum le dit e·l nas e lors semblantz.	Sanguissuguas are not administered in large members but in the members in which no position of ventosas is possible due to their small size, such as the fingers and similar parts; or on a member devoid of flesh, such as the nose and similar areas.
E la qualitat de usar de aquelas que si has trobadas sanguisugas que so en las ayguas dossas de poyredura mundas.	And the quality of using those that you have found leeches in the clean boiled waters.
E aprop sian layssadas le dia e la nueyt en aygua dossa entro que sian famolentas, e que no romangua alcuna causa en le ventre de aquelas; e aprop sia evacuat le cors en le comensament am fleubotomia e am ventozas; e aprop fregua le membre del malaute entro que s’enrojezesca; e aprop sian pausadas sobre lu.	And shortly let them lie in clean water for a day and a night until they become accustomed, and let no cause disturb their belly; and soon evacuate the body at the beginning with bloodletting and with fomentations; and soon rub the limb of the patient until it becomes reddened; and soon place them over it.
E cum son umplidas e caso.	And when they are full and healed.
E si es possible succio del loc am ventoza, es mays derier en juvament.	And if possible, suction of the area with fomentations is more effective in recovery.
E sino, lahoras lava le loc am vi agre e aprop am mota aygua; e sia freguat e expremut.	And if not, then wash the area with water mixed with wine and soon apply hot water; and rub it and express it.
E si es prolonguat le cors del sanc aprop le cazement de las sanguissuguas, e es aquo resudan, lahoras tu enfon un drap de li en aygua freja, e pausa aquel de sobre entro que sia abdida la resudacio.	And if the bleeding of the body continues for a long time at the site of the leeches, and if this is so, then you insert a cloth in cold water, and place it there until the bleeding stops.
E si le sanc es multiplicat, lahoras polveriza sobre lu vitriol trissat, o guallas e semblantz a lor de las causas stipticas, entro que·l sanc sia abscidit; o sian pausadas sobre le loc las maytatz de favas excocicadas, e sian layssadas entro que las favas aderescan al loc, e es le sanc abscidit.	And if the bleeding is excessive, then powder vitriol trisulphate or pieces resembling the causes of haemostasis over it; or place hot bean slices on the area and let them remain until the beans adhere to the site, and then the bleeding will cease.
E cove, si es necessaria, iteracio de sanguissuguas, quan es possible mudar aquelas.	And cover, if necessary, the incision of the blood vessel, when possible to change those.
E si las sanguissuguas son prohibidas de suspenssio, lahoras sia freguat le loc am sanc recent o fique una agulha en les locs entro que yesca sanc; e aprop sian pausadas, quar aquelas quan sento alcun sanc tantost adarysso.	And if the blood vessels are prohibited from suspension, then wash the area with fresh blood or insert a needle into the areas until the bleeding stops; and place them there, so that when any blood begins to flow, it is quickly arrested.
E quan voles que cajan, polveriza sobre aquelas un pauc de aloen trissat, o sal, o cendre, e cazo tantost.	And when you want them to constrict, powder a little aloes trisulphate, or salt, or ashes over them, and apply it quickly.
Ayssi comensa lo prolec de la tersa partida: de restauracio.	Thus begin the procedures of the second part: restoration.
Aquest capitol es motas veguadas necessari en la art de medicina; e es restauracio de fractura e de dislocacio accident en les osses.	This chapter is a necessity in the art of medicine; it concerns the restoration of fractures and dislocations in bones.
O, filh, sapiatz que jactan se de aquest capitol les fols metges e les vulguars e aquels que degun temps no reguardero les libres dels Antics ni legiro de aquels una letra.	Oh, son, know that both the false doctors and the common people, as well as those who for some time have not studied the works of the Ancients or read them even a letter, boast about this chapter.
E per aquesta causa es fayt que aquesta manieyra dels scients in terra nostra es privat; e yeu no ho e obliat en aquo degun temps be de tot; e no he adhibit aquo que apres, sino per longitut de lectio dels libres dels Antics e studi sobre le entendement de aquels, entro que extrayssi la sciencia de aquels.	And for this reason, this method of the scientists on our land is kept secret; and I have not forgotten it during that long time; and I have not adopted what follows, except through a long period of reading the works of the Ancients and study over their understanding, from which I extracted the science.
E aprop adirigui a experiment e studi en la longitut de la mieua vida.	And I have directed this experiment and study over the length of my life.
E yeu ja he de aquo descrit en aquest capitol tot aquo que conte la mieua sciencia e sobre le qual es passat lo mieu experiment; pus que agui abreujat aquo a vos autres e deliuregui aquo de occupacio de elonguacio; e abreujegui aquo en la fi de abreujacio; et e monstrat aquo en la fi de declaracio; e formegui en aquo motas formas dels sturmentz que so administratz en aquel, cum es fayt per addicio de declaracio, ayssi cum he fayt en dos capitols precedentz.	And I have already described in this chapter all that pertains to my science and on which my experiment has passed; now I abbreviate this for you others and deliver this from long discussion; and abbreviate this at the end of abbreviation; and have shown this at the end of declaration; and gathered into this various forms of the instruments that are administered there, as is done by addition of declaration, just as I have done in two previous chapters.
Capitol primier.	First chapter.
Summae et collectiones ex esse fracturae ossium, ex eis quarum praemissio necessaria est, antequam incipiamus rememorationem membrorum fraftorum et diversorum si uniuscuiusque.	Summarize and collect those fractures of bones that require a preliminary discussion before we begin the recollection of various parts of bone fractures.
Cove donc que diguam en le prohemi de aquest capitol las summas del sermo; e les capitols al entendament dels quals en le comensament es forsat le artifexs e a stacio sobre la veritat de aquels; so es vos e aquels que so promptz que sapian o aprenguan aquesta art nobla autres de vos.	Therefore, let us begin this chapter with the summary of the discourse; and those capitols that must be understood at the beginning by the artisans and are based on the truth of those things; it is you and those who are prompt to know or learn this noble art from others.
E donc dic que quan accideys a alcu fractura o dislocacio o torcio o cazement, lahoras cove que tu te coytes al comensament am fleubotomia o aleyar aquel, o quascu ensemps, si no prohibeys alcuna causa, ayssi cum debelitat de vertut, o es aquel al qual accideys effant, o viel en decrepitat, o es temps de vehement calor, o de vehement freg.	And therefore say that when a fracture or dislocation or twist or setting occurs, you must turn to the beginning and perform a venesection or realign that part, or both, if no cause prohibits it, such as weakness of virtue, or in the case affected by it, or due to decrepitude, or during a time of intense heat or intense inflammation.
E aprop sia content en vianda sieua de erbas frejas e de carns de auzels e de crabotz; e prohibem carns grossas e umplir si de viandas e de tota vianda que umple las venas de sanc, entro que siras segurat de apostema caut, e si no temes efusio de materia al membre.	And furthermore, let him eat food consisting of fresh herbs and meat from young birds and crabs; and avoid fatty meats and any food that fills the veins with heat, until you are safe from abscess formation, and if you fear effusion of matter in the limb.
E lahoras retorne le malaute al sieu regiment primier am le qual corr costuma de lu.	And then return the patient to his/her primary position according to the custom of doing so.
E donc cum le os trencat comensa esser restaurat, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia pascut de viandas nutritivas de nutriment mot e gros e greu en les quals sia viscositat, ayssi cum so viandas faytas de froment cueyt am aygua, e ris, e caps, e pes, e ventres de vacas, e huous, e peys fresc, e vi gros e semblants ad aquels, e am aquest regiment es fayta coagulacio de fractura pus leugierament e miels.	And so when the broken bone begins to be restored, then ensure that the patient consumes nutritious foods rich in both fine and heavy moisture, with viscosity, such as foods made from cooked wheat in water, rice, eggs, fish, cow stomachs, nuts, and fresh meat, and foods that are thick and similar to these, and with this regimen coagulation of the fracture is facilitated slightly and honey is applied.
E sapias que les osses trinquatz quan so en les homes que so en la primiera vilura e en los decrepitz, no es possible que sian continuatz e sian consolidatz segon lur natura per la exsiccacio dels membres de lor.	And know that when bones crack in those who are in their prime and in the elderly, it is not possible for them to be continuously restored and consolidated according to their nature due to the drying out of their limbs.
E son consolidatz e continuatz segon lor natura tot temps per la exsiccacio de aquels membres, e so continuatz e consolidatz aquels que so de lor en la fi de la lenitat, ayssi cum les osses dels petitz effantz.	And they are continuously and consolidated according to their nature at all times due to the drying out of those limbs. Those of them that are in the latter stage of youth are also continuously and consolidated, such as the bones of young animals.
Mays empero natura ajusta e amnecteys sobre le os trencat de tota partida alcuna causa semblant a glut en le qual es grossitut que adhereys e strenh aquel entro que so ensemps conglutinatz e liatz ensemps, entro que venen la fi de fortitut e de fermesa, ayssi cum foc al comensament, entro que denguna causa no prohibeys aquel de las suas obres.	But nature adjusts and moderates over the broken bone from any part due to a cause similar to glue in which it thickens and adheres strongly. In this process, conglutination and ligature are performed together, leading to the end of strength and firmness, such as fire at the beginning. In no case should any cause prevent this from its works.
E per aquesta causa es necessari que pauses las viandas del malaute, viandas en las quals so gravitat e viscozitat e grosseza, ayssi cum havem dit.	And for this reason, it is necessary to lift the patient's thighs, viands in which there is gravity, viscosity, and largeness, as we have said.
Mota diversitat de fractura segon diversitat del membre.	Various types of fracture according to the part of the body.
E sapias que las specias de fractura son diversas segon la diversitat dels membres, quar fractura del os de la camba es diversa de la fractura del os del cap; e la fractura del os del pietz es divers de la fractura del os del dos; e semblantment totz les autres membres son diverses entre lor.	And know that the types of fracture are diverse according to the diversity of the limbs, for a fracture of the thigh bone is different from a fracture of the skull bone; and a fracture of the foot bone is different from a fracture of the arm bone; and similarly, all other limbs are different from one another.
E yeu venc am rememoracio de tota specia de fractura, expausada en le sieu capitol distincta del autre.	And I will recount all types of fracture, explained in their own chapter distinct from the others.
Mota diversitat de fractura en si meteyssa.	Various types of fracture in themselves.
E son diversificadas las specias de fractura del os en lor meteyssas; quar es fayta fractura arcuada otra aquo que accidan en lu stellas; e alcunas veguadas es fayta fractura segon la longitut del os: e so las fracturas de lu satagia e astelhas e addicios procedentz e no-procedentz, ayssi cum es fayt en la pena quan es preparada a escriure, e es fractura am plagua e disrupcio en le cap, e es fractura fissura petita.	And the types of fracture in the bone vary; for some fractures are arcuate, while others occur at the stellate lines. Some fractures occur according to the length of the bone: such as those from the sagittal suture and the stellate lines, and their additions and non-additions. Just as when preparing to write, a fracture can be by plucking and disruption in the head, or a small fissure.
E a tota specia es engen o turment propri en restauracio de lu segon que vindra rememoracio de lu distincta en les sieus locs.	And for each case, there is a specific engagement or torment proper in restoring it according to the distinct recall of them in their places.
Mota senhal de fractura del os.	A sign of fracture of the bone.
E per aquo es conoguda fractura del os: es tortuositat de lu, e de aquel eminencia e appericio de lu al sentiment, e so de lu quan compremes aquel am la tua ma.	And by this, a bone fracture is known: it shows a bending or distortion of the bone, and an prominence and appearance of the bone upon touch, and pain felt when pressing on it with your hand.
E donc quan no es en le loc tortuositat apparent ni so no es feyt deves le tieu tocament quan toques le os am agitacio e le malaute no atroba gran dolor, lahoras no es aqui fractura.	And when there is neither apparent bending nor pain, you should test by touching the bone with movement; if the patient does not find great pain, then it is not a fracture.
Habantz es possible que sia tortuositat o petita fissura, adon no cove que tu mauguas aquel am la tua ma e am compressio de tot; habantz pausa sobre lu de las medicinas de las quals ve rememoracio aprop aquel moment le qual conveneys al loc; e aprop sia streyt per strictura subtil.	It is possible that it is a bending or small fracture. Therefore, you should feel it with your hand and apply pressure; then place your hand over the area where you recall from previous experience is appropriate for that location; and it will likely be straightened by a subtle contraction.
E sapias que·l loc quan es arcuat e no es scindit en dos o otra aquo que no accidan en lu satagie, cum es remauguda tota partida de la sua compar, lahoras cove que comenses de la tua hora a rectificacio de lu habantz que a lu accida apostema caut.	And you should know that the area when it is curved but not split into two or more parts, as in a complete tearing of its tissue, then you should start correcting it from your own time, having a purulent abscess form with a cautery.
E si a lu accida apostema caut, lahoras layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que cesse le apostema; e aprop engualha aquel segon quascuna manieyra que podes de levitat e de engen.	And if an abscess occurs at that place, then leave it alone for some days until the abscess ceases; and then treat it in any way you can to promote drainage and healing.
E sapias que restauracio de lu e agulacio de lu es pus leugiera que del os en le qual accideysso sathagie.	And note that the restoration and ligation of the wound are lighter than dealing with the place where the accident occurred.
E aprop strenh aquel segon que vindra la rememoracio de lu.	And then strengthen it according to how the memory of the wound will return.
Mays si en le os so satagias, lahoras es necessaria extencio de aquest membre trencat de doas partz, si es la ma o le pe; o am la tua ma si le membre es petit; o am doas cordas o am una corda e la ma.	More if in the place you find a fracture, then when an extension of this broken member into two parts is necessary, whether it be the arm or the leg; or with your hand if the member is small; or with two cords or one cord and your hand.
E sia la tua posicio am la qual pauses le membre loc engual segon la sua figura natural, mentre que las partidas so extandudas del membre trenquat, lahoras te perforsa que fassas retornar aquelas addicios am engen e segon quascuna manieyra que poyras en lor locs.	And place your hand in the position where you can extend the parts of the broken member naturally, while ensuring that the extensions are made with skill and according to any method you can apply to those areas.
E guarda te segon la tua forssa que no accida sobre le malaute per la tua operacio delor ni lesio; e perforsa te segon le tieu poder que tu appliques la un os am l’autre son companho segon lors milhors formas.	And ensure that your strength is such that it does not cause pain or injury to the patient during your operation; and apply your skill so that one bone fits another, according to their best forms.
E cove que en aquela hora aprofitablament tu toques am la tua ma aquel, e si vezes aqui alcuna causa diversa, rectifiqua aquel e enguala aquel per la quantitat de la tua vertut.	And ensure that at that convenient hour you touch it with your hand, and if you see any other cause different, correct it and equalize it by the quantity of your virtue.
E exquiva vehement extenssio e compressio, ayssi cum fan mots fols metges que motas veguadas fan accidir apostema caut per la sua operacio, o fan accidir contraccio en le membre ayssi cum havem vist aquo per la operacio de lor motas veguadas.	And avoid excessive extension and compression, as foolish doctors often cause abscesses through their operations or cause contraction in the limb as we have seen from their operations.
E aprop annecteys, aprop equacio e decent operacio e strictura de aquel membre, e repaus e tranquilitat; amoneste le malaute sobre aquo e fay le squivar que no maugua aquel en la hora de las suas vigilias e del sieu dormir, e ves la sua revolucio e agitacio, e deves la sua egestio, e deves totz les sieus movementz am tota la sua vertut; e aguarda se que la posicio del membre sia posicio am la qual sia asegurada la dolor, la qual causa es quar quan sent en la disposicio de la posicio del membre delor o lesio; lahoras cove que permutes aquel ad autra disposicio de aquela am la qual non senta dolor; e guarda am aquo que la posicio de lu aquela sia dreyta e engual, per so que al membre non accida tortuositat quan es restaurat.	And ensure the connection, achieve equilibrium and a proper operation of that limb, and maintain rest and tranquility; advise the patient about this and make sure they do not cause it during the hour of their waking and sleeping, and observe its revolution and agitation, and regulate its egestion, and all of its movements with your entire virtue; wait until the position of the limb is in a position where the pain is secured, the cause of which is that when it is in the disposition of the limb's position, there is a sensation of pain or injury; then ensure you change it to another disposition where it does not feel pain; and observe that the position of the limb is straight and equal, so that when it is restored, no tortuosity occurs to the limb.
E la qualitat de la strictura del membre tranquat es aquela que yeu recomti; per que sapias que·ls membres trencatz so diversificatz en lor parvitat e en lor grandeza e en la forma de aquels.	The quality of the fracture of the affected limb is such that I recount; so that you may know that the limbs broken are diverse in their smallness and in their largeness and in the form of those.
E de aquels que son petits ayssi cum le bras e·l dit e·l focil e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras cove que la envolucio sia de drap mol subtil.	And of those that are small like the forearm, the thigh, and similar to those, then cover them with a thin soft cloth.
Mays aquels que so grosses ayssi cum la cuoyssa o la camba, cove que en aquels sia envolucio lada e dura, quar la liadura lada connecteys le membre gran e strenh aquel de tota part am strictura engual, enayssi que en lu no intre macula.	But of those that are large like the thigh or the chest, cover them with an enclosure that is firm and hard, for the firm binding connects the large and strong limb on all sides by the fracture equally, ensure that no stain enters.
E aprop comensa, aprop la tua evacuacio de equacio, pausar liament convenient ad aquo, sobre le loc de aquela fractura am tres envolucios o quatre segon que·l membre mereys; e strenh la tua ma un petit am le liament.	And then begin, as you start your dressing, carefully apply three or four enclosures according to the limb's needs; and firmly hold your hand a little on the bandage.
E aprop ve am aquel a la partida pus sobirana del loc de la fractura, e strenh mens que no foc la tua strictura am la qual has strengut le loc de la fractura.	And then place it at the uppermost part of the location of the fracture, and firmly ensure that your bandage covers the area where you have tightly bound the site of the fracture.
E aprop elongua te am envolucio del loc de la fractura un pauc, e mollifiqua la strictura petit a petit, entro que prenguas del loc sa una gran partida.	And then gradually extend the covering of the fracture area a little, and gradually soften the tension there, while you take from that place a large portion.
E aprop pren una autra benda e envolveys aquela autra veguada sobre le loc trenquat am envolucio, e aprop ve am las envolucios a la partida pus dejos de la fractura; e sia la tua operacio en la strictura de la envolucio e en mollificacio de aquela segon que havem dit en la envolucio primieyra desus.	And then take another bandage and wrap the other part around the injured area covered by the first wrapping, and gradually adjust the wrappings to the portion away from the fracture; and let your operation be in the tension of the wrapping and in the softening of that according to what we said in the first wrapping above.
E aprop pausa entre las volucios de stopa leon o drap am le qual sia engualada la tortuositat de la fractura, si en lu es tortuositat; e sino, no pauses en lu alcuna causa.	And then place the stopa leon or cloth between the wrappings in which the tortuosity of the fracture is equalized, if there is any tortuosity; otherwise, do not pause for any reason.
E aprop pausa sobre lu autra benda, e aprop enguala sobre aquestas envolucios stelhas decentment faytas tantost, si en le loc no es imflacio o apostema caut, e lahoras pausa sobre lu aquo que sede le apostema aquel e que oste la imflacio; e layssa aquela per alcus jorns; e lahoras tu strenh sobre lu las stelhas.	And then place it on the other bandage, and gradually equalize over these wrappings, make them decent enough as soon as possible, if there is no inflammation or abscess in that area; otherwise, pause over what is the abscess there and what causes the inflammation; leave that for a few days; then strengthen the stellate ones.
E sian las stelhas de la maytat de canna lada raza, e be formada saviament; o sian de fust de pi; o de ramps de palma ; e sia le ample de quascuna stelha segon aquesta forma e aquesta figura:	And let the stays of the patient's side be wide and formed wisely; or made of pine wood; or of palm ribs; and let the width of each stay match this form and figure:
Empero cove que la astelha que es pausada sobre aquela fractura sia pus grossa e pus lada un petit que las autras astelhas, e la longitut de la stela segon qu’es legut al membre en magnitut e parvitat; e aprop strenh sobre las astelhas am autra benda segon la tua primieyra strictura; e aprop lia desus am fiel decentment segon que havem dit de strictura, e es que sia la tua strictura segon le loc de la fractura mes, e quant mes es alonguat de la fractura, es mendre la strictura.	However, ensure that the bandage placed over that fracture is thicker and a bit wider than the other bandages, and the length of the strip according to the size and magnitude of the member; and place another bandage underneath according to your first structure; and apply it decently with a piece of cloth as we have said about the structure, and let your structure be more where the fracture is, and the more it is stretched from the fracture, the less the structure.
E cove que les fils sian migiers en grossesa e subtilitat, e sian de li mol; e si les fils so grosses, ayssi cum yeu he vist per la operacio de alcus fols pausantz les lors fils de cordas de li tort, e es error gran, quan catz la strictura fora equalitat.	And ensure that the threads are medium in thickness and fineness, and they should be of linen; if the threads are thick, as I have seen in some operations where flax thread was used for securing the limbs, it is a great error when the structure is not uniform.
E eyssament fils subtils no so convenientz, quar tu no consaguiras per strictura am aquels aquo que voles, e no cove que entre astela e astela haja mens de un dit.	And similarly, thin threads are not convenient, for you will not be able to achieve the structure with them as you desire, and it is not advisable that there be less than one finger's width between bandages.
E si le malaute es ledit per las extremitatz de las stelas aprop la strictura en les locs sas, lahoras pausa dejos aquelas de stopa leon o lana carmenada entro que aquo no li fassa lesio.	And if the patient is injured at the extremities of the vessels near the location, then place those of stopa made from lion's mane or carded wool between them to prevent injury.
Alcunas veguadas fractura es am plagua, e accideys disrupcio en la codena, e yeu vindre am rememoracio en aquela en le capitol segon singularitat.	Some fractures are cracks, and accidents disrupt the chain, and I will come to remember that in the Capitol according to its singularity.
E sapias que ges tot membre trencat no es streyt am stelhas al primier dia; la qual causa es quar le membre, quan es gran, no cove que pauses sobre lu stelhas sino aprop v dias o vii o mays, segon la tua seguratat de adveniment de apostema caut.	And know that for all broken members, they are not set by vessels on the first day; this cause is that the member, when large, cannot be placed on vessels but after about 5 days or 7 or more, according to your safety of the onset of abscess.
E aquesta es la manieyra dels emplaustres am les quals les Antics restauravan, les quals so pausatz sobre fractura e dislocacio e torcio.	And this is the method of plasters that the Ancients used to restore, which are applied over fractures and dislocations.
Manieyra de emplaustra comu abruejat de restaurament de fractura, convenient a motas compleccios e majorment a las femnas e als efantz, quar es de aquo sobre le qual no ventz calor ni freg: e es que prenguas de polvera de moli, e es la medula de la farina que pen deves le movement de la mola en las paretz del moli.	Method of plastering for the reduction of fractures, suitable for complex cases and especially for women and children, which is made from powder of millstone, the marrow of the flour that hangs from the movement of the mill in its walls.
E comfeys aquel ayssi cum es, sino que cribelles aquel am album de huou, e pausa la comfeccio de lu no-spessa ni subtil; e aprop usa de aquela.	And you must confect it thus, but sieve that white flour of wheat, and place the confection not-thin nor subtle; and then use that.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre restaurant fractura e dislocacio e torcio: recipe de assafetida, de lapdanum, de acacia, de enula, e migrach, que es razit de milgraner salvage, de totz ana drac. x; de mirra e aloen ana drac. v; alochil ana drac. xx; totz sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian mesclatz am aygua alichil o am album de huou si la compleccio del malaute es scalfada; e aprop usa de aquest emplaustre, quar es de bona composicio e restaura les osses trencatz leugierament, e confereys a motz homes.	Another method of plastering for fractures, dislocations, and sprains: recipe of asafetida, of lapdanum, of acacia, of fennel, and myrrh, which is gathered from salvager milkweed, of all take a drachm; of myrrh and aloes take a drachm five; of alcohol take two drachms; all be trisected and sieved and mixed with alcohol water or with wheat flour if the wound of the patient is scabbed; then use this plaster, which is of good composition, and it restores broken bones lightly, and you apply it to both men.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre le qual comfereys a fractura e torcio: recipe migrach e met de altea blanca ana drac. x; de mirra e de aloen ana drac v; de acacia drac. vi; de bol armenic drac. .xx.	Another method of plaster for which you must confect a fracture and sprain: recipe myrrh and two drachms of white mullein take a drachm; of myrrh and aloes take five drachms; of acacia take six drachms; of Armenian wax take twenty drachms.
Totz sian trissatz en mortier am mota contricio, e sian cribellatz, e sian comfitz am aygua o am album de huou e sia administrat.	All be trisected in a mortar with each ingredient, be sieved, and confect them with water or wheat flour and be administered.
Manieyra de emplaustre a juncturas e osses separatz de lors locs, e seda dolor accident en aquels e a fissuras e fractaduras: sia presa lana sutza e sia submersa en vi agre e oli cuyt e sia pausat sobre le loc.	Method to plaster joints and bones separated from their places, and for accidental pain in those areas as well as for cracks and fractures: take fine wool and immerse it in olive oil and wine, then place it over the area.
Mays en aquest emplastre no es vertut de restauracio, de apostema caut e expelleys dolors propriament.	But in this plaster there is not the virtue of restoration, but rather for the removal of abscesses and pain.
Autra manieyra de emplastre que restaura os trancat: pren fuelas de figuier sort e fuelas de papaver salvatge; contereys tot e fay emplastre de lor.	Another method of plaster that restores broken bones: take leaves of fig tree and leaves of wild poppy; mix them all together and make a plaster from them.
Manieyra de emplastre abreujat aministrat deves la restauracio de fractura de os e quan tu voles resolucio del romanent de apostema: recipe razitz de altea, de camamilla e flors de violes, de farina de ers, de totz ana partida i; sian totz trissatz e sian cofitz am vi, si·l membre no es scalfat.	Method of a brief plaster to administer for the restoration of bone fractures and when you want the resolution of an abscess: mix root of althea, chamomile flowers, violet flowers, flour of dock, all in equal parts; thoroughly mix them all together and steep them in wine, if the member is not ulcerated.
Mays si es scalfat, lahoras comfeys aquel am aygua de coliandre humit o am aygua e usa de lu.	But if it is ulcerated, then moisten that with water of fennel or with water and use it.
Autra manieyra de emplastra pus fort en resolucio que aquest primier, quan accideys apostema dur deves la restauracio del membre: recipe de razitz de altea e de semensa de li, e de balaustia, e mellilot, majorana, flors de viol, de camamilla, de totz ana partida i engual; totz sian trissatz e sian cofitz am aygua de sauze o am aygua dousa o am vi, tot aquo segon la qualitat del membre e le repaus de la color de lu.	Another way of applying a stronger plaster for resolving the condition when an abscess occurs: take root of althea and seed of linseed, and of balsam, melilot, marjoram, flowers of violet, chamomile, of all parts equally and evenly; all be crushed and macerated in water of sage or water dua or wine, according to the quality of the member and the color thereof.
Mays Ypocras no diyssec en le sieu libre que sia pausat sobre le membre trenquat deves la restauracio de lu sino cerot fayt de cera e de oli e no autre causa; e recomtec que sia migier entre grossitut e subtilitat.	May Hippocrates not say in his own book that it should be placed over the member soaked to promote its restoration but a plaster made of wax and oil; and he recommends that it be mixed between coarseness and subtlety.
Mays a Gualia es vist que sian pausatz sobre le membre trencat deves la restauracio de lu e las causas en las quals es exsiccacio am petit de caliditat so ayssi cum mirra, enses e semblantz a lor de aquelas causas que havem recomtadas.	May Galen be seen as having applied plasters over the broken member to promote its restoration and the causes in which drying of low quality is thus such as myrrh, resin, and similar to them among those causes we have recommended.
Manieyra de emplastre que comfereys a lesio e dolor: recipe migat, de cezes, de pels de home inscizes o pena de auzel, e de altea, e sal, partidas enguals; sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian cofitz, e sia fayt emplastre.	Another way of applying a plaster to heal and relieve pain: take half parts of cypress, of human skins incised or quince wood ash, of althea, and salt, all divided equally; crush and sift them, macerate in water, and make into a plaster.
Mays la quantitat segon la qual cove que romangua la liadura e aprop sia disliada, es que consideres si no es accidit dolor ni pruziment ni le os es trencat no es maugut de son loc, lahoras tu no deslies de motz jorns.	When the quantity according to which you should let the joint swell and then dislocate it, is that you consider whether pain has not occurred nor any bruise and the bone is not broken nor displaced from its place, then you do not dislocate it for many days.
E si accideys al loc dolor vehement o prusiment o imflacio, lahoras tu te coyte o deslie aquel en la hora, e osta le emplastre de lu.	And if pain occurs violently or bruising or inflammation at the site, then you should apply or dislocate it at once, and apply a poultice to it.
E pren drap de li e spongia marina leon humida, e submergeys aquela en aygua tebeza, e am aquela lava le loc entro que cesse aquel pruziment e la dolor sia sedada; e aprop layssa repausar le membre per una hora; e aprop pausa sobre lu lana sutza submersa en vi agre e oli o oli rozat, e lia sobre lu per una nuoyt entro que sias segur de apostema caut, e que repause la imflacio del membre, e sia remauguda la dolor de lu.	And take a cloth and sponge of the sea, wet them, submerge them in thick wine, and apply that to the site until the bruising and pain are relieved; then place the limb at rest for an hour; afterwards, place on it wool soaked in vinegar or rubbed oil, and cover it overnight until you are sure there is no abscess, and that the inflammation of the limb subsides, and the pain is alleviated.
E aprop itera aquela strictura subtil e emplastre petit e no·l strenhas per la tua constriccio primieyra, e subtilia am aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then repeatedly apply that fine poultice and do not tighten your initial bandage too much, but keep it subtle so that the area heals.
E si vezes que le apostema e la rogor e la dolor e la imflacio e tots les accidentz ja so remaugutz de tot, e indigeysses de emplastre e de strictura, lahoras tu itera aquel ayssi cum has fayt al comensant engualment.	And if you see that the abscess and the inflammation and the pain and the swelling and all these accidents are already reduced as much as possible, and you feel they need a poultice and a bandage, then you repeat it in this way just as you did at the beginning.
E si no accideys al membre alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no deslies aquel sino aprop tres dias o quatre o v o vii; e alcunas veguadas tot aquo es layssat per xx dias segon que a tu appar per la desliadura del membre, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que la fractura adhereys, e se acosta a la coagulacio de la carn sobre aquel.	And if no cause of those we have mentioned occurs in the member, then do not remove it but keep it on for three to four days or five to seven; sometimes all this is left for twenty days according to how you judge by the mobility of the member, as we have said, until the fracture adheres and settles into the coagulation of the flesh around it.
E lahoras ajusta en la strictura mays que en la tua strictura primieyra tota, e ayusta en la engrossacio de la vianda del malaute, segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu.	And then adjust the bandage tighter than your first bandage, and adjust for the swelling of the patient's abdomen, according to whether the recollection of the illness has preceded.
Mays si tu vezes le loc de la fractura ja desiccar e extenuar mays que no cove, lahoras sapias que·l nutriment es prohibit pervenir ad aquel; e donc embroca aquel am aygua tebeza deves tota veguada que delias aquel; e sia aquo en totz tres dias; e alleuja la strictura un petit, e per aquesta operacio corr al membre le nutriment, e es sanat leugierament.	And if you see that the place of the fracture is already drying and weakening more than it should, then you know that nourishment cannot reach there; therefore, soak that area in pure water all day long. Do this for three days; and loosen the bandage a little, and by this operation supply nutrition to the member, and it will heal slightly.
Mays aquo que fan les fols restauradors de la fractura del membre autra veguada quan no es restaurat al comensament, segon que cove, e es restaurat segon tortuositat, es error segon la operacio de lor, e temor gran, e si fos dreyturier aquo agrandit les Antics en lors libres e agueran am aquo obrat.	More than what the fol restorers do a second time when the member is not restored to its beginning, according to where it caved in, and is restored according to tortuosity, it is an error in their operation, and great fear arises. If they were right, this would have enlarged the Ancients in their books and warned of this work.
E yeu no he vist ad alcu de lor aquo far, per que es pus razonable que aquo no fassa.	And I have not seen any of them do this, so it is more reasonable that this does not work.
Capitol segon: De fractura quan accideys en le cap.	Capitolsegone: Of Fracture When It Occurs in the Head.
Las specias de fracturas son motas, e las figuras de lor son diversas, e las causas son distinctas, quar de fracturas alcuna es fayta per percussio de spaza, e la percussio osta tot le os entro al ciphac, le qual es dejos le os, ayssi cum fay ayssa en le fust, e per aquo aquesta specia es nompnada ascial; o la spaza inscideys alcuna partida del os, e inscideys la carn de lu e no passa la inscizio entro al derier de lu; e aquesta specia de fractura es nompnada levatio absoluta.	The types of fractures are cracks, and their figures are various, and the causes are distinct. For some fractures, they are caused by the impact of a blow, which cracks the entire bone inside the skull, leaving the bone like this as in the trunk, and for this reason, this type is named "ascial"; or the blow affects part of the bone, cuts its flesh without passing through the marrow; and this type of fracture is named "levatio absoluta.
E la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca, e de fractura que es contricio o atricio; e causa de lu es percussio am poyra o cazement sobre peyra, e a lor semblantz.	And the swelling of these two fractures is either great or small, and from such a fracture there is percussion on the foot or grinding against stone, similar to it.
E aquesta fractura o es penetrant que ja apropinqua al pannicol le qual es dejos le os; o es en la facia del os, e la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca.	And this fracture is penetrating, nearly reaching the cartilage which surrounds the bone; or it is in the face of the bone, and the swelling of these two fractures is either great or small.
E de fractura es que es ameguada en le os, en la subtilitat del cabel petita, e per aquo es nompnada aquesta specia fractura capillar.	And in this fracture, the bone is weakened in its细小的骨质，由于这一点，这种骨折被称为毛细血管性骨折。
E es fractura que es fayta o per cazement o per percussio de peyra e a lu semblantz, que fa intrar alcuna lamina del os a las partidas dedintz, e es fayta en le loc concavitat ayssi cum accideys als payroles de eram quan accideys a lor percussio e es partida de lor intrada a las partidas dedintz.	And this fracture is caused by grinding or percussion of a stone, similar to it, which causes some lamina of the bone to enter the internal partitions, and it occurs in the concave location, as happens with the seams of tiles when they are struck, and it results from their partition entering the internal partitions.
E majorment es fayt aquo en les cors de osses humitz, ayssi cum so caps de efantz.	And this is mostly done in the bodies of moist bones, such as those of calves.
E so a totas aquestas specias fracturas satagias, so son pessas ayssi cum stelhas separadas.	And all these types of fractures are treated as if they were separate stars.
E yeu vindre am reremoracio de tot aquo en son loc.	And I will come to remind you of all this in its place.
E conoyssem totas aquestas specias de fractura per deteccio sobre aquelas e per inquisicio de lor am tentas e ostament de carn corrumpuda que es sobre lor.	And we will know all these types of fracture by detection of those and by inquiry of their pain and the appearance of the corrupted flesh that is upon them.
E specia capillar es conoguda per aysso que es descubert sobre le os, e es abstergit, e linit sobre lu am tentha, quar la fractura appar negra.	And the capillary type is known because it is discovered upon the bone, it is cleaned, and limits around it with pain, for the fracture appears black.
Mays en la curacio de fractura considera al comensament les accidentz del malaute, e lahoras si tu vezes per los accidentz que signifique per significacio manifesta sobre paor, ayssi cum es vomit de colera, e extencio, e perdement de entendament, e abscizio de votz, e sincopi, e febre acuta, e eyssiment dels huels e rogor de aquels, e semblantz a lor dels accidentz en las majors disposicios, ses dopte no es sanat.	More in the cure of fractures consider at the beginning the signs of illness, and if you see through these signs that it means a manifest indication of fear, such as vomiting from colera, extension, loss of understanding, absence of voice, fainting, acute fever, swelling of the limbs and redness of those, and signs similar to them in the major dispositions, then you should doubt that it is not healed.
E si vezes accidentz no-correntz tu speras salut, lahoras tu comensa la curacio de lu.	And if you see unusual signs, you hope for health, and then you begin the cure of it.
La qual causa es quar si es vengut a tu le plaguat en le comensament cum es plaguat e aquo es en les dias de ivern, lahoras cove que tu studias en le ostament del os denant le dia xiiii segon tota disposicio.	This cause is because if the injured person comes to you in the beginning of their injury and it occurred on a winter day, then you should study in the appearance of the bone facing the fourteenth day according to all disposition.
E si es en les dias d’estiu, lahoras cove que te coytes ostar le os denant le vii dia, habantz que aquo que es dejos le os sia corromput del pannicol, e que accidescan les accidentz que havem recomtatz.	And if it is in the days of summer, customarily you should wait for the sores to appear before the seventh day, having that what is left on the bones be corrupted by putrefaction, and that accidents occur which we have recounted.
E si la fractura ja es pervenguda al pannicol cubrent le cervel, e es am partidas menudas e atricio, lahoras cove que inscidas la partida conminuta e atrita, segon que yeu recomtare a tu.	And if the fracture has already reached the marrow, covering the bone and is broken into many pieces and is crushed, then you should incise the broken part and rub it, according to what I will recount to you.
E es que tu razas le cap del malaute plaguat, e descuebres sobre le os segon costuma e manieyra a tu possible segon la figura de la plagua, e que sia leugier sobre le malaute.	And you should cut the skin of the patient's wound, expose the bone according to custom and your method as is feasible based on the shape of the wound, and make it shallow over the wound.
E si accideys a tu deves la deteccio del os, fluxs de sanc o apostema caut, lahora tu te oppausa a lu am aquo que cove, e es que huemplas le loc de draps infuzes en vi e oli rozat, e fassa repausar la plagua entro que sia sedat le apostema, e sies segur de fluxs del sanc; e aprop comensa en la circuicio del os e en la ablatio de lu.	And if you detect the bone, flows of pus or abscess, then you should apply what is appropriate to it, and fill the area with soaked cloths in wine and oiled rosin, and let the wound rest until the abscess is subdued, and be sure of the flow of pus; and then proceed with the circumference of the bone and its excision.
E aquo sia segon una de dos manieyras de operacio.	And this shall be according to one of two ways of operation.
E la una manieyra es que tu inscidas le os am inscisori de streyt tal, e aquesta es la forma de lu: E aprop administra un autre inscissori aquest, un pauc pus lat que aquel; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And one way is that you incise the tissue straight through, and this is its form: And then administer another incisor here, a little further laterally; and this is its form:
E aprop administra mays le inscissori pus lat que·l segon.	And then administer more with the incisor further laterally than the second.
E cove que sia deves tu nombre de inscissoris diverses, dels quals alcus so pus latz que alcus autres; e alcus de lor so pus breus que·ls autres e sian en le derier de acuitat de las suas extremitatz, e sian de ferr indi o felod.	And ensure that you have the number of different incisors, of which some are more laterally placed than others; and some of them are shorter than the others and be at the very tip of their extremities, and be made of iron or steel.
E usa de lor am facilitat en percussio sobre le inscissori per so que no concutesca le cap e leda aquel.	And use them with ease in percussion on the incisors so that the head does not shake and guide it.
E si le os es fort, dur, lahoras cove que perfores en le circuit de lu denant que tu administres los inscissoris am les taravels, les quals so nomnatz taravels no-profundantz.	And if the tissue is strong and hard, then you must perforate in its circumference before administering the incisors along the travels, which you call shallow cuts.
E no so nomnatz ayssi sino quar aquels no pausan le terme de l’os del test ad aquo que es aprop lu, per so quar al taravel es redonda extremitat o marge sobre aquel que es dejos le cap de lu agut semblant a marge o a cercle petit, le qual prohibeys esser submergit e passar la spissitut del os.	And we are not called this way unless those who pause the term of the bone at the test (groin) to that which is nearby it, so that along the travel is a rounded extremity or margin over that upon which they leave the head of it sharp resembling a small margin or circle, the which you prohibit from being submerged and passing the thickness of the bone.
E es convenient que tu prenguas de aquestz taravels gran nombre dels quals quascu convenesca a la spicitut de quascun os, entro que sia a tu present en tottz testz del cervel la extremitat del qual sia aguda, la quantitat en longitut e brevitat sia segon la quantitat de spicitut de aquest test.	And it is convenient that you take of these travels a great number of which each suits the thickness of each bone, during which let the extremity of all be sharp, the quantity in length and breadth be according to the quantity of thickness of this bone.
E aquesta es la forma de tres specias de teravels: La qualitat de perforar en le circuit del os trencat es que pauses le teravel sobre le os e revolvas aquel am les tieus ditz entro que sapias que l’os ja es penetrat; e aprop permuda le terevel ad autre loc, e pausa aquo que es entre tot trauc la quantitat de la grosseza del ray o enviro aquo.	And this is the form of three species of travels: The quality of perforating in the circuit of the broken bone is that you pause the travel over the bone and revolve it with the nails called until you know that the bone has already been penetrated; then place the travel elsewhere, and pause that which goes through all and takes the quantity of the thickness of the ray or around that.
E aprop inscideys am inscissoris aquo que es entre quascun trauc del os, e fay aquel pus subtil que podes sobre aquo en fi de levitat, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que erradiques le os, o am la tua ma, o am alcuna autra causa per alcus sturmentz les quals auras apparelhatz ad aquo, ayssi cum tanalhas e forceps subtils.	And then incise with the incisor where each goes through the bone, and make that pus subtle which you can over it at the end of levitas, as we have said, during which you remove the bone, or with your hand, or by some other cause using certain instruments which you will prepare for this, such as thin tannals and forceps.
E cove que tu guardes am tota cautela que l’inscissori no toque alcuna causa del ciphac.	And make sure that you use great caution so that the scalpel does not touch any part of the cavity.
E donc cum auras circuit le os perforan, e sira separat del ciphac si es continuat am lu, e auras aquel extrayt, cove que razas e enguales aquel en la asperitat de lu de aquo que es en le os am autra sturment semblant a inscissori, mays empero cove que sia pus teon e pus subtil que les autres inscissoris.	And therefore, after you have circled the perforated bone and separated it from the cavity if it is continuous with it, and you have extracted that part, make sure you scrape and smooth it to the texture of what is in the bone with another instrument resembling a scalpel, but so ensure it is finer and more delicate than other scalpels.
E si roman alcuna partida dels osses petitz e satagias, lahoras pren aquela am facilitat am aquo que es deves tu dels sturmentz; e aprop aquo cura la plagua am lichinis e enguentz les quals havem ditz.	And if any small part of the bones is removed and separated, then take that with ease using the instrument you should use for the instruments; and then cure the wound with linen and ointments which we have said.
E l’autra manieyra de operacio es leugiera, longinqua de paor, la qual diyssec Gualia e la lauzec per gran lausor; e aquest es le sermo de lu: necessari es a tu en le comensament que comenses descobrir la partida del os del loc en le qual es la fractura pus vehement e pus manifesta, entro que quan auras descubert aquela partida e auras pausat dejos lu la extremitat de aquest inscissori lent e alegre del qual aquesta es la forma:	And the other method of operation is lighter, far from fear, which Diyssec Gualia and cuts it for great lausor; this is how he speaks of it: At the beginning, you must start uncovering the part of the bone in the area where the fracture is most severe and most evident. When you have uncovered that part, place your hand on the end of this scalpel slowly and cheerfully, which is its form:
E es que la partida lenticular es leon e no inscideys alcuna causa, e la partida aguda es de lu en dos latz avantz en longitut, ayssi cum vezes; que la partida lenticular sia ajustada al ciphac am la facia de lu inscident aguda en le os.	And this is that the lenticular part is lion and you do not incise any cause, and the acute part divides into two cuts in length as you see; that the lenticular part be adjusted to the chip (keel) at its sharp end incident on the bone.
E aprop percuteys sobre le inscissori de una partida am un petit malhet entro que inscidas tot le os am facilitat ayssi cum es revolvut, e tu sias segur del pannicol que no accida en lu accident que temas en denguna manieyra, e si le medicant14 era le pus fol de totz les homes e le mays ignorant de lor; certament, e si era dorment.	And then you strike on the incision of one part with a small hammer between where you have incised the whole bone as it is rotated, and you be certain of the panniculus that no accident occurs in the manner you fear; and if the medicant were the worst leaf of all men and the most ignorant of them; certainly, and if he were asleep.
Lahoras si romania alcuna causa annexa al os del pannicol en alcus locs de os, inscidira aquel de lu am la extremitat del inscissori aquel lenticular, e deliuraria aquel de lu am facilitat, quar es deliurat de lu ses nocument e ses paor.	And if the panniculus bone has any additional cause in some parts of the bone, he will incise that part at the end of the lenticular incision, and deliver that part as it is freed from its harm and fear.
E si fractura del os no penetra entro al pannicol, e aquo que es abscidit o es ostat del os es la facia de lu, e roman en lu asperitat e satagias subtils, lahoras cove que razas aquela asperitat e erradiques aquelas satagias am razoris subtils per les quals tu has preparat le nombre, de diversas quantitatz per que sia a tu possible administrar de aquels en tot loc les pus convenientz de lor e le pus dreyt de aquels segon aquo en que te perduzeys la tua operacio aquel os trencat e la figura de lu.	And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate into the panniculus, and what is incised or remains of the bone is its surface, and it remains in it roughness and fine sutures, then scrape that roughness away and remove those fine sutures with sharp razors you have prepared in various quantities so that it is possible for you to administer from them the most convenient parts and the right part according to where you have directed your operation on that broken bone and its figure.
E cove que administres en la tua razio am la qual razes le os al comensament le pus lat de aquels razoris, e aprop usa aprop lu del pus subtil de lu, e no cesses far aquo segon continuitat entro que pervenguas ad aministrar le pus teon e·l pus subtil de totz aquels.	And ensure that you apply according to your measure, placing the os at the beginning with those razors, then use close to it from the subtle matter underneath, and do not cease doing this continuously until you reach administering the thick pus and the subtle matter of all.
Mays en quascuna de las autras fracturas petitas capillars e fractura subtil, cove que administres cura segon aquo que perduseys ad rectificacio de lu.	In any other small fractured bones or subtle fractures, ensure that you apply care according to what is lost for the correction of it.
E es causa que no es ameguada sobre totz les quals han studi en aquela art.	And it is because they have not studied all those matters in that art.
E stec sobre aquo que nos scriut havem mostrat en grans fracturas.	And place it on what we have written about great fractures.
E si le pannicol es retangut quan tu erradiques le os, lahoras cove que prenguas drap de li segon la quantitat de la plagua, e submergeys aquel en oli rozat, e pausa aquel sobre le orrifici de la plagua; e aprop pren autre drap doblat o triplicat e submergeys lu en vi e oli rozat e pausa aquel sobre drap prim e fay aquo al pus leugierament que podes sobre aquel, que no graves le ciphac; e aprop administra sobre aquel liament lat, e no strenhas aquel sino per quantitat que tengua la plagua tant solament.	And if the skin is cut when you extract the bone, then you should take a cloth according to the amount of the wound, and submerge it in infused oil, placing it over the wound; then take another folded or tripled cloth, submerge it in wine and infused oil, place it over the first cloth, and do this gently on top so as not to press on the flesh; then apply a plaster, and do not strain it except according to the amount that the wound has.
E layssa aquel am aquesta cura per un dia o per dos entro que sias segur de apostema caut; e aprop deslia aquel e aprop aministra medicinas am las quals es superflua siccitat, ayssi cum razitz de lin e farina de errs, e polvera de enses e de aristologia, e de semblantz ad aquels.	Leave that point for one or two days until you are sure of the abscess; then remove it and apply medicines to which excessive dryness is superfluous, such as linseed and wheat bran, and powders of thyme and of oregano, and similar.
E es que tu fassas de aquestas medicinas polvera que sia pulverizada sobre la plagua, ayssi cum son secas; e universalment, administra en aquel tota medicina de proprietat de la qual es que abstergesca e no mordique.	And you make these medicines into a powder that is sprinkled on the wound, as it is dry; and generally, apply to it all medicine of a性质或功能能够清洁和不刺激的。
E guarda te segon la tua vertut que la plagua en la tua curacio sia neta; e no sia en lu surdicia de enguent ni autra; ni no layssas agreguar virulencia en lu; quar quan es ajustada sobre le pannicol del cervel, corromp aquel e poyreys aquel, e accideys sobre le malaute aprop aquo malicia maligna.	And use according to your virtue that the wound in your cure be clean; and do not leave any grease or other ointment on it; for when applied over the cerebrospinal fluid, it corrupts it and spoils it, and brings about the evil malady nearby.
E accideys en le ciphac del cap, cum de lu es mondificat le os e majorment quan es menspresada la cura de lu, e es negror en la superficia de lu; e donc considera lahoras si accideys al malaute les accidentz que havem ditz, sapias que es parnicios ses tot dopte.	And it happens in the cranium of the head, as when modified the bone and especially when the cure is neglected, and a blackness appears on the surface; and therefore consider when such accidents occur to the patient whether you know that it is perilous and altogether harmful.
E si no accideys negror sino de la medicina que es pausada desus, e es en vertut de aquela medicina que fassa aquela negror, lahoras cove que tu prenguas de mel una partida e de oli rozat partidas iii, e am aquels linieys un drap, e aprop pausa aquel sobre le ciphac; e aprop cura aquel am las specias de curacio que conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if you encounter blackness only from the medicine that is applied above, and it is due to that medicine causing that blackness, then take part of honey and part of rubbed oil in equal parts, make lines with those liquids on a cloth, and place it over the cicatrix; and cure it according to the species of cure that you consider appropriate until it is healed.
Capitol .iii.	Capitol iii.
De restauracio del nas quan es trincat.	For the restoration of the nose when it is broken.
Sapias que no es trencat del nas sino doas partidas ensemps pus sobiranas, o una de aquelas alcunas veguadas, per so quar en lu has dos osses, quar la partida dejos es cartillaginosa, e no es trencada e no accideys a lu sino atricio e tortuositat e sinuitat.	Know that it is not the nose itself that is broken, but two parts together with some additional flesh, or one of those few blows, because in it you have two bones. The part that is left is cartilaginous and not broken; therefore, no fracture occurs to it, but only friction, tortuosity, and sinuitas.
Mays si es trencada la una de las doas partidas de lu, lahoras cove que tu intrometas le dit petit en le sieu nas, e que engualhas aquela fractura dedintz am le tieu dit indic, e am le dit pous defora, entro que retorne le nas segon la sua figura natural.	But if one of the two parts is broken, then you should introduce the little finger into the nostril, and equalize that fracture inside with your thumb, and outside with your finger, so that the nose returns to its natural shape.
E sia fayt aquo per tu am facilitat, e guarda te que no caja per aquela tua operacio sobre le malaute delor.	And do this for your own ease, and make sure not to injure the patient's pain.
E si la fractura es en la pus sobirana partida del nas, e le dit no perve ad aquela, lahoras cove que sia equat am la extremitat del ray en le qual sia petita grossitut.	And if the fracture is in the nasal bone at its split part, and you cannot reach it directly, then apply pressure to the extremity of the ray in which there is a small swelling.
E si la fractura es en doas partidas, lahoras tu fay le semblant de aquo.	And if the fracture is in two parts, then you make it appear as such.
E coyta te am restauracio de lu en le primier dia de la fractura, si es possible; e sino, lahoras aprop le vii o·l x deves le repaus del apostema caut.	And apply this to promote the healing of the fracture on the first day of the fracture, if possible; otherwise, as soon as the seventh or eighth day, you should rest the affected area with a cautery.
E aprop entromet en la extremitat del nas una meca de drap de li, si la fractura es en una partida, o metz doas calguas, si la fractura es en doas partidas, e sia en la calgua grossitut de tanta quantitat que umpla le trauc del nas.	And insert a pad of linen cloth into the extremity of the nose, if the fracture is in one part, or place two small pieces of cloth, if the fracture is in two parts, and ensure that the piece of cloth has enough bulk to fill the nostril.
E diysso alcus dels antics restauradors que las calguas sian enfundudas en boder, e sian permudadas en tot dia, mays no es vist a mi; habantz cove que la meca sia enfunduda en album de huou comfit am polvera de moli; e aprop layssa la qualgua entro que l’os sia fermat e sia endurazida la cartillage.	And some of the ancient restorers say that the pieces of cloth should be dipped in broth, and kept moist throughout the day. However, I do not see this; instead, ensure that the pad is soaked in honey comfit powder. And leave the piece of cloth inside until the bone has healed and the cartilage has hardened.
E alcunas veguadas sia entromes en le nas, en loc de calgua, pena de auca pus que es envolopada de drap de li leon; e sia que ja te la fractura del nas pus vehement e que le malaute no sia prohibit de inspiracio.	And sometimes it is inserted in the nose, in place of a gouty swelling, to relieve more intense pain as it is wrapped in lion's skin fabric; and now you have the broken nose more violently and that the patient not be prohibited from breathing.
E aquesta causa no es a tu necessaria; e si voles, fay aquo, e si voles, fay calguas.	And this cause is not necessary for you; and if you wish, do this, and if you wish, do gout.
E si accideys autra veguada apostema caut, emplastra le nas am cerot o am coto enfus en vi agre e oli rozat, o am diaquilon.	And if another swelling occurs, apply a cauterization for it. Plaster the nose with cerot or with a hot oil mixture, or with a diachylon.
Mays si no accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que emplaustres aquel defora am farina de sizami e am polvera de enses cofitz am album de huou; e aprop pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e no lies le nas am alcuna causa.	But if no swelling occurs, then when you need to plaster it externally, use sesame seed flour and powder of cloven acorns with honeycomb; and place your hand on the patient's stopa (a measure), and do not touch the nose for any cause.
Mays si so trencats les osses del nas am fractura petita o so conminuitz, lahoras cove que scindas sobre aquels, e extraguas aquels am insturmentz que conveno ad aquels; e aprop cos la scissura, e cura aquela am aquo que encarna e consolida, e am emplastres ad aquo convenientz.	But if the nose bones are broken with a small fracture or are comminuted, then you must incise those areas, and extract them with instruments suitable for those conditions; and near the incision, treat that with what encarnates and consolidates, and with plasters appropriate for it.
E si accideys plagua dedintz le nas, lahoras cove que cures aquela am calguas e administra canulas de plom entro que sia de tot sanat.	And if you happen to have a pain inside the nose, then cure that with saline and administer lead canulas when they are completely healed.
Capitol .iiii.	Capitol. iv.
De restauracio de la mandibula quan es trincada.	For the restoration of the jaw when broken.
Quan la mandibula dejos es rompuda e la fractura de lu no es am plagua, reguarda lahoras si la fractura es deforas tant solament, e no es trencada en dos e es curvada a las partidas dedintz, lahoras la sua cognicio es leugiera.	When the jaw is broken and the fracture is not displaced, consider whether the fracture is only on the surface and not split into two parts but curved inward. In this case, the pain is mild.
E cove donc, si la fractura es en la part dreyta, que tu intrometas le tieu indic senestre en la boca del malaute; e semblantment si la fractura es an la mandibula senestra, lahoras intromet le dit indic de la ma dreyta; e impelleys am aquel la gilbositat de la fractura dedintz am facilitat a las partidas defora, am la tua autra ma de la partida defora del os; am aquel decentment equa aquelam.	And thus, if the fracture is on the right side, you should insert the left index finger into the patient's mouth; similarly, if the fracture is on the left jaw, then insert the right index finger; and push the blood from the fractured area inward to the parts outside, using your other hand on the part outside of the bone.
E si la fractura de la mandibula ja es separada en doas, lahoras cove que administres extensio de doas partz segon rectitut entro que sia possibla la equacio de lu.	And if the fracture of the jaw is already separated into two parts, then you should administer extension to both parts according to the correct alignment so that their adjustment is possible.
E si accideys conmocio de dentz a disrupcio, lahoras strenh aquelas de las quals speras que romandran am fil de aur o de argent o de ceda; e aprop pausa sobre la mandibula trencada cerot, e aprop pausa sobre lu drap duplicat, e pausa sobre le drap gran stelha decentment fayta, o una pessa de sola engual a la longitut de la mandibula; e aprop lia aquela desus segon que a tu es apparelhada la liadura de lu e que conveneys la applicacio, entro que no es destruida.	And if you encounter a loosening of teeth with disruption, then strengthen those from which you fear that they will break along the edge of gold or silver or lead; then place a cauterization over the broken jaw, place a large diamond star cloth decently made or a single piece equal in length to the jaw under it; and place it above as your ligature allows and as is convenient for the application, without being destroyed.
E comanda al malaute que use de repaus e tranquilitat, e pausa la vianda de lu sorbicios leons.	And command the patient to rest and be tranquil, and place the food and drink away from the sick person.
E si extimas que ja es alterada la figura en alcuna manieyra, lahoras tu te coyta e deslia aquel al tertz dia; e aprop rectifica aquo que ja es alterat de lu e emplaustra aquel am polvera de moli, am album de huou, o am farina de cisami, pus que tu auras ostat le cerot de lu, e pausa sobre le emplastra lana leon.	And if you suspect that the figure has already been altered in any way, then you should wait until the third day and then lance it; then correct what has already been altered in it and apply a plaster using powder of molybdenum, or ochre, or flour of ceramis; after you have applied the cauterization to it, place a lion's wool over the plaster.
E adonc cum sta annex e ajustat aquel emplastre sobre lu, e la disposicio del os no es alterada, layssa aquel, que no le deslies entro que sia sanat e strenh la fractura; quar motas veguadas aquesta fractura es streyta en tres sempmanas.	And then, once the plaster is applied and adjusted properly, and the position of the bone has not been altered, leave it as it is, without lancing it until it is healed, strengthening the fracture; for this fracture will usually heal in three weeks.
E si autra veguada accida apostema caut, lahoras administra aquo que havem dit motas veguadas en la sedacio de lu entro que sia sanat, e sia remaugut aquel apostema.	And if another time a boil occurs, then administer what we have said multiple times in the treatment of it until it is healed, and cure that boil.
E si la fractura es am plagua, lahoras considera si es pessa del os separada o satagias, lahoras tu te subtilia que ostes aquelas satagias am aquo que conveneys ad aquo en la remocio de aquelas dels sturmentz.	And if the fracture is open, consider whether it is a bone separated from its place or displaced, then you must distinguish how to handle these displacements according to the removal of those disturbances.
E si le orrifici de la plagua es streyt, lahoras tu le amplifique am le fleubotomi segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And if the openings of the wound are stretched, then you must enlarge them with bloodletting according to the quantity of your necessity.
E aprop quan tu auras ostat aquelas satagias, e de aquelas no sira remaugut re, lahoras tu cos le orrifici de la plagua si es ampla; e sino, pausa sobre aquela un dels emplaustres que conveneysso ad aquo e encarnan aquela, entro que sia sanada.	And when you have set those displacements, and no reduction is required, then you close the openings of the wound if it is large; otherwise, place over it one of the plasters that are suitable and seal it, until it is healed.
Capitol .v.	Chapter V.
De restauracio de la furcula quan es trinquada.	On the restoration of the furcula when it is fractured.
Motas veguadas es trencada la furcula de la partida denant deves le muscle, e aquela fractura es fayta en una de tres manieyras.	Multiple times, when the furcula is fractured at the front part, the break occurs in one of three ways.
Quar o es trencada, o seperada, o es seperada en doas partz otra que no accidan satagias; e es leugier a la restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que accideysso en lu satagias, e es dificil a restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que la fractura es am plagua.	If it is broken, or separated, or split into two parts rather than at joints; and it is easy to restore; or as often happens in joints, and is difficult to restore; or as the fracture is open.
E la operacio en aquela, quan la fractura es ses plagua, es que tu fassas esser present dos ministres, per so que la un tengua le adjutori e siegua la furcula trencada, e l’autre extenda le col ves aquela partida.	And the operation in that case, when the fracture is open, is that you have two assistants present, so that one holds the aid and follows the broken furcula, and the other extends the leg at that part.
E aprop enguala la fractura am les tieus ditz entro que sia fayta la forma de lu segon que cove, e no sia en lu eminencia pauca ni concavitat.	Then adjust the fracture with the nails called entras so that it forms as it should, and do not leave it with a prominence or concavity.
E si indigeysses mes de extencio, lahoras cove que pauses dejos le titillic del malaute spera de drap o de lana, e sia la grandesa de lu segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat; e exten e eleva la furcula e coarta la spera am la tua ma entro que enguales la frectura segon que cove.	And if more extension is needed, then place a pad or wool cloth under the patient's leg to determine its size according to your need; extend and elevate the furcula and hold the pad with your hand so that you can adjust the fracture as it should.
E si no podes atirar la extremitat de la furcula a las partidas defora, per so quar es pervenguda al preon, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e pauses sobre le muscle de lu un coyssi migier en grandeza.	And if you cannot pull the extremity of the furcula to the outer parts because it is impinged by the spine, then place the patient on their side over their neck, and position a medium-sized cushion under the muscle.
E le ministre prema le muscle de lu a las partidas dejos entro que l’os de la furcula sia elevat que es en le preon en sus, e lahoras tu rectifique la fractura e enguala aquela am les tieus ditz.	And the minister presses the muscle of the patient at the parts left between that bone of the scapula when it is in front of them, and then you align the fracture and equalize it with those said ties.
Mays si sentes satagias de la furcula e so maugudas, lahoras cove que fendes sobre aquela e extraguas aquelas satagias am facilitat.	And if you feel the symptoms of the scapula and it is tender, then cut there and extract those symptoms with facility.
E si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu ingenia inscisio de lu am un dels inscissoris les quals has apparelhatz ad aquo, pus que havias pausat dejos la furcula le sturment que serve le ciphac; e es sturment de fust o de ferr del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if it is retained in the bone, then you make an incision in it with one of the bistourys that you have brought for this, after having placed the scapula on the table to operate; and it is a bight or iron instrument of which this is the form:
E es semblant a culier del qual aquesta es la concavitat; e sia la sua latitut segon aquo que has necessitat de lu, segon la grandeza del os o la pauqueza de lu.	And it is similar to a spoon of which this is the concavity; and its width should be according to what you need of it, according to the size of the bone or its smallness.
Mays la longitut de lu sia segon que es a tu possible a la operacio; que haja doas extremitatz ayssi cum vezes, e la una extremitat sia ample e l’autre streyta.	And the length of it should be according to what is possible for the operation; it should have two extremities as you see, and one extremity broad and the other narrow.
E si la disrupcio de la plagua la qual has inscidida quan has extraytas la satagia del os es ampla, e yest segur de apostema caut, lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura.	And if the wound disruption which you have incised when you have extracted the sinew of the bone is wide, and you are certain of an abscess, then you adjust the two edges of the wound with suture.
E si la disrupcio es pauca, o temes apostema caut, lahoras tu uemple la plagua am draps e pulvils segon la quantitat de la scissura de la plagua.	And if the wound disruption is small, or you fear an abscess, then you use the wound with cloths and powders according to the size of the incision of the wound.
E si accideys apostema caut, lahoras infon drap en vi agre e oli rozat e vi, e pausa sobre aquel.	And if you encounter an abscess, then soak a cloth in wine and rose oil and vinegar, and place it over it.
Mays la strictura del os quan es ses plagua e ses seccio, es que pauses emplastre fayt de farina de moli am album de huou, e pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e aprop pausa la spera dejos le titillic de lu, si indigeyssas de aquela, e aprop pren humemate, so es torca la qual teno les Sarrazis , que sia mot longua, e sia latitut de lu de un palm o entorn aquel; e aprop pausa pulvils duplicatz sobre la stopa e l’emplastre; e aprop pren una stela de taula subtil de la qual la latitut d’ela sia de tres ditz e en longitut semblantment; e aprop envolopa aquela en drap, e aprop envolopa aquel drap am la stela en lo loc sobre le loc de la fractura; e aprop pausa humemati ayssi cum es revout, e revol aquela sobre le col de lu e dejos le titillic de lu sa e dejos le titillic de lu malaute, e reduzeys aquela sobre tota partida, e quan vezes que la strictura de la fractura am strictura descent, e es aquo que no es occultat sobre tu.	For the fracture of the bone when it is a large wound and section, you should place a plaster made of flour mixed with honey, apply it over the stopa leon, and then place a small stick of the same size as your thumb or about that; then sprinkle double powder over the plaster and the stopa. Next, take a thin table stick where its width is three fingers and its length similar; wrap this in cloth, and then wrap this cloth around the stick at the location of the fracture. Then place the humetate thus wrapped, and wrap it around the neck of the stick and leave the tip of the stick, and leave the tip of the patient, and return the plaster over all parts, and when the fracture starts to heal properly, this is what you cannot ignore in your practice.
E tot, que no sia mauguda la stelha desobre le os trencat; e per so cove que tu vejas le malaute quascun dia, que quan le liament es mollificat o vezas la stela ja esser remauguda, lahoras tu rectifica aquo e strenh la liadura.	And always, unless there is a sore on the bone above the broken one; and so cover that you see the wound daily, when the flesh becomes softened or see the splint already loosened, then adjust this and strengthen the ligament.
E aprop pausa le dormir del malaute sobre le col de lu, e pausa dejos le titillic de lu deves le dormir de lu en la nueyt un petit coyssi; per so que am aquel sia elevat le adjutori de lu del latz de aquel, e donc es elevada la la fractura de la furcula a elevacio del muscle; o sia le bras de lu liat al col de aquel.	And then place the patient's head on its pillow, and place a small cushion under its neck; so that the support for that side is elevated, and therefore the fracture of the furcula is elevated to the elevation of the muscle; or the arm attached to it.
E no deslies le liament si no accideys en le loc prusiment o apostema, entro a xii dias.	And do not remove the bandage unless there is an abscess or other issue at the same place within twelve days.
E aprop renovelha le emplastre si has vista la facia de lu ad aquo, e ajusta en la strictura e restaura aquel e layssa entro que sia restaurat e sia coagulat la fractura de la furcula.	And then renew the plaster if you see that it is effective, and adjust the application and restore it, allowing the fracture of the furcula to be fully restored and coagulated.
E es strenguda e comfortada segon le mes en xxviii dias, e alcunas veguadas en alcus homes es fayt en mens de temps de aquel.	And it is strengthened and comforted according to the condition in twenty-eight days, and in some cases, it is done in less time.
Capitol .vi.	Capitol. vi.
De restauracio de fractura de la spalla.	For the restoration of shoulder fractures.
Spatula tart es trencada en le loc lat de lu e no so trencatz de lu sino les marges.	Shoulder blade is broken in the middle of the location and not break it but the edges.
E donc quan es trencat le loc de lu — e es trencat en le mieg loc de lu — e no es conogut sino per tocament, lahoras segon que es la figura de la fractura sforsa te la preparacio de lu e reduzir aquela segon la figura natural en tota manieyra de engen la qual es a tu possible.	And therefore when it is broken in the middle of the location — and it is broken in the middle of the location — and is known only by touch, then according to the figure of the fracture you prepare it and reduce it according to its natural figure in every manner that is possible for you.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc polvera de moli am album de huou e stopa leon; e aprop pausa pulvil de drap duplicat; e aprop pausa sobre lu stela lada de taula subtil segon la quantitat de la spatula tota o mays un pauc.	And place over the area powder of ground albium of hemp and stopa leon; and place over it dust of doubled cloth; and place on the table thin slice according to the quantity of the spoon all or a little more.
Mays si dejos la stela es concavitat en alcu dels locs de la spatula, lahoras tu enguala aquela concavitat am stopa leon, e aprop pueja la stela segon equalitat.	More if you place the slice concave in some of the areas of the spoon, then equalize that concavity with stopa leon, and then adjust the slice to match.
E aprop strenh desus am humemati longua ab constriccio decent e am fermesa de la stela entro que no sia remauguda del sieu loc.	And place firmly above with good construction and with firmness of the slice so that it is not displaced from its place.
E considera le liament en quascun dia; e totas veguadas que sia mollificat, lia autra veguada e stren le e equa la stela si es remauguda del sieu loc.	And consider the bandage on each day; and all days that it is softened, change another time and strengthen the plaster if it has moved from its place.
E jagua le malaute sobre le sieu latz sa.	And place the patient on their side.
E la spatula es restaurada en xx dias o en .xxv.	And the spatula is restored in xx days or in .xxv.
E donc quan es complit aquest nombre, lahoras tu dissolveys le liament, e que tu scias ensegurat quar aquela es dels osses dels quals la cominicio no es temuda ni lor dissolucio.	And when this number is completed, then you dissolve the bandage. And know that it is from the bones whose beginning was not feared nor their dissolution.
E si procezeys del loc del os pessa e pongeys dejos la codena, lahoras tu scindeys sobre lu, e osta le, e fay segon que havem dit en la fractura de la furcula de sadacio de apostema caut si accideys aqui.	And if you proceed from the place of the bone fracture and place a knot in the ligament, then cut over it, and secure it, and do as we have said in the treatment of the fracture of the scapula with an apostema caut if this happens here.
Capitol .vii.	Capitol VII.
De restauracio de la fractura del pietz.	On the restoration of the fracture of the foot.
Le pietz alcunas veguadas es romput en le mieg loc de lu e aquo tart endeve; mays las extremitatz de lu mot endeve que so ciccadas e comminuidas.	The foot sometimes breaks in the middle of its location; however, its ends usually become constricted and comminuted.
E dels accidentz de lu quan es trencat le mieg de lu es que declina a las partidas dedintz e accideys a lu gran dolor, e dificultat en lo hale, e tos, e fort leu e vomeys sanc; e es declarada en lu cavitat en le os trencat e no es occulta al sentiment.	And concerning the accidents when his meatus is broken, it tends to decline towards the internal parts and causes great pain, difficulty in urination, coughing, fainting, and bloody vomiting; these are declared in the cavity of the broken bone and are not hidden from sensation.
E la restauracio de lu es que sia resupinat le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa entre las spallas de lu un coyssi; e aprop prem als muscles de lu, e ajusta las costas de lu am las mas de dos costatz, e subtilia te en la operacio de lu e en la equacio segon tota manieyra que es ad aquo possibla e que conveneys ad aquo, entro que retorne la figura del os segon que cove.	And the restoration of it is that the patient should be supine on his back, and a cushion placed between his shoulders; then press on his muscles, adjust his spine against the bones of his back, and be subtle in the operation and in the equilibrium according to every manner that is possible and suitable, until the figure of the bone returns as it should.
E aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e estopa e pausa desobre astela de taula subtil de sauze o de caligi e de a lor semblantz en levitat, pus que tu envolopas aquela en drap; e aprop subtilia te en lian aquela sobre le os trencat que no sia maugut; e vay am liadura segon retonditat al dors alcunas veguadas, e strenh aquel am strictura decent; e aprop considera la liadura en tota hora, e quan es mollificada strenh aquela.	And then place it on the plaster and cloth, and press above the table with a thin layer of wax or salve similar in levity, so you wrap that in cloth; then be subtle about placing that over the broken bone to ensure it is not loose; and carefully bind it around the back several times, and strengthen it with proper tension; and always consider the binding at all times, and when it becomes softened, strengthen it.
E si necessitat provoca a desliament de aquela deves corrossio o pruziment, o dolor, o apostema que accideysso en le loc, lahoras tu coyta e deslia aquela e erradica le emplastre e rectifique aquo que accideys per aquo am manieyra de curacio de lu; e aprop reduzeys le emplastre, si vezes ad aquo la facia; e ajusta a lu strictura entro que sia sanat.	And if necessity provokes to incision of that which you have corroded or pricked, or pain, or abscess that has occurred in the area, then you cut and separate that and eradicate the plaster and correct what has occurred by this method of cure; then return the plaster, if you see fit for that part; and adjust the stricture between when it is healed.
Capitol .viii.	Capitol. viii.
De restauracio de las costas quan son trincadas.	For the restoration of the ribs when they are fractured.
Sapias que fractura de las costas no catz sino en locs grosses que siegon le dos; e de las extremitatz de lor de la partida denant no accideys ad aquelas contricio sino per aquo quar so cartillaginosas.	Know that a fracture of the ribs occurs only in large areas where they meet in two; and at the extremities of their front part, such collisions do not occur because they are cartilaginous.
E cognicio de lu no es amaguada al sentiment deves la inquisicio de lu am les ditz.	And the knowledge of this is not hidden from the feeling of the inquiry into it with the fingers.
E la restauracio sia ayssi que enguales la fractura am les ditz segon la manieyra possibla, entro que sia engulhat segon que cove, e aprop emplastre e strenh le os trencat am stela, si indigeys de aquel.	And the restoration should be such that you equalize the fracture with your fingers according to the possible method, while it is reduced as it fits, and then apply plaster and strengthen the broken bone with wire, if needed.
E si la fractura de las costas es declinant a las partidas dedintz, lahoras accideys al malaute dolor vehement e punctura, ayssi cum punctura que accideys ad aquel que ha pleureci, e per aquo quar le os ponh le velament; e accideys a lu difficultat de hanelit, e tos, e vomit de mot sanc; e aquesta es de dificil curacio.	And if the fracture of the ribs is declining towards the interior divisions, then it happens that severe pain occurs and punctures happen, as with those who have pleurisy, and for this reason he puts a veil on the bone; and difficulties in breathing, coughing, and bloody vomiting occur; and this is of difficult cure.
E ja les Antixs so engeniatz en aquela am motz engientz.	And the kidneys are ingeniously placed in that region expanding outward.
E de lor so que diso: cove que pauses viandas del malaute que engendro imflacio e ventositat, per que le ventre sia imflat e sia extendut, e la fractura sia impellida a las partidas defora.	And from them, we say: place the patient in a position where they can take food that causes inflammation and swelling, so that the abdomen becomes swollen and extended, and the fracture is pushed towards the external parts.
Mays nos avoreyssem aquo per so que no sia causa leugiera a generar apostema caut, si no accideys; e si ja accideys, lahoras ja ajuda ad aquo.	But we do this so that it is not a trivial cause to generate a carbuncle by chance; if it already happens, then help with this.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia pausada desus ventoza e aprop que sucque am fortitut; e es semblant a ratiocinacio, mays empero es temut que la ventoza atire las superfluitatz al loc per la debilitat.	And some say that it should be placed above the abdomen and close to where urine is expelled with strength; it seems like reasoning, but nevertheless, it is feared that the urine will be drawn to that place due to weakness.
E diyssero alcus de lor: cove que·l loc sia cubert am lana que ja es submersa en oli caut, e sian pausatz pulvils entre las costas entro que sia umplida, que sia la liadura engual quan envolopas aquela segon retonditat; e aprop sia curat le malaute am curacio de pleuresi de vianda e de medicina.	And some of them say that the area should be covered with wool that is already submerged in caut oil, and powders should be placed between the ribs until it is filled, that the bandage should fit evenly as you wrap it according to roundness; and place the patient on a cure of food and medicine.
E si causa vehement constrenh le malaute la qual no sufferta, e le os punh le velament am punctura ledent, temem sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que fendam sobre le loc, descubram de la costa trencada, e aprop pausem desobre aquela instrument que conserve le ciphac, la rememoracio del qual es precedida, e que inscidam le os am facilitat, e extraguam aquel.	And if the gout causes intense constriction on which it does not yield, and the bone resists with puncture of the veil, fear for the patient, then cut over the area, expose the broken rib, and place ourselves above that instrument which preserves the key, the memory of which is preceding, and cut the bone with facility, and extract it.
E aprop que ajustem las doas labias de la plagua, si es gran, am cozidura, e curem aquela am emplastres entro que sia sanada.	And when we adjust the two edges of the wound, if it is large, with缝合，我们用药膏敷直到愈合。
E si accideys dedintz apostema, lahoras tu coyta e enfon pulvils en oli rozat e pausa sobre le loc, e que sia curat le malaute am aquo que cove a la apostema dedintz.	And if an abscess occurs inside, then incise and introduce powders in diluted oil, place yourself over the area, and cure the gout with what is appropriate for the abscess inside.
E sia ressupinat sobre le latz sobre le qual dorm, entro que sia sanat.	And he should be laid on his back on the mat on which he sleeps, until he is cured.
Capitol .ix.	Capitol.ix.
De restauracio de fractura del spondil del dos e del col.	For the restoration of fracture of the spine and neck.
Alcunas veguadas endeve fractura als osses del col, e tart endeve a lor atricio, e semblantment als spondils del dos.	In some cases where there is a fracture of the neck bones, and then to their rubbing, similar to the vertebrae of the back.
E cum aquo accideys ad alcu e voles saber si sara sanat o no, lahoras considera, quar si vezes las sieuas mas ja mollificadas e stupefaytas e mortas e no pot maure aquelas ni extendre ni strenher aquelas e quan constrenges aquelas am les tieus ditz o punges aquelas am agulha e no sent en aquelas dolor, lahoras sapias que no es sanat, e en las mes de disposicios es mortal.	And when this happens to someone and you want to know if they will be cured or not, then consider whether their muscles are already softened, numbed, and dead and cannot grow, extend, or strengthen those muscles. When you stretch them with your hands or prick them with a needle and they do not feel pain in them, then you can conclude that they are not cured, and in such cases, it is fatal.
E si mau aquelas e sent en aquelas constriccio am les ditz e punctura, lahoras sapias que la nucha de l’os es salva e que le malaute guereys am curacio.	And if you stretch them and they feel the stretching in their hands and prick pain, then you can conclude that the neck of the bone is saved and that the patient will recover with treatment.
E si ve als spondils del col le semblant ad aquo e voles saber si sira sanat o no, lahoras considera als pes de lu.	And if you examine the vertebrae of the neck for their appearance and want to know if they are healthy or not, then consider the feet.
Lahoras si tu vezes que so ja mollificatz, accideys ad aquels aquo que es accidit en las mas, e aprop quan jatz sobre le sieu dos, yeys ventozitat e egestio ses la sua volontat, e alcunas veguadas es resupinat sobre le sieu dos e vol urinar e no pot, lahoras sapias que es mortal, e adonc no trebales en la curacio de lu.	And when you find that they are already softened, attend to those things that occur in the intestines, and observe when they are on their backs, show patience and desire release according to their will, and sometimes they are supine on their backs and wish to urinate but cannot, then know that it is fatal, and then do not trouble with the cure of them.
Mays si no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, la causa es milhor e pus leugiera.	But if none of these occur, the cause is better and lighter.
E la curacio de lu es que te perforses a la sedacio del apostema caut que pauses sobre le spondil atrissat oli rozat sol, o am mugols de huous asatz; pausa sobre aquela aquel alcunas veguadas le dia entro que sia sedat le apostema caut.	And the cure for them is that you apply a cautery to the sedation of the abscess caut which you place over the transverse or rubbed vertebra, or with pieces of hot wax; place it there for some days until the abscess is sedated.
E lahoras pausa un dels emplastres confortantz e exsitans, e strenh sobre aquel am liament; e comanda al malaute que use de repaus e de tranquillitat e que no dorme sobre la partida am la qual atroba dolor entro que sia sanat.	And then place one of the comforting and existing poultices, and cover it with a layer of dough; command the patient to rest and be tranquil and not sleep on the part where he feels pain until he is healed.
E si accideys deves la atricio del os satagias o alcuna causa que ja es seperada de lu, lahoras cove que secces sobre la codena e que ostes aquel os; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua, am sutura si es gran; e aprop cura aquela am alcu encarnatiu dels enguentz, entro que sia sanat.	If you happen to find the joint of the bone displaced or any part separated from it, then you should treat the ligament and that bone; then adjust the two edges of the wound,缝合如果伤口较大；然后治疗那个部位的肉芽组织，直到痊愈。
Mays si es trencat le derier del os alhoses, e es la fi de la coeta, lahoras cove que tu entrometas le dit pous de la ma senestra en le cul, e que enguales le os trencat am l’autra ma segon que es possible per equacio segonda; e aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e astelha, si indigeysses de aquels, e aprop strenh aquel.	If the end of the bone in the heel is broken, then you should insert your left thumb into the wound, and align the broken bone with your other hand as much as possible for second-order equilibrium; then place a dressing and bandage if needed, and strengthen it.
E si sentes satagias trencadas en lu, lahoras tu fen sobre aquela, e osta aquel, e cura la plagua am la curacio que es precedida entro que sia sanada.	And if you feel displaced bones in it, then you should set them there, and reset them, and treat the wound with the treatment that follows until it is healed.
Capitol .x.	Capitol. x.
De restauracio de la ancha.	For the restoration of the ankle.
Les osses de las anchas tart so trencats, e si trencan, lahoras la fractura de lor no es sino communicio en las extremitatz de aquelas e son inscidas en la longitut e declinan a las partidas dedintz; e accideys al malaute dolor en le loc e punctura, e la camba es stupefacta quan es fractura.	The bones of the ankles are broken, and if they break, then the fracture is simply communication at the extremities of those bones and are split lengthwise, declining towards the inner parts; and pain occurs in the ankle area with puncture, and the leg becomes numb when fractured.
E la restauracio de lu es que tu extendas la tua ma sobre aquel entro que sia sobre la fractura qual es la figura de lu.	And the restoration of it is that you extend your hand over that inside which is above the fracture where its figure is.
E si fractura es en la extremitat de lu tant solament, lahoras tu enguala aquela segon que a tu es apparelhat per equacio engual entro que sia asemblat a la sua figura natural.	And if the fracture is only in the extremity of the limb, then you equalize it according to what appears to you by equilibrium, equalizing it so that it resembles its natural figure.
Mays si la fractura es en le lonc o que ja declina a las partidas dejos, lahoras tu fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu ventre entro que sia preparada a tu la restauracio de aquela fractura.	But if the fracture is in the length or what has already declined towards the parts, then you place the limb on its side chest prepared so that you can restore that fracture.
E donc quan auras engualada aquela, pausa sobre lu emplastre, e aprop pausa sobre aquel astela de fust o de codena, e strenh per strictura sobre la qual no temas punctacio de fractura ni remocio de la stelha.	And when you have equalized it, apply a poultice over it, and then place the wooden or copper splint over it, and bind tightly with a bandage without fearing the puncture of the fracture or the removal of the splint.
E enguala la concavitat am aquo que uempla aquela entro que aquela prengua la strictura segon equalitat, e comanda al malaute que dorma sobre le sieu dos o desobre le sieu costat sa.	And equalize the depression by filling it with something that takes the shape of the limb according to its equality, and command the patient to lie on his back or on his side.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu cessa de extencio de lu e de la sua restauracio entro que sia sedat le apostema caut, e pausa sobre lu aquo que sede aquel segon que es precedit; e aprop retorna a la restauracio de lu, e strenh aquel ayssi cum cove.	But if an abscess develops, then cease the extension and restoration of it until the abscess is treated with a cautery, and apply something that sedates it according to what has been previously described; then return to the restoration, and bind it thus tightly.
E si accideysso en le os satagias o son comminuidas, lahoras tu las tratz.	And if it happens in the bone that you find or are fractured, then you set them.
Capitol .xi.	Capitol.
De restauracio de la fractura del adjutori.	For the restoration of the fracture of the femur.
Adjutori es aquo que es entre le coyde entro al cap de la spalla.	Adjutori is that which is between the knee and the head of the thigh.
E si es trencat, lahoras la restauracio de lu es en una de doas manieyras, de las quals es la una que tu prenguas fust pla de migiera groceza segon aquesta forma:	And if it is broken, then the restoration of it is in one of two ways, of which the first is that you take a wooden rod of moderate thickness according to this form:
E sian liatz en doas extremitatz dos liamentz, e aprop sia suspendut del loc elevat.	And insert two pins at the ends, and then suspend it from the elevated location.
E segua le malaute sobre una sezela; e aprop gieta fora le sieu bras trencat sobre le fust entro que pervengua al titillic de lu en le mieg loc del qual sia annexa la curvitat del fust.	And place the patient on a cushion; then insert his broken arm into the rod until it reaches the nodal point of which the curvature of the rod is attached.
E aprop suspen sobre aquel alcuna causa greu, o·l minestre extenda aquel a las partidas dejos; e aprop le metge eque la fractura am las sieuas mas ensemps, entro que la fractura retorne segon que cove.	And place it over that with some heavy weight, or the servant extend it to the parts left; then the doctor keeps the fracture in his hands meantime, until the fracture returns according to its nature.
E l’autra manieyra es que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sieua cervitz e suspen la ma del col de lu am liament; e aprop comanda a dos ministres que la un de lor tengua aquo que es desobre la fractura am las suas mas; e l’autre tengua le pus dejos de lu; e quascu de lor extenda a la sua partida.	And another method is that the patient be supine on their back and suspend their head by the neck with your hand; then command two ministers that one of them hold what is above the fracture with his hands; and the other hold the lower part of him; and each of them extend to their side.
E si voles que la extencio sia pus fort, lahoras tu strenh sobre la fractura am liament e sobre aquela am autre liament, e quascu dels dos ministres extendan a doas suas partidas.	And if you want the extension to be stronger, then strengthen your hold on the fracture with one hand and on another part with the other hand, and each of the two ministers extend to their respective sides.
E donc si la fractura es propinquada a la extremitat del muscle, lahoras cove que sia pausat la mitat del liament sobre le citillic e l’autre dejos la fractura deves le coyde.	And so, if the fracture is near the extremity of the muscle, then place the middle of the hand on the tendon and the other hand should hold the fracture with its fingers.
E semblantment si la fractura es propdana al coyde, lahoras cove que sia pausat le liament sobre aquel loc e sobre aquel coyde.	And similarly, if the fracture is near the joint, then place the tendon over that location and over that joint.
Enguala aquela am facilitat e ses trebal, e aprop quant sira engualada segon que cove e es applicada per bona applicacio, lahoras strenh aquela si no accideys apostema caut.	Equalize that with ease and skill, and then when it is equalized according to what is needed and applied properly, then strengthen it if no abscess occurs.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras layssa la strictura entro al vii dia, e pausa sobre lu lana sutza enbeguda en vi agre e oli rozat entro que repause le apostema, e lahoras tu stren aquela.	If an abscess forms on the seventh day, then leave the stricture intact, place a woolen pad sewn in three places over it, and rub it with oil between each time you apply pressure to the abscess, and then firmly press that area.
E la manieyra de strenher aquela es que pauses emplastre sobre la fractura, e aprop pausa envolopament de drap nau sobre le emplastre; e aprop ajuste le bras sobre aquel adjutori, e pause la sua ma uberta sobre le sieu muscle.	The manner of pressing that area is to place a plaster over the fracture, then wrap a cloth bandage around the plaster; next adjust the arm on that support, and place your hand open over its muscle.
E pausa le drap e strenh sobre le adjutori le bras per so que·l bras sia en loc de stelhas, si no prohibeys de aquo alcuna causa del os trencat.	Then place the cloth and press the arm on the support so that the arm is in a stable position, unless some cause of the broken bone prevents this.
E lahoras usa de stelhas.	Then use splints.
E es que pauses sobre la fractura aquela stela que sia pus lada e pus fort de las autras stelas; e pausa entre quascuna stela la latitut del dit, e sia la longitut de las stelas segon la trencadura am addicio de tres ditz de tota partida.	Then place that splint over the fracture which is both longer and stronger than the other splints; place the width of each splint equal to the width of a finger, and the length of the splints according to the breakage plus three fingers in total.
E aprop strenh sobre las stelas am la strictura la qual he dita al comensament del capitol.	Then press the splints on the stricture which I mentioned at the beginning of this chapter.
E es que la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura sia pus streyt.	And that your pressure at the fracture site be more firm.
E quant pus es alonguada la fractura sia la strictura menor.	And when the fracture is longer, the pressure should be less.
E donc si vezes le situament de las stelas e la strictura ayssi cum havem dit en la hora en la qual restauras le membre al sieu assituament, lahoras tu fay.	And so, if you position the bones and apply pressure as we have said when restoring the limb to its position, then you do this.
E si temes apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la strictura e las stelas entro al dia vii ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you fear an abscess, wait, then leave the pressure and bones in place as we have said.
E aprop considera le liament en totas partidas per tres dias per so que no accida en le loc pruziment o imflacio; o es prohibida la vianda pervenir al membre per disposicio de superfluitat de strictura; e donc rectifiqua tot aquo segon que havem dit.	And then consider the bandage in all parts for three days so that no infection or inflammation occurs; or is forbidden food to reach the limb due to excessive pressure; and so adjust all this as we have said.
Mays si tu yest sobre confizanssa que no accida alcuna causa de aquo, lahoras no deslias la liguadura sino aprop tres dias o mays.	But if you are confident that no such cause will occur, then do not release the ligature for at least three days or more.
E sia la sua dormicio del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e las sieuas mas sian sobre le stomac.	And let the patient lie on their back, and their hands be over their stomach.
E pausa sobre le adjutori cocena plena de lana engualment, e considera en tota hora de la nueyt o del dia que no sia deliada ni dissolta la figura del membre trencat, o que sia le liament mollificat, donc rectifica aquo tot am la tua vertut.	And place yourself over the assistant who is holding a woolen blanket, and consider at all times during the night or day that the figure of the broken limb should not be altered nor the ligament softened, therefore correct this entirely with your virtue.
E pausa la vianda del malaute segon le orde le qual havem denant mes, enayssi que la vianda sia subtil en le comensament entro que es comensat strenher; e lahoras cove que egrossas la vianda de lu.	And place the food for the patient according to the order we have mentioned before, ensuring that the food starts subtle and gradually strengthens; then increase the thickness of the food as it progresses.
Quar de constuma del adjutori e de la camba de lu es que sian strengutz en xl dias; e lahoras cove que sian desliatz e sia administrat banh e sia medicat am enguentz los quals rectifican aquel.	Four days after the assistance and support of the patient, they are usually strengthened over ten days; then it is necessary to make them loose, apply a bath, and use ointments that correct this.
E si la fractura es layha atrita, lahoras tu no deslies de aquela le liament e las stelhas entro a l dias o entro a dos meses.	And if the fracture has been aggravated, then do not make them loose of the ligaments and tendons for ten days or two months.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter XII.
De restauracio de fractura del bras.	On the Restoration of Fractures of the Arm.
Bras es compost de dos osses les quals so appelatz dos focils; dels quals la un es petit, e es aquel que siec le dit pous, e l’autre es gran e es aquel le qual es pausat dejos le petit dit, de la partida pus dejus.	The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the ulna and the radius; of which the former is small, and is that which lies on the side of the thumb, while the latter is large and is placed beside the small one.
E fort leu es trencat le focil major solament, o le petit, e fort leu son trincatz ensemps.	And when the large or small firestick is broken forcefully, and you are forced to cut them together.
E quan es trencat le focil petit desus, lahoras la restauracio de lu es leugiera, e la sanacio de lu es pus leugiera.	And when the small firestick breaks above, then the restoration of it is light, and its healing is even lighter.
E quan es trencat le focil de lu dejos la fractura de lu es mala, e la sanacio de lu es dificil.	And when the firestick breaks, if you find the fracture is bad, then its healing is difficult.
E pus mala de aquela es quan son trencatz dos osses essemps.	And worse than that is when two stable bones are broken.
Donc si l’os le qual es trencat es le focil petit desus, lahoras es convenient al metge, deves la restauracio de lu, que pauze petita extencio am facilitat entro que aquel sia engualhat.	So if the bone that is broken is the small firestick above, then it is convenient for the doctor to perform the restoration, which should be done with a slight extension and placed so that it is aligned.
Mays si le focil gran es aquo que es trincat, lahoras cove que pause extencio pus vehement.	But if the large firestick is what is broken, then you must apply a greater extension forcefully.
E si les dos focils so ensemps trincatz, lahoras cove que tu pauses la extritura mot pus fort.	And if both firesticks are broken together, then you must apply the traction more forcefully.
E cove que pauses la figura de la ma deves la restauracio de lu e la extencio de lu estenduda sobre un coyssi, e sia le pols de la ma a las partidas desus, pus aut que totz les autres ditz, e le dit auricular sia pus bas dels autres ditz, e le malaute sia cezent sobre una cezela cayrada.	And you must place your hand in the position for restoration and extend it over a cushion, while positioning the wrist above the extensions of the other fingers, more so than all the others. The auricular finger should be below the other fingers, and the thumb should be placed on a tilted surface.
E sia un coyssi denant lu en la altetut o endreyt de lu, per so que·l malaute no encorra trebalh.	And place a cushion in front of them on their back or side, so that the patient does not further labor.
E aprop le ministre extenda le bras de la partida pus dejos am la sieua ma o am liament, e autre ministre extenda desus semblantment.	And then the minister extends the arm of the affected side and places it either on his own hand or on a pillow, and another minister extends it similarly above.
E aprop le metge engualhe le os entro que redugua aquel segon la milhor figura que pot.	And then the doctor aligns the bone at the site where it dislocated according to the best shape possible.
E si en la factura del os so satagias, lahoras te perforsa raduzir tota pessa en le sieu loc am la tua vertut.	And if there are fragments in the fracture of the bone, then you must reduce all pieces to their place with your virtue.
E si appar en lu satagia separada que punh la codena e no es a tu speransa en la restauracio de lu, lahoras tu fen sobre lu e osta aquela segon la manieyra la qual havem dita desus.	And if there appears a separate fragment that cannot be reduced to your hope in the restoration of it, then you set it as is and bind it according to the manner we have said above.
Mays si la fractura es am plagua, yeu ja he fayt ad aquo capitol singular, e donc pren la curacio de aquel.	But if the fracture is open, I have dealt with that separately, and therefore proceed with the treatment of it.
E si accideys apostema caut al comensament de la tua restauracio, lahoras tu lineys un drap am cerot fayt de oli rozat e cera blanca, e sia migier entre specitut e subtilitat, e strenh drap sobre aquel am strictura subtil entro que le apostema sia cedat; e lahoras remau le cerot e pausa emplastre preparat de polvera de moli am clayre de huou, e aprop pausa stelhas; e sia la stela la qual es pauzada sobre aquela fractura pus lada e pus fort.	And if an abscess occurs at the beginning of your restoration, then you draw a cloth with charcoal made from rubbed oil and white wax, making it medium in thickness and strength. Place the cloth over that area with a thin string between which the abscess can drain; then remove the charcoal and apply a prepared plaster of powder of ocher with honey; afterward place bandages; and let the bandage which is placed over that fracture be more to the side and stronger.
E sapias que·l nombre de las stelas del bras so vi en las majors disposicios, o sia la fractura en un focil o en dos focils ensemps.	And you shall know that the number of the ribs of the arm I saw in major dispositions, or rather the fracture in one bone or in two bones together.
E aprop pausa la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura pus fort e pus vehement, e quan mays sira la extrictura a las partidas desus de la fractura o a las partidas pus bassas de lu, pausa la strictura un pauc pus molh segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu en le comensament del capitol.	And return your grip firmly and strongly over the place of the fracture, and when the tension is greatest either above or below the fracture, return the grip a little more tightly according to how the recollection of it is recalled at the beginning of the chapter.
E les draps que so envolopatz sobre la fractura sian draps mols humitz, e no sian durs ni aspres, e·l fiel am le qual es strenhut sia de li propriament migier entre subtil e gros, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And the cloths that you wrap around the fracture should be moist but not hard or rough, and the fat oil which is strengthened should be of the proper consistency between subtle and thick, as we have recommended.
E considera le membre e·l liament aprop alcus dias.	And consider the limb and the joint for several days.
E si accideys alcuna causa de la qual rectificacio es necessaria, ayssi cum prusiment le qual accideys al membre, e lahoras cove que tu enbroques le membre am aygua cauda entro que cesse aquel pruziment.	And if any cause arises for which correction is necessary, as often happens to the limb, then you should immerse the limb in water until that disturbance ceases.
E leysses le membre no costreyt entro que repause, e aprop torna la strictura.	And leave the limb unrestrained until it rests, and then return your grip.
E si la extrictura ja es mollificada e l’os ja es remaugut e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras rectifiqua tot aquo am la tua vertut.	And if the spasm is already softened and the bone has already been reduced and appears like those, then correct all this with your virtue.
E considera mays si le nutriment es prohibit pervenir al membre per superfluitat de strictura, quar lahoras cove que mollifiques aquel un petit e laysses aquel per alcus dias entro que corra ad aquel le nutriment, e aprop strenh aquel.	And consider more if the nourishment is prohibited from reaching the member due to excessive spasm, so that you soften it a little and leave it for some days until the nourishment flows to it, and then strengthen it.
Mays si al malaute no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no cove que sia desliat entro aprop xx dias o enviro de aquels.	And if to the patient none of the causes we have mentioned occurs, then it is not necessary that it be relieved within about twenty days or around those.
E aprop sia suspenduda la ma del malaute per la sua vertut de movement agitatius, e fay aquel dormir sobre le sieu dos.	And place the hand of the patient above its virtue of movement agitative, and have it sleep on its back.
E sapias que aquesta fractura es restaurada en xxx dias o en xxxii dias, o fort leu es restaurada en xxviii dias, e tot aquo es segon la disposicio de las compleccios e las disposicios de la vertut.	And know that this fracture is restored in thirty days or in thirty-two days, or slightly strengthened in twenty-eight days, and all this is according to the complexity and arrangements of the virtues.
Capitol .xiii.	Capitol. XIII.
De restauracio de fractura de la pinche de la ma e dels ditz.	On the restoration of fractures of the wrist and fingers.
Sapias que a la pinche de la ma e als nuzes dels ditz tart endeve fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio motas veguadas.	Know that at the knuckles of the hand and the joints of the fingers sharp pain occurs, and do not hurt them but rub them gently.
E quan accideys a la ma fractura o atrissio, lahoras cove que·l malaute segua cayrat e denant lu lies cezent segon equalitat, e aprop pausa la ma de lu sobre aquela extenduda.	And when hurt occurs to the hand in fracture or rubbing, then make sure the patient remains lying down and before the limb is extended equally, and then place your hand over the one that is extended.
E aprop le ministre extenda les osses trencatz e·l metge engualhe aquels entro que sian congongitz am bona congoncio.	And then the minister extend the broken bones and the doctor adjust those so that they are properly aligned.
E lahoras cove que pause emplastre e estopa, si no accideys apostema caut; e aprop pausa stela desus segon la quantitat del loc, e tu ja has envolopada aquela en drap de li.	And then apply plaster and cotton, if no abscess develops use a cauterization; then place a cloth over it according to the size of the area, and you have already wrapped that in a cloth.
Mays si la trincadura es en las partidas dedintz deves le ventre de la palma, e lahoras fay semblant de spera de drap, e comanda al malaute que strenha aquela am la sua palma trincada; aprop sia strenguda am drap lonc.	But if the wound is in the inner parts of the palm, then make a pad of cloth, and command the patient to hold that with his injured palm; then tightly wrap it with long cloth.
E sia la stelha de cuer am drap en le qual sia levitat, per so que le cuer sia aplicat a la palma; e strenh aquela segon que cove.	And let the pad be of cloth on which a weight is placed, so that the body is applied to the palm; and hold it tightly as needed.
Mays si la fractura es a las partidas defora, lahoras cove que pauses desus stela e autre estela de la partida dejos en la palma, per so que la ma sia uberta e dreyta; e aprop pausa la strictura, ayssi cum es revolvuda la ma a la rateta entre les ditz am liamentz.	If the fracture is on the outer parts, then you should place another piece of the bone above the stone and another piece from the same bone in your palm, so that your hand is open and straight; then place the ligature, as if you were turning your hand at the wrist between the fingers with grain.
E si accideys fractura a alcu dels nozes dels ditz, lahoras si es le dit pous, sia engualat segon que cove e aprop sia strenhut am la palma e si·t voles, pausa a lu astela petita dreyta per so que sia elevada la fractura e no sia mauguda.	If a fracture occurs in one of the phalanges of the fingers, then if it is the finger tip, equalize it according to what is seen and then strengthen it by placing your palm on it; if you wish, place a small splint on the side so that the fracture is elevated and not depressed.
Mays si la fractura es en les autres ditz, ayssi cum en aquel del mieg loc, o en le indic, o en le auricular, o en le anular, lahoras sia engualhat e liat am le dit sa le qual siec aquel; o sian totz liatz segon continuacio, e es milhor; o pausa sobre aquel stela petita, ayssi cum havem dit en le pous.	If the fracture is in the other fingers, as in the middle finger, or the index, or the ring finger, then equalize and bind it to the finger where that one belongs; or bind them all according to continuity, which is better; or place a small splint on it, as we have said for the fingertip.
E considera, en la tua restauracio, e aprop aquela, la disposicio de apostema caut e oppose — am la tieua operacio — am aquo que cove quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, segon que es iterada la narracio de lu.	And consider, in your restoration, and nearby, the placement of cauteries and opposition—during your operation—according to what is seen when any cause from those occurs, as indicated in the narrative.
Capitol .xiv.	Chapter XIV.
De restauracio de fractura del os de la coyssa.	For the restoration of fracture of the hip bone.
Le os de la cueyssa motas veguadas es trencat e es declarat al sentiment segon que es convertit a la partida denant e a la pus sobirana.	The hip bone, when fractured, is felt to shift according to its displacement both anteriorly and posteriorly.
E la restauracio de lu se fa enayssi que·l liament es strenhut sobre la fractura e autre liament dejos la fractura, e le malaute sia prostrat sobre le sieu ventre e sobre la cara.	And the restoration is done by first strengthening the ligaments over the fracture and another ligament below the fracture. The patient is then laid on his side and on his face.
E aprop le ministre extenda tot le liament a la sua partida segon la qualitat, quan la fractura es en le mieg loc del os.	And then the surgeon extends the ligament over its proper part according to the quality of the fracture, when it is in the middle of the bone.
Mays si es propdana a la razitz de la cueyssa, lahoras sia le liament propda al denolh a la partida del pentenilh, per so que la extencio caja en sus, e le autre liament dejos la fractura.	But if it is close to the root of the hip, then extend the ligament over the part below the iliac bone, so that the extension reaches there, and another ligament below the fracture.
E semblantment si la trencadura es propdana al denolh, lahoras sia fayt le liament propda al denol, e sia la extencio a las partidas dejos.	And similarly, if the fracture is close to the iliac bone, then place the ligament over the iliac bone, and extend it to the parts below.
E aprop le metge enguale le os am amduas las sieuas mas entro que reduzesca aquel segon la semblansa natural e l’os es conjungit per bona conjunccio; lahoras cove que pauses emplastre e strictura, si no accideys al membre apostema.	And then the doctor aligns the bone by bringing his hands close to where you have returned it according to its natural form, and the bone is joined by good articulation; then apply a poultice and bandage, so as not to cause inflammation in the limb.
Mays si accideys en lu apostema, lahoras tu layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que l’apostema caut sia cedat, e aprop retorna a la tua curacio.	But if an abscess occurs in it, then you let that be for a few days until the abscess is reduced by cauterization, and then return to your treatment.
La strictura de lu sia ayssi fayta: cove que envolopes sobre la fractura una benda dura, e dobla aquela dos o tres veguadas, e remaugua de lu superfluitat; e aprop envolopa la camba entro que pervengua al talo e a la razitz de la cueyssa.	The bandage should be applied as follows: first, wrap a hard bandage around the fracture, fold it two or three times, and secure it to prevent any excess; then wrap the bandage so that it reaches the ankle and the heel of the foot.
E intromet lonc fiel entre la cueyssa e la camba prop del denol a las partidas dejos, e venguan las extremitatz del fiel de la partida pus sobirana de las doas partz, e aprop revolveys sobre la camba e la cueyssa aquo que superflueys de la benda.	And insert a long needle between the thigh and the nearby bandage at the fracture site, ensuring that the ends of the needle protrude significantly from both sides, and then revolve the bandage over the thigh and foot with any excess of the bandage.
E aprop pausa sobre la cueyssa en le loc de aquela fractura astelhas, e pausa de aquelas una stela sobre le os de la camba.	And then place something on the thigh at the location of the fracture, and place a stick over the bone of the foot.
E aprop uempli las vacuitatz entre la camba e la cuoyssa am draps mols, per so que sia coagulada la extrictura.	And then fill the space between the waist and the thigh with many towels, so that the contraction is constricted.
E aprop comensa am strictura fort del mieg sobre le loc de la fractura am tres envolucios o quatre, e quant mays tu te alonhas am liament del loc de la fractura, la tua strictura sia menor e pus leugiera e pus molha.	And then begin a strong contraction of the muscles over the location of the fracture with three or four layers, and the farther you are from the site of the fracture, the lesser, lighter, and more moist your contraction should be.
E aprop exten a doas extremitatz del fiel a las partidas dejos entro que pervengua a la cavilha del pe, e strenh amdoas las extremitatz de las stelhas del autra part per so que·l liament no sia remaugut del sieu loc.	And then extend to both ends of the fiber into the parts where it reaches the cavity of the foot, and strengthen both ends of the threads of the other part so that the tissue does not shift from its place.
E aprop leyssa la strectura sobre aquel, don esta ayssi que no accideys al membre corrosio ni apostema caut ni emflacio e semblantz ad aquels; e si accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, adonc cueta te am desliament de lu, e rectifica aquo que accideys tot aprop, segon que havem dit motas veguadas.	And then let the contraction remain like this so as not to injure the limb with cautery, abscess, or inflammation and resemble those; if any of these causes occur, then note it carefully, and correct what happens immediately, according to what we have said previously.
Mays si en le os es pessa del os la qual pongua, lahoras cove que tu engualhes aquel segon que a tu es possibla; e sino, fen sobre lu e remau aquel, e cura am aquo del qual es precedida la rememoracio entro que sia sanat.	If in the bone there is a serious injury that requires placement of a splint, then make sure you equalize it as much as possible; if not, work on it and maintain it, and treat the area where the memory of the injury is present until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es strenhuda aquesta fractura de la coyssa otra aquo que sian ajustadas a lu stelhas, ayssi cum havem dit en le adjutori e·n le bras.	And sometimes this fracture of the pelvis is reinforced with straps or bands that are adjusted to the stellates muscles, as we have said in the assistant and in the arm.
Mays empero en la restauracio de lu en tal manieyra fayta no accideys al malaute claudicacio; e si es restaurada sola, otra aquo que li sia applicada l’autra camba, lahoras es necessari que claudique aquel del qual es tostemps.	But still in the restoration in such a manner made no claudication occurs to the patient; and if it is restored alone, or that the other leg is applied, then it is necessary that the one of which it is spoken claudicate.
E sapias que la coyssa es strenhuda en xl dias o un pauc mes o un pauc mens, e tot aquo es segon la diversitat de las compleccios e de las autras dispozicios.	And know that the pelvis is reinforced in about ten days or a few months, and all this is according to the diversity of the complications and other dispositions.
Capitol .xv.	 Chapter XV.
De restauracio de la fractura de la rodela del denolh.	On the restoration of the fracture of the tibia.
Sapias que fractura de la rodela del denol tart endeve, mays accideys a lu motas veguadas atrissio.	Know that the fracture of the tibia occurs less frequently, but it often happens more than a few days with atrophy.
Mays si accideys a lu fractura, lahoras no es sino fissura o trauc en las suas partidas, e aquo es am plagua o ses plagua, e sobre aquo tot es estat am le sentiment.	But if the fracture occurs, then it is not a complete break but a crack or a tear in its parts, and this is either one crack or several cracks, and about this everything depends on the sensation.
E la restauracio de lu es enayssi que sia engualat aquo que es romput de las partidas de lu am les ditz entro que sia agreguat e conjongit segon que es possible per equacio e facilitat e fabricacio.	And the restoration of it is attempted to be equalized what is broken from the parts of it among the fingers into which it is added and joined according to what is possible by equality, facilitation, and fabrication.
E aprop pausa emplastre e pausa sobre aquel stela redonda, si indigeysses de aquela; e strenh desus am strictura ad aquo convenient.	And then place the plaster and hold over that round plate, if you need it; strengthen above at the stricture to what is suitable.
E aprop considera totas las disposicios las quals havem recomtadas en las autras fracturas, ayssi cum es apostema caut e semblant ad aquels enaissi que se oppause a tot accident am aquo que a lu es convenient entro que sia sanat.	And then consider all the dispositions which we have recommended in other fractures, thus as for abscesses and appearance to those that arise when opposing to every accident what is suitable until it is healed.
Capitol .xvi.	Capitol. XVI.
De restauracio de la fractura de la camba.	Of the restoration of the fracture of the flank.
Sapias que en la camba so dos osses dels quals la un es gros, e es le nompnat per nom de la camba; e l’autra es subtil, e es nompnat focil.	Know that in the flank there are two bones, of which one is large and is named after the flank; the other is thin and is named fragile.
E accideys a quascus de las specias de fractura aquo que accideys als dos osses del bras, e per aquo es fayta restauracio de lu ayssi cum restauracio del bras engualment, e la operacio de lu es una.	And accidents to the species of fracture occur as they do in the two bones of the arm, and for this reason, its restoration is done similarly to the restoration of the arm, and its operation is one.
E si so trincatz dos osses ensemps, la camba es convertida a totas partidas.	And if you need to break two bones at once, the joint becomes dislocated in all directions.
E si es trinquat le os pus subtil, la camba es convertida a las partidas Denant.	And if the finer bone is broken, the joint becomes dislocated in front.
E si es trincat le os pus gros, atrobas aquel dejos, e es de aquelas causas que no so a tu ameguadas.	And if the thicker bone is broken, you find the fracture, and this is one of those causes that are beyond your control.
E aprop aministra extencio e equacio e liguacio de las astelas segon aquel engualment.	And then administer extension, equalization, and ligature of the tendons according to this method.
Mays empero cove, si la fractura de la camba es laja havent motas satagias, que la extencio sia mendre e pus leugiera, e alleuja am la tua vertut.	However, if the joint fracture is loose with visible spots, let the extension be less and lighter, and rely on your virtue to heal it.
E en la camba es alcuna causa de operacio sobre le bras, e es quan tu engualas las stelhas e que comples tota la tieua operacio, lahoras tu prendras pessas de fustz de pi le qual es pausat dejos las cauzas las quals so pausades en solies, e so faytas eyssament de brancas de palma; aligeys de aquelas a las quals es petita groceza, e no sia ges de las manudas, e sia la longuesa de aquelas segon la longuesa de la camba, e del denol entro al pus dejos.	And in the joint, if there is a need for an operation on the arm, and when you equalize the tendons and complete your entire surgical operation, then take pieces of pine wood which are placed under the causes that are fixed in stays, and make them from palm branches; select those with little grain, not too thick, and let their length be according to the length of the joint and the distance between them.
E aprop envolopa sobre quascuna drap en doas envolucios segon la longitut de lu, e pausa la una sobre la partida de la camba de la una part e l’autra del autra part, e sian del denol entro al pus bas loc del pe.	And then wrap each one in two layers of cloth according to the length of the foot, and place one layer over the back of the leg on one side and the other layer on the other side, and let them be close to the bottom base location of the foot.
E aprop lias las doas stelhas en tres locs de doas extremitatz e al mieg loc, quar am aquesta strectura la camba es prohibida de clinar a la partida dextra e sinistra, e sta per bona stacio.	And place the two stitches in three points of both extremities and in the middle point, for at this structure the leg is prohibited from leaning to the right or left side, and it should be in good position.
E ja es aministrat un brasset de fust segon la longuesa de la camba; e sia pausada en lu la camba per so que conserve aquel de movement.	And already a brace of wood has been administered according to the length of the leg; and place the leg in this position so that it maintains its movement.
E majorment cove que tu fassas aquo en fractura, e quan am aquela es plagua propriament.	And especially ensure that you do this in fractures, and when there is swelling properly.
E aprop considera en quascun jorn la camba e studia am aquel per derier studi, e tu le guardes de apostema e de imflacio o de autres causas semblantz; e cum accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, lahoras opausa te a lu am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	And then consider the leg on each day and study it well from previous studies, and keep it free from abscesses and inflammation or other similar causes; and if any of these causes occur, then pause treatment until it is healed.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter XVII.
De la fractura del talo e dels osses del pe e dels ditz.	On the fracture of the talar bone and the bones of the foot and toes.
Al talo no accideys fractura de tot; mays als osses del pe accideys fractura alcunas veguadas; e als ditz del pe pauc accideys fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio en las mes de disposicio.	Fractures do not occur in the talus bone; more commonly, fractures affect the bones of the foot; and fractures of the toes of the foot are rare, occurring only when they are improperly handled.
E si als osses del pe endeve fractura e vezes aquels osses esser elevatz sobre si entre lor, lahoras le malaute pause le sieu pe sobre la terra preparat ayssi cum anant.	And if fractures occur in the bones of the foot and sometimes those bones need to be elevated over each other, then place the patient's foot on a prepared ground as shown.
E aprop pausa la un pe sobre aquo que es elevat de aquels osses, e aprop calca aquels, e prem, e engualha aquels entro que torno en los locs.	Then place the other foot on what is elevated beneath those bones, and compress, press, and align those bones back into their proper places.
E aprop pausa emplastre e stopa desus, e pausa dejos le ventre del pe una petita taula a la qual sian dos caps plas.	Then apply a plaster and bandage over it, and place the sole of the foot on a small table with two convex sides.
E aprop strenh aquela am le pe am strectura descent, pus que tu has envolopada aquela am draps e am autres causes de las quals indigeys.	Then firmly hold the foot in this position, ensuring that you have wrapped it with cloths and other materials as needed.
E cum a lu passan tres dias o quatre, lahoras tu deslia le liament, quar tu atrobaras les osses engualatz, o sian trincatz o sian dislocatz, e la operacio en aquels es ayssi co coneysses.	And when three or four days have passed, then you untie the bandage, for you will find the bones equalized, or broken, or dislocated, and the operation in those cases is as you know.
Mays si alcus ditz son trincatz, lahoras restaura aquels, e enguala aquels ayssi cum yeu e recomtat a tu en la restauracio dels ditz de la ma.	And if some are said to be broken, then restore those, and equalize them as I and have shown you in the restoration of the fingers of the hand.
E aprop pausa al dit trincat stela segon la longitut del dit, e sia pus lada de lu un pauc; e aprop dejos le pe aquesta taula la qual e a tu recomtada, e strenh aquela am strictura decent.	And then place the broken finger in position according to the length of the finger, and a little to the side of it; and place the skin on this table which you have previously prepared, and tighten that bandage properly.
Mays si aquo que es trincat dels osses so dos o tres o mays, lahoras tu pausa sobre quascun dit astela de la sua quantitat envolopada en drap leon, e strenh la taula en le pus bas del pe, e sia stant sobre la un dels caps de la taula foro le ventre del pe per que la tengua am bona retencio.	And if what is broken of the bones are two or three or more, then you place each broken bone on its own finger slightly above it, enveloped in a piece of linen, and support the table under the base of the foot, and standing over one of the ends of the table, puncture the sole of the foot to ensure good retention.
E es convenient a tu que no oblides que no consideres totas las causas las quals que e ditas a tu en las autras fracturas dels accidentz que havem dit; e opausa te a tot accident am aquo que cove.	And you should remember not to overlook that all the causes mentioned to you in the other fractures of the accidents we have discussed are not considered here; and you should adapt this to any similar case.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter XVIII.
De fractura del conh de la femna e del os del pentenilh e de la vergua del home.	Of the fracture of the thigh bone and the patella and the groin of the man.
Quan le conh de la femna es trincat, lahoras fay aquela ceser en cezela cayrada, e aprop enclina aquela a la partida del dos un petit, e sia tenguda detras.	When the thigh bone is fractured, place the broken ends in proper alignment, and slightly incline it towards the upper part of the leg by a little, and keep it stable behind.
E aprop la matrona umpla le conh de coto, e sia fayt en le conh de lu ayssi cum spera; e aprop la femna sia concutida, e eleva le dos de lu petit a petit, quar tot aquo es fora-getat entro que sia denant la partida del conh ayssi cum spera e l’os trincat retorna.	And the midwife fills the fracture with a splint, and it is done in the thigh as desired; then the woman is bandaged, and her leg is elevated little by little, for all this must be done before the part of the thigh as desired and the fractured bone returns.
E aprop pausa pulvils sobre le dos de lu, e quan vol urinar remaugua le coto am facilitat e aprop urine, e reduzeys e retorna aquel segon la manieyra segon la qual mezist aquel al comensament, e aprop retorne al sieu pulvil primier.	And place powders on the leg, and when she wants to urinate, moisten the splint to facilitate it; then she urinates, return to her original position according to the manner in which you adjusted that part at the beginning, and then return to her first powder.
E fassa ayssi per vii dias o enviro aquels, quar aquel es restaurat.	And do so for seven days or until it is restored.
E si voles, pren una vezica de ovela e strenh sobre le trauc de lu una canula de canavera; e entromet tota la vesica en le conh de lu, e aprop ensuffla en la canula am vertut entro que la vesica sia imflada dedintz le conh, quar la fractura retorna.	And if you wish, take a bladder of sheep and strengthen it by tying a cannula of cane around its neck; then insert the entire bladder into the wound, and proceed to blow through the cannula with virtue until the bladder inflates inside the wound, which aids in the fracture returning.
E aprop sia umplida de coto e estia per alcus dias segon que havem recomtat, entro que sia sanat.	And it should be filled with pus and left for some days as we have advised, until it is healed.
E quan le os del pentenil de home o de femna es trincat, lahoras aministra en la restauracio e agulacio de lu aquo que havem recomtat en l’os del anca.	When the bone of the thigh of a man or woman is broken, then administer in the restoration and needle treatment of it what we have advised for the bone of the hip.
E aquo que es dreyt no es occultat en aquestas fracturas proprinquas e que pauc endeveno, majorment ad aquel al qual es alcun studi e us e enten aquest meu libre mot; quar aquela fractura significa a tu en las majors disposicios via dreyturiera en la restauracio e en la strictura de lu, e donc enten be.	And what is right is not concealed in these nearby fractures and those that rarely occur, especially to him who has some study and use and understands this my free will; for that fracture means to you in the major disposals via recta in the restoration and in the stricture of it, and therefore understand well.
Mays en la vergua del home quan es trincada, pren guarguamela de auca, e met la vergua en aquela; e aprop pausa sobre lu envolucio de drap, e sia envolopada, e aprop sia layssada per tres dias o enviro aquels, e sia sanada.	In the case of the thigh of a man when it is broken, protect it from infection, and insert the thigh into it; then place over it an envelop of cloth, and let it be wrapped up, and let it be left for three days or nearly that time, until it is healed.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XIX.
De restauracio de fractura dels osses quan es am plagua.	For the restoration of bone fractures when they are dislocated.
Convenient es ad aquel al qual accideys fractura am plagua, e majorment si le os es gran ayssi cum es le os de la cuoyssa o de l’adjutori, o semblant ad aquel, que tu te cuoytes e fleubotomes aquel tantost si las condicios de fleubotomia a tu o testifican ayssi cum desus havem dit.	It is convenient to treat those who sustain a dislocated fracture, especially if the bone is large, such as the thigh bone or the fibula, or similar. You should set and bleed that area frequently, provided that the conditions for bloodletting are present as we have said above.
E si la plagua eflueys sanc, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la retencio de lu enayssi que tu polverizes sobre lu zegi trissat, si a tu autra causa no es present.	And if the dislocation exudes pus, then keep setting the area and try to retain it by sprinkling saffron on it, if no other cause is present.
E aprop comensa restaurar la fractura en aquel meteys dia, e no prolongues aquo, si no accideys apostema.	And then begin to restore the fracture on that day, and do not delay this, if an abscess does not occur.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la restauracio de lu entro al ix dia, entro que sia cedat le apostema, e no apropinques a lu en le tertz dia e·l iiii de tot, quar tu faras accidir mals accidentz.	But if an abscess does occur, then you should delay the restoration until the sixth day, once the abscess has subsided, and not approach it on the seventh or eighth day, for then you will cause worse accidents.
Mays si le os trencat es eminent sobre la codena descubert, lahoras cove que te perforses reduzir aquel e engualar aquel am las tuas mas am facilitat e am pauca extencio.	But if the bone is broken and prominent over the knee joint, then you must probe to reduce it and align it with your hands with ease and minimal extension.
Mays si extencio no es a tu preparada e la equacio de lu am las tieuas mas, lahoras tu reduzeys aquel am las tuas mas am aquest sturment; e es sturment le qual es fayt de ferr, la longitut del qual es de vii ditz o de viii e la latitut del qual es segon la quantitat de la plagua; e per aquo es necessari al metge que prengua de aquels tres o quatre segon la quantitat que indigeys ad aquo en la curacio en tota specia de fractura.	But if the extension is not at your readiness and the alignment with your hands is difficult, then you reduce it with your hands using this instrument; and this instrument is made of iron, its length being seven or eight inches and its width according to the size of the wound; for which reason it is necessary for the doctor to take three or four of them according to the quantity needed in the treatment for any type of fracture.
E sia redon, e sia en lu pauca groceza per so que no sia doblat deves la comprecio sobre aquel en la hora de la operacio.	And it should be round, and of small thickness so that it does not bend during the operation.
E sia de aguda extremitat al qual sia marge en las sieuas extremitatz; e sia le desus de lu a grossetut tendent, e de la maytat de lu entro a las partidas.	And it should have sharp ends, with edges at the outer ends; and be thick on the underside, but thin within.
E aquesta es la forma de lu:	And this is the shape of it:
E es nompnat en grec “labre volentz atelarem”, so es paleta pauca.	And it is called in Greek "labre volentz atelarem", so it is a small palette.
Per que cove que sia pausada la extremitat de lu acuda elevada sobre la extremitat del os eminent.	In order that the extremity of the patient be elevated above the extremity of the bone.
E inpelleys aquel en una veguada entro que retorne le os, e sia engualat am alcuna equacio.	And draw it back in one movement so that the bone returns and is aligned with some equation.
E donc esforsa te engualar las extremitatz de la fractura entre lor, e si la extremitat de lu trencada es subtil, e no pren aquela le sturment per bona axcepcio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas la extremitat de aquel os entro que l’insturment haja poder de aquo.	And strive to align the extremities of the fracture with each other, and if the broken extremity is fine and does not take that tool for good reason, then it is necessary to insert the extremity of that bone where the instrument has the power to do so.
Mays si no podes reduzir le os de tot am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras enscideys aquel am aquo que coveneys a lu dels inscizoris les quals havem ditz; o serra aquel am una de las serras en qualque manieyra sia a tu possible.	But if you cannot reduce the bone completely as we have advised, then incise that part using the scalpel which we have mentioned; it may be one of the blades in any manner that is possible for you.
E aprop ratz aquel que roman en le os de asperitat e de scorsas menudas.	And then scrape out the bone of roughness and small fragments.
E cum le os es reduzit, e aprop la reduccio le malaute atroba dolor vehement ledent, lahoras sapias que le os no es retornat al sieu loc natural; e adonc fay aquo quar tu confereyses al malaute gran juvament.	And when the bone is reduced, and after the reduction, if the patient experiences severe pain in the bone, then you should know that the bone has not returned to its natural place; then do what you have been taught to give the patient great relief.
Cum es complida la tua restauracio la qual fas al os, e lahoras submergeys drap en vi stiptic negre, e propriament si es en estiu, e no pauses sobre la plagua cerot ni autre causa en la qual sia oli, per so que no fassa en lu accidir poyredura e corropcio.	When your restoration of the mouth is completed, and then immerse a cloth in vinegar that is tightly bound with a black string, and precisely during summer, and do not remain over the wound too long or any other cause which might be oily, so that no accident such as inflammation and corruption occur.
E aprop aministra stelas en la hora del tieu compliment de la restauracio de l’os, e layssa la plagua descuberta enayssi que inscidas le trauc am forfexs e uses de envolucios segon la quantitat de la plagua.	And then administer steams at the hour of the completion of the bone restoration, and leave the wound uncovered to ensure it can breathe, using scissors where necessary and employing bandages according to the size of the wound.
E guarda te am tota cautela que no strenhas la plagua am la fractura, quar motas veguadas an fayt aquo les fols metges, e fero accidir sobre les sieus malautes mort o malautia corrodent o zuthement, so es sania.	And guard yourself with all caution that you do not irritate the wound near the fracture, for once the doctors have made their incisions, it is easy to cause death or a severe and corrosive illness in your patients. This is for their health.
E si la tieua strictura leugiera, molli, diversa de la strictura de las autras fracturas.	And if the pain is slight and moist, different from the pain of other fractures.
E si la plagua es gran o es plagua mala, e temes sobre aquel alcus accidentz mals les quals havem recomtatz, e atrobas dolor en le loc, lahoras no cove que pauses sobre aquel astelas, mays fay ad aquel envolucio de draps durs en loc de stelas e strenh lu am aquelas.	And if the wound is large or a bad wound, and you fear certain adverse accidents that we have mentioned, and find pain in the area, then do not remain over those steams too long. Instead, use hard cloth bandages in place of steams and strengthen it with those.
E cum aprop un dia o dos vezes ja la plagua comensar, que en lu sia engendrat brac, lahoras tu osta desus le drap le qual havias pausat sobre aquel am vi, e aprop aministra calguas, enguentz am les quals de nostra constuma es que mediquem las plaguas, ayssi cum enguentz tetrafarmacon e semblantz ad aquel.	And when about one or two days have passed since the sore began to form a blister, then you lift up the cloth you had placed over that area, and soon apply blisters, ointments which according to our custom we use to treat sores, thus applying tetrafarmacum and similar substances to it.
E conveneys a tu que deslias le liament e considera la plagua en quascun dia mati e vespre entro que sia consolidada e fermada, e cove que·l membre sia preparat en tal manieyra que la poyredura corra de lu a las partidas dejos am facilitat.	And you should remove the bandage and examine the sore at midday and in the evening while it is consolidated and closed, and ensure that the limb is prepared in such a manner that the pus drains from it with your assistance.
si a la plagua passan motz dias, e no es consolidada ni es abscindit de lu le brac, lahoras sapias que aqui so satagias de las petitas per que cove enquieras la plagua am tenta.	If the sore passes many days and is neither consolidated nor has the blister been removed from it, then you should know that here are situated the small blisters, so examine the sore by pricking it.
E de aquelas satagias aquelas que so separadas remau e extratz, aquelas que de lor no so separadas e pongen le membre e fan accidir dolor, perforsa te a inscidir aquelas segon que a tu aquo es possibla.	And of those blisters, those that are separated remain and are extracted, while those that do not separate and cause pain in the limb, forcefully incise them as much as possible.
E si accideys a la plagua zuchem o eluchen, so es stiomenios, o autra specia de corrupcio e de putrefaccio, lahoras cove que pauses a quada un de aquels am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio del qual es precedida narracio en le sieu capitol.	And if the sore turns yellow or black, it is stiomenios or some other form of corruption and putrefaction. Then you should know that this is preceded by a narration of the treatment for which there is a separate chapter in its own section.
E de aquo en le qual cove que stia lo mieu sermo e tu fassas present la tua pessa: quan os gros es trincat, emineys sobre le membre ayssi cum le os de la coyssa e del ajutori e semblantz ad aquels dels membres grans, e que no presumas atraccio de lu, ni la extraccio de lu quar motas veguadas accideys per aquo la mort; habantz layssa aquel entro que poyresca, quar fort leu cayra per si aprop xx dias o xxx; e lahoras cura la plagua si a tu es vist, e si no layssa aquela.	And from where the main speech cavity is located, you make your presence known: when the large bone is broken, place yourself above the limb in such a way as the bones of the thigh and helper and resemble those of the large limbs, and do not presume its contraction or extraction due to visible accidents; through this, death might occur. Have it remain there where it can be left, for it will fall away on its own within about 20 to 30 days; then cure the wound if you see fit, otherwise leave it as it is.
Capitol .xx.	Capitol.xx.
De la curacio de nodacio que accideys en le vestigi de alcuna fractura.	For the cure of a swelling that occurs in the region of some fracture.
Motas veguadas accideys aquesta nodacio en le vestigi de sanacio de fractura, e majorment que es prop de las juncturas, e es orrasada per lu la figura del membre; e fort leu prohibeys le membre de la sua operacio natural.	Visible accidents occur in this swelling in the region of the fracture's healing, especially near the joints, and it distorts the shape of the limb; therefore, you strongly prohibit the limb from performing its natural functions.
Adonc considera si la nodacio es recent e aministra en aquela medicinas que han stipticat ayssi co es aloen, e enses, e mira, e sercacollo, e acrassia, e semblantz ad aquels; enayssi que prenguas de aquela alcunas o totas, e comfesiys aquelas am vi stiptic, o am album de huou, o am vi agre, e pausa aquela sobre la nodacio en estopa, e constringeys aquelas sobre lu per bona constriccio.	Then consider if the swelling is recent and administer those medicines that have astringent properties, such as aloes, saffron, mirra, acacia, and resemble those; try to use some or all of them, confirm that they are genuine astringents, or made from white oak bark, or are genuinely good. Place one over the swelling in a cloth, and apply it tightly around it with proper constriction.
E leyssa extrictura que no deslies aquela per motz dias; e aprop deslia aquela e itera autra, entro que sia remauguda la nodacio; o strenh sobre aquela lamina de plom descentment, quar plom ha proprietat de remaure tot aquo que es imflat en les membres.	Leave the constriction in place so that you do not loosen it for several days; then remove it and put another one in its place, during which time the knot should be reformed; or strengthen the lead plate descending from it, as lead has the property of curing whatever is swollen in the limbs.
Mays si nodacio ja es en peyra convertida e streyta es e nessessitat provoca a ostar aquela coytadament, e lahoras scindeys aquela per la partida pus sobirana de lu, e inscideys la superfluitat e eminent, o ratz aquela am alcus rezoris entro que sia remauguda; e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But if the knot is already in the vein tightened and needs to be loosened, then remove that knot temporarily, and split it along the upper part of it, and incise the superfluous and prominent part, or let it rot away with a cautery during which time it should be reformed; and cure it until it is healed.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI.
De restauracio de fractura quan es restaurada e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul no segon la sieua natura.	For the restoration of fractures, when restored and then the member is subtly returned according to its natural position.
Quan fractura de os es restaurada, e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul, lahoras aquo no es fayt sino per motas causas: de las quals la una es multitut de solucio del liament e de la liguacio de lu fayta no segon que cove; o per superfluitat de strictura dels liamentz entro que·l nutriment sia prohibit correr al membre; o per multitut de embrocaccio superflua; o per movement superfluent no en la sua hora; o per pauquesa de sanc en le cors del malaute e per debelitat de lu.	When a bone fracture is restored, and then the member is subtly returned according to its natural position, this is done for several causes: one of which is the excess of ligament solution and the joining of the ligaments not following how it should; or due to excess constriction of the ligaments during which nutrition cannot flow to the member; or due to excess ointment application; or due to excessive unnecessary movement; or due to a lack of strength in the body of the patient and its weakness.
E curacio de aquo es dar a mengar al malaute e far le cor de lu tendre entro que·l sanc sia multiplicat en lu; e aministra banh; e entromet gaug e leticia sobre lu.	And the cure for this is to give the patient light food and keep his body soft while the disease multiplies within him; administer baths; and insert tubes and joy into him.
E aprop pausa pegua sobre le membre, per so que la pegua atire a lu mot nutriment, o continua embrocacio de lu am aygua tebeza, entro que·l nutriment corr e retorne a la sua figura natural.	And place your hand over the member, so that the hand draws in nutrition, or continue the application of the cold lotion, while the nutrition flows and returns to its natural form.
Capitol .xxii.	Capitol.xxii.
De curacio dels osses trincatz quan so restauratz tortuozament e prohibeys la operacio de lor de aquo que cove.	For the treatment of broken bones when they are reduced tortuously and prohibit the operation from which this results.
Quan accideys al membre ja restaurat aprop la sanacio de lu de tortuositat e eminencia al os trincat e nodacio, e es per aquo fededa de forma del membre, mays empero le membre no es prohibit de la sieua operacio natural, lahora no cove que tu recipias la paraula de aquel que exsistima aquel membre sia de novel trincat.	When the member, already reduced near its healing from tortuosity and prominence of the broken bone and nodularity, occurs in the form of a deformity of the member, but nevertheless the member is not prohibited from its natural operation, then you should not receive the word of him who thinks that member is newly broken.
Mays ja so statz motz fols metges e restauradors les quals han fayt aquo en nostra tera; e aquesta operacio es mot vituperable perduzent a gran temor le senhal de la qual es mortal.	Nevertheless, there are many foolish physicians and reducers who have done this in our land; this operation is greatly reproachable, leading to great fear from the sign of which is fatal.
Mays si claudicacio e nodacio son recentz, lahoras cove que sian enbrocatz am aygua tebeza en la qual so coytas erbas mollificantz, ayssi cum son fuelas de altea e razitz de lu, e mellilot, e semblantz ad aquels; e sia fayt a lu emplastre am emplastre mollificatio ayssi cum dyallaquilon ben fayt; o que sia preza mucillage de razit de altea e sia contucida am gray de gualina o am oli de cirami, e sia emplastrat am aquel; o que sian prezes figuas grassas e sian trissadas am fems de colom, e semblantz ad aquels de las medicinas que son nompnadas amermans consolidacio.	If claudication and nodulation are recent, then soak them in a mixture of goat's milk in which you have put softening herbs such as althea, radix raziti, melilot, similar to those; and make for it a poultice with a well-made demulcent paste; or that it be soaked in mucilage of raziti and wrapped with linen cloth or oil of cedar, and applied with that; or that it be dressed with fatty figs which are macerated in pigeon's dung, similar to those mentioned in the medicines called amermans consolidatio.
E alcunas vetz es dissolvuda am assidua fricacio leugiera que sia am las mas humidas, e sia administrat movement del membre a tota partida en totas horas.	And sometimes it is dissolved with light friction that is applied to the more humid areas, and movement of the limb should be administered at all times in all hours.
Mays si tortuositat ja es anada denant e es fayta fort e convertida es en peyra e provocada es necessitat a curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que sia le pus desus cecsat e la continuacio del os sia dissolvut, e sia inscidit aquo que superflueys de nodacio de aquel meteys am le os am inscissoris subtils, e sia aministrada facilitat en aquel am sollicitut e studi.	And if tortuosity has already gone on for some time and is strong, converted into a stone, and provoked, it is necessary to cure it by cutting. Then, the pus above the cecum and the continuation of the bone should be dissolved and incised. What is superfluous from the nodulation of that part should be removed from the bone with sharp scissors, and facilitation should be administered in that area with solicitude and study.
Capitol .xxiii.	Chapter XXIII.
De sermo en dislocacio.	On speech concerning dislocation.
Dislocacio es eyssiment de alcuna de las juncturas del sieu loc, per que es prohibida de movement, e es orrezada la figura del membre, e fa venir sobre le malaute dolors e lesios grans.	Dislocation is the displacement of one of the joints of that part, making it forbidden to move, and altering the shape of the limb, causing great pain and injuries in the patient.
Donc quan accideys ad alcu dislocacio, lahoras cove tantost perforsar que sia reduzit, e no tarde aquela reduzir, quar si es tardada, le loc es apostemat e fort leu am aquo es fayta dificil la reduccio de dislocaccio.	Therefore, when a dislocation occurs, it is important to quickly ensure that it is reduced, and not delay the reduction, for if delayed, the area may become gangrenous, making the reduction of the dislocation much more difficult.
E per aysso no cove que sia maugut ni stendut en la hora de la apostemacio, quar motas veguadas fa venir spasme e dolors ledentz.	And for this reason, it should not be cut or extended during the time of gangrene, for moist wounds cause spasms and intense pain.
Mays quan aquo accideys, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la flaubotomia del malaute, e aprop sia layssat entro que repause le apostema; e aprop le membre sia embrocat am aygua cauda e oli, e aprop sia reduzit am facilitat.	More so when this occurs, it is advisable to perform a flarethotomy on the foot, and allow the gangrene to rest until it has subsided; then the limb should be soaked in warm water and oil, and finally, the dislocation should be reduced with ease.
E tot membre sia curat am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra en son loc.	And every member be treated with the water from which its memory will return to its place.
E yeu ja e ordenatz les capitols de dislocacio segon que es precedit en fractura; de la partida del cos pus sobirana entro a la partida pus dejos.	And I have already ordered the chapters on dislocation according to what is preceded in fracture; from the part of the body first, then proceed.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter XXIV.
De curacio de dislocacio de la mandibula dejos.	For the treatment of dislocation of the jaw, proceed.
So dislocadas las doas mandibulas si no tart; e la dislocacio de amdos es fayta segon una de dos manieyras: que o son remaugudas de lurs locs per pauca remocio, e so mollificadas un petit; o so dislocadas per entiera dislocacio e complida, entro que sian mollificadas a la partida de la junctura entro que corro saliva del malaute e que no puesca tenir aquela ni puesca claure la sua boca, e la lengua de lu sia envolopada en sa paraula.	When both jaws are dislocated without a fracture; and the dislocation of both is performed according to one of two methods: either they are slightly moved from their places with little movement and slightly softened; or they are completely dislocated and fully reduced, at which point they should be softened at the point of the joint where saliva from the patient flows and cannot keep that position nor close its mouth entirely, and the tongue of the patient is wrapped in a cloth.
Mays quan la dislocacio de lu es pauca, lahoras en las majors disposicios retorna per si an pauca causa.	More often than not, when the dislocation is slight, it returns to its place with little cause in major displacements.
Mays si la dislocacio es entiera e complida, lahoras cove que sia administrada reduccio de lu leugierament, e no sia tardada de tot.	More often than not, when the dislocation is complete and full, you must immediately administer reduction of it, and not delay it entirely.
E es que·l ministre tengua le cap del malaute, e entrometa lo metge le dit pous de la una sieua ma en la razit de la dislocacio de la mandibula dedintz la boca de lu, si la dislocacio es de la una part; o que entrometa les sieus dos pouzes ensemps, si la dislocacio es de doas partz, e les autres ditz de las mas de lu sian defora am les quals enguale; e comanda al malaute que cesse las suas mandibulas e absolva aquelas anar de quascuna partida; e le metge engualhe la mandibula e enpellisca la mandibula entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And the minister should hold the patient's head, and the doctor insert his thumb from one hand into the side of the dislocation in the mouth on that side if the dislocation is on one side; or he should insert both thumbs together if the dislocation is on both sides, with the other fingers holding the cheeks; and command the patient to cease moving his jaw and bring those going in all directions back; and the doctor equalize the jaw and push it back into its place.
E si dificil es la reducio de lu, e majorment si amdos las mandibulas so essemps dislocadas, lahoras aministra evoporacio am aygua cauda e oli, entro que sia fayta leugiera la reduccio de amdos e no tardes la reduccio de amdos de tot, ayssi quo havem dit.	And if the reduction is difficult, especially if both jaws are completely dislocated, then administer evaporation with hot water and oil, while performing a light reduction of both, and do not delay the reduction of both entirely, as we have said before.
E donc cum retornam e so engualadas, e es clausa la boca del malaute e no es mollificada, lahoras pausa sobre aquelas polvils de drap am cerot, e sia fayt de cera e oli rozat; e aprop sia liat am facilitat am liamens mols.	And when returned and equalized, and the mouth of the patient is closed and not softened, then place it over those powders of cloth with cerot, made of wax and oil rubbed together; and soon it will be facilitated with many lint pads.
E sia le dormir del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e·l cap de lu sia stant entre dos aurelhes, per so que no maugue aquel a la partida dreyta ni a la sinistra; e no li fassas per forsa masteguar alcuna causa; habans la sieua vianda sia forbicio leon, entro que quan las dolors sian remaugudas e las mandibulas so nozadas, lahoras maugue aquo que vol.	And let the patient sleep on their back, with their head standing between two pillows, so that it does not sweat on either the right or left side; and do not force them to vomit for any cause; having their food consisting of a moderate amount of bread, until when the pains are relieved and the jaws are moistened, then let them sweat as they wish.
E aquo sia aministrat am facilita, e no trebalhe sobre la apercio de la boca deves la comestio e beure e ocitatio, entro que la mandibula sia nozada e sanada.	And this should be administered with mildness, and you must not trouble the appetite of the mouth; let them eat and drink as they can, until when the jaw is healed.
E si es dificil la reduccio de duas mandibulas quan so dislocadas en alcuna hora e no so convertidas als lors locs, lahoras motas veguadas accideysso febres e soda assidua, e fort leu es alerguat le ventre del malaute, e fort leu e vomeys colera pura.	And if the reduction of two jaws when dislocated at any hour and cannot be returned to their proper places, then swelling and frequent fever occur, and strongly moving the abdomen of the patient causes diarrhea and pure vomiting.
E quan tu vezes aquo, lahoras sapias que es perdicio; e motas veguadas mor aquel al qual accideys aquo en x dias.	And when you see this, then know it is dangerous; and strong swelling may occur to the one upon whom this happens within a few days.
Capitol .xxv.	 Chapter 25.
De reduccio de la dislocacio de la furcula e de la extremitat del muscle.	For the reduction of the dislocation of the furcula and the extremity of the muscle.
Furcula no es dislocada del latz dedintz per la sua continuacio am le pietz; e alcunas veguadas es dislocada a la partida defora, e aquo es declarat al sentiment.	The furcula is not dislocated from the joint inside by its continuation to the foot; and sometimes it is dislocated at the outer part, and this is declared by the feeling.
E la restauracio de lu es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos e extenda les sieus brasses.	And the restoration of it is that the patient lies down and extends his arms.
E aprop coarta le loc am la tua palma am fort coartacio, quar ela retornara.	And then compress the area with your palm firmly, for it will return.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre e pulvils e strenh aquela.	And then place your hand over the area with the plaster and powders, strengthening it.
Mays la extremitat de aquel que siec le coyde e·s continuat am aquel, no es dislocada en alcun dia; lahoras cove que sia reduzida e engualhada segon que havem dit e segon que es a tu aparelhat.	More often, the extremity of that which is connected to the thigh is not dislocated in any day; then it must be reduced and aligned as we have said and according to what is at your disposal.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre, e pulvils, e extrictura, e comanda al malaute adherir a trenquilitat e a repaus entro que sia sanat.	And then place your hand over the area with the plaster, powders, and compress it, and command the patient to adhere to tranquility and rest until it is healed.
E am aquesta meteyssa curacio es reduzida la extremita del muscle quan es separada del sieu loc.	And in this method of cure, the extremity of the muscle is reduced when it is separated from its place.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter 26.
De la reduccio de la dislocacio del muscle.	On the reduction of the dislocation of the muscle.
Sapias que·l muscle no es dislocat sino segon tres manieras, de las quals es la una que sia dislocat a la partida del titillic a la partida dejos.	Know that the muscle is not dislocated in any of three ways, one of which is when it is dislocated from the tendon to the bone.
E la segonda es que sia dislocat a la partida desus del muscle, e aquo es fayt tart; e no es dislocat a las partidas detras per la spalla; e no es dislocat a las partidas denant per les nervis.	And the second is when it is dislocated from above the muscle, which is called taut; and it is not dislocated at the rear parts by the shoulder; and it is not dislocated at the front parts by the nerves.
E majorment es dislocat e defora eyssit a las partidas dejos deves le titillic, e majorment en aquels dels quals las carns son paucas, leugierament es dislocat; mays en aquels en les quals so motas carns, es eyssit fora am dificultat.	And mostly it is dislocated outward and below the parts where the tendon joins the bone, and more easily in those where there are few muscles, it is slightly dislocated; more difficulty is encountered in those where there are many muscles.
E fort leu accideys ad alcus homes percussio o cazement, e le muscle de lu es apostemat de apostema caut, e es cujat per aquo que ja sia dislocat.	And often such people are struck by a blow or fall, and the muscle of the affected area develops an abscess due to a wound, and is thus already dislocated.
Adonc cove que tu sproes aquo entro que estias sobre-sertetut de lu, e lahoras procesiscas en la curacio de lu.	Then cover what you have sprinkled there, especially over him, and proceed with the cure of him.
E es conoguda la dislocacio de lu quan es a las partidas dejos deves le titillic; per so que distingescas entre le muscle dislocat e·l muscle sa, quar tu atrobas entre aquels diversitat manifesta; e atrobas en le cap del muscle concavitat e dejos le titillic deves le tocament del cap del muscle ayssi quo un huou, e al malaute no pot redusir la sua ma a la sieua aurelha, ni maure aquela per totz movementz.	And the dislocation is known when it is in the joints; you must probe; so that you can distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the sound one, which you find to have a manifest difference; and you find at the head of the muscle a concavity; by probing the head of the muscle, you feel it like a hollow, and the patient cannot bring his hand to his ear, nor move it with all movements.
Si es dislocat deves le pietz o ensus, e tu lahoras atrobas manifest tocament, e no es amaguat.	If it is dislocated, probe the foot or above it, and then you will find a clear sensation upon touch, and it is not hidden.
E de aquesta dislocacio es fayta leugiera reduccio quan es fresca e le malaute es enfant.	And this dislocation is gently reduced when it is fresh and the patient is in pain.
E la reduccio de lu es que·l ministre eleva la ma de lu a las partidas desus; e aprop pause les tieus pouses dejos le titillic de lu, e eleva la junctura am fortaleza en sus al sieu loc, e·l ministre eleva la ma de lu, e extenda aquela en sus; e aprop pausa aquela dejos quar ela retorna leugierament.	And the reduction is that the minister raises the patient's hand above the joints; then place your thumbs on either side and probe the area, elevate the joint with strength at its location, and the minister raises the patient's hand, extending it properly; then place your fingers there so that it returns gently.
Mays si per aquo que havem dit no retorna, e so del comensament que accidic la dislocacio, motz dias, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia banhat en aygua cauda e sia aministrada enbrocacio que mollifique e liniesca ayssi cum si so coytz razitz de altea, e fenugrec, e melillot en aygua, e sia administrada.	If, however, it does not return by what we have said, and the dislocation occurs from its initial beginning, for several days, then the patient should be bathed in warm water and a wet compress that softens and lubricates should be applied as if made of roots of almond, fenugreek, and melilot in water, and this should be administered.
E aprop le malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu dos e sia pausat dejos le titillic de lu espera de lana que sia engual entre levitat e strictura, e aprop le metge pause le sieu talo sobre la spera, e eleva le cap del muscle am vertut, e atire la ma del malaute per que no sia mauguda a las partidas dejos, e autre ministre tengua le cap del malaute, que no sia maugut a las partidas dejos, quar aquela tantost retorna al sieu loc.	And then the patient should be placed face down and kept in this position until the wool felt is equal between levity and stiffness, and then the doctor places his hand on the spine, raises the head of the muscle by its virtue, and pulls the patient's hand so that it does not get stuck at the joints, and another attendant holds the head of the patient to prevent it from getting stuck at the joints, for there it will quickly return to its place.
E si voles, reduzeys aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu fassas esser prezent un home le qual sia pus lonc que·l malaute, e estia de la part de aquel latz, e entrometa le sieu muscle dejos le titillic del malaute e eleve le titillic de lu a las partidas desus entro que·l malaute sia suspendut en ayre, e autre ministre tire la ma del malaute de las partidas dejos del sieu ventre.	And if you wish, reduce the second as follows: and let there be present a man who is longer than the patient, standing on that side of the limb, and insert his muscle under the skin of the patient and raise the skin above the joint while the patient is suspended in the air, and another attendant pull the patient's hand from the joints below his abdomen.
Mays si le malaute es leugier, lahoras cove que am lu que autre causa sia suspenduda, per so que grave aquel, quar la dislocacio retorna tantost.	But if the patient is light, then find what other cause is suspended, so that the serious one returns quickly.
E es reduzit eysament segon autra manieyra: e es que sia ficat en terra un fust lonc le cap del qual sia redon de figura, ayssi cum pilo de mortier, que no sia gros ni subtil, e aprop sia pausat dejos le malaute; pus que so pausatz sobre·l cap del fust draps leons, e·l malaute sia stant segon la longitut del fust, e aprop sia extenduda la ma de lu a las partidas dejos del autra part; e sia extendut le cos de lu del autre part am fortaleza, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And it is reduced by another method: and it is that the patient be placed on the ground with a long stick whose head is round in shape, like the bottom of a mortar, neither thick nor thin, and then place the patient; then cover its head with lion skins, and the patient stand according to the length of the stick. And extend your hand at the parts below from the other part; and extend the body from the other part with strength, for the joint returns to its place quickly.
E si es dificil reduccio de lu per totas las causas que havem ditas, lahoras usa de aquesta cura: e es que tu prenguas un fust la quantitat del qual sia en le lonc de dos brasses, e latitut de aquel sia de quatre ditz, e la grossetut de lu sia aleujat en le preon del tittilic segon aquesta forma:	And if the reduction is difficult due to all the causes we have said, then use this cure: and it is that you take a stick whose length is two cubits, and its width is four fingers, and its thickness be enlarged at the base according to this form.
E aprop sobre le cap redon sian liatz drap leons per so que·l fust no ledesca le malaute.	And place lion skins over the round head so that the stick does not slip off the patient.
E aprop sia pausat dejos le titillic del malaute, e sia extenduda la ma o le bras sobre·l fust entro a las partidas dejos, e sia liat le fust sobre le adjutori e le bras e la extremitat de la ma.	And then place the patient's legs outstretched, and extend your hand or arm along the side of the body between the parts, and tie the limb to the supporter and the arm and the extremity of the hand.
Aprop sia pausat le bras sobre un scalo de scala segon la latitut, e la ma sia extenduda a las partidas dejos, e l’autre cos sia suspendut de l’autre part, quar la junctura intra tantost.	And then place the arm on a step of the ladder according to its width, and the hand extended between the parts, and the other side be suspended from the other part, that the joint may soon come together.
E cum le intrament de lu es complit segon quascuna maniera que es a tu possibla, e lahoras cove que tu pauses dejos le titillic spera de lana de engual quantitat; e aprop pauza emplastre perparat de polvera de moli am enses e album de huou sobre tot le muscle, ayssi quo es revolvut desus, e aprop strenh dejos le titillic am strictura decent; e le liament sia revolvut sobre le emplastre, e la ma de lu sia annectida al col de lu, e sia leyssat, e no sia mauguda la ma de lu per vii dias.	And when the instrument is complete according to any manner that is possible for you, then take a waiting thread of wool of equal quantity; and place a plaster prepared of powder of moly ammen and honey over all the muscle, thus thoroughly mixed on top, and strongly tie the thread around the area; let the plaster be thoroughly applied over the thread, and the hand be attached to the collar of the patient, and do not move the hand for seven days.
E cove que sia pausada la vianda del malaute pauca, entro que·l membre sia confortat, quar es pus leugier a la sanacio de lu.	And ensure that the diet of the patient is light, until the limb is comforted, for it is easier to recover.
E aprop la vianda sia donada major aprop vii o v e sia exercitat un movement; e donc si es fermat e no es mollificat, lahoras ja es sanat.	And then the food should be given more seven or five times and exercise should be performed; and thus if it is closed and not softened, then it is already healed.
Mays si la junctura es dislocada motas veguadas per humiditat que accideys a lu o per autra causa, lahoras cove que en aquela sia administrat cauteri am tres traucs, segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri.	And if the joint is dislocated due to repeated humidity that affects it or for another cause, then you must apply a cautery three times, as mentioned earlier in the chapter on cautery.
E si tot aysso es fayt e aprop vii dias es desliat le liament e la junctura no es fermada, e le emplastre e la strictura son reduzitz sobre lu alcunas veguadas, e no es fermada e catz e no pot elevar aquel bras a las partidas desus, lahoras sapias que·ls nervis de lu, les quals so al cap del muscle, ja so inscizes o extendutz o mollificatz, e sapia que la junctura nul temps no sira ficada en loc sieu.	And if all this is done and after seven days the ligament and joint are not closed, and the plaster and stricture remain over it for several times, and still are not closed with catgut and the arm cannot be raised above the parts above, then you should know that the nerves of it, which are at the head of the muscle, are either incised or extended or softened, and you should know that the joint will never be fixed in its place.
De la dislocacio de aquela qu’es fayta deves le pietz e la mamilha o las partidas detras, la reduccio es fayta am impulcio e extencio am las mas, entro que retorne.	For the dislocation of that which is caused, you should raise the foot and the thigh or the parts behind, and the reduction is done by impulse and extension with the hands, while it returns.
E sia administrada en aquela l’autra strictura, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And it should be applied to the other stricture, and care should be taken that it be healed within.
E si accideys aprop la sanacio gravitat en le membre e tarditat en le movement de lu, lahoras le malaute uze de banh motas veguadas entro que aquela gravitat sia alleujada e que retorne a la natura de lu primiera.	And if there is a delay in the healing and a decrease in the movement of the limb, then the patient uses warm baths until the swelling is alleviated and returns to its natural state.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter XXVII.
De curacio de dislocacio del coyde.	On the treatment of dislocation of the shoulder.
Sapias que la junctura del coyde es dislocada am difficultat e semblantment retorna am difficultat; e aquela es dislocada a totas partidas, e majorment a la partida denant a la partida detras, e la dislocacio de lu no es amaguada a tu quar es cazent dejos le vezement o dejos le tocament segon qualque figura sia dislocat, e quan ajustes le coyde disloguat am le sa, aquo es a tu declarat manifestament, quar la junctura es concavada e no pot doblar le bras, ni tocar am aquel le sieu muscle.	Know that the joint of the shoulder is dislocated with difficulty and seems to return with difficulty; it can be dislocated in all directions, but most commonly in front and behind. The dislocation is not hidden; whether you see it quickly or feel it by touch depending on the figure that is dislocated, when you reduce the dislocated shoulder joint into place, this is clearly manifest to you, for the joint is concave and cannot bend the arm or reach its own muscle.
E cove que·t coytes, e reduzescas la dislocacio tantost denant que vengua a lu apostema caut, quar si ve a lu apostema caut, dificil es la reduccio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot; e majorment quan es a las partidas detras, quar pus mala es de totas las autras specias de dislocacio, e de major dolor, e motas veguadas deyssen am aquela la mort.	And note that when it comes to the collarbone, reduce the dislocation as soon as possible before an abscess forms; for if an abscess forms, reduction is difficult, and even with a strong effort, it may not be fully healed. Especially behind, for this is worse than all other types of dislocation, causing more pain, and warm poultices can lead to its death.
E la restauracio de lu, quan es aquela que es possibla reduzir, es que la ma de lu sia extenduda am doas mas, e le bras de lu sia expandut, e las mas del metge sian sobre le coyde e dejos lu, e el empellisca la junctura am les pouzes de las suas mas ensemps, o am la razit de la sua palma entro que torne en son loc.	And the restoration of it, when that is possible to reduce, is that the hand of the patient be extended between two more, and the arm of the patient be stretched out, and the doctor's hands be on the sides and let him, and push the joint with the heels of his hands or with the edge of his palm as it returns to its place.
Mays si la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras retorna ayssi que dobla la ma am la sua ma, entro que percuta le coyde am la razit de la sua palma.	And if the dislocation is in the front parts, then return it thus by bending the hand against its own hand, between striking the knee with the edge of his palm.
E si la dislocacio no obezeys a la reduccio, lahoras aministra vehement extencio e mot fort.	And if the dislocation does not yield to reduction, then administer strong extension and a firm movement.
E es que dos ministres extendan le bras, e tenguan aquel eyssament dos ministres per so que no sia remaugut deves la extencio.	And let two ministers extend the arm, and hold that position with two ministers so that the extension is not reversed.
E aprop sia revolvut le bras deves tota part, pus que es envolopat drap doblat lonc sobre la ma de lu, o liament.	And then rotate the arm completely around, as it is wrapped in a long folded cloth around the patient's hand, or bandage.
E quant le metge toca la junctura am la sua ma, unte aquela am alcun oli per so que aquo sia aquelas causas las quals ajudan en lubricitat de la junctura am facilitat; e aprop empellesca la junctura am empulcio vehement entro que retorne.	And when the doctor touches the joint with his hand, anoint that area with some oil so that it helps in the lubrication of the joint for easier movement; and then push the joint with strong pressure as it returns.
E aprop la reduccio de lu cove que sia pausat sobre aquela empastre en le qual sia stipticitat e excequacio am album de huou, e sia extrenhut am strictura descent, e·l bras sia suspendut del col, e sia layssat per alcus dias.	And after the reduction of the cavity let it be placed on that bandage in which is applied a poultice of album of hog, and be externally treated with a strictura descent, and the arm be suspended from the neck, and let it be left for some days.
E aprop sia desliat; e donc si la junctura es formada en le sieu loc, lahoras tu deslia le liament de lu e layssa aquela.	And then it should be released; and so if the joint is formed in that place, then you release the ligament and leave it.
E si vezas la junctura no be strenher, lahoras tu itera le emplastre e·l liament, e layssa aquela per alcus dias entro que sia extrenhuda; e aprop deslia aquela.	And if you see the joint not well strengthened, then reapply the poultice and ligament, and leave it for some days until it is healed; and then release it.
Mays si accideys a lu gravitat aprop la reduccio de la junctura, e la disposicio de lu es en movement, lahoras aministra humectacio en banh e fricacio subtil, e comprecio, entro que sia aleujat; o pausa sobre la junctura aleliati, so es coyssa de moto grassa; e aprop sia liada, e layssa aquela sobre le os le dia e la nueyt.	But if accidents occur to it gravely after the reduction of the joint, and its disposition is in movement, then administer moistening in bath and gentle friction, and compression, until it is healed; or pause over the joint for a day or two, so it is a matter of grassy motion; and then bind it, and leave it over the bone day and night.
E aprop osta aquela, e met aquel en banh; e quan suza, lahoras tu fregua la junctura am fricacio temprada, e aprop itera sobre aquela aleliati, so es ronhonal de moto, una veguada, e la segonda, e la .iii.a.,	And then immerse that in bath; and when soaked, then friction the joint with tempered friction, and then apply over it for a day or two, so it is a matter of gentle motion, once, and the second, and the third.
am intrament de banh, entro que sia linit.	am intrament de banh, entro que sia linit.
E si voles, pausa sobre aquela fenda de vaca humida e scalfada am boder e stren sobre aquel; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas, quar aquela es humida e reduzeys a la sua disposicio.	And if you wish, place your hand over that wet and scraped groove on the edge and firmly hold it there; do this several times, for that is wet and reduce it to its disposition.
Capitol .xxviii.	Capitol. xxviii.
De curacio de dislocacio de malassen, so es de la junctura que es entre·l bras e la ma.	For the treatment of dislocation of the shoulder, it is of the joint that is between the arm and the hand.
Malassen de la ma alcunas vetz es deslocada, e la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es leugiera, e·l contrari es de las autras juncturas, mays empero cove que sia velocitat en la reduccio de lu en la hora en la qual es deslocada, denant que le loc sia apostemat o que accida en lu apostema caut.	Shoulder of the hand is sometimes dislocated, and the reduction of its dislocation is easy. The opposite is true for other joints; however, more importantly, it requires speed in the reduction of it at the hour when it is dislocated, before the area becomes infected or an abscess occurs.
E la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es que tu pauses la junctura de la ma del malaute sobre una taula e le ministre extenda la ma de aquel, e le metge pause la sua ma o o la sua palma sobre la iminencia de la junctura, e empellisca aquela entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And the reduction of the dislocation is that you place the shoulder joint of the patient on a table and instruct them to extend their arm. The doctor then places his hand or palm over the vicinity of the joint and gently push it back into its proper place.
Mays empero cove que sia considerat si la palma ja es ostada al ventre de la ma, lahoras le malaute pause le dos de la sua ma sobre una taula deves la extencio e la reduccio; e si la dislocacio es precedent deves le dos de la ma, lahoras sia la posicio de la ma de aquel intrinicequement sobre la taula, per so que la ma del metge caja sobre aquela iminencia de la junctura.	But more importantly, one should consider if the palm is already placed on the abdomen of the hand, then the patient places the two hands on a table to extend and reduce; and if the dislocation has preceded, then place the two hands, while intrinsically positioning the hand of the physician over the table, so that the physician's hand falls over that potentiality of the joint.
E donc si retorna tantost, bon es; e sino, lahoras strenh aquela am empastre cedant le apostema e layssa aquel; e no iteres aquo, quar sino, no soferta ni no podes sobre la reduccio de lu pus que passan a lu dias.	And so if it returns quickly, that is good; and otherwise, then strengthen that by binding the abscess and leave it as it is; and do not repeat this, for if you do not, you should neither endure nor be able to force anything beyond what passes in his days.
Mays empero la junctura roman segon la sua tortuositat; e no notz al malaute alcuna causa, sino que la ma es mollificada e no pot strenher alcuna causa; lahoras sapias que les nervis son trincatz o trissatz, e lahoras no es engen en lu sino que sia strenhuda am cauteri prop le cazament de lu e fort leu aquo confereys alcuna causa.	But more importantly, the joint is to be treated according to its tortuosity; and do not notify the patient any cause, but let your hand be softened and cannot strengthen any cause; then you know that the nerves are taut or stretched, and then there is no need in it but to strengthen it by cautery near the insertion and make it firm with this you confer some cause.
Donc cum malassem es retornada, lahoras pausa sobre lu empastre le qual havem recomtat, e sia layssat e strenhut per v dias; e aprop sia desliat e sia layssat e la ma de lu sia excercitada.	And since the joint has returned, then place it over the binding which we have recommended, and let it be softened and strengthened for five days; and then release it and let it be left, and exercise the hand of the patient.
Mays si le movement de lu es ostat e accideys en lu alcuna gravitat, lahoras leniys aquela am aygua cauda e am fricacio alcunas veguadas, entro que sia alleujat.	But if the movement in it has been sustained and occurred with some gravity, then gently apply that which has warm water and some friction several times, until it is alleviated.
Capitol .xxix.	Capitol.xxix.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels ditz.	Of the treatment of dislocation of the fingers.
Alcunas veguadas so dislocatz les ditz a tota partida.	In some cases, dislocate the fingers all at once.
E quan es dislocat alcun dit de aquels al dos de la palma o al ventre de lu, lahoras sten le dit e impelleys la dislocacio de lu am les tieus pouses, entro que retorne.	And when one of those fingers is dislocated at the base of the palm or in the finger itself, then hold the finger and push the dislocation back with your thumbs, until it returns to place.
E aprop sostenta le cap del dit, e suspen aquel deves la part a la qual es dislocat, e layssa aquel per dos dias.	And then hold the tip of the finger, and suspend that part which is dislocated, leaving it for two days.
E aprop suspen aquel e exten aquel entro que dreyt sia engualhat en aquel sieu dia.	And then suspend that part and extend it until it is straightened in that same day.
E quan sira noyt, lia aquel segon aquela narracio, e no cesses desliar aquel en le dia e exercitar am movement, e lia aquel en la noyt; e fay aquo per alcus dias entro que sia streyt.	And when it is night, tie it according to that narration, and do not cease to loosen it during the day and exercise with movement, and tie it at night; do this for several days until it straightens.
E fay semblant am aquo, si es dislocat al ventre de la ma, e lia aquel ad aquela partida e fay am aquo la tieua primiera operacio, entro que sia sanat.	And make it seem as if you are doing so, even if dislocated in the hand, and bind that to that part and do with this your first operation, until it is healed.
E semblantment fay am aquo quan es dislocat a las autres partidas.	And make it seem as if you are doing so when it is dislocated in the other parts.
Capitol .xxx.	Capitol.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels spondils del dos.	For the cure of dislocation of the cervical vertebrae.
Quan accideys ad alcun dels spondils del dos o del col dislocacio complida, e so remaugutz motz spondils de lors locs, lahoras en aquela no es curacio, quar la mort se coyta al malaute.	When a dislocation occurs in any of the vertebrae of the back or the neck, and multiple vertebrae are displaced from their places, then there is no cure for that, for death will follow.
E senhal de aquo es que la egestio del malaute es fora-eyssida ses voluntat, e no pot retenir aquela; e motas veguadas so mollificatz alcus membres de lu o doas cambas de lu o dos brasses de lu, o un de aquels; o es remaugut un spondil de son loc, quar motas veguadas es remaugut e motas veguadas es fayta la remocio de aquels a quatre partidas.	And the sign of this is that the patient's excretion is forced out against their will, and they cannot retain it; often several times, the limbs, or both sides, or one side of the body become soft. Or a vertebra is displaced from its place, for multiple times a vertebra is displaced, and multiple times the removal of those to four parts is performed.
Donc aquela ja es remauguda a las partidas detras e es nompnada gelbozitat.	Then it is already reduced to the parts behind and is named gelbozitation.
Mays la curacio de lu es que lahoras consideras si la gelbozitat accidey de puerissia, quar lahoras en aquela no es curacio ni de aquela no es sanacio de tot.	May the cure of it be that when you consider if the gelbozitation occurs from pregnancy, then in that case there is no cure nor will it heal completely.
Mays en aquela que ve per cazement o per percussio o per semblant ad aquels, ja diyssero les Antics las manieras de curacio am sermo prolixs, del qual lo mays retorna am profieyt; mays yeu ja e abreujat de aquel del qual lo pauc escusa del trop de lu, per la mieua propinquitat a la entencio mieua exposicio, am la qual he aquo expausat et format ex instrument divers de aquel am le qual mostrero aquo e espausero aquel.	May it be that in those cases that arise from birth or by percussion or similar to those, the Ancients have already detailed the methods of cure at great length, about which the best is reserved for prophecy; but I shall now abbreviate what I know of that, for the sake of simplicity and proximity of my explanation, with which I have expanded and arranged it in various instruments from which I will show and expand upon that.
E dic que en gelbosita que accideys de la partida denant en le pietz, no es engen ni sanacio de aquela; e semblantment en aquela que es fayta a dos latz.	And I say that in gout that occurs from the front part of the foot, neither cure nor healing will occur; similarly in that which arises from two sides.
E de aquelas no es curada sino aquela que accideys en le dos propriament am aquo que yeu recomti.	And of those, only the one that occurs in the two places properly so-called is cured as I recommend.
E es que·l malaute sia extendut sobre la sua cara sobre pug engual prop de paret, e sia extendut dejos lu esturment molh per so que no sia lidit le pietz de lu.	And it is that the patient be extended on his back close to the wall, and be covered with a moist cloth to prevent his feet from getting cold.
E aprop un fust dreyt sia pausat, ficat en la terra en la extremitat del pug entorn le cap de lu, e autra fust en aviro les pes de lu en l’autra extremitat del pueg.	And place a straight stick, placed in the ground at the end of the back near its head, and another stick across its feet at the other end of the stick.
E·l ministre tengua le fust, e no sia fermat en fossa; e autre ministre tengua l’autre segon aquela forma.	The minister hold the stick, and it should not be fixed in the ground; another minister hold the other end according to that form.
E aprop envolopa sobre le cap del malaute e dejos les titillic liamen leon ferm; e exten la extremitat del liamel al fust le qual es deves le cap de lu, e lia aquel en lu; e aprop strenh l’autre liament sobre las ancas de lu les denols de lu, e deves las cambas de lu; e aprop ajusta totz les liamentz e lia aquels en l’autre fust le qual es deves les pes de lu.	And wrap a cloth around the patient's head and tie it tightly with a leather thong; extend the end of the thong to the stick which is placed at the head, and fasten that end on it. And wrap another leather thong around the patient's hips under his armpits, and support his legs; and adjust all the thongs and fasten those on the other stick which supports his feet.
E aprop le ministre cascu extenda le liament a la partida del fust, e no sian remaugutz les dos fustz e les liamentz dels sieus locs en les quals son ficatz, mays empero no so fermatz ayssi cum havem dit.	And the minister carefully extend the thong to the part of the stick, and do not move the two sticks and the thongs in which they are placed, but do not fix them as we have said.
E le metge pause las suas palmas sobre le spondil am fortaleza entro que retorne, o que pause sobre aquela una taula, e aprop que ajuste sobre la taula les sieus pes entro que retorne.	And the doctor places his palms on the spine with strength until it returns, or he places one hand on a table and adjusts his feet on the table as it returns.
Mays si no retorna per aquesta forma, lahoras pren una taula de la qual la latitut o la longitut sia en aviro de tres brassas, e cava en la paret de la qual havem dit que es prop le malaute un loc en le qual intre la extremitat de la taula.	And if it does not return in this manner, then take a table of which the width or length is about three braces, and cut into the wall which we said is close to the patient a place between the ends of the table.
E aprop pausa la maytat de la taula sobre le spondilh, e·l metge pause les sieus pes sobre l’autre extremitat, e estrenha be entro que le spondil sia coartat e que retorne al sieu loc.	And place the majority of the table's surface on the spine, and the doctor places his feet on the other end, and presses firmly so that the spine is compressed and returns to its place.
E si tu voles, obre am torn le qual es revolvut am la ma; e es que tu fiques en terra deves le cap del malaute en le derier del pug dos fustz, la longitut dels quals sia d’un bras, e deves le cap de lu en le derier del pug eyssament dos fustz; e sia la longitut que es entre quascun fust un palm, e ja es fayt en quascun fust trauc en le qual corr torn, e quascun sia mot fermat en terra per so que no sia maugut.	And if you wish, open a turn which is revolved in your hand; and when you stand on the ground, place the patient's head at the heel of two sticks, the length of which is one brace, and place his head at the heel of two sticks similarly. The distance between each stick should be one palm. Now draw a circle around each stick with thread, and make sure each is firmly fixed to the ground so that it cannot move.
E sia mes un fust redon en le qual es le torn, e sia revolvut en les dos traucs dels dos fustz.	And there should be a round stake on which the torn part is placed, and it should be turned in the two cuts of the two stakes.
E en la extremitat de lu es un trauc en le qual es format le fust, la longueza del qual es un palm am aquo que es revolvut; e en les dos autres fustz es semblant de aquel.	And at the end of it is a cut on which the stake is formed, the length of which is one palm's breadth as it is turned; and in the other two stakes it is similar to that.
E aprop strenh les liamentz que has streyt en le pietz del malaute en le trau le qual es deves le cap de lu, e les liamentz que has streyts en las coyssas de lu en le torn le qual es deves les pes de lu.	And then strengthen the ligaments you have stretched in the feet of the patient in the cut where you place its head, and the ligaments you have stretched in the thighs of the patient in the wound where you place its feet.
E aprop deves quascun torn e stia un ministre que torssa le torn am la sua ma, e le metge engualhe le spondil segon que havem dit.	And then you should place each wound and have a minister twist the wound with his hand, and the doctor straighten the spine as we have said.
E aquesta es la forma del torn:	And this is the form of the wound:
E aprop pus que le spondil es retornat, e le loc es engualhat, lahoras cove que pauses empastre exciccatiu am album de huou, e aprop estopa; e aprop pause sobre le empastre astela de taula de la qual la latitut sia de tres ditz o enviro aquels, e la longitut de lu sia quantitat que prengua le loc de la gelbositat, e sobre la partida del spondil sa.	And once the spine is returned and the area is straightened, then cover it with a paste poultice of swine's grease, and some wool; place a strip of cloth over the paste, the width of which should be about three fingers or nearly those, and its length should accommodate the area of the yellow bile, and over the part of the spine.
E aprop sia liat am liament le qual havem dit, e uze le malaute de nutriment subtil entro que sia sanat.	And then apply the incense which we have mentioned, and use the patient of subtle nourishment under which it heals.
E si roman alcuna iminencia en le loc en la fi de la sanacio, lahoras cove que sian aministradas medicinas que moilifico e liniscan am aministracio de la taula per lonc temps, la qual havem recomtada; e ja es aministrada en aquel loc lamina de plom.	And if there is any danger at the place near the end of the healing, then it should be treated with medicines that moderate and soothe over a long period as we have recommended; and already a lead plate has been administered in that place.
E alcunas veguadas accideys imminencia en le derier dels spondils del dos, e es cujat per aquela dislocacio; e es aquel os le qual ja imineys per que no cove que sia fayta prosompcio a lu am aquesta medicina, quar fort leu fara a tu accidir mort.	Sometimes dangers occur near the end of the vertebrae in the back, and are caused by that dislocation; it is that bone where you already suspect that no strong medicine should be applied to it, as it might cause your patient to die.
Capitol .xxxi.	Capitol.xxxxi.
De curacio de anca dislocada.	On the treatment of dislocated hip.
Sapias que la junctura del ancha e la junctura del muscle no endeve sino dislocacio tant solament, e no accideys ad aquelas aquo que accideys a las autras juncturas de petita remocio e concavitat.	Know that the joint of the hip and the joint of the muscle should occur only from dislocation, and not from what occurs in other joints due to slight movement and凹陷。
E la junctura de la ancha es dislocada segon quatre manieyras, quar es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, o a las partidas defora, o a las partidas denant, o a las partidas detras.	And the joint of the wrist is dislocated according to four manners, which is dislocated to the inner parts, or to the outer parts, or to the front parts, or to the back parts.
E majorment es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, e pauc a las partidas denant o a las partidas detras.	And mostly it is dislocated to the inner parts, and rarely to the front or back parts.
E senhal de la dislocacio de lu a las partidas de dintz es quar, quan tu ajustas la camba del malaute sana am la malaute, es pus longua e·l denolh es pus heminent que de la sana, e·l malaute no pot doblar le sieu pe deves le lenguonar, e es le loc que siec le lengonar apostemat de apostema caut, per so que·l cap de la coyssa ja es pervengut aqui.	And the sign of dislocation to the inner parts is that when you adjust the leg of the healthy side against the affected side, the injured part becomes longer and the swelling is more prominent than on the healthy side. The affected limb cannot bend its foot, so it must be stretched. This is the place where one should apply a cauterization to an abscess, so that the head of the swelling has been reached here.
E·l senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio es a las partidas defora, es que les accidentz de lu so contraris ad aquest accident.	And the sign of dislocation to the outer parts is that the symptoms of the injury are contrary to this dislocation.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas denant es quar expan la camba sieua segon compliment, mays empero no dobla aquela ses dolor que es en le denol, e si se perforsa ad anar e no pot sobre aquo a las partidas denant; e la urina de lu es retenguda e l’engonar de lu es apostemat, e deves la ambulacio de lu sobre le talo.	And the sign of dislocation to the front parts is that the swelling expands according to its complement, but it cannot bend the part where the pain is located. If forced to move towards the front parts, it cannot do so; and his urine is retained, and his congestion is an abscess. You should apply treatment to this area on the thigh.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas detras es que no expande le denol, ni no puesca doblar aquel denant que doble le engonar, e la camba de lu es pus breva que l’autra, e l’engonar es mollificat, e·l cap de la coyssa es deves aquel loc.	And a sign of dislocation in the rear parts is that the buttock does not expand, nor can it bend what is before to bend the injured part, and the thigh is shorter than the other, and the injured part is softened, and the groin is displaced to that location.
Mays reduccio de las specias de aquesta dislocacio es que tu consideras, lahoras, si la dislocacio es vetusta et antiqua, que ja es anticada am le havent aquela aprop tu aministras reduccio de lu e roman segon la sua disposicio, lahoras no es en aquela curacio de tot; e adonc no cove que en aquela sia fayta prosompcio.	The main reduction of these species of dislocation is that you consider, at the time, if the dislocation is old, whether it has already hardened. If so, then after you have had it near you, you administer the reduction according to its disposition, but not in all of that treatment; then one should not conjecture about it.
Mays en aquel del qual la dislocacio es recent, e es una de las quatre specias de dislocacio, lahoras te coyta ad aquo que volvas la junctura e extendas aquela a las partidas dedintz e a las partidas defora, e mau aquela a la dextra e sinistra, quar fort leu retorna e no indigeys de autra cura.	For the one where the dislocation is recent, and it is one of the four species of dislocation, then you should attend to this by reducing the joint and extending it to the internal and external parts, and move it to the right and left, as it will naturally return and you will not need any other treatment.
Mays, si no retorna en aquesta manieyra, lahoras cove que tu prepares ministre fort e extendas la camba de lu de la partida pus dejos, o am las suas mas, o am liament lo qual es liat sobre la camba desus le denol; e autre ministre extenda la ma de aquel desus enayssi que meta las suas mas dejos les titillics de lu; e aprop strenha am liament leon sobre la razit de la coyssa, e tengua autre ministre ters le extremitat del liament.	Moreover, if it does not return in this manner, then you should prepare a strong remedy and extend the thigh from the part left out, or on its hands, or with linen which is tied over the thigh above the buttock; another remedy extends the hand from above so that it touches the tips of its feet; and apply hot linseed over the groin, and have another person hold the end of the linen.
E sia extencio de lu o de la partida dedintz a l’angonar a la partida de la furcula, o de la partida detras a la partida del dos.	And it is an extension of the lung or from the inside part to the angle at the forked part, or from the back part to the side of the diaphragm.
E sia la extencio de totz aquels en una veguada entro que·l malaute sia elevat am le sieu cos de terra e que romangua pendent.	And it is the extension of all those in one swoop where the patient's body rises from the ground and bends.
E aquesta specia de extencio es specia cominal a totas quatre.	And this species of extension is special for all four.
E donc si la dislocacio retorna am aquo que havem dit, sira bo; e sino, lahoras es necessari a tota specia aquo que dire de la propria curacio.	And so, if the dislocation returns as we have said, it will be good; otherwise, for every species, what I say about its own cure is necessary.
En la reduccio de lu propria, quan es dislocada, e la dislocacio es a las partidas dedintz, cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu latz sa; e aprop pausa les liamentz sobre la razit de la coyssa en aquel loc le qual entre le cap de la coyssa e·l loc que es dejos le langonar; e aprop exten le liament en sus de la part del angonar a la pus auta partida de la furcula.	In the reduction of its own, when dislocated, and the dislocation is from the inside parts, make sure the patient lies on their side; then place the bandages around the thigh in that location where between the base of the thigh and where the bandage meets the angle of the hip. And extend the bandage from the part of the hip to the other side of the forked part.
E aprop autre ministre fort prengua les brasses de lu, e amerme le loc gros de la coyssa malaute e extenda a las partidas deforo per extencio vehement, quar aquela retorna en le sieu loc.	And then another minister firmly holds the thighs, compresses the thick part of the thigh, and extends to the outer parts by strong extension, so that it returns to its place.
E aquesta specia es de pus leugiera curacio am la qual aquest membre es reduzit que las autres specias.	And this species is of such gentle cure for which this member is reduced more than other species.
Mays si es excusat sobre tu e no obezeys al entrament am aquesta specia de curacio de tot, lahoras cove que sian liatz les dos pes del malaute ensemps am liament fort, leugier, sobre amdos les talos e amdos les denols.	And if it is excused for you and you do not obey the instruction for this cure, then ensure that both feet of the patient are tied together firmly but gently over both ankles and insteps.
E sia la longitut de quascun de son par la quantitat de quatre ditz, e sia la camba malaute extenduda mays que l’autre per quantitat de dos ditz.	And let the length of each be that of four fingers, and let the patient's leg be extended more than the other by the amount of two fingers.
E aprop le malaute sia suspendut sobre le cap del fust, e que sia en la mayso; e sia la longitut de lu de la terra la quantitat de dos brasses.	And then hang the patient's leg over the top of the stake, and let it be supported by the hand; and let the length of the rope be that of two braces.
E aprop comanda a un jove fort que minuesca le cap de la coyssa, e sia suspendut am le malaute autre jove, e l’autre jove minuent la coysa am fortaleza empellesca, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And command a strong young man to hold the patient's thigh, and let another strong man hang the leg, with one holding the thigh firmly to help return the joint to its place quickly.
Mays en la reducio propria, quan es dislocacio a la partida defora, cove que·l malaute jaga sobre pug segon que havem recomtat en le havent gelbozitat; e sia strenhut le liament sobre la camba malauta propriament e sobre le pietz de lu.	And in the proper reduction, when dislocation occurs at the outer part, ensure that the patient lies on his side according to what we have recommended for lateral decubitus; and strengthen the bandage around the affected leg and over its ankle.
E aprop dos fustz sian pausatz, la un als pes de lu, e l’autre al cap; e aprop sian pausatz fustz ajustatz al mieg del pueg ficat sobre·l qual draps humitz sian envolopatz, per so que·l malaute no sia dampnajat per que·l fust sia entre las coyssas de lu, per que deves la extencio a las partidas dejos no sia atirat.	And then two poles be placed, one on the foot and the other on the head; and then poles adjusted be placed in the middle of the stake fixed over which wet cloths be wrapped, so that the patient is not damaged by the pole being between their thighs, for you must allow the extension of the parts left undone.
E aprop quascun ministre extenda a la sua part, e·l metge am la sua ma enguala la reduccio segon l’art.	And then each minister extend to their part, and the doctor with his hand equalize the reduction according to the art.
Donc, si obezeys a revercio, sira bo grandament; e sino, pausa sobre aquela diligentment e ayssi quo havem dit en gelbozitat per aquela engualment.	Then, if you obey reversal, it will be very good; and otherwise, place your hand diligently over it, as we said in the equalization for that part.
Mays cove que·l malaute jagua sobre les sieus latz sa quetament.	May the gout attack only his legs and no more.
E quan la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras cove que la camba sia extenduda leugierament, e es segon aquesta meteyssa narracio sobre pueg; e le metge pause la palma de la sua ma dreyta sobre·l langonar malaute, e aprop coarte aquel am l’autra ma, e am aquela coartacio pausa aquel extendut a las partidas dejos a la partida del denol.	And when the dislocation is in the front parts, then it is good that the leg be slightly extended, and this according to this narrative method for the stake; and the doctor places the palm of his right hand on the gouty joint, and then ties it with the other hand, and with that tie he fixes the extension at the back part relative to the front part.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas detras, lahoras no cove que·l malaute sia extendut a las partidas dejos, e es elevat sobre la terra; habantz cove que sia pausat sobre causa dura, ayssi cum cove le eyssament si l’ancha de lu es dislocada a las partidas defora, segon aquo que havem dit del jasement de lu sobre dos anchas; e es sobre la sua cara e les liamentz sian extendutz, segon que havem dit, no ha guayre.	If the dislocation is at the rear parts, then do not allow the patient to stretch out his legs and stand on the ground; instead, elevate him above the ground. You should place him on a hard surface, just as you would if the width of the joint were dislocated outward, as we said regarding its position between two widths; and his face and thighs should be stretched out, as we have said, with little difficulty.
E cove que sia aministrada compressio am taula sobre le loc al qual yeys la junctura.	A compress should be applied on the area where the joint protrudes.
Donc cum la reducio es complida segon que cove — e·l senhal de la reduccio de lu no es amaguat a tu, e es que tu extendas del malaute doas cambas, e quan tu vezes aquelas enguals e le malaute extrenh la sieua camba e expandeys aquela ses excusacio, lahoras sapias que·l membre segon que cove es retornat — e lahoras tu ajusta doas coyssas e pausa empastre e extrenh am benda ayssi que la ancha no sia mauguda en alcuna de las partidas; e adheresca le malaute a repaus per tres dias o per quatre.	So, when the reduction is completed as it should — and you notice the sign of the reduction, which is that you can extend both legs of the patient, and when you test them and find that the limb returns to its normal position — then adjust the thighs and apply padding and wrap tightly so that the width is not altered in any part; and adhere the limb to rest for three or four days.
E aprop deslia le liament e l’empastre, e compara la una camba am l’autra.	Then remove the bandage and padding, and compare one leg with the other.
Lahoras, si vezas aquelas enguals en vustament, lahoras sapias que la dislocacio ja es fermada, e adonc layssa le malaute anar.	When you see the equal marks in the wound, then you know that the dislocation is already fixed, and then let the patient go.
E si vezas alcuna causa de mollificacio, lahoras tu retorna e emplastra aquel, e extrenh aquel segon la tua primiera strectura, e layssa aquel en tres dias.	And if you see any cause of swelling, then return and apply a plaster there, and extend that according to your first structure, and let it be for three days.
E aprop deslia aquel, e fay aquel tardar en ambulacio sobre quascu per alcus dias, entro que sia confortat.	Then loosen that, and let it have an ambulation on each part for some days until it is comfortable.
Capitol .xxxii.	Capitol.xxxii.
De curacio de dislocacio del denolh.	On the treatment of dislocation of the shoulder.
Le denolh es dislocat segon tres manieyras, quar es dislocat a las partidas defora, e a las partidas dedintz, e a las partidas dejos mays a las partidas detras; e a las partidas denant no es dislocat.	The shoulder is dislocated in three ways: it can be dislocated to the outward parts, to the inward parts, and to the front parts more than to the back parts; it is not dislocated to the rear parts.
E le senhal de dislocacio de lu es que comandes al malaute que aplique la sua camba am la coyssa; lahoras sapias que·l denol es dislocat.	And the sign of shoulder dislocation is that when you command the patient to apply their hand to their hip; then you know that the shoulder is dislocated.
E la restauracio de totas las manieyras de lu es que fassas cezer le malaute dreyt, enayssi que ja extenda la sieua camba, si pot sobre aquo; adherir le tieu dos a la cara de lu, e pausa le pe de lu entre les tieus pes; e aprop fay adherir le denol de lu am las tuas palmas, e rete aquelas entre les tieus ditz sobre le denolh de lu am fortaleza, e autre ministre extenda le sieu pe entro que·l denol retorne a son loc.	And the restoration of all these ways is that you make sure the patient lies straight, try to extend his side as much as possible; attach your two hands to the face of him, and place his foot between your feet; then make sure the sole of him adheres to your palms, hold those between your toes on the sole of him with strength, and another minister extends his foot so that the sole returns to its place.
E senhal de reddicio de lu es que la sua camba adharesca am la coyssa am levitat no-laboroza.	And the sign of relief is that his side adheres to the flank with light, effortless ease.
E aprop emplastra aquel e fay adhirir la camba am la coyssa, e aprop lia aquelas emsemps am una benda per tres dias o per quatre, e aprop deslia aquelas.	And then apply that and make the side adhere to the flank, and place those continuously with a bandage for three or four days, and later remove those.
E no uze le malaute de ambulacio per alcus dias, entro que sia sanat e cofortat.	And do not use the patient for labor for some days until he is healed and comforted.
Mays si la reduccio de lu a tu es excusada, lahoras aministra fort extencio am liamentz dels quals en la curacio de la hancha precedit narracio.	But if the reduction of it is excused to you, then administer strong extension to the limbs of which in the treatment of the hip the previous narration was given.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter XXXIII.
De la curacio de la dislocacio del talo.	For the treatment of dislocation of the ankle.
Le talo alcunas veguadas es remaugut per petita remocio, e alcunas veguadas es dislocat segon compliment, e la dislocacio de lu es fayta o a las partidas dedintz o a las partidas deforo.	The ankle is sometimes reduced by a small movement, and sometimes dislocated according to the injury, and the dislocation of the ankle is performed either on the inner parts or on the outer parts.
E le senhal de la dislocacio de lu es que vezes le talo imflat procedent a la partida a la qual es dislocat.	And the sign of the ankle dislocation is that you see the ankle swollen coming from the part to which it is dislocated.
Mays la curacio de la remocio de lu es de leugiera reddicio, e es que sia extendut am facilitat am las mas e sia engualhat entro que retorne.	More the treatment of reducing the ankle is by gentle movement, and it is that the swelling be reduced with ease and return to its normal position.
Mays en la curacio de lu quan es dislocat segon compliment, cove que fasses cezer le malaute dreyt, e tengua aquel un ministre fort e valent de la partida detras del dos de aquel en le mieg loc de lu.	More in the treatment of the ankle when it is dislocated according to the injury, make sure you correct the deformity properly, and have a strong and brave assistant behind the injured limb at the midpoint of the leg.
E aprop te tu am la tieua ma dreyta le pe de la pus sobirana part, e am la tua ma sinistra de la part pus dejos del pe en le loc de la cavilha.	And then place your right hand on the top part of the foot, and with your left hand hold the lower part of the foot at the location of the heel.
E aprop atira le pe a tu am la tua ma dreyta, e aprop am la sinistra per dos veguadas, e aprop exten am la sinistra; e empelleys le pietz del pe am la dreyta deves la camba ses trebalh.	And then draw the foot to your right hand, and towards the left by two passes, and extend the left; and push the foot on the right should lower the leg well.
E fay aquo doas veguadas segon que havem comtat.	And do this twice as we have counted.
E aprop empelleys le pietz del pe a la camba la tersa veguada, e tu es a la cavilha.	And then push the foot towards the thigh for the third pass, and you are at the ankle.
Donc si retorna en una veguada o en dos segon aquesta manieyra, e si vezes le pe engualhat, es bo; e sino, lahoras sobre lu itera la operacio, quar aquel retorna.	So if it returns in one or two passes in this manner, and if you grasp the foot properly, that is good; otherwise, then iterate the operation, for it may not have returned.
Mays si a tu es prohibida la reduccio de lu am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu dos sobre terra, e estrenh un paysel mot en terra fermat, e que caja entre las coyssas de lu, e tu ja has envolopat sobre lu drap per so que no ledesca le malaute.	But if the reduction is forbidden to you as we have prescribed, then place the patient on his side on the ground, and insert a firm stick between the patient's thighs, and you have already wrapped it with a cloth to prevent the stick from touching the patient.
E aprop le ministre de lu tengua las suas coyssas, e aprop autre ministre extenda le pe am las suas mas o am liament que lie sobre le col del pe; e aprop extenda aquel quascun ministre contre extencio del sieu par, e le payssel sia extant entre las coyssas del malaute retinent aquel, per so que·l cos de lu no sia atirat a las partidas dejos deves la sua extencio.	And then the minister hold their thighs, and another minister extends the foot with their hands or with a cloth tied around the ankle of the foot; and then each minister extends themselves against the extension of their part, and the stick remains between the patient's thighs holding them, so that the body of the patient is not drawn to the sides as you lower its extension.
E aprop le metge enguala la dislocacio am las sieuas mas, e autre ministre tengua la coyssa sana a las partidas dejos, quar la dislocacio retorna am la facilitat.	And then the doctor equalizes the dislocation with his hands, while another assistant holds the healthy thigh at the points left, so that the dislocation returns with ease.
E donc cum retorna la dislocacio e es declarada a tu la sanetat de la reduccio de lu, lahoras pausa emplastre e extrenh aquela am liamentz fortment, e ligua le pe am liament a la camba.	And then as the dislocation returns and its reduction is declared to you as healthy, then apply a plaster and bind the foot with strong lint to the leg.
E cove que temes o te guardes dels nervis les quals so detras sobre le talo, per que le liament sobre aquel no sia vehement e leda aquel fortment.	And beware of the nerves behind the ankle, for strong lint over that area might irritate and severely affect them.
E aprop layssa aquel per dos dias o per tres; e si le liament es mollificat, extrenh aquel.	And then leave that area for two or three days; and if the lint has become moist, change it.
E aprop deslia aquel en le ters dia o en le quart, e prohibeys le malaute de anament per xl dias.	And then remove the lint on the third day or the fourth, and prohibit the patient from walking for forty days.
Mays si es forsat de anar denant aquel spazi, no es fayta segurtat que la dislocacio no sia sobre lu dissolvuda e corrumpuda, e aprop aquo que no recipia curacio.	But if it is necessary for the patient to walk in that area, then there is no guarantee that the dislocation is not dissolved and corrupted, and such cases do not respond to treatment.
E si accideys a lu apostema caut, lahoras cove que tu aministre en la cedacio de lu aquo en lo qual precedic la nostra narracio, en autre loc de curacio e de embrocacio, entro que sia remauguda.	And if an abscess occurs at that site, then ensure that you administer as we described in the previous part of our narrative, in another location for treatment and fomentation, until it is ripe.
Capitol .xxxiiii.	Chapter 34.
De curacio de dislocacio dels ditz dels pes.	For the treatment of dislocation of the toes of the feet.
Cove que aquel qu’es dislocat sia engualhat am pauca extencio ses trebal; e aquo que no es dificil, abantz es leugier.	First, ensure that what is dislocated can be reduced with little extension; and whatever is not difficult, it is easier to do so quickly.
Mays si la dislocacio es en alcus nozes del dos del pe, lahoras cove que fassas cezer le malaute le sieu pe sobre loc engual de la terra o sobre taula, e sia estant ayssi cum si anava.	But if the dislocation is in some of the bones of the foot, then you should place the patient's foot on a flat surface or on a table, and have them lie as if they were sleeping.
E aprop tu sta de pes, e pausa le tieu pe sobre aquo que imineys de las juncturas, e aprop calca aquel am le tieu pe am vertut entro que retorne, e que vejas aquel ja engualhat e no aparesca en le loc eminencia.	Then stand on the patient's foot, and place your hand over what you suspect to be the joint. Gently push that area with your hand to promote its return to place, and observe whether it has been reduced and no prominence appears in the area.
E aprop pausa dejos le ventre del pe de lu una taula que prengua tot le pe, a la qual sian dos caps, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent e ferma per tres dias; e aprop deslia aquel e fay aquel repausar de ambulacio per motz dias, entro que sia estrenhut e de reddicio sia assegurat.	Then place the patient's foot on a table that can hold the entire foot, which has two ends. Gently maintain this position with a strong, steady structure for three days; then release it and allow the foot to rest by walking for several days, until it is strengthened and reliability is assured.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter 35.
De las specias de dislocacio que sian faytas am plagua o am fractura o am quascuna ensemps.	Of the types of dislocation that occur from blows or fractures or any other way.
Quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, e tu te perforssas en la curacio de aquela e en la restauracio de lu, motas veguadas succezeys la mort.	When any of these causes occur, and you are involved in the treatment and restoration thereof, mishaps may lead to death.
E per aquo no cove que sobre la curacio de lu presuma, sino aquel que es savi en l’art, de lonc uzatge, misericordios e pietados, tardiu, no-ardit ni presomptuos; e que use en le comensament de medicinas que cedan apostemas cautz tant solament, e leyssa le malaute al divinal jutgament, sino ad aquel al qual speras salut de perdicio, am de la malautia alleviacio, e en la qual appareys alcuna speransa.	And for this reason, you should not presume in the treatment of it, but rather someone who is skilled in the art, long accustomed to its use, merciful and pious; one who waits, not eager or presumptuous. He should use medicines at the beginning that allow the abscesses to come to a head with cautery only, leaving the fate to divine judgment, but to whom you hope for a cure, for alleviation of the illness, in which some hope appears.
E adonc esforsa te tantost far de lu la reduccio en le comensament de la causa, denant que endevengua apostema caut.	And then strive to perform the reduction at the beginning of the cause, before it develops into an abscess.
E adonc si le membre retorna segon que volem, lahoras aministra regiment le qual ceda apostema caut e cura la plagua am aquo que conveneys a lu dels enguentz desiccatius.	And then, if the limb returns as we wish, proceed to administer treatment that allows the abscess to come to a head with cautery and heals the wound according to what is suitable for it using drying ointments.
E si dislocacio es am fractura e accideys en le os satagias separadas, lahoras tu perforsa le stement de lor, e fay en aquo so que havem dit en las malautias simplas de aquo que es precedit en les locz de aquels.	And if dislocation or fracture occurs in the separated bones of the foot, then you must realign their joint, and do so as we have said in the simple ailments that precede here in those places.
E guarda e esquiva segon la tua vertut aquel del intrament en las vias de temor segon que a tu es precedida la mia predicacio; quar aquo es milhor a tu deves le tieu Creator, e mays permanent a la tua gloria, e mays saludos al tieu cos verays aquels en le tieu temps.	And guard and avoid according to your virtue that of the instrument in the ways of fear according to which my preaching precedes you; for this is better for you from your Creator, and more permanent for your glory, and more greetings to your true essence those in your time.
Ayssi fineysso las paraulas de Albucasim perfieytament de las quals Dieus ne sia benezeyt.	Thus you finish the words of Al-Bucasis perfectly, for which may God bless him.
Amen.	Amen.
