Ayssi comensan las paraulas de Albucasim .	Thus begin the words of Albucasim.
O, filhs, pus yeu he a vos complit aquest libre, le qual es le derier de la sciencia de medicina, per le compliment de lu so consequit la fi en lu, e per las exposicios de lu, e per las declaracios de lu, es a mi vist que yeu complesca aquel a vos am aquest tractat, le qual es partida de la operacio am ma, so es cyrurgia.	O, my children, now that I have completed this book, which is the last of medical science, through the completion of which you will reach its end, and by its explanations and declarations, it is clear to me that I complete for you this treatise, which pertains to my surgical operations.
Quar la operacio am ma es prostrada en nostre regio e en nostre temps de tot privada, entro que fort leu peric la sciencia de lu, e le vistigi de lu es ostat; e no romasero de lu sino alcunas petitas descripcios en les libres dels Antics, les quals mudero las mas e endevenc ad aquels error e heyssitacio entro que son clausas las entencios de lu e es elonguada la forsa de lu e l’art.	For our operation of the hand is proscribed in our region and in our time, being wholly forbidden; yet the science of it is well known, and its secrets have been revealed. It has not been abandoned but only some small descriptions appear in the books of the Ancients, which correct most of the errors and hesitations that are closed within them, weakening the understanding of it and prolonging the art.
E es vist a mi que yeu vivifique aquela am ordenacio de aquest tractat en aquela segon la via de exposicio e de declaracio e de abreviacio; e per que vengua am las formas dels ferramentz de cautheri e dels autres instrumentz de la obra cum sia per addicio de la declaracio, e per preparacio de lu, la qual causa es necessaria.	And it is evident to me that I should vivify that part of this treatise in the manner of explanation and declaration and abbreviation; so that it may include the forms of the cautery tools and other instruments of the work, with the addition of their declarations and preparation, which is necessary.
Mays la causa per la qual no es atrobat bo artifex am la sieua ma en aquest nostre temps, es quar la art de medicina es longua, e que cove le sieu actor denant aquo esser excercitat en la sciencia de anotomia la qual recontec Gualia entro que sapia les juvament dels membres e las formas de aquels, e la conjunctio e la separacio de lor; e haia la conoyssensa dels osses, dels nervis e dels lacertz, e·l nombre de aquels, e la egrecio de lor; e de las venas pulsatils e de las quietas, e dels locs del eyssiment de lor.	More the cause why a good craftsman does not use his hand well in our time is that the art of medicine is long and that its practitioner must be trained in the science of anatomy which Galen knew well enough to understand the youth of the members and their forms, as well as their conjunction and separation; and had knowledge of the bones, nerves, and sinews, their number, and their strength; and of the veins pulsating and quiet ones, and the places of their movement.
E per aquo ditz Ypocras que am u nom es mot, mays en l’obra petit, e majorment en la art de la ma.	And for this Hippocrates says that in name is good, but more in the short work, and especially in the art of the hand.
Mays nos ja avem dit de aquel en l’introit de aquest libre; quar qui no es scient aquo que li avem dit de anotomia, no es evacuat que no caia en error per la qual siran mortz les homes, ayssi cum yeu he vist trops de aquels, quar alscus son formatz en esta sciencia e gettan se de aquela ses sciencia e ses experiment.	More we have already spoken of this in the introduction to this book; for who does not know what we said about anatomy will be unlikely to fall into error through which many men have died, as I have seen too many of those. For some are formed in this science and stray from that other science and its experiments.
Quar yeu vi un metge folh e enperit aver incidit un apostema escrophilos en le colh de una femna, e incidic alcunas arterias del colh per que fluic gran sanc entro que la femna cazec morta entre las mas de lu.	For I have seen a foolish and experienced doctor who incurred an apostematose in the neck of a woman, and damaged some arteries so that great blood flowed until the woman died amid her greatest pains.
E vi un autre metge que pres que el traguera una peyra d’un home le qual avia procesit en sa etat, e la peyra era gran, e venguet a lu e trayssec aquela peyra am un tros de la vesiqua, per que aquel home al tertz dia es mort.	And there was another doctor who almost extracted a stone from a man who had been suffering from it for some time, and the stone was large, and brought it to him and removed that stone with a piece of the bladder, so that that man died on the third day.
E yeu ja apelat fuy a estrayre aquela, e vi que per la grandesa de la peyra e per la disposicio del malaute conogui subre lu que morira.	And I have already called for the stone to be removed, and I saw that due to the size of the stone and the position of the patient over which it lay, he would die.
E vi un autre metge le qual prenia stipendic de un duc de nostra terra per cyrurgia, e endeven a un crastrat negre le qual era deves lu fractura en la coyssa de lu; e perparec le metge am la sua ignorancia, estrayssec la fractura, sobre la plagua, am pulvinas e astelas am forta strectura, e no layssec a la plagua espiracio.	And there was another doctor who took payment from a duke of our land for surgery, and he came upon a black slave who had a fracture in the thigh; and because of the doctor's ignorance, he removed the fracture, over the wound, with pillows and splints of strong structure, and did not allow the wound to breathe.
E aprop le desliet segons los sieus desiriers, e aprop le relieg, e aprop le leyssec per alcus jorns e comandec que nos deslies le liament; e estec ayssi entro que la coyssa e·l pe foro apostematz, e pervenguet a perdicio.	And then the dislocation according to his desires, and then the realigning, and then the letting it rest for a few days and commanding us to release the ligament; and thus remain so until the thigh and foot recover, and thereby proceed to recovery.
E yeu fuy apelat a lu, e aparelhegui a desliar le liament, e conseguida es tranquilitat e enayssi amermet de sas dolors.	And I was called to him, and prepared to untie the ligament, and tranquility and an attempt to alleviate his pains was achieved.
Mays empero ja corrupcio era confermada en le membre, per que no pogui refrenar aquela, e no cessec perambular la corrupcio en le membre entro que·l malaute peric.	But however, corruption was confirmed in the member, because I could not restrain that, and did not cease to wander the corruption in the member while the malaise persisted.
E vi un autre metge le qual perforec un apostema cancros, e fo ulcerat aprop alscus dias, entro que foc magnificada la malicia de lu am lo senhor de lu.	And there was another doctor who perforated an oncous abscess, and it ulcerated for several days, during which the evil increased in him to the detriment of his lord.
La qual causa es quar le cranc caut es pur de humor melencolic, lahoras no cove que pervengua a lu am ferr de tot, sino que sia an membre le qual suffertes que de tot fos hostat.	The cause is that the pain arises purely from melancholic humors, but does not affect all parts, rather it affects a member that suffers from being attacked by all.
E per aquo, filhs, necessari es a vos que la operacio am ma sia devisada en dos devesios: so es en operacio a lu qual es associada salut, e en obra am la qual es perilh en las majors disposicios.	And for this reason, my sons, it is necessary for you that the operation be devised in two ways: one where the operation is associated with health, and another where the work is perilous in its major dispositions.
E yeu ja he exsitat aquo en tot loc de aquest libre en le qual venc opperacio en la qual es error e temor; per que necessari es a vos que guardetz aquo e layssetz aquel, per que les folhs no atrobo via a parlar e a vos desonestar.	And I have already existed in all parts of this book where the operation involves error and fear; therefore, it is necessary for you to keep this and leave that, so that the leaves do not find a way to speak against you and dishonor you.
E donc prenetz las vostras armas am sollicitut e am proteccio de Dieu , e les vostres malautes am falicitat e am fermetat.	And therefore take your arms with diligence and protection of God, and your patients with felicity and firmness.
E usatz de la milhor via per la gracia de Dieu perdusent a salut e a lausabla successio, e laysatz las malautias terriblas de difficil sanacio, e ostatz las vostras armas de aquo que vos fa temer, per so que ysitatio en vostra fe e en le vostre nom no vos evasisca: quar mays es remanent a la vostra gloria, e pus aut en le mon e en derier a las vostras sanctitatz.	And use the best way by the grace of God seeking salvation and praiseworthy success, and lay aside the terrible illnesses difficult to cure, and place your arms around what fears you, so that sitting in your faith and in your name you do not falter: for more remains to your glory, and more in the world and beyond to your sanctity.
Gualia ja diyssec en alcunas sieuas monicios:	Gaulia already has been dissected in some monastic schools:
“No mediquetz malautia mala, per so que mals metges no siatz nompnatz”.	Do not treat evil illnesses, so that bad doctors are not named,
E yeu ja he devesit aquest libre segontz tres capitols.	And I have already devoted this livre according to three chapters.
Comensa la divisio del libre, e primier de la primieyra partida.	Begin the division of the book, and first of the first part.
Le primier capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, en las formas dels instrumentz e en les ferrementz dels cauteris, e de aquo que necessari es en la opperacio.	The first chapter ordered of the foot, in the forms of the instruments and in the tools of the cautery, and of what is necessary in the operation.
La divisio de la segonda partida.	The division of the second part.
Le segon capitol, de siccio e perforacio, e de ventosas, e de plaguas, e de extractio de sagetas e de semblantz ad aquelas, tot capitolat e ordenat de las formas dels instrumentz.	The second chapter, on dryness and perforation, and on suction cups, and on blisters, and on the extraction of arrows and similar, all categorized and ordered by the forms of the instruments.
Divisio de la tersa partida.	The division of the third part.
Le tertz capitol, de restauracio e de dislocacio, e de curacio de torcio e de semblantz ad aquels; capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, e de las formas dels instrumentz.	The third chapter, on restoration and dislocation, and on the cure of a twisted neck and similar; chapter ordered by the head between the feet, and by the forms of the instruments.
De cauteri am foc e am medicina aguda e rememoracio de la opperacio.	On the cautery with fire and with sharp medical instruments, and a reminder of the operation.
Am aquel comensa le tractat de tot le libre.	With that, we begin the treatise of this book.
Cove que yeu digua la qualitat dels juvamentz de aquel cauteri e dels noccumentz de lu, e en qual compleccio sia prohibit cauteri.	First, I will describe the qualities of the metals used in the cautery and its components, and in what condition the cautery should not be used.
Donc dic que·l sermo de la qualitat del juvament de cauteri e del noccument de lu es sermo lonc e prolixs, e subtil per sciensa, e secret amaguat; e ja de lu a parlat gran multitut de savis, e de lu se son desacordatz, et a mi abasta un petit dels sermons de lor, temen perlonguacio.	Therefore, I say that the discourse on the quality of the cautery metal and its components is long and tedious, subtle through science, and a hidden secret; much has already been said about it by wise men, and they are in disagreement. For me, a little from their sermons will suffice, as I fear lengthiness.
E donc dic que cauteri comfereys a tota compleccio universalment la qual es am materia o ses materia, exceptat dos compleccios, las quals son compleccios caudas ses materia .	And thus it is said that a cautery is applied to all composition universally which is of flesh or bone material, except for two compositions, which are compositions of bone material.
En la compleccio cauda e secca am materia se desecordero; quar alcus dyssero que cauteri es juvatiu ad aquela, e les autres dyssero le contrari de aquel, que cauteri no es convenient en malautia la qual es per qualiditat e per siccitat, quar natura del foc es qualiditat e siccitat, e enconvenient es que malautia cauda e secca am aquo que es caut e sec sia sanada.	In the composition of bones and tendons, which are of flesh material, they dry up; for some said that a cautery is beneficial for that, while others said the opposite, that a cautery is not convenient in illness which is due to quality and dryness, for the nature of fire is quality and dryness, and it is inconvenient that an illness of bones and tendons, which are of flesh material, be healed by what is hot and dry.
E diysec aquel que ditz le contrari de aquel, que per cauteri es fayt juvament en tota malautia cauda e secca que ve en les cors dels homes, quar quan tu comparas le cors de home e las humiditatz de lu a la compleccio del foc, atrobas le cors de home freg.	And he who says the opposite argues that by cautery, one is cured in all bone and tendon illnesses that come in men's bodies, for when you compare the body of man to the humidity of the fire composition, you find the body dry.
E yeu dic per le sermo de aquel, que esperiment aquo ja a mi alscunas vetz a descubert.	And I say according to the saying of that person, who has already experienced this several times and discovered it.
Mays empero no cove que vengua sobre aquo aquel que ja es exproat e excersitat en le capitol de cauteri per derier exercici, e a conogut la diversitat de la compleccio dels homes e la disposicio de las malautias en lor meteyssas, e las causas de aquelas, e·ls accidentz de lor, e l’espasi del temps de aquelas.	But I do not claim to have experienced this as much as those who are well versed and exercised in the Capitol of cautery through prolonged practice, and who have known the diversity of human composition and the disposition of illnesses in their various forms, and the causes of these, and the accidents related to them, and the duration of these.
Mays en las autras compleccios, no es sobre vos temor, e majorment en las malautias fregas e humidas, quar ja totz les metges se son acordatz sobre aquels, e no so desecordatz en le juvament am cauteri en aquelas.	In other complications, you need not fear, and especially in the wet and painful conditions, for all doctors are agreed upon those, and do not differ in using cautery in such cases.
E sapiatz, filhs, que del secret de curacio per cauteri am foc e de la bontat de lu, so sobre cauteri am medicina comburent, es quar le foc es simple, la accio del qual no perven sino al membre le qual es cauterizat e no notz al autre membre am lu ajustat sino am petit nocument.	Understand, sons, that the secret of curing by cautery with fire and its goodness lies in the burning medicine, for the fire is simple, and its action reaches only the member being cauterized and causes no great harm to other members.
Mays la accio de medicina comburent perven ad aquel en les membres le qual de lu alunhat, e fort leu fa venir en le membre malautia de dificil sanacio e fort leu ausit.	Yet the action of the burning medicine reaches those members from which it was taken, and strongly brings to the diseased member a difficulty in healing that is hard to cure and quickly worsens it.
Mays le foc, per la sua sublimitat e de la sua substancia bontat, no fa aquo sino que superfluisca E ja es a nos conogut per experiment e per longitut de servitut de studi am l’art sobre le veritat de las causas; e per aquo yeu so excusat de la longitut del sermo E si no fos que no es legut al mieu libre en aquest pausero a vos secret amaguat am le foc, e la qualitat de la operacio de lu en les cors e de la sieua expulcio per la qual expellis las malautias, am sermo philosophic demostratiu, le qual siria acuit en las vostras pessas.	Yet the fire, by its subtlety and goodness of substance, does not cause anything but to superfluously consume. We are already familiar with this through experience and long service in studying the art on the truth of causes; and for this reason, I am excused for the length of my discourse. If it were not that this is not read at your leisure in this pause, and you have a secret hidden about fire, concerning the quality of its operation in bodies and the nature of its expulsion by which you expel diseases, then I would use a philosophical demonstration in your presence, which would be acute for your understanding.
E sapiatz, filhs, que els se desacordan del temps en le qual es convenient far cauteri e pausan le milhor temps de primaveyra.	And be wise, sons, that they do not disagree about the time at which it is convenient to make a cautery and pause the best time of spring.
E yeu dic que cauteri es convenient en tot temps, per so que le nocument per le temps accident es submergit en le juvament de aquo que am le cauteri es atirat, e majorment si le cauteri es per dolors o de dolors necessaries, fortz e fistinas, las quals no suffertan tarditat per so que es temut de aquelas que vengua malicia, que es major que petit nocument entrant per lo temps.	And I say that a cautery is convenient at all times, because the damage from the accidental season is submerged in the youth of what is cauterized, and especially if the cautery is for pains or necessary pains, strong wounds, and fissures, which do not suffer delay for fear of those that come from evil intent, which are greater than minor damage entering through time.
E aysso no catz en vostras pessas, o, filhs, aquo no estiman sino le poble vulguar e les fols metges, so es que ad aquela malautia que es sanada per cauteri no es redicio tot temps, e pausan aquel consequen.	And thus do not doubt in your own cases, sons, that they consider only the common people and the foolish doctors, for it is not always convenient to use a cautery for that illness that is cured by it, and they pause that consequence.
E la causa no es ges ayssi quo els cuydan per aquo, quar cauteri no es sino en loc de medicina la qual altera la compleccio e esicca las humiditatz las quals son causa per que veno las dolors.	And the reason is not thus because they consider it so; for a cautery is not other than in place of medicine which alters the composition and dries up the humors which are the cause of the wind and pains.
Mays empero cauteri superflueys sobre la medicina per volicitat de la sua valitut e vertut de la sua operacio e grandesa del sieu senhor.	Yet, however, excessive use of cautery over medicine for the swiftness of its efficacy and virtue of its operation and greatness of its sovereign power.
E es possible que la sua malautia retorne en alcuna hora del temps, segon la compleccio del malaute e la locacio de la sua malautia, e la vertut de lu, e aquo que es preparat en le cors de lu de la agreguacio de las superfluitatz en lu, e aquo que es pervengut a lu en la sua acquisicio en viandas e semblantz de aquelas causas; sino que la malautia en la qual sia aministrat cauteri sia malautia subtil en membre de paucas superfluitatz e humiditatz, ayssi cum cauteri de dent per dolor e semblantz ad aquel, possible es que en lu no retorne aquela dolor, mays aquo se fa en petitz.	It is possible that the patient's illness may return at some point in time, according to the complexity of the illness and the location of the illness, the virtue of the person, and what is prepared within the body from the accumulation of superfluities in it, and what is acquired by the person through food and similar causes; but if the illness in which cautery is administered is a subtle illness in a member with few superfluities and humidity, like a dental cautery for pain and similar to that one, it is possible that that pain will not return, but this is done in small amounts.
E mays sermo vulgar es que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, e es sermo dreyturier, no ad aquo que els entendo en lu, quar els crezo que no es curacio que aprofieyta am medicina ni am autra causa aprop cauteri.	It is more common to say that cautery is the last remedy of medicine, and it is a saying of a surgeon, not what we understand by it, for I believe that it is not a cure that benefits either medicine or any other cause except cautery.
E la causa es en contrari de aquo; e la entencio que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina no es sino quan administram las manieyras de curacio en alcunas malautias, e aquelas medicinas no conferieysso, e aprop en la fi de la causa aministra hom cauteri, e aprofieyta ad aquela.	The cause is the opposite; and I understand that cautery is the last remedy of medicine only when we administer the methods of cure in some illnesses, and those medicines do not work, and at the end of the illness, one administers cautery, which benefits that.
E lahoras de aqui cat16 que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, no segon la entencio la qual entendo les vulgars e trops dels fols metges.	And here it is that a cautery is the last remedy of medicine, not according to understanding which I understand of the common and most foolish doctors.
E diyssero les antics que cauteri am aur es milhor que cauteri am ferr, e no diyssero aquo sino per la equalitat del aur e sublimitat de la sua sustancia.	And the ancients said that a gold cautery is better than an iron one, and they would not say this only because of the equality of gold and the sublimity of its substance.
E diyssero que le loc de cauteri no fa brac, cum aquo no sia absolutament vertat, quar yeu ja he aquo proat e he atrobat que aquel no fa aquo sino en alcus cors ses les autres, e cauteri am aquel es bo e milhor que am ferr ayssi quo els diyssero; mays empero quan tu fas cauteri am foc am de aur, no es a tu declarat, quar es egnit segon la quantitat que tu vols per la rugor de l’aur, e quar prepara a recebre freg; e si ajustas sobre lu ignicio se fon l’aur per le foc, e caso en le foc alcunas laminas per que le artifex catz per la occupacio de aquel.	And they said that the place for cauterization does not burn, since it is not absolutely heated, for I have tried this and found that only in some bodies does it work where others do not. A gold cautery is good and better than iron, as they would say; yet when you make a cauterization with fire made of gold, it has been shown to you, for it ignites according to the quantity you want by the hardness of the gold, and prepares to receive heat; and if you adjust over the flame, the gold melts due to the fire, and some sheets are cast into the fire so that the craftsman can cut through its occupation.
E per aquo es fayt cauteri am ferr deves nos pus leugerament e pus propdanament a rectitut de operacio.	And for this, you should make the cauterization with iron more lightly and more precisely in accordance with the operation.
E yeu ja he ordenat aquest capitol en le cauteri segon capitols, et he ordenat aquels del cap entro les pes, per so que aleugo le demandant aquo que vol de lu.	And I have already arranged this chapter concerning the cautery according to other chapters, and I have arranged those of the foot within it, so that I delay the request of the patient for what he wants.
De cauteri de dolor de cap per frigiditat e humiditat.	Of the cautery for headaches due to cold and humidity.
Le capitol primier.	The first chapter.
Aquesta cauterizacio confereys a la humiditat e frigiditat sobre le servel accident de la qual so doas causas, so es causa de soda e multitut de flux raumatic, apelat corissa, del cap a las partidas dels huelhs e de las aurelhas fluent, e multitut de dormir, e de dolor de dentz e del guolayro, e universalment de tota malautia que ve per fregiditat, ayssi cum paraliticament, sodo e apoplexio, e semblantz en aquelas malautias.	This cautery addresses the cold and humidity over the servel accident of which there are two causes, these being the cause of swelling and much traumatic flux, called corissa, from the head to the regions of the neck and ears that flow, as well as much drowsiness, toothache, and migraine, and generally all illness that comes through coldness, such as paralytic, swelling, apoplexy, and symptoms in those illnesses.
La forma de aquesta cauterizacio es aquesta, que primieyrament comandes al malaute que sia evacuat am medicina lacsativa le cap mondificant, per tres o per quatre nueytz, segon que exhigeys la vertut del malaute e la edat de lu e la sua costuma.	The form of this cautery is as follows: first, you command the patient to be evacuated with a mild medicine for three or four nights, according to the virtue of the patient, their age, and their habit.
E aprop comanda li que raza le sieu cap am razor, e aprop fay aquel sezer entre las tuas mas sobre una banca cayrada e que pause las suas mas sobre le pietz sieu.	And then command him to shave his head with a razor, and place that razor between your hands on a leaning bench and have his hands rest on his own foot.
E aprop pausa la razit de la tua palma aprop le pous sobre la razit del nas entre les huels sieus.	And then place the razor from your palm near the throat between his heels.
Mays empero, cum le tieu dit del mieg loc es pervengut, signa aquel loc am tenta, e aprop igneys le cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma:	More importantly, since the middle location has been reached, mark that place with a needle, and then heat the olive cautery, the form of which is as follows:
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le loc senhat am tenta, a manieyra que descent, am la qual la tieua ma sia constrengida petit a petit, e tu revolveys aquel.	And then place the heated cautery over the marked place with a needle, in such a way that it descends gradually, and your hand is gradually constrained, and you rotate it.
E aprop leva la tua ma leugerament e reguarda le loc, e si veses ja del os esser descubert alcuna quantitat del cap, ayssi cum la quantitat de gra de errs, lahoras eleva la tua ma, e si no torno la tua ma am aquel ferr, am autre de aquel, si es enfrigidat, entro que sia vist del os aquo que yeu he dit a tu.	And then lift your hand slightly and examine the place, and if you see any part of the bone being uncovered by a drop of oil, as much as a grain of wheat, then lift your hand. If not, return your hand to that iron, or another of them, if it is cooled, so that what I have said can be seen on the bone.
E aprop pren un petit de sal e disolveys aquel sobre le loc e leyssa aquel per tres jorns.	And then take a little salt, dissolve it in that [solution], and leave it there for three days.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto enbegut en boder e leyssa aquel sobre lu entro que sia destrusida la scara del foc.	And then place it over the inflamed wound edge and leave it there until the scar of the fire is destroyed.
E aprop cura le loc am anguent tetrafarmacon entro que sia sanat.	And then cure the place with ointment of tetrafarmachon until it is healed.
E ja diyssero que quant la plagua roman uberta, tant mielhs geta le brac, per que es milhor e mays juvatiu.	And we have said that when the wound is opened wide, it heals better, because it is better and more beneficial.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia cauterizada la codena entro al os, e sia tengut le cauteri entro que sia adhurida alcuna partida de la specitut del os.	And some of them say that the condyle should be cauterized within the bone, and that the cautery should remain until a part of the bone's surface is cauterized.
E aprop sia ras aquo que es adhust del os, e aprop sia curat.	And then scrape what is adhered to the bone, and then cure it.
E diyssero autres que am lo cauteri pervengua al derier, entro que enprema en le os forta enprecio entro que le os caga, e aquesta es la forma de alphecati petit:	And others say that the cautery should reach the marrow, pressing firmly into the bone until it cools, and this is the method of Alphécatii petit.
E estiman de aquel loc expiran la vapors del cap.	And they consider that from that place exhale the vapors of the head.
E sia tenguda la plagua uberta per lonc temps, e aprop sia curada entro que sia consolidada.	And the wound should be kept open for a long time, and then healed before it consolidates.
Mays a mi no so vistas aquestas doas specias de cauteri de tot, sino en alcus homes segon via de temor; e layssa aquel, deves mi, milhor es am salut, quan es; quar le cap es develitat per solucio de continuitat de lu ayssi cum havem testificat en les autres membres, e majorment quan le cap del malaute es de freul natura.	But I do not see these two types of cautery in all cases, except in some people out of fear; leave that one, I advise you, when it is for the better health, as the head is affected by solution due to the continuity of the body, just as we have testified in other members, especially when the head of the patient is of cold nature.
E la specia de cauteri primieyra es mays salva e milhor deves mi; e de aquela husi e am aquela obra am salut.	And the first type of cautery is safer and better, I advise you; use that one and do that for health.
Capitol segon.	Chapter two.
Del cauteri del cap.	Of the cautery for the head.
Quan en tot le cap accideys dolor cronica e longua e aquo es en le malaute prolonguat, e usa de gerras e de cochias e de capipurges e de emplaustres e de guatz e de cadels e de gualinas e de semblantz, e majorment si ja es cauterizat am un cautere le qual recontam e no aprofieyta a lu deguna de aquelas causas, lahoras considera quar si le cap del malaute es de fort creacio en la sua natura; e no es freul et atroba mot gran freg, lahoras aquel cauterisa am autra cauteri dejos aquel un pauc.	When chronic and long-lasting pain occurs in the head of the patient, and this has been prolonged in the illness, and if the patient uses towels, pillows, head purges, plasters, poultices, cats (a method of applying a hot compress), gualinas (a type of fomentation), and semblants (a form of application or treatment), and especially if the head has already been cauterized with a cautery which does not improve the condition due to any of these causes, then consider whether the head of the patient is of strong constitution in its nature; and if it is not cold and there is no great distress, then leave that cautery and use another one.
E aprop cauterisa aquel sobre le corn del sieu cap am cauteri entro que la codena es partida.	And then cauterize that on the top of his head between where the seam has split.
Incisa la codena e sia descuberta del os la quantitat la qual havem recontat e cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en la partida deriera del cap en le loc le qual es apelat vas, — e es aquel loc en le qual es pausada ventosa.	Incise the seam and the quantity of the mouth which we have counted, and cauterize that with a cautery at the rear part of the head in the place called vas, — and this is the location where suction is applied.
Et alleuja la tua ma en aysso, e no descobras le os, quar le malaute per aquo atroba mot gran dolor diversa de la dolor de totz les autres cauteris del cap.	And move your hand here, but do not uncover the mouth, for the patient experiences great pain different from that of all other head cauterizations.
E yeu diyre aquest cauteri en son loc, quar cove que·l cauteri am le qual so cauterisatz les corns del cap e le occiput es pus subtil cauteri que aquel am le qual es cauterisat le mieg loc del cap; e aquesta es la forma de lu.	And I say this cauterization in its place, for know that the cauterization on the horns of the head and the occiput is a finer cauterization than that which cauterizes the middle part of the head; and this is the form of it.
Capitol ters.	Top of the head.
De cauterisacio de emigranea no-antiqua.	On the cauterization for new migraines.
Quan endeve en la partida del cap dolor sodo, o es stenduda dolor entro al uelh, sia evacuat am medicinas le cap mondificantz, e sia aministrada l’autra curacio, la qual yeu he dita en las devesios de las malautias; e tot no aprofieyta, lahoras cauterisacio en lu es en dos manieyras: o cauterisacio am medicina acuta comburent, o am ferr.	When there is a sharp pain in the part of the head or a dull pain between the ears, the head should be treated with medicines that penetrate deeply, and then another treatment should be administered, which I have described in the deviations of diseases; and if this does not help, cauterization can be performed in two ways: either with a sharp burning medicinal cautery or with iron.
Mays cauteri am medicina comburent es que tu prenguas una dolsa de alh, e escorgas aquela e abcindas las extremitatz de lu de amdos les caps.	May a cautery in medicine burn be that you take a small piece of aloes, heat it, and separate its ends from both sides.
E aprop incideys le loc de la dolor en la templa am una lanceta lada entro que sia en lu feyt loc dejos la codena, entro que sia occultada.	Then apply the place of the pain in the temple with a lancet slightly inside where you make the incision, and let the needle be hidden.
E aprop strenh sobre lu am stopada per descent constreccio, e layssa aquel per le spazi de tres horas; e aprop deslia le e tratz le alh, e laysa la plagua per dos o per tres jorn, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto submergit en boder entro que le loc fassa brac.	Then strengthen over the place stopped by descending compression, and leave it for the space of three hours; then remove the aloes, and let the wound remain for two or three days, and place your hand under it submerged in water until the area heals.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Then cure that with ointment until it is healed.
E si tu voys, fe aquo am alcunas medicinas comburentz las quals yeu he scriutas en le douse tractat de medicinas comburentz.	And if you wish, do what some medicines require, which I have written in the second treatise of burning medicines.
Mays la cauterisacio am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: igneys per cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	May the cautery be performed according to this manner: heat it with fire of which this is the form:
e es apelat claus clavilhs, quar le cap de lu es ayssi cum forma de clavel en le qual es alcuna curvitat, e·n le mieg loc de lu es eminensia petita.	and it is called a key clamp, for the head of it is shaped like a key with some curvature, and in the middle part there is a small prominence.
E aprop pausa sobre loc de la dolor, e rete la tua ma — per que no sia adhurida la arceria la qual es dejos — e revol le ferr petit a petit am velocitat.	And then place your hand over the location of the pain, so that the artery which is left is not adhered, and turn the small iron bit slowly and quickly.
E si la quantitat de lu que es adhurida per la specitut de la codena ayssi quo la maytat de lu, e elava la tua ma per so que la arteria no sia adhurida la qual es dejos, per so que no vengua flux de sanc.	And if the amount that is adhered by the cut of the cord is as much as its size, lift your hand so that the artery which is left is not adhered, so that no flow of blood comes.
E aprop enbibeys coto en aygua de sal e pausa aquel sobre le loc, e layssa aquel per tres dias; e aprop pausa coto mulhat am boder, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then soak it in salt water and place it over the area, leaving it for three days. Then place something warm over it, and apply ointment until it heals.
E si voys, cauterisa am la extremitat del cutellari segon cauteri, e guarda te de incisio de arteria en aquesta emigranea propriament no-antiqua.	And if you burn it, cauterize at the tip of the scalpel according to the cautery, and guard against cutting the artery in this new migraine properly.
Capitol quart.	Capitol quart.
De cauterizacio d’emigranea antiqua.	Of the cauterization for old migraine.
Quan tu curas emigranea am aquo que havem dit de la curacio precedent, e aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias, e no aprofieyta la curacio, e vezes per la malautia que no abasta a lu aquo que havem dit del primier cauteri am medicina o del cauteri am foc, lahoras cove que tu igniscas le cauteri cutellar entro que sia albificat, pus que significas sobre le loc de la dolor am linha de longuesa de la qual sia la maytat del dit, o quays aquel; e depausa la tua ma per una veguada e strenh aquela entro incidiscas la arceria e pervengua entro al os.	When you cure migraine as we have said in the previous treatment, and as we have said in the divisions of diseases, and the treatment is not effective for the pain, and sometimes due to the disease it is insufficient what we have said about the first cautery with medicine or the cautery with fire, then you should ignite the surgical cautery when it is white-hot. Place a line on the location of the pain that corresponds to its size, or mark that place; then lift your hand for a moment and strongly hold that area to avoid injuring the artery and penetrate into the bone.
Empero necessari es a tu que guardes de la continuacio de la mandibula, la qual es mauguda deves la masticacio, e que le lacert no sia adhurit e le nervi le qual mau aquela, e que no s’endevengua espasme.	But you must guard against the continuation of the jawbone, which is used for chewing, and ensure that the tendon is not attached and the nerves, which supply it, are not affected, and that no spasm occurs.
E si es sobre la custodia e cautela de flux de sanc de l’arteria que es abciza, quar en la abcizio de lu es temor, e majorment ad aquel le qual ignora aquo que fa e no es studios e esproat; e layssa la operacio en lu al comensament.	And if it is about the care and caution of the flow of sand from the artery that is amputated, for in its amputation there is fear, especially for him who ignores what he does and is not studious and hesitates; and leaves the operation to the beginning.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio del regiment de flux de sanc accident de la arceria segon la sieua manieyra, en le sieu loc de aquest libre.	And I will recall the regulation of the flow of sand in the accident of the artery according to its manner, in this place of this free text.
E si veses de aquesta malautia que no abaste aquest cauteri e veses le cors del malaute tollerable, cauteriza aquel en le mieg loc del cap ayssi cum havem recontat, e cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And if you see this illness has not reached this cautery and you see the body of the patient tolerable, cauterize it in the middle of the foot as we have recounted, and cure the wound while it is healing.
E si voys, aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le capitol de streccio de arceria am cauteri havent dos cotels, e es milhor cauterizacio aquesta e mays conferent.	And if you see, apply the cautery which we have said in the chapter on the strengthening of the artery with two knives, and this cautery is better and more appropriate.
Capitol .v.	Capitol V.
De cauterisacio de las dolors de aurelhas.	Of the cautery treatment for ear pains.
Quan en la aurelha ve dolor per freg e es curat am causas lacsativas e am l’autra curacio la qual he dita en la divisio, e no es remauguda la dolor, lahoras igneys le cauteri, e es aquest le qual ha nom puncta, del qual aquesta es la forma:	When there is pain in the ear due to cold and it is cured by causes of laceration and another treatment which I have described in the division, and the pain is not relieved, then apply the cautery, which is called puncta. This is its form:
E aprop puncta aprop la ignicio, e sia menat al enviro de tota la aurelha ayssi cum roda es revolguda, o en le circuit de quascuna essemps si la dolor es en quascuna.	Then place the puncta near the beginning, and extend it around the entire ear as if a wheel were turned, or in the circumference of any part if the pain is in that part.
Alonga te am le cauteri de la razit de la aurelha pauc a pauc pus que aias senhat le loc am tenta.	Lengthen the cautery from the root of the ear gradually until you have touched the location where the pain is felt.
E si le cauteri de detz puntz en tota aurelha, e quays aquela, e aprop cura les locz entro que sian sanatz.	And if the cautery of these puncta covers the entire ear, and you then withdraw it, and proceed to cure the areas between as they are healed.
Capitol .vi.	Capitol VI.
De cauterizacio de turtura.	Of the cautery treatment for tortura.
Turtura la qual es curada e am cauterizacio no es sino de las specias las quals veno per flecma, segon que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias.	The pain which is cured by cautery is not anything other than due to the vein through phlegm, as we have said in the divisions of the illnesses.
Esquiva cauterizacio de la specia que endeve per siccacio o per spasme del nervi.	Avoid cautery for the part that suffers from dryness or spasms of the nerve.
Quan tu curas aquela specia de turtura am jerras e capipurgi e guarguarismes, e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas le malaute am tres cauteris: la i deves la razit de la aurelha, e·l segon un petit dejos le sieu templar, e le ters deves la conjunccio de doas labias.	When you cure that kind of pain by cauterization, drainage, and therapies, and you are not satisfied with your cure, then when you cauterize the illness, you should use three cautery strokes: the first along the ear ridge, the second a small touch on its temple, and the third at the junction of two lips.
E pausa lo tieu cauteri per le contrari de la partida malauta, quar mollificacio no ve sino en la partida que apar sana.	And place your cautery on the opposite side of the affected part, for mollification occurs only in the area that appears healthy.
E la forma de cauterisacio es que cauterizas aquel am le cauteri en le dreyt de la extremitat de la aurelha pus sobirana un petit sobre le corn del cap, e en le templar autre, la longuesa del qual sia segon la longitut del dit pous, e depausa la tua ma am cauteri entro que sia comburida la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena.	And the method of cautery is to cauterize that part along the straight line of the outer ear, a little above the corner of the head, and on the temple, another, the length of which should be according to the length of the side of the face. Then place your hand over the cautery until the quantity of the affected part of the ear is burned.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri, e es specia del cutellari, la forma del qual es denant mesa.	And this is the form of the cautery, and it is special to the barber-surgeon, the form of which is shown in front here.
Mays empero pus subtil es que aquel un pauc ayssi co vesas; e cove que cotel en lu de superflua groceza un pauc.	But more subtle is that when you see only a slight reddening; and note with a knife for superfluous grittiness a slight amount.
E aprop cura le loc am aquo que es denant procezit entro que sia sanat.	And then cure the area where it is shown treated until it is healed.
Capitol .vii.	Capitol. vii.
De cauterizacio de apoplextia antiqua.	On the cautery treatment for old apoplexy.
Quan apoplextia es antiquada e curas aquela am aquo que havem dit e no confereys la tua medicacio e le malaute no ha febre, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris: sobre totz les corn del sieu cap; e am cauteri e le mieg loc del cap, ayssi cum havem dit; e am cauteri en le coguot.	When apoplexy is old and you have treated it as we said, and the patient does not have fever, then cautery treat that area with four cauteries: mainly on all the horns of its head; and with a cautery on the middle of the head, as we said; and with a cautery on the scrotum.
E la manieyra del cauteri es fayta segon que es desus dit.	And the method of the cautery is made according to what was said above.
E ja es cauterizat sobre la boca del estomac; e es mays derier; e aprop sia curat am aquo que procezeys.	And already it has been cauteryed on the mouth of the stomach; and it is more behind; and then you should treat with what you are proceeding.
Capitol .viii.	Capitol VIII.
De cauterizacio de obblivio fayta per flacma.	Cauterization of oblivion performed by flame.
Cove que sian donatz al malaute en le comensament jerras grans e pilulas le servel mondificantz.	Cover that they be given to the patient at the beginning large jars and pills of the servant millifying.
E aprop ras le cap tot del malaute e pausa sus le coguot de lu emplaustre de cetre descrit en le tractat dels emplastres.	And then place your hand on the head of the patient and hold it over the heart described in the treatise on plasters.
E pausa aquel alcunas veguadas, quar aquel es manieyra de cauteri.	And hold it there for several minutes, as this is the way of cautery.
E fay aquo segon aquel meteys orde le qual ja he dit.	And do so according to that method and order which I have already said.
E donc si per aqueles sanat bo es; e sino, lahoras fay a lu tres cauteris en la deriera partida de sieu cap, les quals sian deysendentz de la partida pus sobirana del cap entro a la partida pus dejos del col.	And therefore if for those good herbs it is; and otherwise, then make three cautery marks on the back part of his head, which are descending from the upper part of the head to the lower part of the neck.
E pausa entre quascun cauteri la grossetut del dit, e aprop cura lo cauteri am aquo que es procedit.	And place your hand between each cautery and carefully control the cautery as it is applied.
Mays si tu vos addicio e le malaute es aquo tollerant, lahoras fay a lu cauteri en le mieg loc; e si voys major addicio, lahora cauteriza aquel sobre les dos corns.	And if you add more substance to the sore and it is tolerable, then make the cautery in the middle location; and if you have greater addition, then cauterize that area over the two horns.
Aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat; e sia le cauteri olivar segon la forma denant donat.	And cure that until it is healed; and let the cautery be olive-shaped as given in the form above.
Capitol .ix.	Capitol.ix.
De cauterisacio de parazili e de mollificacio de tot le cors.	On the cautery treatment of piles and the mollification of the entire body.
Cove que tu procesiscas en mondificacio del cap am jerras e am aquo que havem dit; e aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap, e am cauteri sobre totz les corns del cap, e am cauteri sobre la deriera partida de lu, e am tres cauteris sobre les spondils del col.	Cover that you proceed in mollification of the head with stones and as we have said; and near the head of the patient, and carefully apply the cautery in the middle location of the head, and with cautery over all the horns of the head, and with a cautery over the back part of it, and with three cauteries on the vertebrae of the neck.
E si es necessari en la malautia de mollificacio del cors de trops aquel e les malautes tollerantz e la malautia es fort, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e dererament am cauteri entro que sia comborit de la codena mot de lu, e aleva la tieua ma.	And if it is necessary in the illness of mollification of the body for more of those and the pains are tolerable and the illness is severe, then cauterize that with four cauteries on the vertebrae of the back, and behind that with a cautery where the spine meets it, and lift your hand.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat, e aquest sia cauteri olivar.	And then cure that which is within until it is healed, and use an olive cautery.
Capitol .x.	Capitol.
De cauterisacio de epilemcia.	Of the cautery treatment for epilepsy.
No es cauterizat le epilemtic sino aquella epilemcia es per flecma.	No is it cauterized the epileptic, but rather the epilepsy is due to phlegm.
E donc cove que mondifiques le cervel de lu al comensament de lu am yeras e am l’autra curacio la qual havem dicta en la divisio quan le malaute es gran e es tollerant la exceperacio de las medicinas.	And therefore, modify the brain of the patient at its beginning, both on one side and on the other, which we have described in the division when the illness is great and tolerates the exception of medicines.
E si es enfant le qual no sufferte las medicinas, lahoras aministra guarguarissmes e mastiguatoris le servel mondifican, denant aquo per motz dias, am bonifficacio de las viandas.	And if it is a child who does not tolerate the medicines, then administer garglers and chewables to the servant to modify, in advance of this for several days, with improvement of the food.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en le mieg loc del cap segon la manieyra precedent, e am autre cauteri en le occiput de lu, e sobre quascun corn del cap sieu cauterisa.	And then roast the head of the patient, and carefully cauterize that with a cautery in the middle of the head according to the preceding method, and another cautery at the back of the head, and over each horn of the head cauterize it.
E si le malaute es fort e es tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteris les quals he ditz, en havent paraliticament e mollificacio del cors sobre les spondils del col e les spondils del dos.	And if the patient is strong and tolerant, then cauterize those points as I said, while keeping a gentle and soothing touch on the body over the vertebrae of the neck and the vertebrae of the back.
E sia cauteri olivar segon qu’es precedit.	And use the olive cautery as previously described.
Mays si le malaute es enfant, lahoras pausa cauteri subtil segon aquesta manieyra.	And if the patient is a child, then use a fine cautery in this manner.
Capitol .xi.	Capitol. xi.
De cauterizacio de melencolia.	Of the cauterization for melancholy.
Quan las causas de melencolia so humiditatz corrompudas e flacma gros, lahoras cauteriza aquel am les cauteris les quals havem ditz en le havent paralisi.	When the causes of melancholy are humid and grossly flame-like, then cauterize those areas with the cautery we have mentioned while maintaining a paralytic touch.
E si la causa de melencolia es superfluitat declinant a melencolia, e le cors del malaute es humit, lahoras da ha beure aquo que mundifica le cervel de lu segon aquo que ha precedut en la divisio.	And if the cause of melancholy is superfluity resolving into melancholy, and the patient's body is humid, then have them drink what purifies their brain according to what was described in the division.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop fay tortora decentment fayta de li sobre le cercle, e aprop depausa aquela en le mieg loc del cap.	And place your hand on the patient's head, and properly make a tortora mark on it over the circle, and then pause that one in the middle of the head.
E le malaute sia sesent cayrat, e sia tengut de tota partida.	And the patient should be laid down, and held from all sides.
E aprop pausa liniment; et es pus digne de boder antic de ovelhas.	And then apply a liniment; it is more worthy to rub on the skin before sheep.
E escalfa aquel sobre le foc per calefaccio temprada per mesura, le qual le dit sufferta quan es mes en lu.	And heat it over the fire for a tempered warmth by measure, which the patient suffers when more is applied.
E aprop vuo’ aquel en le mieg loc del cap de lu en le cercle, e leysa lu entro que sia enfregidat.	And then place it in the middle of his head in a circle, and let him remain until it is rubbed.
E fay aquo am le malaute en tota semmana una veguada, am le autre regiment de lu bo entro que sia sanat; o si vols, cauteriza aquel fazen petitz puntz segon lo mays de lu, sino que tenguas la ma am un cauteri ayssi ordenat: aquesta es specia de cauteri la qual humecta le cervel am equalitat.	And do this for the patient once in every week, and use the other regimen until he is healed; or if you wish, apply a cautery making small points according to his condition. Otherwise, keep your hand on an ordered cautery: this is a special cautery which wets the brain in equal measure.
E aprop pausa aquel coto enbegut en boder o en grays de gualina.	And then apply that poultice on the affected area using oil or pieces of linen.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter XII.
De cauterisacio de aygua descendent en le huel.	On the application of water cautery descending on the heel.
Quan a tu es declarat le comensament de aygua en le huel per les senhals les quals yeu he ditz en la divisio, lahoras comensa e dona en beure al malaute aquo que mondifique le cap de lu, e guarda aquel de totas humiditatz.	When you have declared the beginning of fever in the body by the signs which I have said in the division, then begin and give to drink to the patient what modifies his head, and keep away all humidity from it.
E fay aquel suzar en banh en degu per alcus jorns.	And make that syrup in wine for a few days.
E aprop comanda a lu que raza le sieu cap, e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap; e aprop cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre dos templas si es le comensament de ysement de aygua en dos huels, o de la un latz si es comensamen de l’aygua en un huel.	Then command him to rub his head, and cauterize that with a cautery in the middle of the head; then cauterize that with two cauteries on the temples if the beginning of jaundice of fever is in two bodies, or on one side if the beginning of the fever is in one body.
Incideys am cauteri totas las venas e arcerias las quals so dejos la codena; e sian les cauteris en aquela lonh en la latitut de las templas.	Cauterize all the veins and arteries which are left uncovered; let the cautery be in that place along the width of the temples.
E guarda te de fluxs de sanc quan es cauterizat; e si veses de lu fluxs de sanc, osta le am alcuna medicina, la qual es a tu possible.	And guard against flows of blood when it is cauterized; and if you see flows of blood, stop it with some medicine which is within your reach.
E yeu vindre am savieza la qual es en extraccio de arcerias e am abscizio de aquelas e cautela de fluxs de sanc.	And I will come with wisdom which is in the extraction of arteries and in the cutting of those, and caution about flows of blood.
E alcunas vetz es cauterizat en le cervitz dejos dos osses am dos cauteris dererament produzitz.	And sometimes it is cautery applied on the neck leaving two bones thoroughly produced.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter XIII.
De cauterizacio de lacrimas antiquas.	On the cautery of ancient tears.
Quan lacrimas dels huels so antiquas assuduament e per las venas e arterias las quals so en le loc manifest del cap defora e es verificat que aquo es superfluitatz frejas flecmatiquas, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri le qual havem recontat en le capitol de comensament de aygua cazent en les huels, e am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos templas, e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos osses.	When tears from the feet are ancient and frequently present in the veins and arteries which are visibly located on the head, and it is verified that these are superfluous phlegmatic fluids, then cauterize that area with a cautery as we have described in the chapter on starting water flow in the feet, and cauterize the middle of the head with one cautery, and place two cauteries on the neck leaving two temples, and place two cauteries on the neck leaving two bones.
E si indigeyses de addicio, lahoras cauteriza aquel en tot latz de la coa del huel sobre la extremitat del sobrecilh am petit cauteri.	And if you need to add cautery, then cauterize that area along the entire length of the foot on the outer side of the eyebrow with a small cautery.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter XIV.
De cauterizacio de fetor de nas.	On the cautery for nasal odor.
Quan tu medicas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no aprofieyta la tua medicacio, lahoras tu aparelha e dona en beure al malaute las cochias per tres noytz; e aprop ras le cap de lu, e cauteriza le am cauteri migier am cauteri olivar.	When you treat that patient as we have said in the division and your treatment is not effective, then you prepare and give to drink to the sick man the chicory roots for three nights; then shave his head, and cauterize the arm with a cauterizer made of iron and another of olive wood.
E aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri clavelh am dos cauteris sobre les dos sobrecilhs dejos les cabels un petit.	Then cauterize the arm with a cauterizer made of iron and another on both eyebrows, leaving the hair a little.
E guarda te de la arceria que no incindas aquela.	And be careful with the eyebrow so you do not burn it.
E del cauteri clavilh aquesta es la forma.	And this is the form of the iron cauterizer.
Capitol .xv.	Capitol. XV.
De cauteri de mollificacio de palpebras dels huels.	Of the cauterizer for softening the eyelids of women.
Quan la palpebra del huel es mollificada per malautia o per humiditat, lahoras cauteriza aquela palpebre1 am un cauteri am aquest cauteri lunar; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When the eyelid of the foot is softened due to illness or humidity, then cauterize that eyelid with a cauterizer made of this lunar cauterizer; and this is its form:
E si vos, cauteriza aquel sobre les dos sobrecils un petit am dos cauteris en tota partida, e sian elonguatz de las timporas.	And if you cauterize that on both eyebrows a little with two cauterizers in total, making them long from the temples.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la quantitat del sobrecil.	And the length of each cautery should be according to the extent of the sore.
E no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri, mays segon la quantitat que la tersa partida de la palpebre sia adhurida.	And do not press too hard with your hand on the cautery, but according to the extent that the inner part of the eyelid is touched.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter XVI.
De cauteri de la palpebre del huel quan les pels so convertitz a las partidas dedintz e punho le huel.	Of the cautery for the eyelid when the skin is converted to the inner parts and fistula.
Quan les pels del huel son convertitz a las partidas dedintz ayssi que pungo le huel, cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, quar cauteri o es am fer o es am medicina comburent.	When the skin of the fistula is converted to the inner parts, one must puncture the fistula. The cautery for this can be performed in two ways: either by using a cautery or by applying a burning medicine.
Si am cauteri de lu am foc, comanda al malaute denant aquo que leyse les sieus pels ayssi cum aquels les quals les mundan, entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz; e si punho aquel deves le lor naysement, lahoras tu strenh les huels de lu am una benda per so que no sia maugut entro que·ls pels sian nascutz.	If the cautery is to be made with fire, command the patient before performing it that he let his skin be cleaned as those which are bathed, until they are prolonged and equalized; and if you puncture him, note the place of its birth. Then strengthen the fistulas with a bandage so that they do not get infected until the skin is regenerated.
Donc cum siran nascutz e engualhatz, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop senha sobre la palpebre dels huels de lu am tenta, am senhal le qual sia segon la figura de fulha de merta, e sia le comensament del senhal prop dels pels.	Then when they are born and equalized, place the head of the patient on your lap, and put a hand over the eyelids of the patient to test, marking the mark in the shape of a leaf of mistletoe, which is the beginning of the mark for the skin.
E aprop pausa coto enbegut en album de huou o en mucillatge de ptilli sobre le huel.	Then place a cold cloth in the bile or mucus of the eye over the eyelid.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu.	Then heat the cautery, the form of which is as follows.
E aprop cauteriza sobre la figura la qual as senhada, petit a petit, em motas veguadas, entro que sia comburida la superficia de la codena la qual es ayssi cum fuelha de mirta, tota aparent propriament.	Then apply the cautery over the marked figure, marking it little by little in rings, as the surface is burned until it appears like a leaf of laurel, entirely apparent and proper.
E senhal de sanetat de la tieua obra es que tu vegus la palpebre de l’huel ja esser contrayta e·ls pels de lu esser elevatz deves la punctura del huel.	The sign of the patient's recovery from this operation is that you see the eyelid of the eye already contracted, and the skin around it elevated due to the puncture of the eye.
E donc eleva la tua ma e laysa aquel per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eredicada la scara.	Then lift your hand and leave it there for three days, and then place it over the cold cloth between the time the scar is healed.
E aprop cura aquela am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And after, cure that which was ointed until it is healed.
Mays si retorna per les pels alcuna causa aprop lor naysement e la palpebra es mollificada, lahoras fay autra vetz le cauteri sobre aquel tot ayssi cum avias fayt primieyrament.	And if it returns through the skin for some cause near their origin and the eyelid is softened, then apply the cautery again over that area as you did first.
Mays si les pels so en la palpebra dejos, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que sia elevada al sieu loc natural e sia engualhat e que les pels no punhan le huelh.	And if the skin is on the eyelid, then apply the cautery to it until it is raised to its natural place and equalized, so that the skin does not remain loose.
Mays le cauteri am medicina comburent aquest es que comandes al malaute que leyse les pels entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz, e aprop sia fayta de carta de drap la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	And if the cautery is medicinal and burns this, then command the patient to extend the skin until it is stretched and equalized, and then make it of linen cloth in the shape of a hawthorn leaf.
E aprop pren de sabo conogut e de caus viva ana unc. i, o quays aquo, e aprop mescle3 aquelas causas be, e fay aquo am festinacio per so que no sia enfregidat; e aprop expandeys de aquo sobre la carta la qual es fayta ayssi cum forma de fulha de mirtra, e pausa aquel sobre la un huel od amdos; e pausa dejos le huel coto enbegut en album de huou, e el cap del malaute sia en le tieu se.	And then take known soap and fresh lard, or if not available, and mix these ingredients well, prepare this with moderation so that it is not heavily mixed; then spread this over the linen cloth which is made in the shape of a hawthorn leaf, and place that on one side or both sides; and place the other side carefully in a pot of honey, and the patient's head be in the middle.
E pausa le dit sobre le medicina e prem aquela un petit e no la mauguas entro que lo malaute senta la mordicacio de la medicina, quar mordicacio es en lu ayssi cum de foc.	And place it over the medicine and press it slightly but do not let the patient feel the bite of the medicine, for the bite is in it as from fire.
E donc cum percevera aquo que el atrobo mordicacio, lahoras leyssa la medicina e mau aquela am le tieu dit; donc cum cessa la mordicacio, lahoras remau la medicina he lava le huel am aygua; e lahoras considera si vezes la palpebra ja es levada ayssi cum es lavada deves la costriccio am foc o am incisio, quar lahoras esta be; e si no torna sobre aquela de la medicina sobre le loc en le qual no ha empremut la medicina e no se denigra entro que sia engualhada la tua operacio e sia contrayt le huel.	And therefore, to perceive when the atrobo bites, let the medicine go and place it as you just said; therefore, when the biting ceases, put back the medicine and wash it with all water; then consider if the eyelid has already been raised; if it is washed like this, apply the constriction with fire or incision, for then it is good; and if not, return to the place of the medicine where you have not pressed the medicine and ensure that your operation is equalized and contracted with all.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eradicada la codena de la adhustio, e aprop cura aquel am enguent deafinicon o am autre entro que sia sanat.	And then place it on the edge of the cut so that the bond of adhesion is eradicated, and then cure that with an ointment or something else so that it is healed.
E es necessari a tu, deves la tua operacio que guardes am pervigil diligencia que en le huel no caia re de la medicina, e si la palpebre aprop alscus dias es mollificada e alcuna causa dels pels punh en le huel, lahoras itera la tua medicina sobre aquel loc le qual de la palpebre es mollificat, e propriamen ayssi quo as fayt al comensament, e aprop enaviro lu entro que sia sanat.	And you must ensure that your operation is conducted with vigilant diligence so that the entire area does not fall prey to the medicine. If the eyelid becomes soft over a few days or if any part of the skin swells in the area, then reapply your medicine to that part where the eyelid has softened, and do so precisely as you did at the beginning, and frequently apply it until it is healed.
E aquesta es la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	And this is the form of lung leaf.
E sapias que les huels dels homes son diversificatz segon la magnitut e la parvitat, e donc segon aquo es fayta la tua contraccio.	And know that the lungs of men are diverse according to their size and smallness, and therefore according to this your operation is made.
E no sira amaguada la via de rectetut ad aquel al qual es studi en aquesta art.	And the way to the intestine shall not be obstructed for him who is studied in this art.
Capitol .xvii.	Capitol. xvii.
De cauterizacio de fistula que es en le lacrimal de l’huel.	On the cautery treatment of a fistula in the lacrimal duct of the lung.
Quan tu curas fistula am aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquela segon aquesta manieyra: comanda al malaute que pause le cap sieu en le tieu se, e tengua le cap de lu alcun ministre entre las tieuas mas en tal manieyra que no sia maugut ni agitat am le sieu cap.	When you treat a fistula as we have said in the divisions of the ailments and do not align your treatment, then when you cauterize it according to this manner: command the patient to place his head in your lap, and have some minister hold the head between their laps in such a way that it is neither too tight nor agitated on his head.
E aprop pausa coto enfus en album de huou o en mucellage de ptilli sobre le huel de lu.	And then place the cautery on the lung over the area of the humor or the mucus pocket.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then heat the cautery of which this is the form:
le qual sia conquau, ayssi cum es forma de cana o de pena de voltor, de la una extremitat am la qual es fayta lo cauteri.	which is convex, thus in the form of a cane or a hooked pin, from one end of which the cautery is made.
E si voys, sia penetrant entro a la autra extremitat.	And if you wish, penetrate into the other end.
E si vols sia sort ayssi cum tenta.	And if you wish, let it be shaped like a needle.
Mays empero aquel que es concau es milhor a la tieua obra.	However, that which is concave is better for your work.
E aprop prem la fistula si es uberta, e tra de lu sania et exsicca aquela.	And then press the fistula if it is open, and clean and dry it out.
E si no es uberta, lahoras obre aquela e extratz la poyredura de lu.	And if it is not open, then open it and extract the pus from it.
E aprop pausa sobre lu le cauteri le qual sia be ignit, e te am aquel la tieua ma un petit deves le cauteri del huel a la partida del nas, per so que no erre la tua ma o le malaute sia enquietat, e lahoras pausa le cauteri en le grays del huel e corrompas aquel.	And then place the heated cautery over it, and let your hand hold the cautery near the root of the nose, so that your hand does not err or hit the patient, and then place the cautery on the hairs of the nose and destroy that.
E donc si al comensament del tieu cauteri perve entro al os, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera le cauteri una veguada o dos, si mestiers era; e layssa aquel ayssi per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre aquel coto am boder e enviro lu am enguent exsiccatiu entro que sia sanat.	And so if at the beginning of your cautery it enters into the socket, that is good; and otherwise, then iterate the cautery one or two times, as needed; leave it thus for three days, and place your hand over that spot to keep it warm and apply an ointment while it heals.
Mays si eran passatz xi dias e no es sanat, lahoras pausa sobre lu medicina aguda corrosiva entro que l’os sia descubert e sia ras segon que conveneys en le sieu capitol.	And if it has passed ten days and it is not healed, then place the sharp corrosive medicine over it until the socket is revealed and is scraped as needed in your chapter.
E es autra manieyra de cauteri de fistula la qual alscus primiers diysero: enten al loc de la fistula e fen aquela e aprop pausa en aquela fissura camaen subtil del qual es la forma de lu: E fon en aquela la quantitat de i unc de plom fundut; e te la tua ma am camaem am bona retencio, e no sia maugut le malaute per so que le plom fundut no pervengua al huel de aquel; e cove que pausas sobre le huel del malaute coto enfus en album de huou o en aygua, quar plom adhureys le loc de la fistula e sana aquela per sanacio meravilhora.	And another way to cauterize a fistula which some earlier doctors said: Identify the location of the fistula and do it there, then place your hand gently on it, so that the melted lead does not enter the wound; cover over the wound as if in a thin layer, ensuring the melted lead adheres only to the location of the fistula and heals it through miraculous healing.
E si la fistula es sanada am aquo que havem dit del cauteri e de la curacio, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari aministrar trauc del nas e reduzir la fistula al cors del nas segon que vindra en son loc propri.	And if the fistula is healed as we have said regarding the cautery and healing, that is good; and otherwise, it is necessary to administer a draught through the nose and reduce the fistula to the nasal cavity according to its proper place.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter XVIII.
De cauterizacio de la fendedura des potz.	Of the cautery for the foot wound.
Motas veguadas accideysso fissuras en las labias, e majorment en las labias dels enfantz.	Small cuts often occur in the lips, and especially in the lips of children.
Donc cum tu curas aquelas fissuras am aquo que nos havem dit en las divisios e no aprofieyta la tua cura, lahoras igneys le cauteri petit cutellar segon aquesta forma que s’ensiec:	So when you treat those cracks, follow what we have said in the divisions and do not deepen your treatment. Then heat the small surgical cautery according to this form that is shown:
E sia la conquavitat de lu segon la subtilitat de cotella.	And let its cavity be according to the thinness of the blade.
Aprop pausa aquel init cuytadament en aquelas fissuras entro que·l cauteri pervengua al preon de las fissuras.	Then place that hot cautery in those cracks until the cautery reaches the bottom of the cracks.
E aprop cura aquel am cerotz entro que sia sanat.	Then treat it with cerate until it is healed.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XIX.
De cauterizacio de fistula en la boca.	Of the cautery for fistula in the mouth.
Quan en la razit de uvula o en le paladar o en las razitz de las dentz endeve apostema e aprop fa brac, e aprop es rompuda, e aprop es antiquada, e corr brac e es fayta fistula, e aprop tu curas aquela e no aprofieyta a curacio, lahoras cove que tu igniscas cauteri segon la quantitat que sia receubuda en la fistula, e aprop met aquel ignit en le trauc de la fistola, e te la tua ma entro que pervengua le ferr ignit al preon de lu, e al derier de lu fazen aysso una veguada o dos; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que nos havem dit de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	When an abscess is found in the uvula or on the palate or around the teeth and soon develops, and soon breaks, and soon becomes old, and forms a fistula, then treat it without deepening the treatment. Heat the cautery according to the amount received in the fistula, and place that heated cautery into the tract of the fistula, keeping your hand there until the hot iron reaches the bottom of it, and at the end do this one or two times; then treat it with what we have said about the treatment until it is healed.
E donc si la sania es abscindita e es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari de descubrir le loc e hostar le os corrumput segon que vindra en son capitol.	And therefore if the abscess is incised and healed, that is good; but if not, then it is necessary to expose the place and set the corrupted bone according to what will come in its chapter.
Capitol .xx.	capitol .xx.
De cauterisacio de las dentz e de mollificacio de las angivas.	Of the cautery treatment of teeth and the softening of glands.
Quan las angivas son mollificadas per humiditat e las dentz son maugudas, e curas aquelas am medicinas e no confereys, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra aprop aysso, enayssi que tu pauses la quanula sobre la dent e entromet en aquela le cauteri ignit festinantment, e te la tieua ma un petit entro que·l malaute cente la calor del foc a la razit de la dent esser pervenguda.	When the glands are softened by humidity and the teeth are decayed, cure those with medicines and do not confine them. Then place the head of the patient on a pillow, and soon after, heat the cautery to the form which will be given below. Try to hold the cautery above the tooth, inserting it into that area with force, ensuring that the patient feels the heat of the fire at the root of the tooth so that the heat can reach it.
E aprop leva la tua ma, e aprop itera le cauteri alcunas veguadas segon que vols.	Then lift your hand, and repeatedly apply the cautery several times according to your desire.
E aprop le malaute huompla la sua boca de aygua de sal e tengua aquela per una hora, e pueys stupa aquela, quar la dent mauguda es fermada e la gengiva mollificada es strenguda e la humiditat corrompuda es exsiccada.	Then the patient should spit out the salt water and hold it for an hour, then spit it out, as the decayed tooth is sealed, the softened gum is tightened, and the corrupted humidity is dried up.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI.
De cauterisacio de dolor de dent.	Of cauterization for tooth pain.
Quan dolor de dent es per fregiditat, o en lu es freg o verm, o no comfereys la curacio am medicina, lahoras cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am boder de vacas, o cauteri am foc.	When tooth pain is due to inflammation or there is a swelling, or if medical treatment does not relieve the pain, then cauterization in that area can be performed according to two methods: either with a cauterizing iron made from ox horn, or with a hot fire.
Cauteri am boder es que tu prenguas boder de vacas e bulhas aquel en culhe de ferr , e aprop pren coto e envolopa le sobre la extremitat de la tenta, e aprop enmergeys aquel am boder bulhit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolorosa festinantment entro que sia enfregidat.	Cauterization with an ox horn is done by taking a piece of ox horn and heating it at the end where the iron is placed. Then, you hold this heated piece tightly at the tip of the instrument, immerse that heated part in the ox horn, and place it firmly over the painful tooth, pressing it in quickly before it cools down.
E aprop itera aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la vertut del foc pervengua a la razit de la dentz.	And then repeatedly apply that several times until the heat from the fire permeates to the root of the teeth.
E si voys, submergeys lana o coto en le boder desus dit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolent, e pausa sobre aquel ferr ignit entro que·l ferr pervengua al preon de la conquavitat de la dent.	And if you do, immerse a piece of wool or cloth in the ox horn mentioned above, and place that over the painful tooth. Hold the hot iron above the tooth until the heat reaches the root of the tooth's cavity.
Mays empero la cauterizacio am foc es que tu atendas a la quannula de eram o de ferr, e sia en le cor de lu alcuna grocesa e la acuitat del foc no pervengua a la boca del malaute.	May however the cautery with fire be that you attend to the tip of flax or iron, and in its core some coarse material and the acuity of the fire not reach the mouth of the malaise.
E aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra, e pausa aquel sobre la dent e te la tua ma entro que·l cauteri sia enfregidat; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas quar la dolor sira remauguda o en aquel dia o en l’autre dia.	And then shape the cautery in the form it will take, and place that part over the tooth and put your hand inside to ensure the cautery is well lubricated; and do this several times to prevent the pain from intensifying on that day or the next.
E cove que per empressio de aquel cauteri que·l malaute umpla la sieua boca de bon boder e tengua aquel per una hora e aprop scupa le; e aquesta es la forma del cauteri.	And ensure that through the impression of that cautery, the malaise opens its mouth wide and keeps it open for about an hour; and this is the form of the cautery.
E cauteriza am qual que tu voys extremittat segon que a tu es possible.	And cauterize wherever you will stop according to what is possible.
E aquesta es la forma de la cannula:	And this is the form of the cannula:
Capitol .xxii.	Capitol.xxii.
De cauterizacio de extrophulos.	On the cautery treatment for extrophy.
Quan extrophulos so de flecma e de humors fregas e no so hobedientz a digistio per medicinas e tu voys la digistio de aquelas leugerament, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri conquau la forma del qual es aquesta seguen, havent dos extremitatz hubertas per que yesca le fum deves le cauteri per l’autra extremitat, e pausa aquel ignit sobre aquel apostema una veguada, e autre si indigeyses de aquel, entro que pervengua al preon del apostema.	When prolapses are caused by phlegm and humors that are not obedient to digestion with medicines, and you have slightly digested those with the medicine, then you apply the cautery to the form of which this follows: having two open extremities so that smoke arises from one end, place the cautery over the abscess for one minute, and another if necessary until it reaches the root of the abscess.
E si l’apostema es pauca, lahoras pausa le cauteri segon la quantitat del apostema, e aprop leyssa le per tres jorns e pausa sobre lu coto enfus en boder entro que sia remaugut aquo que·l foc ha comburit.	And if the abscess is small, then place the cautery according to the quantity of the abscess, and let it be for three days, placing it over the hot border until what the fire has consumed is healed.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent e tentas e draps entro que sia sanat.	And then dress it with ointment and bandages until it is healed.
E la forma de la cannula o deu cauteri a tal es comveyter.	And the shape of the cannula or cautery should be as follows.
Capitol .xxiii.	Capitol. xxiii.
De cauterizacio de rauquiera de votz e de constriccio de ale.	Of the cautery for hoarseness and for the constriction of the larynx.
Quan las humiditatz veno sobre le quanal del pulmo, e majorment quan aquo es am fregiditat de compleccio, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia evacuat al comensament am medicinas laxativas, e aprop cauteriza aquel deves la razit del golayro en le loc depremegut.	When the moisture of the wind affects the canal of the lung, especially when it is due to a complex coldness, then it should be known that the patient must be treated with laxative medicines at the beginning, and soon cauterize the root of the gallbladder in the compressed area.
E guarda te que no pervenguas am le cauteri al golayro ni no comburas de la codena de lu sino un pauc.	And be sure not to apply the cautery to the gallbladder or burn the vein of the liver, but only a little.
E cauteriza aquel am autra cauteri deves la junctura del col en le derier espondil de lu.	And cauterize it with another cautery at the junction of the neck in the rear part of the spine.
E·l cauteri de lu sia clavilh sego la maniera precedent.	The cautery for the liver should be applied according to the previous method.
E aprop cura aquel am aquo que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And soon cure it with what was previously mentioned until it is healed.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter 24.
De cauterizacio de malautia del pulmo e de tos.	On the cauterization for lung disease and cough.
Quan tos e malautia de pulmo so de humiditatz fregas e le malaute no ha febre ni tisic e es malautia antiqua, lahoras cauterisa aquel am dos cauteris sobre la furcula en les locz depremegutz leontz e buoytz; e am autra cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz entre dos mamillos; e sia le cauteri clavilh segon la forma precedent.	When cough and lung disease are due to cold moisture, and the liver has no fever or consumption, and it is an old lung disease, then cauterize it with two cauteries on the furcula in the compressed areas below the breast and above the navel; and with another cautery in the middle of the abdomen between the two breasts; and apply the cautery to the liver according to the form previously described.
E si vols, sia la tua cauterizacio punctan am le cauteri que es apelat puncta, la forma del qual precedeys en la ponctacio de dolor de aurelhas.	And if you wish, let your cautery puncture with the cautery that is called puncta, the form of which you precede in the punctation of ear pain.
E sian puntz entro cays ad aquels; e aprop cura aquel am aquo meteys que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And let the puncture into the veins at those; and then cure that with what you apply when it is healed.
E ya sia le cauteri haventz tres ramps quar cauterizacio es am aquel: am una veguada podes far tres cauteris segon aquesta forma:	And let the cautery having three tines; and with one puncture, you can make three cauterizations according to this form:
Capitol .xxv.	Capitol.xxv.
De cauterizacio de titillic que es le cap del ajutori.	Of the cautery for titillium, which is the head of the helper.
Quan le cap del ajutori es dislocat per causa de humiditatz lubricas e no es fermat en la hora del sieu retornament deves la sua dislocacio entro que sia a lu aquo costuma de retornar, e aprop per un petit movement es deslocat ayssi que s’endeve, ayssi cum nos havem testificat, lahoras cove que primieyrament redusiscas la dislocacio, e aprop le malaute sia reversat sobre le sieu dos o sobre le latz sa; e aprop eleva la codena la qual es en la partida dedintz del citillic a las partidas desus am les ditz de la tua ma sinistra, si la junctura es dislocada a las partidas dedintz.	When the head of the helper is dislocated due to lubricating humidity and is not stabilized in the hour of its return, you must maintain its dislocation until it naturally returns, and then by a slight movement it is relocated as it strives to return, as we have testified. When first reducing the dislocation, make sure the patient lies on their back or on their side; and lift the codena which is in the inner part of the titillium towards the outer parts above your left hand, if the joint is dislocated towards the inner parts.
E aprop igneys le cauteri havent dos caps; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then heat the cautery having two heads; this is its form:
E aprop cauteriza la codena entro que penetre aquela entro al autre latz; e vindra la figura de cauterizacio lahoras de iv caps cauteris.	And then cauterize the chain where one head penetrates into the other side; and the figure of cauterization will come when of two heads of cautery.
e so aquel subtils segon la quantitat de tenta; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	and it is those subtle ones according to the quantity of the wound; and this is its form:
E alcunas veguadas es ajustat segon aquest comte i per que son les cauteris .viii.	And sometimes it is adjusted according to this count and because these cauteries are VIII.
E aprop pausa sobre le cauteri porys cuytz am sal, e aprop fay adherir le malaute a trenquilitat, e lo membre no sia maugut per alcun temps entro que sia confortat.	And then place on the cautery for a while some salt, and then make the patient adhere to tranquility, and the limb should not be moved for some time until it is comforted.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas desus e tart es fayt aquo, lahoras cauteriza sobre le muscle am cauteri clavilh o am motz cauteris puntan, quar la junctura es confermada e la humiditat es romauguda e le malaute es sanat.	And if the dislocation is above and heat is applied there, then cauterize over the muscle with a clavilh cautery or with pointed cauteries, that the joint may be confirmed and the humidity broken up and the patient healed.
Capitol .xxvi.	Capitol. XXVI.
De cauterizacio del stomac.	Of cautery of the stomach.
Quan veno en l’estomac freg e motas humiditatz entro que aquel extrazo de la sua compleccio e so multiplicatz raumases a lu, e si tu continuas las manieyras de curacio e no confereyso, lahoras cove que le malaute sia sobre le sieu dos ressupinat, e extenda las suas mas e las suas coysas, e aprop cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris: an un cauteri dejos le pietz per la quantitat d’un dit am cauteri clavilh, e am dos cauteris dejos del dos costatz del cauteri, entro que vengua la figura de cauteri triangulada; e elonga entre els que no sian ajustatz que faran poyredura.	When pain in the stomach is caused by humid vapors that extract from its composition and multiply there, and if you continue the methods of cure and do not relieve it, then the patient will be on their back, extend their limbs and things, and then cauterize that area with three cauteries: at one cautery place the foot with the size of a finger's breadth using aawl cautery, and at two cauteries place the sides of the cautery, forming the figure of a triangular cautery; and leave space between those not tightly placed to prevent suppuration.
E si la profunditat del cauteri la quantitat de les dos terses de la grocesa de la codena.	And if the depth of the cautery is the quantity of two-thirds of the thickness of the chain.
E sia la figura del cauteri segon aquesta forma ses addicio, E si vols, cauteriza am gran cauteri en le mieg loc del estomac segon aquesta forma; et aquest sia un cauteri segon la forma de cercle segon aquesta forma:	And let the shape of the cautery be as follows: If you wish, cauterize with a large cautery in the middle of the stomach according to this form; and let this be a cauterization according to the circle's shape as follows:
E sia cauterizat l’estomac punctan ad aquel que de aquest cauteri es spaventat: e es que tu senhes sobre l’estomac punt segon la quantitat que voles am tenta, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en les puntz; e aprop cura aquel am la curacio qu’es precedita entro que sia sanat.	And let the stomach be cauterized with puncture at that which is scared by this cautery: and you touch the stomach with a point according to the quantity you want tentatively, and then cauterize that with the cautery in the points; and cure that with the cure that precedes until it is healed.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter XXVII.
De cauterizacio del fietge fret.	Of cautery of the sore foot.
Quan endeve en le fietge dolor per fregiditat o per humiditat o per grossa ventositat entro que de la sieua normal compleccio sia getat per egressio superflua, e es curat le malaute am aquo que havem dit e no comfereys, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e senhes am tenta tres cauteris segon aquesta forma et aquesta quantitat meteyssa sobre le fietge dejos dels ipocondres, la hon perve le decubit de home.	When there is pain in the foot due to coldness or humidity or excessive windiness that has altered its normal structure through superfluous egress, and if the patient does not respond to the treatment we have said, then you should ensure that the foot is brought back over its ankle, and test with three cauteries according to this form and quantity placed on the foot below the hipbones, one along the length of the body.
E sia l’espazi le qual es entre quascun cauteri segon la grossetut del dit, e sia le cauteri segon la longitut del cors dreyta.	And let the space be the one between each cautery according to the thickness of the finger, and let the cautery be placed along the length of the body in a straight line.
E no compremas la tua am le cauteri mot.	And do not move your hand while applying the cautery.
E si la quantitat de aquo que es adhurit la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena, e no y sia pus ajustat; e si le malaute stant sobre les pes de lu; e si no es estant, lahoras sia jassent, le qual ja ha extendudas las suas coysas, e eleve les sieus brasses.	And if the quantity of what is applied equals the size of the cautery tip, and it is not adjusted; and if the patient is standing on their feet; and if they are not standing, then lie down, which has already extended its parts, and raise their thighs.
E es aquesta la forma del cauteri:	And this is the form of the cautery:
E a tu es possible que cauterizes aquestz cauteris am cauteri cutellar, quan es am tu subtilitat e prudencia en l’art.	And it is possible that you may use this cautery with a surgical cautery when your subtlety and prudence in the art are required.
E guarda te que trop no procesiscas en la cauterizacio, e sia adhurida la specitut de tota la codena per que sia adhurit tot le cors e pervengua entro als budels, quar la codena aqui es subtil; e sapias aquo.	And guard thee that thou dost not burn too much in the cauterization, so that the subtlety of all the cord be burned and the whole body be affected, for here the cord is subtle; know this.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter XXVIII.
De perforacio de apostema del fietge am cauteri.	On the perforation of an abscess on the sole with a cautery.
Quan endeve excitura o apostema en le fietge e voles saber si aquel apostema es en le carn del fietge o en la tunica de lu, lahoras si es en la carn del fietge, le malaute atrobo gravitat e dolor ses acuitat.	When there is inflammation or an abscess on the sole and you want to know whether the abscess is in the flesh of the sole or in the skin, then if it is in the flesh of the sole, the patient will experience a severe swelling and acute pain.
E si es en la tunica del fietge, am la dolor es acuitat gran e vezes que ja afatiguatz les metges la cura de lu.	And if it is in the skin of the sole, then the pain will be acute and often so severe that it exhausts even the doctors with its treatment.
Donc cove que·l malaute sia enversat sobre la sieua cervit; e aprop senha le loc de l’apostema am tenta; e aprop igneys le cauteri le quel es asemblat a rag, la forma del qual a precedit en l’autra pagina.	Then make sure the patient is lying on his back; and place the spot where the abscess is to be incised. Then heat the cautery which resembles a rod, as described in the other page preceding this one.
E cauteriza am aquel i cauteri entro que tota la codena sia comborida, entro que pervengua al ciphac, entro qu’en yesca sania.	And cauterize there and within until the entire chain be burned, until it reaches the cyst, until in healthy flesh.
E aprop cura aquel per curacio dels autres apostemas entro que sia sanat.	And then treat that by curing the other abscesses until they are healed.
E no cove que de aquesta forma de cauteri use sino aquel del qual le estudi en l’art de medicina es prolonguat, e en las mas del qual motas malautias an conogut; mays aquest am esperiment alcunas veguadas sia ardit sobre aquesta operacio, mays empero leyssa aquela deves nos, e es miels.	And you must use only that cautery of which the study in the art of medicine is prolonged, and in most of which maladies they have known defects; but this I have experimented several times to be hot during this operation, yet I leave that to your discretion, and it is better.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter XXIX.
De cauterizacio de plauresi.	On the cauterization of ulcers.
Diyssero les antics cauteri de las razitz de aristologia a plauresi frega segon aquesta manieyra esser fazedor, e es aquest que tu prenguas de las razitz de aristologia longa secca una razit pun longua que es trobada, e sia de la grossetut del dit.	They said that the ancient cautery for ulcers should be made according to this manner, and it is this: you take from the residue of aristology a long strip of parchment, which is found, and is of the thickness of a finger.
E aprop submergeys aquela en oli e eysen aquela al foc, e aprop cauteriza per un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre la continuacio de la furcula am le col; e am dos cauteris petitz dejos guidazi, un pauc declinans a la partida que es dejus la barba, e am dos cauteris en aquo que es declinant entre la quinta costa e la cizena, declinant un pauc a las partidas detras; e am autre cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz; et am autre sobre l’estomac, et am tres cauteris de las partidas detras; et am un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre las dos spallas, e am dos cauteris dels dos latz del pietz, dejos le cauteri le qual es entre doas spallas.	And then immerse that in oil and place it on the fire, and then cauterize with a cautery in that place which is between the continuation of the furcula to the neck; with two small cauteries guide them, one slightly inclining towards the side where the beard ends, and with two cauteries in what is inclining between the fifth rib and the seventh, inclining slightly towards the back sides; and another cauterize in the middle of the foot; and another on the stomach, and three cauteries at the back sides; and one cauterize in that place which is between the two shoulders, and two cauteries at the sides of the foot, leaving the cautery in the space between the two shoulders.
E no cove que compremas la tua ma am le cauteri, ans sia en le manifest de la codena en obra.	And do not hold your hand on the cautery, but rather at the edge of the blade.
E ja diyssero alscus antics que so alscus dels homes les quals uson de cauteri de ferr semblant a ray e igneysso aquel, e meto aquel en aquel loc le qual es entre las costas, entro que pervenguam am aquel ad aquel apostema e sia foragetada sania, ayssi cum havem dit en l’apostema del fietge.	And some ancient doctors said that certain men use a cautery of iron resembling a ray and burn that, and place that in that place which is between the ribs, until we perceive that to that apostema that healthy tissue has grown, as we have said regarding the apostema of the thigh.
Mays en aquesta perforacio am cauteri no es ses temor, quar hu mor tantost ho accideys en le loc fistula a la qual no es sanacio.	In this perforation, there is no fear of burning, for it soon happens in the place where the fistula is formed, which does not heal.
Capitol .xxx.	Capitol.
De la cauterizacio de la melsa.	Of the cautery of the ulcer.
Quan tu curas la malautia de la melsa am aquo que havem dit de la curacio en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cauteri en lu es segon tres manieras, las quals totas son dreyturieras, de las quals la una es que fassas tres cauteris o quatre linhan segon la longitut de la melsa segon la figura dels cauteris del fietge, la figura dels quals ha precedit.	When you treat the illness of the ulcer, as we have said in the division regarding treatment, and your treatment does not align with it, the application of the cautery to the ulcer is according to three ways, all of which are correct. The first way is to make three or four lines according to the length of the ulcer, following the shape of the cautery iron, the shape of which has been described previously.
E sia entre quascun cauteri la grossetut d’un dit o un pauc mes, e la manieyra del cauteri sia la manieyra la qual havem dita en le cauteri del fietge engualment.	And the distance between each cautery should be as wide as one finger or a little more, and the method of applying the cautery should be the same method we have described for the cautery iron.
E no compremas la tua ma am le cauteri; e le malaute sia eves sobre lo sieu dos.	And do not hold your hand on the cautery; let the patient's foot be placed on its side.
E es autra manieyra de cauterizar, so es que tu igniscas le cauteri haventz dos vertimentz, la qual causa havem dita en le capitol de dislocacio del muscle, e elava la codena la qual es en le endreyt de la melsa la hon perve le jazer del malaute sinistre.	And another way to cauterize, so that you ignite the cautery having two embers, which we have said in the chapter of dislocation of the muscle, and lift the chain which is in the center of the back the head receives the heat from the left side of the malady.
E sia la tua elevacio am la qual elevas la codena segon la longuesa del cors, per que sian faytz cauteris segon la latitut del cos.	And your elevation is with that by which you lift the chain according to the length of the body, so that cauterizations are made according to the breadth of the body.
E aprop entromet les dos vernimentz, ignitz mot, en aquel entro que am aquels penetres la codena de la autra part.	And then insert the two embers, ignite them, in that space where you penetrate the chain from the other side.
E aprop extrayt le cauteri; e donc son faytz quatre cauteris.	And then extract the cautery; and so he makes four cauterizations.
E si voys, cauteriza am cauteri havent tres vernimentz.	And if you do, cauterize with the cautery having three embers.
E aprop tu cura le cauteri pus que aia laysat de getar brac per trops jorns, quar mays es comferent que las autras causas precedentz en la curacio.	And then you cure the cautery after it has lain too long to cool from burning for too many days, for this is more conducive than other previous causes in the treatment.
Capitol .xxxi.	Capitol.xxxi.
De cauterizacio de ydropici.	Of the cautery for hydrocele.
Cauteri no catz en ydropici sino en alcinte3 propriament.	Cautery is not used for hydrocele but for the parts properly affected.
Quan tu curas le ydropic am las manieyras de curacio las quals havem ditas en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que aquel cauterizes am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic e am un cauteri sobre l’estomac, e am autre cauteri sobre le fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa, e am dos cauteris entre les spondils del dos, e un cauteri en lo dreyt del pietz, e am autre cauteri sobre l’estomac.	When you treat the hydrocele, follow the methods of cure that we have said in the division and do not deviate from your treatment. Instead, when you must apply the cautery, use four cauteries around the swelling, one on the stomach, another on the flanks, another on the ileum, and two between the spinal vertebrae, and one on the right side of the foot, and another on the stomach.
E la quantitat de la profunditat del cauteri sia propdana a la spicitut de la codena.	And the depth of the cautery be proportionate to the thickness of the skin.
E aprop layssa le cauteri ubert per so que gete brac per lonc temps.	And allow the cautery to remain until it blisters for a long time.
E no evacuas le malaute de curacio aprop le cauteri am aquo que cove per que sian agreguadas a lu doas entencios, e sira festinada a lu am ajutori sanacio.	And do not evacuate the bad humor near the cautery where it comes, so that two intentions are added to it, and it will be hastened by the healing aid.
La forma del cauteri am lo qual es cauterizat lo ventre sia clavilh segon que la forma de aquel es desus precedent, e es aquel am le qual es cauterizat le dos sia olivar segon qu’es precedent a la sua forma.	The shape of the cautery with which the abdomen is seared should follow the form as described above, and it is with this that the two olive-shaped areas are seared according to what was previously mentioned regarding their form.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter XXXII.
De cauterizacio de pes e de las coyssas.	On the cautery treatment of feet and thighs.
Quan les pes so apostematz en ydropitz e so repletz de aygua sitrina, cove que cauterisas les pes sobre le dos del pe in nocrati aquo que es entre le auricular e le anular, e eleva la tua ma am le cauteri e no torses aquel; e aprop eleva la tua ma, e no retornes aquela de tot, quar l’aygua satrina rezuda.	When the feet are swollen and full of yellow water, you should cauterize the feet on the inner side of the foot between the great toe and the ring finger, and lift your hand with the cautery without twisting that area; then lift your hand further, and do not return it completely, as the yellow water may flow back.
Es le cauteri segon aquesta forma: E aprop fay sobre las doas coyssas dos cauteris, e en quascuna coysa sia feyt cauteri am la extremitat del cauteri cutellar.	The cautery should be done in this manner: Then make two cautery marks on each thigh, and on each side of the thigh, place a cautery mark at the knife-cut extremity.
E sia le cauteri segon la longitut de la coyssa: i dejos le denolh e l’autre jos le mieg loc de la coyssa; e sobre quascuna coyssa dos cauteris.	The cautery should be done according to the length of the thigh: then place one mark on the outer side and the other midway down the thigh; and on each thigh, make two cautery marks.
E layssa la plagua uberta ses curacio per lonc temps per so que alcuna aygua resuda de lu.	Leave the wound open for a long time so that any water exudes from it.
E aprop cura le am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas.	And then treat the remaining causes which we have mentioned.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter XXXIII.
De cauterizacio de cos de ventre.	On the cautery of the abdomen.
Quan cos de ventre es per freg e per humiditat entro que debelice las vertutz, so es la vertut digestiva e retentiva, las quals so en l’estomac e en les budels, e es curat aquo am las manieyras de curacio e no confereys, e vezes le malaute suffertan cauteri de vertut exhiberant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am gran cauteri sobre le sieu stomac segon que a precedit en la cauterizacio del estomac, am le cauteri del cercle e am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic subtils, am cauteri clavilh subtil; e am cauteri sobre le alcatin sobre alozis gran, o am dos cauteris.	When the abdomen is caused by cold and humidity penetrating into the intestines, it is due to the digestive and retentive virtues, which are in the stomach and the intestines. This condition is treated according to the methods of treatment without adding anything, and sometimes the patient suffers from the exhibition of a virtue, so cauterize that part with a large cautery over their own stomach according to what was mentioned in the cauterization of the stomach. Use the cautery of the circle and four cauteries in the circuit of the fine fibres, use a subtle clavil cautery; or use a cautery on aloes, either large or two cauteries.
E si vezes las humiditatz exhuberants e le malaute aquo tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le pentenilh e sobre les budels, e fort leu ajustant dos cauteris sobre l’estomac e prop dels inguonas, quar es curacio perficent de juvament de la qual no erras.	And if sometimes the excessive humidity and the patient tolerate it, then cauterize that part over the pentenburg and over the intestines, and strengthen it by applying two cauteries on the stomach near the inguinal region; these are the perfect cure for the youth of which you will not err.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Chapter XXXIV.
De cauterizacio de emorroydas antiquas.	Of the cautery treatment for old hemorrhoids.
Quan so en la natura derier emorroydas antiquas o una de humors grossas fregas o de humiditatz corrompudas, e son curadas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no confereys la tieua curacio, lahoras cauterisa am tres cauteris sobre le pus dejos spondilh del dos petit e petit triangular, e am cauteri desus le ombelic cays per dos ditz.	When they are in the nature of old hemorrhoids or one of thick humors or corrupted humidity, and are cured as we have said in the division, and you do not perform your own cure, then cauterize three times on the tip of the pus spot below the two small triangular parts, and with a cauterizer above the navel going down by two fingers.
E si doptas que l’estomac de lu sia enfregidat e la vianda de lu no sia degerida, e la cara de lu vezes apostemada, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre l’estomac am gran cauteri segon que es precedit; e am un cauteri sobre fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa de lu am cauteri clavilh, e leyssa le cauteri per alcun temps ubert, e aprop cura lu entro que sia sanat.	And if you suspect that the stomach of the patient is inflamed and the food they ate was not digested, and their face appears feverish, then cauterize that area on the stomach with a large cauterizer as previously described; and with one cauterizer on the side, and another on the armpit with a clavilh cauterizer. Leave the cauterizer open for some time, and cure the patient until they are healed.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter XXXV.
De cauterizacio de atheyl aprop la abscizio de lor.	Of the cautery treatment for the area near the excision of the stone.
Quan tu abscindes atheyl, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri que es asemblat a ray.	When you incise the thigh, then ignite the cautery that is similar to a brand.
Aprop entremet aquel ignit en aquel atheyl abscis, e ultima la tieua ma entro que pervengua le cauteri al orifici de la vena de la qual ve la sanc.	Then insert the ignited cautery into that incised thigh, and keep your hand there until the cautery reaches the opening of the vein from which the pus flows.
E fay aquo una vetz o doas, quar si achieyl son trops, lahoras cauteriza quascun de lor segon que havem recontat, e aprop cura aquels am aquo que confereys a lor dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And do this one or two times; if the veins are too many, then cauterize each of them according to how we have counted, and place ointments between the skin and the vein until it is healed.
E si cauterizas am gran cauteri sobre alquatin, es mays derier en juvament.	And if you cauterize with a large cautery on some areas, it is more effective in healing.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Capitol.xxxvi.
De cauterizacio de fistolas que son faytas en la natura derie en las partidas de lu.	Of the cauterization of fistulas that are formed in the parts of the body.
Quan la natura no obeziys a la obra la qual havem recomtada en son loc, e·l pacient es espaventat per aquo, sia sanat am cauteri.	When nature does not obey the work we have recommended in that place, and the patient is frightened by this, heal it with a cautery.
Donc quan ad alcun ve fistola en la natura derier, e es antiquada, corro sania de lu e humiditatz corrompudas, e donc aquo que es pus digne que cove es que proes aquela am tenta subtil, e aprop conoys la quantitat de la profunditat de lu am la devant dita tenta.	When there is some fistula in the nature behind and it is ancient, full of corrupted health and humidity, therefore what is most worthy that you probe is to try with a fine needle, and then know the quantity of the depth of it by the front said needle.
Aprop igneys le cauteri que es semblant a ray.	Then heat the cautery that resembles a ray.
E aprop met aquel cauteri ignit en aquesta fistula, e segon la quantitat en la qual intrec la tenta.	Then place the heated cautery in this fistula, according to the quantity in which you insert the needle.
E itera sobre aquela le cauteri entro que sian comburitz aquels cors corrumputz tost una veguada o dos o tres, segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And repeatedly apply the cautery until those corrupted tissues are burned through once or twice or three times, according to the quantity of your necessity.
E guarda te de combustio de nervi e de vena; o si fistula va al cors de la vesica o al cors del budel, lahoras guarda te de totz aquels locz; e no fassas aquo sino quan la fistula es en loc carnos e cogitas que no es penetrant.	And guard yourself from burning the nerves and veins; or if the fistula goes to the region of the bladder or the intestine, then guard yourself from all those areas; and do not do this except when the fistula is in a fleshly location and you perceive that it is not penetrating.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	And then cure the area until it is healed.
E si le loc es sigillat, e so abscindidas de lu las materias, e roman ayssi per lonc temps, lahoras sapias que ja es curat entierament.	And if the area is sealed, and the materials are severed from it, and the wound remains long, then you may know that it is entirely healed.
E si las materias no so de lu ostadas, lahoras sapias que es penetrant o en le preon de lu os corromput, o cays aquo de aquelas causas de las quals vindra rememoracio en son loc.	And if the materials are not from the wound, then you may know that it is penetrating or in the pus of the wound, or comes from those causes which will be remembered in its place.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Chapter XXXV.
De cauterizacio dels ronhos.	On the cautery of warts.
Quan en les ronhos endeve dolor per freg o per grossa ventozitat, e per aysso le coyt del malaute es amermat, lahoras cove que cauterizes aquel sobre les ronhos am cauteri sobre quascun ronho am cauteri clavilh del qual precesic la rememoracio.	When warts are painful due to inflammation or excessive moisture, and thus the patient's discomfort is reduced, then you should cauterize that area with a cautery, applying the cautery to each wart using the method previously described.
E fort leu cauterizam am le segon un petit dejos, per que vindran tres cauteris liniatz, e donc siran mays deriers en juvament.	And after applying the cautery for a short while, pause for a small break, as three linear cauterizations will follow, and thus they will be more effective in healing.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter XXXVIII.
De cauterizacio de la vesica.	Of the cautery of the bladder.
Quan accideys en la vesica debelitat e mollificacio per freg e per humiditatz ayssi que·l malaute la urina no retengua, lahoras cauteriza aquel en la partida pus dejos sobre la vesiqua, la hon comensan les pels del pentenilh, e cauteriza am un cauteri en la partida dreyta, e am autre en la senestra de lu.	When there is a debility and softening of the bladder due to inflammation and moisture, such that the patient retains urine, then cauterize that part on the side of the bladder where the skin of the pubis begins, and cauterize with one cautery on the right side and another on the left side.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la cantitat dels not del pous; e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en la partida pus bassa del dos, o am dos cauteris si es necessitat.	And the length of each cautery should be according to the size of the foot; and cauterize that part with a cautery on the lower side of the foot, or with two cauteries if necessary.
E sia cauteri clavilh segon que es procesit.	And use a cautery on the knee according to how it is processed.
Capitol .xxxix.	Chapter XXXIX.
De cauterizacio de la mayra.	Of the cautery of the womb.
Quan veno en la mayra freg e humiditatz, e per aysso es prohibida enpreignacio, e son corrompudas las mestruas de lu, e es tardada la provocacio de lor, e accideys dolor deves le haveniment de lor, lahoras cove que·l loc sia cauterizat am tres cauteris en le circuit del ombelic, ayssi cum havem dit en le cauteri de la vesica; e am cauteri sobre le loc pus dejos del dos, o am dos cauteris, e sia le cauteri clavilh.	When there is venous congestion and moisture in the womb, and for this reason conception is forbidden, and the menstruation is corrupted, and the induction is delayed, and joint pain occurs due to these conditions, then it is necessary to cauterize that area with three cauteries around the umbilical circuit, as we have said in the cauterization of the bladder; and with a cautery on the lower side of the foot, or with two cauteries, and use a knee cautery.
Capitol .xl.	Capitol of the day.
De cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua.	Of the cautery for the dislocation of the ankle.
Quan humiditatz moucozas so efundudas a la partida de la anqua, e so faytas causas del yssiment del sieu loc, e senhal de lu es que la coyssa es prolonguada sobre l’autre quan so comparadas entre lor.	When moist phlegm infiltrates the region of the ankle, and causes conditions due to displacement of its place, a sign of this is that the swelling extends over the other leg when compared between them.
E le loc de la dislocacio es atrobat en lu quays boyt.	And the place of the dislocation is applied to the side of the ankle.
Adonc cove que cauterizas le malaute sobre la partida de la anqua de lu am cauteri a sercle semblant, pus que tu auras senhat am tenta en le cercuit de la partida ayssi cum es revolguda, e per so que la partida caia el mieg loc del cercle.	Then, cauterize the ankle with a hot cautery in a circular manner, as you will have marked the circuit of the region as it is rotated, so that the region falls in the middle of the circle.
E sia le cauteri del qual precedit la forma en la cauterizacio del estomac.	And the cautery mentioned above is used in the cauterization of the stomach.
E si aquest cauteri no es a tu present, lahoras cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris am cauteri olivar gran.	And if this cautery is not at hand, then use three large olive wood cauteries.
E sia fayt le cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de tota la codena; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And the cautery should be applied according to the strength of the pain in the entire limb; and then care for that which remains until it is healed.
Capitol .xli.	Capitol forty.
De cauterizacio de la vena sciatica.	Of the cautery treatment for the sciatic vein.
Quan dolor ve en la partida de anqua, e so causa de lu freg et humiditatz, le malaute es curat am aquo que havem dit e no confereys, e aquo es antiquat, lahoras cove que tu lacses le malaute de humors grosses am pillulas fetidas o am pillulas artificials o semblantz; e aprop cauteriza aquel.	When pain is felt in the sciatic region and its cause is cold and humidity, the patient is treated with what we have said, and you do not apply any other treatment, as this is outdated. Instead, treat the patient with pills made from bitter substances or artificial ones that resemble them; and then cauterize the area.
E la manieyra del cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am medicinas comburentz, o cauteri am foc.	The method of cauterization in this case is according to two methods: either with burning medicines, or with fire.
Sira segon dos manieyras scientas, de las quals es la una que cauterizes aquel sobre la partida de l’ancha de lu am tres cauteris triangulatz segon aquesta forma; e fay am aquels bona profunditat.	Follow two scientific methods, of which one is to cauterize the area over the width of the foot with three triangular cauterizations according to this form; and do so with good depth.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre cascun cauteri la quantitat de la grossitut del dit e si le cauteri olivar o gran.	And let the space between each cauterization be the width of one finger, whether the cauterization is small or large.
Mays alcunas veguadas sia le cauteri sobre le mieg loc sobre le cap de l’anquan per que son quatre cauteris.	More often, apply the cauterization in the middle of the location on the head of the sciatic area because it is four cauterizations.
E si vols, cauteriza am le cercle del qual es precesida la forma en la cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua, la i que sia cercle continent e comburey la ispicitut de tota la codena.	And if you wish, cauterize around the circle where the form precedes in the cauterization of the dislocation of the ankle, which should be a circle that burns the entire circumference.
E aquesta es la manieyra de cauteri in ciatiqua quan dolor es adherent al anqua e no es estenduda entro a la coyssa.	And this is the way to cauterize for the ankle when pain is localized to the ankle and not extended down the leg.
Mays si es estenduda entro a la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre la coyssa sobre le loc al qual envireys le malaute que es la dolor; e am un cauteri sobre la cavilha per quatre ditz un pauc deves la part cilvestra.	But if it is extended down the leg, then cauterize there with two cauteries on the thigh over the area around which you will encircle the ankle that causes the pain; and with one cautery on the shin, a little bit of the upper part should be included.
E si le cauteri cutellar, e sia la profunditat del cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de la codena.	And if using a surgical cautery, the depth of the cauterization should be according to the circumference of the affected area.
E si le malaute envireys que la dolor es estenduda entro al loc prop les ditz des pes, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui on envireys am cauteri per tres puntz o quatre o mays si indigeys de aquel.	And if the pain extends to the area near the ankle bones, then cauterize there where you encircle with a cautery for three or four points, or more if needed.
E si le malaute envireys dolor esser dejos le donolh ves la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui am un cauteri cutellar.	And if the pain extends to the area near the heel, then cauterize there with a surgical cautery.
E guarda te en tota cauterizacio que no ultimes am le cauteri en tant que comburas nervi o gran arceria, e que per aquo a tu es sobre le malaute mal noccument o contraccio.	Guard yourself in all cautery that you do not end with the cautery to such an extent that it burns nerves or great artery, and that by this you are above the patient harmfully or contraction.
E yeu ja e vist un e autre de aquels les quals cauterizero sobre la cavilha e ultimero en la cauterizacio, e la cama foc inflada entro que la tumor aconseguit lo pe, e foc perforat e corromput tot le pe.	And I have seen several cases where they cauterized the cyst and ended with the cautery, and the fire inflated between the tumor and the skin, burning and corrupting all the skin.
E aprop accidic fort solucio de ventre, e aprop aquo la mort.	And then follows a severe abdominal cramp, and often death.
E si la dolor es en dos partidas ensemps cauteriza quascuna segon aquesta manieyra.	And if the pain is in two parts, cauterize each one according to this manner.
E diysero les savis alcus en la cauterizacio de anqua cauteri del qual aquesta es la manieyra: fay semblant a cercle de ferr del qual le cercuit sia la maytat de un palm; e sia deves le sieu orrifici segon la grossesa de un os de datil o mens un pauc.	And the wise will say about the cautery in the cautery of water: this is the manner: make it resemble a circle of iron where the circumference is the width of one palm; and let its orifices be according to the size of an os bone or at most a little more.
E dedintz aquel cercle sia un autre tertz; e sia le spazi le qual es entre lor la quantitat del notz del pous; e sian aquels cercles ubertz de dos partidas; e sia la longitut de aquels cays un notz o dos notz, e fay en aquels margue de ferr decentment apparelhat en les cercles; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And inside that circle, make another third; and let the space between them be the quantity of a finger's breadth; and may those circles be open in two parts; and let the length of those lines be one finger's width or two, and make at those iron margins decently fitted to the circles; this is the form of it:
Aprop sia ignit en le foc entro que s’enrogesisca e gete scintillas, e aprop sia pausat sobre la partida del anqua, le malaute colcat sobre le latz sa.	It is heated in the fire until it turns red and gives off sparks, then placed over the part of the water, the patient lying on the mat.
E donc cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris redontz en una veguada.	And therefore cauterize that part with three round cautery marks in one go.
E aprop layssa aquel per tres jorns; aprop emplastre aquel am boder e layssa la plagua uberta per trops dias; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And leave that [area] for three days; then apply a plaster with a bandage and leave the wound open for many days; and cure that by anointing it until it is healed.
Diys Albucasis : o, filhs, de aquesta specia de cauteri pauc havem usat per la terror del reguardament de lu, e per aquo que paucs havem trobatz les quals reguardan sobre lu.	Albucasis says: Oh, my son, we have used this type of cautery rarely because of the fear of looking at it, and because we have found few things that regard it.
Mays dels bos cauteris a lu qui les sufferta, et atroba am aquel le loc de lu.	But for those who have suffered from good cautery, you find that the location heals well.
Mays cauteri am medicinas adhurentz es que tu fassas dos cercles haventz armula perforada en la qual deyssen le guaffo de la porta de ferr; sia la longuitut de la paretz en la nauteza de lor sian dos nozes o quays aquels.	Better medicines that adhere are that you make two circles having an armula perforated with a hole through which the smoke of the iron-smelting furnace passes; let the length of the walls where they will stick be as wide as two or three fingers.
E si le spazi le qual es entre quascu la quantitat de la grossitut del dit; e sian ubertz dejos e desus, e sian que contenguan se entre lor segon aquesta forma:	And if the space which is between each one of the quantity of the swelling of the digit; and be opened below and above, and should contain themselves among them according to this form:
E aprop pausa sobre la partida de la anqua le malaut jasent sobre le latz sa, e comprem la tua ma sobre la partida de la anqua; e aprop pren de aygua cauda e fon la entre dos cercles, e la qualiditat de aquela sia am le foc petit a petit, e te aquela per la quantitat de una hora, e sufferta le malaute la mordicacio e la adhustio de lu — quar aquel atrobo mordicacio ayssi cum de foc — entro que cesse la mordicacio.	And then place your hand over the part of the foot where the patient feels pain, and hold your hand over the part of the water; and take some hot water and pour it between two circles, and let the quality of that water be as hot as little fire, and have that water for the quantity of one hour, and suffer the patient the biting and adjustment of it — for that empty space bites like fire — until the biting ceases.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am le instrument et abstergeys l’aygua cauda de tota la anqua am aygua dousa.	And then lift your hand with the instrument and remove the hot water from all the foot with cold water.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres jorns e pausa sobre aquel boder entro que sia la negror de la adhustio remauguda, e leyssa aquo per alcus jorns, e correra de lu poyredura; aquest es derier en juvament.	And then let that be for three days and place your hand over that border until the blackness of the adjustment fades, and let this be for some days, after which the redness will pass; this is the end of the treatment.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then cure that with ointment until it is healed.
E si la dolor es extenduda entro la coyssa o la camba, fay a lu estatua en lu que contengua aygua segon que es feyt en la anqua engualment.	And if the pain is extended to the thigh or abdomen, make an incision in it that contains water according to how it is done in the water.
E aquesta es la manieyra de aygua cauda, e yeu ja he scrit aquela en le tractat de la rectificacio de medicinas.	And this is the way of water cauda, and I have already written that in the treatise on the rectification of medicines.
Recipe de alcali e de caus no extinta de amdos ana partida una, e trissa les e pausa en una ola nova de la qual la partida dejos sia perforada per un petit trauc, segon la quantitat que intre en lu ray.	Recipe for alkali and for the fire not extinct from both parts one, three pieces and pause in a new bowl of which the part left is perforated by a small tube, according to the quantity that enters into it.
E pausa dejos le fons de la ola autra ola enveyriada, e gete sobre aquel alcali e caus viva de aygua doussa la qual cobra aquels per un dit, e pus que tu compremes aquels am la tieua ma per bona compressio, e leyssa la hola que deyssenda de lu aygua aguda en la partida dejos a la ola enveyriada.	And pause the bottom of the bowl in another boiling bowl, and place it over that alkali and live fire of water from which they take out one digit, and when you understand them with your hand by good compression, let the bowl that contains the sharp water remain in the part left to the boiled bowl.
E aprop ajusta tota aquela aygua, e geta la sobre autra caus viva e autre alcali renovelatz, quar aquela lahoras sira de mot forta acuitat, la qual es aministrada en motas operacios de medicina e en cauterizacio dels autres membres, quar operacio fa de foc.	And then adjust all that water, and place it over another live fire and fresh alkali, for which it will have strong acuity, which is administered in many operations of medicine and in the cautery of other members, for which operation makes use of fire.
E so de las medicinas alcunas am las quals es cauterizat ancha, ayssi cum tezizic e mel anacrat e caus am sabo enayssi que sian mesclatz.	And of some medicines, those which are heated wide, thus with terebinth and honey and have been tested to ensure they are mixed.
E Gualia recontet de un home dels antics la operacio e la curacio am la qual es curada dolor de anqua e de vena sciatica, e magnifiquet mot be esser de aquel, e diys que no hac necessitat de autra curacio, e quar es sanat per una veguada ayssi cum recomtec, quar fort leu aquel intrec en banh e eysic ja sa d’aquel.	And Gualia relates of an ancient man the operation and cure for pain and sciatica, magnificently describing it well, saying there is no need for another cure, and that he was cured in one instance as recommended, for he immersed himself in hot and cold baths as instructed.
Et es que sia pres de certarragi vert, e si no es atrobat vert, sia presa figua recent; e mot sia trissada am un pauc de grays e sia pausat sus la anqua en la qual es la dolor, o en la coyssa, o en la camba, e sia liat.	And it should be near the willow tree, and if there is no willow leaf, a fresh fig should be used; it should be tied with a few gray threads and placed on the water in which the pain is, or on the thigh, or on the chest, and should be pressed.
E sia layssat per la cantitat de tres horas o per la quantitat que·l malaute centa cedacio de la adhustio.	And it should be left for the quantity of three hours or for the amount of time the patient senses relief from the application.
E aprop met aquel en banh e donc quan le cors de lu sia enrozat, entromet aquel en le sol, quar la dolor cessa e es sanat.	And then place it in hot water; when the patient's body is warm, insert it into the soil, for the pain subsides and the patient is cured.
E sapias que no cove que alcu use de cauteri am aquestas medicinas sino aprop la evacuacio del cors.	And you should know that no such use of cautery in these medicines is made except near the body's evacuation.
Mays ja Escorides diysec que quan am fenda de cabra la vena stretica es cauterizada, aprofieyra a lu mo be; e sia le cauteri am lu segon aquesta manieyra: sia presa lana e sia enbeguda en oli antic, e sia pausat entre le pous del pe e entre le fossil.	When making a slit in the sinew vein, it is seared; this will heal better. And the cautery is done in this manner: take wool and soak it in old oil, and place it between the toes of the foot and on the stone.
E aprop pren fenda de cabra secca e emflasma aquela am foc entro que sia fayta carbo; e aprop pausa lu sobre la lana e leysa la entro que sia estengida.	And then take a slit in the dry sinew and flame it inside, making it char; then place it over the wool until it is extended.
E aprop itera aquo, e no cessas far aquo entro que·l scintiment de la mordicacio pervengua entro al anqua e repausa la dolor.	And then repeat this, and do not cease to do so until the sensation of the bite reaches the water and relieves the pain.
Et aquesta manieyra de cauteri es apelat cauteri de vaquas.	And this method of cautery is called the cattle cautery.
Capitol .xlii.	Capitol. xlii.
De cauterizacio de dolor de dos.	On the cautery for pain in the toes.
Alcunas veguadas dolor es en le dos per tropas causas, cum per cazement o per percucio o per superflua evacuacio, e per causas ad aquelas semblantz, per infusio de materia frega e humida.	Sometimes pain in the two [limbs] is caused by multiple reasons, such as inflammation or percussion or excessive evacuation, and by causes similar to those, through the infusion of wet and irritating material.
E cauteri no catz sino en aquesta sola specia la qual es fayta per efusio de materia frega.	And the cautery should not be used except in this single instance where it is applied due to the infusion of wet and irritating material.
Donc cove, aprop evacuacio del malaute am pillulas fitidas e am semblant a lor, que sian faytas sobre·l dos en le qual es la dolor tres linhas segon la latitut de lu, pus que senhas am tentha en quascuna linha v cauteris o mays, segon la quantitat que ve de la tolleransa del malaute e de la vertut de lu.	Therefore, open, and place pills that are similar in size to the inflamed area over both sides where the pain is located, three lines wide according to the width of the area. Then apply cautery or more, according to the quantity that the patient can tolerate and the virtue of the area.
E sia fayta cauterizacio am cauteri de punt.	And perform the cautery with a pointed cautery.
E si vols, cauteriza am tres cauteris o am quatre am cauteri clavilh medial segon aquesta forma:	And if you wish, perform the cautery with three or four lancet-cauteries according to this form.
Capitol .xliii.	Capitol. xliv.
De cauterizacio al comensament de gilbositat.	On the cautery at the beginning of gilbositat.
Motas veguadas endeve aquesta malautia als petitz enfantz; e senhal del comensament de lu en les enfantz es que accideys sobre lor estrectura en le ale eves la elevacio e·l movement.	Small fevers for this illness in small children; and the sign of the beginning of it in children is that they stumble in walking and show elevation and movement in their structure.
E atrobas en le derier espondil del dos e dels notz de lu que ja comensa a sobremontar sobre les autres spondils.	You find in the lower vertebra of the back and of the neck that it is beginning to overcome the other vertebra.
E donc quan tu vezes aquo e voles prohibir, lahoras cauterisa aquel am cauteri que sia cercle segon aquesta forma:	And when you see this and want to treat it, then cauterize that area with a cautery in the shape of a circle according to this form:
que prengua le cauteri sobre tota partida del spondilh engualment.	place the cautery over the entire part of the vertebra equally.
E si vols, cauteriza en le circuit del spondilh am le cauteri de punt dos linhas o tres.	And if you wish, cauterize around the vertebra with a pointed cautery two or three lines wide.
E sian les puntz propdas entre lor.	And let the points be close to each other.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat am aquo que havem dit.	Then cover the area thoroughly until it is healed with what we have said.
Mays guarda que cauteri no sia administrat en gelbositat que sia fayta per spasme de nervi.	More importantly, ensure that the cautery is not applied in cases of inflammation caused by nerve spasm.
Capitol .xliv.	Capitol XLIV.
De cauterizacio de podagra e de dolor de juncturas.	Of the cautery treatment for gout and joint pain.
Quan dolor de juncturas son faytas per humors fregas les quals so enfundutz a quascun membre del cors, lahoras quan veno dolors en los pes, de costuma dels metges es que aquo apelen podragua propriament.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E donc cum es curada podagra de causa frega am manieyra de cura e no so remaugudas las dolors, lahoras las remau cauteri.	And therefore, since gout caused by cold is cured by a method of treatment and not by alleviating the pain, but rather by cautery.
E es que tu cauterizas aquel aprop evacuacio en le circuit de la junctura del pe am motz cauteris.	And you cautery the area near the joint of the foot with a cautery for evacuation in the circuit of the joint.
E sia cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the olive-shaped cautery, of which this is the form:
E si es necessitat que puntz sia fayt sobre la fassia del pe, lahoras fay am cauteri de punt.	And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
E si las dolors pujan entro als denolhs o a las autras juncturas, e aquo motas vetz s’endeve, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre quascun donolh am tres cauteris o quatre de tota partida am aquest cauteri olivar.	And if the pains rise to the toes or other joints, and you observe this, then cautery the area over each toe with three or four cauteries of this olive-shaped cautery.
E si motz cauteris que aquestz cauteris sian a tu necessaris, lahoras cauteriza aquel e no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri abans, sia tant solament enviro la specitut de la codena.	And if you need to use cautery irons for these cauteries, then cauterize that area but do not press your hand too much against the cautery before, only around the tip of the needle.
E si las dolors pugan entro al donolh e·l dos, lahoras aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le sieu capitol.	And if the pains penetrate into the groin and testicles, then apply the cautery which we have mentioned in our chapter.
E si las dolors so en las mas tant solament, e es apelada suagra, lahoras puncta en le circuit dels focils ayssi cum se revolvo, puncta en aquels dos linhas.	And if the pains are only in the thighs and it is called sciatica, then puncture along the course of the femoral nerves as they run, puncturing at those two lines.
E si reman de las dolors en les ditz, lahoras puncta en le cercuit dels focils sobre quascun notz e sobre la pinche de la ma.	And if the pains remain in the fingers, then puncture along the course of the femoral nerves over each finger and over the little finger.
E si las dolors pugan aprop alscus jorns als coydes o als muscles, lahoras cauteriza les quascus de tota part dels ajutoris.	And if the pains remain for several days in the knees or muscles, then cauterize all parts of those areas.
E no evacuas le malaute de bon regiment e de recepcio de medicinas, quar si es fayt bon regiment e flacma es evacuada am aquest cauteri sira sanat, Dieus ajudan.	And if you do not evacuate the rheumatism with proper regimen and reception of medicines, for if it is done properly and inflammation is reduced, then this cautery will be sufficient, God help us.
Capitol .xlv.	Capitol. xlv.
De cauterizacio de rompeduras.	Of cautery for ruptures.
Quan endeve rompedura en les angonars e diysendo les budels denant l’atela al genetiu, e aquo es comensan de aprop, lahoras cove que tu mandas al malaute layssar la sua comestio en le sieu dia e que use de causas leniens per so que la fenda deyssenda del sieu ventre.	When there is a rupture in the inguinal region and the intestines are prolapsing through the mesh of the hernia, and this begins to approach, then when you command the patient to stop eating on that day and use mild remedies so that the opening of their abdomen decreases.
E aprop segua le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e comanda a lu que tengua le sieu ale entro que sia foro getat o aparesca l’atela o·l budels.	And then place the patient between your arms over their abdomen, and command them to hold their legs together until the mesh appears or the intestine is visible.
E aprop retorna aquel am les tieus ditz e senha am tenta la ruptura sobre le os del pentenilh am senhal la extremitat del qual sia semblant a la maytat de cercle a las subiranas partidas del cors.	And then return those to your arms and test the rupture over the bone of the pelvis, marking the extremity of which is similar in size to the breadth of the upper parts of the body.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then heat the cautery, the form of which is as follows:
entro que sia mot rog e gete cintilhas.	until it is well heated and begins to emit sparks.
E aprop reduzeys le budel o l’atela a la sua conquavitat, e aprop pause la sua ma sobre le loc per so que le budel no yesqua.	Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
E tu ja has ubert entre las coyssas del malaute e dejos lu as pausat un coyssi, et autre servent sia sus las cambas de lu, e autre sus le pietz de lu, le qual tengua las suas mas.	You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
E aprop pausa le cauteri sobre aquel senhal am la tua ma am cauteri stan dreyt, e te aquel entro que am lu consieguas le os del pentenilh entro al mieg del duiduni; e itera am aquel autra veguada si a tu aquel no has conseguit en la primieyra veguada entro al os.	Then place the cautery over that mark with your hand holding the cautery straight, and keep it there until you can feel the bone in the middle of the foot; and repeat this on another side if you have not felt the bone in the first attempt.
E observa saviament del ysiment del budel en la hora de la tua cauterizacio, que no comburas aquel budel per so que sobre le malaute no vengua in mort o autre gran malicia.	Observe wisely the reaction of the patient during your cautery, that you do not burn the intestine too much, lest it lead to death or another great mischief for the patient.
E sapias que quan tu am le cauteri no atenhas le os, no confereys la tua operacio.	Be mindful that when you use the cautery, do not touch the bone, as this would compromise your operation.
E cove que·l cauteri dels enfants sia subtil segon le gran e la mesura de lor.	Ensure that the cautery for children is fine according to their size and age.
E aprop cura le loc del cauteri per tres dias am boder entro que sia remauguda la scara del foc.	And then care for the area of the cautery for three days by applying something between until the wound from the fire heals.
E aprop cura aquel am les autres enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then care for that as with other ointments until it is healed.
E le malaute sia jasent sobre le sieu dos per xl dias entro que sia sigillat le loc e la plagua.	And the patient lie on their back for 10 days until the area and wound are sealed.
E cove que pauses le nutriment de lu segon la longitut del temps de la curacio de lu le qual le linesca le ventre de lu, e que le budel no yesca fora deves le esforsament de guerir.	And ensure that you provide nourishment to the patient according to the length of time for the wound's healing, and that the intestine does not come out with the great effort to heal.
E aprop quan se vol levar aprop xl dias, lahoras aministra liament decentment fayt, e tengua aquel per autres xl jorns.	And then when you want to lift it after 10 days, properly apply a dressing, and keep it for another 10 days.
E sia mermat de trebalh e de replecio de vianda e de beure, e de votz vehementz, quar quan usa de aquest regiment de sanacio entiera sira sanat.	And let it rest from work and the replenishment of food and drink, as well as loud voices. For when it uses this regimen for complete healing, it will be healthy.
E yeu diyre la curacio de las rupturas en las autras partidas del ventre, e so al comensament, e vols que no treguan, lahoras cauterisa la ruptura d’aquel am cauteri redon segon la quantitat de lu, e sia aquo que es exhurit de la codena ayssi cum la tersa partida de lu; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit, e no es ajustat.	And I will say the healing of ruptures in other parts of the abdomen, and at the beginning, if you do not want them to tear again, then cauterize the rupture with a round cautery according to its size. And what is extracted from the codena should be treated like the tender part of it; then care for that as we have said, and it is not fastened.
E ja diyssero alcus primiers que ruptura sia cauterizada am cauteri triangular segon aquesta forma, pus que es senhada am tenta:	And some first ones have said that the rupture should be seared using a triangular cautery in this manner, rather than with forceps.
e es pausada linha que eys per la latitut en le latz pus sobira de la ruptura, e autra linha al desus; e depausa la tua ma am un cauteri clavilh, mays le primier cauteri es pus leugier e milhor.	And it is paused line that lies for the width in the laceration and passes above the rupture, and another line from below; and then place your hand on a cruciform cautery, but the first cautery is lighter and better.
Capitol .xlvi.	Capitol XLVI.
De cauterizacio de torcio.	Of the cautery for the hernia.
Quan endeve en alscus membres per cazement o per percussio dolor e persevera aquela dolor per lonc temps e no comfereys al u curacio am medicinas, lahoras cove que cauterizes am cauteri de punt.	When pain in certain members persists due to inflammation or percussion and does not respond to medical treatment over a long period, then it is necessary to cautery with a pointed cautery.
E sia le cauteri de tot membre segon la magnitut e la parvitat de lu, e vertut e develitat de lu, e locacio de torcio e dolor de lu.	And the cautery should be applied to the entire member according to its size and degree of inflammation, its strength and urgency, and the location of the hernia and its pain.
Donc si·s sanat per le primier cauteri, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera sobre lu le cauteri; quar de costuma de aquelas dolors es que sian punctatz de membre ad aquel membre le qual apropinque al u, per que cove que consieguas aquels am cauteri entro que·l malaute sia sanat.	If the patient is cured by the first cautery, that is good; but if not, then repeat the cautery on it; for customarily, such pains are punctured at a member near to that member where they are located, so that you may achieve the cure with the cautery before the malady is healed.
Capitol .xlvii.	Capitol forty-seven.
De cauterizacio de lepra.	Of the cautery treatment for leprosy.
Les lebros alcunas veguadas am cauteri per mot gran juvament, e magerment si la specia de lepra que es fayta per putrefaccio de flacma e de melencolia.	Lepers are sometimes treated with a large cautery, especially when the type of leprosy is caused by the putrefaction of flame and melancholy.
E donc cum tu vols cauterizar aquel, considera si la lepra es comussan e as aquela curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no deysen, ni esta, e temes sobre le malaute que la corrupcio comprehenda tot le cors de lu e tota la compleccio de lu, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le cap am v cauteris: am un en le mieg loc del cap, e am le segon pus dejos de lu, eves le front a la fi dels cabels; e amdos sobre dos corns; e am un detras, sobre la nuca o servitz.	And so, when you want to cauterize the affected area, consider whether the leprosy is common and similar to that cured as we have said in the division. Do not use this method here or there, nor fear that the corruption might encompass his entire body and all its complexities; then cauterize the head with five cauteries: one in the middle of the forehead, leave the second space between them, extend the brow toward the end of the hairline; two on the corners; and one behind, on the neck or shoulder.
E ultima la tua ma am le cauteri un pauc entro que emprema en le os una petita empressio, e de lu sian deslocadas las scorsas, per so que la expiracio de grossas vapors sia alleujada de lu; e cauteriza sobre la melsa segon que es precesit.	And finish your hand with a small pressure from the cautery near the opening of the mouth, so that the expulsion of thick vapors is alleviated; then cauterize on the cheek as necessary.
E si la lepra es ja expanduda sobre le malaute e apar manifestament, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquel am aquels cauteris les quals havem ditz en le cap; e am cauteri sobre la extremitat del nas, e am dos cauteris sobre las doas maysselas, e am dos cauteris sobre dos spondils del col, e am vi cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e am un gran sobre les spondils prop de la coeta, e un sobre la cotea , e am dos sobre las anquas, e am un sobre quascuna anqua, e am dos sobre les donols e un sobre quascun donolh, e am dos sobre les coydes, e am dos sobre les muscles, e am dos las teneretutz del sieu pietz; e cauteriza aquel sobre totas las juncturas dels ditz de las mas e dels pes, e sobre quascun talon dels sieus pes, e sobre les foscils de las suas mas.	And if leprosy is already extended over the patient and manifestly appears, then you cauterize that area as well as those cauterizations which we have said in the head; on the extremity of the nose, and on two cauterizations on both cheeks, and on two cauterizations on two vertebrae of the neck, and on six cauterizations on the vertebrae of the back, and a large one near the sacrum, one on the spine, and two on the hips, and one on each hip, and two on the knees, and one on each knee, and two on the elbows, and two on the muscles, and two on the soles of his feet; cauterize that on all joints of his fingers and of his feet, and on each heel of his feet, and on his arteries.
E guarda te dels nervis les quals so sobre le talo que no comburas aquels.	And guard the nerves which are over the heel that you do not burn those.
E alcunas veguadas es cauterizat am un cauteri sobre le os del pentenilh e am autre sobre la boca del stomac, e autre sobre le fietge.	And sometimes cauterization is done with one cauterization on the os of the pentenilh and another on the mouth of the stomach, and another on the liver.
E sapias que quant mays ajustas cauteris, tant es mays juvatiu e mays conferent; e sapias que le malaute no ha en le cauteri dolor, ayssi cum han les sas, per so quar le cors de lu ja es stupefayt.	And know that the more tightly you adjust the cautery, the more beneficial and effective it is; and know that the patient does not feel pain in the cautery as they do elsewhere, since the body of the patient is already numbed.
E cove que les cauteris sian grans o paucs segon les membres e las juncturas segon que es precedit de las specias dels ferramentz.	And know that the cautery should be large or small according to the limb and joints as directed by the tools used.
E aprop cura le cauteri am farina de errs coyta am mel e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And place the cautery in flour mixed with honey and other remedies until it is healed.
Capitol .xlviii.	Capitol. xlviii.
De cauterizacio de stupor.	On the cautery for stupefaction.
Quan alcun membre es stabozit o adormit e es curat am medicinas, olis e emplastres, e no es sanat, lahoras tu cauteriza aquel membre stabozit am cauteris segon que merita la grandesa del membre o la parvitat de lu.	When some limb is numbed or asleep and is treated with medicines, oils, and plasters, and does not heal, then you cautery that numb limb with cauteries according to the size of the limb or its smallness.
E sia lo tieu cauteri intrant la ispicitut de la codena un pauc.	And let your cautery enter the depth of the wound slightly.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then cure that which is ointed until it is healed.
E alscunas veguadas es cauterizada alcuna stupor le qual endeve a las mas e als pes, e als spondils del dos e ves le eysiment dels nervis les quals mavon aquel membre, e es remauguda la stupor.	And sometimes certain spots are cauterized to alleviate pain in the feet and the spine, and to relieve the tension of the nerves that run through that member.
Mays no prusuma sobre aquo sino aquel que es savi en la anotomia dels membre e de la egressio dels nervis tot le cors moventz.	But do not presume on this except those who are skilled in the anatomy of the members and the course of the nerves throughout the body.
Capitol .xlix.	Capitol. xliv.
De cauterizacio de albaras que es morfea.	On the cauterization of ulcers that are morphew.
Quan albaras es antiqua e no comfereys a lu alcu dels enguentz de medicina, lahoras tu cauteriza sobre aquela am cauteri preon un pauc segon la quantitat de la specitut de la codena entro que sia remauguda la blancor e la color de lu, e la color de lu sia mudada.	When ulcers are old and do not respond to any of the medical ointments, then cauterize over that with a cautery, using a small amount according to the quantity of the powder in it until the white and the color of it are changed.
E aprop cura aquel am farina de errs e de lentilhas am oli rozat e am folhas de arnagrosa, e am sanc de colomba o am sanc de yronda, da cascuna sia una partida e totas sian mescladas, e aprop sia linit un drap e sus le loc sia pausat entro que sia sanat.	And then cure that which is sprinkled with flour of erthumbs and lentils in fine oil and leaves of rosemary, and with pigeon droppings or hen droppings, using a part of each, all mixed together. Then place a cloth over it until it is healed.
Capitol .l.	Capitol I.
De cauterizacio de cranc.	Of cautery for the groin.
Quan canser es comensan e vols aquel ostar, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri de cercle en le circuit de lu ayssi cum es revolgut.	When cancer begins and you want to stop it, then cautery it with a circular cautery in the circuit of the tumor as it is revolved.
E diysero les savis que sia cauterizat am lo derier cauteri en le mieg loc; mays a mi no es vist aquo, quar temi que sia ulcerat, e yeu ja e vist aquo alcunas veguadas.	And the wise will say that it should be cauterized with the last cautery in the middle location; but to me it is not visible, for I fear it might be ulcerated, and I have seen this several times.
E es pus dreyturier que sia cauterizat en le circuit de lu am cercle ayssi cum avem dit, o am motz cauteris.	And it is more proper to cauterize it in the circuit of the tumor with a circular cautery as we have said, or with several cauteries.
Capitol .li.	Capitol II.
De cauterizacio de adubilati.	Of cautery for adenitis.
Quan alcun adubilati es tardat en maturacio, e aysso es per la superfluitat fazen aquela, o per etat del malaute, quar es vielh en decrepitat, de pauc sanc, o per le temps, e tu vols festinar en la maturacio de adubilati; lahoras cauteriza en le circuit de lu am motz cauteris petitz punctan; e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela fastinara en maturacio.	When some adenitis is delayed in maturation, this happens either due to excess causing it, or due to the patient's condition, which may be old age in decrepitude, with little strength, or due to time, and you want to hasten the maturation of the adenitis; then cauterize in the circuit of the adenitis with several small puncturing cauteries; and leave that which will mature on its own.
Mays si tu vols la perforacio de lu am cauteri, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: e depausa aquel en le mieg loc de adubilati entro que penetre la codena.	If you want to make a puncture with the cautery, then heat the cautery of which this is the shape: and place it in the middle of the area where the needle will penetrate.
E si le cauteri en aquel loc que es pus dejos, per so que le cors del brac sia alleujat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you place the cautery in that area, do so that the arm may be relieved; and then cure that which needs to heal.
Capitol .lii.	Capitol. lii.
De cauterizacio de corrodent.	Of the cautery for corroding.
Corrodent es corrupcio ambulant en le membre, la qual corrodeys aquel ayssi cum a foc comedent lenha secca.	Corrodent is a wandering corruption in the member, which corrodes it as fire consumes dry wood.
Donc si vezes aquel corrodent en loc le qual sufferte cauteri am foc, lahoras tu igneys cauteris clavils motz paucs, e grans segon que es convenent en aquel loc en le qual es corrodent.	Therefore, if you find the corrodent in a place where it will receive a cautery with fire, then heat the cautery with a few strong and large coals as is suitable for that place where the corrodent is.
E aprop cauteriza aquel de tota partida entro que erradiques tota la corrosio e no romangua alcuna causa de lu.	And then cauterize that completely as you remove all the corruption and do not leave any cause of it.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres dias, e pausa sobre les locs cauterizats solpre trissat am oli mesclat entro que las scaras sian totas eradicadas e tota la corrupcio.	And let that be for three days, and place a hot oil mixture over the cauterized areas until all the scabs are removed and all the corruption is gone.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz carn engendrantz.	And let it heal by applying ointment to the flesh producing wounds.
Mays si aprop tres dias vezes que la carn nasca sana en la qual no es corrupcio, bo es; mays sino, lahoras itera le cauteri sobre aquo que es romas en les locs corrumputz.	But if after three days the flesh grows healthy in the area where there is no corruption, that is good; but if not, then cauterize again the area that is rotten in the corrupted areas.
E corrodent es medicat alcunas vetz am medicina aguda, quar aquela es meza en loc de cauteri.	And when the wound is medicated several times with acute medicine, for there it is used instead of cauterization.
Mays empero cauteri am foc es de pus leugier juvament.	But nevertheless, cauterization with fire is more beneficial than light ointments.
E yeu ja e dit la curacio de lu am medicina aguda en la divisio, e donc pren aquela quan de lu auras endegencia.	And I have already described the treatment with acute medicine in the division, so use that when you need it.
Capitol .liii.	Chapter XXXIII.
De cauterizacio de claus e dels autres semblants.	On the Cautioning of Wounds and Other Similar Cases.
Motas veguadas endeve a las partidas dejos del pe malautia que s’apela clau, e es causa grossa, fentrada, la qual ladeys le pe; e cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, so es cauteri am foc e cauteri am aygua cauda.	Motes viewed around the sides of the bad foot that suffers, which is called clau, and this is a large cause, entered, which affects the foot; in these, cauterization is according to two manners, so it is cauterization by fire and cauterization by water caudata.
Mays cauteri am foc es que igniscas le cauteri concau semblant a pena de voltor, le qual sia feyt de ferr segon la quantitat la qual contengua le clau de tota partida, e sia de subtils marguas.	Cauterization by fire is that you heat the concave cauterizer resembling a turning pin, which is made of iron according to the quantity it can contain for all parts, and should have thin edges.
E aprop pausa aquel ignit sobre le clau, e aprop revolveys la tua ma am le cauteri en le circuit del clau entro que·l cauteri pervengua a la profunditat del clau.	And then place that heated instrument on the foot, and quickly move your hand with the cauterizer in a circuit around the foot while the cauterizer reaches the depth of the foot.
E leyssa aquel per tres dias entro que comense getar brac.	And let it be there for three days until it begins to scab.
E aprop emplastre aquel am malvas salvatges trissadas am sal, e leyssa le emplastre sobre aquel per una nuoyt, quar aquel sira eradicat de las suas razitz.	And then apply a poultice to it with wild trios of mallows salted, and let the poultice remain on it for one night, so that it will be eradicated from its root.
E aprop cura le loc am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanat.	And then treat the area with a cream of generative flesh until it is healed.
E si so no-convertitz, e motas veguadas accideysso en la superficia del cors, majorment en las mas e les pes, lahoras cove que tu aministres en aquels cauteri am aygua, e es que prenguas una quannula de eram o de ferr o de pena de voltor, e pausa aquela sobre le clau; e aprop geta en la quanula de aygua cauda pauca cantitat, e rete la tua ma, e tu revolveys aquela am compressio de la tua ma de tot, e sia enpremut le marge de la canula en la razit del clau, e atrobara la aygua cauda via al preon de la razit del cau; e espera le malaute un pauc la mordicacio de l’aygua cauda per una hora, e aprop remau aquela, quar le clau am las suas razitz sira erredicat.	If they are not reducible, and many edemas occur in the surface of the body, especially in the thighs and feet, then when you need to apply cauterization with water, take a quannaula of copper or iron or nail, place it on the clavicle; then put some water in the quannaula, raise your hand, and move it with compression of your hand from all sides, pressing the margin of the quannaula against the base of the clavicle, and you will find the water coming out through the slit of the quannaula; wait for the patient a little while after the bite of the flowing water for an hour, then remove it, as the clavicle will be eroded.
E ayssi fe am aquels la i aprop l’autre entro que venguas sobre totz les quals de lor so en le cors.	And thus do it for those and nearby each other where you come over all of which they have in their body.
E aprop cura aquels pus que las razitz dels claus so erradicadas am aquo dels enguentz les quals la carn ve engenran.	And then cure those boils where the roots of the claws have been eradicated by applying ointments that cause the flesh to regenerate.
Capitol .liiii.	Capitol. liiii.
De cauterizacio de tremor.	Of the cautery for trembling.
Quan endeve ad alcu tremor per freg en le nervi o per febre de causa frega, o per autra causa semblant, lahoras cove que tu cauterises aquel am quatre cauteris o am v sobre les spondils del dos, entre quascun spondilh am un cauteri; e am cauteri en le pietz de lu, e sobre l‘estomac de lu, am cauteri olivar.	When there is a tremor due to friction in the nerves or from fever of some cause, or from another similar cause, then you should cautery that area with four or five cauteries on the spine, placing one cautery between each vertebra; and one cautery on the foot, and one over its stomach.
E la tremor de lu se repausa e festina la sanetat de la malautia frega.	And the tremor subsides, and the illness is cured.
Capitol .lv.	Capitol.
De cauterizacio de albati accidentz al cors.	Of the cautery for accidents in the body.
Quan en le cors so espellitz albati, e so pustulas fendas las quals so feytas de materias grossas corruptas; donc cove al comensament cum apareyso, que sia cauterizat sobre tot cap de la fistola am cauteri subtil am fustz de mirt, la extremitat del qual es estenduda am foc; o am razitz de erestologia longua; o am cauteri lentecular.	When in the body abscesses are formed and pustules develop, which are made of corrupt gross materials; then at the beginning as they appear, the fistula should be cauteryed with a fine cautery using a branch of myrtle, the end of which is extended over the fire; or with an iron from erythronium; or with a lentil-shaped cautery.
E alscunas veguadas es cauteri ademamil al comensament de la sua expulcio segon aquesta manieyra; e no so cregudas, e es disrumpuda la superfluitat fazens aquels, et sana de aquels.	And sometimes a cautery is applied additionally at the beginning of its expulsion according to this manner; and they are not believed, and when the superfluity is ruptured, they heal from those.
Mays empero cove que aquo sia fayt aprop evacuacio am fleubotomia.	Moreover, I must ensure that this is done near the evacuation by flebotomy.
Capitol lvi.	Capitol lvi.
De cauterizacio de fluex de sanc accident per incisio de arceria.	Of the cautery treatment for flux due to an injury by an arrow wound.
Tropas veguadas endeve fluex de arceria que es inciza deves la plagua la qual endeve deforo, o deves la incizio de apostemas o cauteri del membre, e alor semblantz, e es dificil remaura aquel.	Often times, flux from an arrow wound that is incised either at the site of the plague which then perforates, or at the incision for apothecary or cautery of the member, then swelling occurs, and it is difficult to remedy this.
Donc cum accideys ad alcu aquo, lahoras tu·t coyta am la tua ma a l’orrifici de la arceria, e pausa sobre aquel le tieu dit endic estrenh aquel motas veguadas entro que sia ostat le fluex del sanc dejos le tieu dit, e que non yesqua.	Then, when such a case occurs, hold your hand over the orifices of the arrow wound, and place it there until the flux of the blood has stopped, then remove it so that it does not reappear.
E aprop pausa en le foc les cauteris olivars paucs e grantz, per nombre motz, e exsuffla sobre aquels entro que sian mot ignitz.	And place the olive cautery sticks, some large and small, in the fire for a moment, and then blow on them until they are dry.
E aprop pren de aquels un petit o un gran segon le loc e la plagua en la qual es rompuda la arteria, sobre aquela vena festinantment pus que auras remaugut le tieu dit, e te le cauteri entro que sia abcindit e restreyt aquel sanc.	And then take one small or large [piece], according to the place and wound where the artery is broken, over that vein press forcefully as you have just cauterized the one you said, and keep the cautery between so that it narrows and restrains the bleeding.
E si le sanc es expellit de l’orrifici de la arteria quan tu remaues le tieu dit e extringeys le cauteri, lahoras pren la un autre cauteri coytadament dels cauteris les quals en le foc son preparatz, e donc no cesses fer aquo un aprop autre entro que le sanc sia restrengit.	And if the blood is expelled from the opening of the artery when you move as just said and tighten the cautery, then take another cautery prepared among those in the fire, and therefore continue to do this repeatedly until the bleeding is restricted.
E guarda te que no comburas le nervi que aqui es, e que vengua sobre le malaute autra malicia.	And make sure you do not burn the nerves here, or cause another illness to the patient.
E sapias que quan de l’arteria flueys sanc, lahoras no es possible en aquels restrenge la sanc, e majorment quan l’arteria es gran, si no am una de quatre manieyras: o am cauteri ayssi quo dit havem, o am extraccio quan no es extrayta, quar quan es extrayta las extremitatz de lu miels son comburidas e es restreyt le sanc, o que sia liat am fiel o am liament per fort strectura, o que sian pausadas sobre lu medicinas de las quals la vertut es restringir la sanc; e sian strengudas am pulvinar am costriccio decent.	And know that when blood flows from the artery, it is not possible to restrict the bleeding without one of four methods: either with a cautery as just said, or with extraction when not extracted, in which case the ends of the artery are burned and the bleeding is restricted, or by using vinegar or salt for strong constriction, or by placing them over medicines whose virtue is to restrict the bleeding; and they should be tightly bound with a pulvinar in a proper constrictive manner.
Mays aquel que aministra restriccio decent de lu am liament e am strictura am draps o per posicio de causas comburentz e de semblantz, no comfereys sino tart.	More importantly, he who administers proper restraint to the patient with ligaments and straps or by position due to burning causes and similar ones, does not conferees but tar.
Mays si aquo endeve ad alcu e no sia le metge present ni medicina, lahoras obre am pausament del dit indic sobre le orrifici de aquela vena ayssi cum havem dit, e entenda a la gran costreccio de lu entro que le sanc sia ostat de la sobirana partida de la plagua, e sobre la arceria le dit no sia remaugut; e de sobre la arceria sia aspergit am aygua frega de mot gran fregiditat entro que·l sanc sia congilat e engrossat; e mays cossire en que ha de cauteri o de medicina necessitat.	More importantly, if one has to do so for someone and the doctor or medicine is not present, then open slowly with the finger indicating over the holes of that vein as we have said, and understand the great constriction within which the sore was situated from the upper part of the wound, and over the archery let the finger not be remooved; and over the archery let water fregated with a strong refrigerating fume be applied before the sore is healed and swelled; and more often apply a cauterization or necessity of medicine.
Comensa la segonda partida.	Begin the second part.
De incisio e perforacio e ventozas e de fleubotomia e de plaguas e de lor semblants.	Of incision and perforation and vents and of phlebotomy and of wounds and their similarities.
Aquestas son paraulas de Albucazis.	These are the words of Albucazis.
Ja havem dit en le primier capitol tota malautia en la qual cauteri am foc es convenient e am medicina comburent, e las occasios e las causas de lu, e les instrumentz en aquels necessaris am las formas dels cauteris; e he ordenatz les capitols de la subiranetat del cap entro als pes.	We have already said in the first chapter all illness in which cautery with fire is convenient and medicine burning, and the occasions and causes of it, and the instruments necessary for those cauteries; and I have ordered the chapters from the upper part of the head to the feet.
E yeu procesire en aquest capitol per aquela meteysa guisa, per que sia alliujat lo querent aquo, lahoras sobre aquo que aura demandat.	And you shall proceed in this chapter in that manner, so that the one seeking this may be relieved, concerning what he has requested.
E denant que yeu comense aquo, cove, fils, que aprenguatz que en aquest capitol es per terror aquo que es en le capitol primier de cauterizacio.	And before you begin this, know, sons, that in this chapter the fear of what is in the first chapter on cautery shall be great.
E per aquo que cove que sia en lu gran cautela, quar en la operacio la qual es en aquest capitol motas veguadas catz evacuacio la qual es am sanc am le qual esta la vida deves la aspersio de la vena o incisio sobre l’apostema o apercio de exsitura o puracio de la plagua o extraccio de sageta o incizio de peyra e a lor semblantz.	And because you must be in great caution, for in the operation which is in this chapter, many cases of evacuation are encountered which may threaten life; you should apply the sprinkling of the vein or incision over the abscess or pustule or puncture of exsufflation or purification of the wound or extraction of an arrow or incision of the pus and their like.
E de totz aquels so acompanhatz temor e tremor e en le mas de lor catz la mort.	And in all of these, there is fear and trembling, and in the greater part of them, death.
E yeu amonesti vos que sobre vos no caia aquo en le qual es esitacio, quar alcunas veguadas cazo deves vos manieyras de homes am manieyras motas de malautias.	And I warn you that this applies to you in which there is a position, for at times positions of patients may seem favorable but are actually harmful.
E de lor es alcu que s’irays am la sua malautia e es leugiera deves lu la mort, e aysso per la vehemensia de aquo que troba de sa malautia, e per longuesa de la malautia de lu, e am la malautia es paor la qual significa mort.	And some of them go to their illness and are seemingly better, but die due to the severity of what they find in their illness, and from the length of their illness, and in their illness is fear which means death.
E de aquels es le qual dona a tu son aver e ditta, tu esperant am aquel sanetat, e la sieua malautia es perniciosa.	And of those which give to you their account and testimony, you expecting from that health, and their illness is pernicious.
E donc no cove que tu consentas en aquel que ve a vos del qual es aquesta manieyra; e la vostra cautela sia major que covesitat e la vostra rapacitat; e no presumatz alcuna causa sobre aquo sino aprop sciencia certa la qual virifica aquo deves vos, e al qual perve successio lausabla.	And therefore you must ensure that you consent to only those who come to you, of which this is the manner; and your caution should be greater than greed and your rapacity; and do not presume any cause over it but rather certainty which verifies what you should do, and to which through succession commendable praise can be achieved.
E usatz en la curacio de totz vostres malautes de pronosticacio e indicacio de lu al qual es salut convertida, quar en aquel es a vos ajutori sobre adquisicio de fama e de memoria, de lausor e de gloria.	And use in the cure of all your patients where prognosis and indication lead to health, for in that you will gain assistance in the acquisition of fame and memory, praise and glory.
O, filhs, Dieus en vos spire le sieu entendement e no oste a vos direccio e proteccio, quar aquo es en la sua ma.	O, children, God inspires his understanding in you and does not take away your direction and protection, for that is in His hand.
E yeu e ordenat aquest capitol distingent per capitols segon que precedit en le capitol de cauteris, de la cura del cap entro als pes, per que sia a vos alleujat aquo que demandatz de aquo e del qual havetz necessitat.	And I have ordered this chapter separately distinguished into chapters as preceded in the chapter of cautery, concerning the cure from head to foot, so that what you seek and need may be alleviated.
Capitol primier.	Capitol first.
De la curacio de aygua la qual es contenguda en le cap dels enfantz.	Of the cure of water that is contained in the head of the child.
Sapias que aquesta malautia motas veguadas endeve als enfantz deves le enfantament e quan la noyrissa estrenh le cap del enfant ses livitat.	Know that this illness often appears in children during birth and when the mother's body strengthens the child's head, it causes pain.
E alcunas veguadas endeve per causa amaguada la qual no es saubuda.	And sometimes appears due to hidden causes that are unknown.
Mays yeu no vi aquesta malautia sino en les enfantz; e a totz aquels les quals yeu vi se coytec la mort, e per ayssi es a mi vist layssada obra en aquels.	But I do not see this illness in adults; and for all those I see, death is certain, and thus it has been left to me to work on them.
E yeu e vist que un enfant le cap del qual era d’aygua omplit, e·l cap de lu era totjorn ayssi magnificat entro que ceser no podia sobre si meteys per la grandesa del sieu cap, e mays que la humiditat fe aucmentada entro que foc mort.	And I have seen that a child's head was filled with water, and its head was always swollen until it could no longer bear the weight due to the size of its head, and more so as the moisture increased, leading to its death.
E aquesta humiditat o es agreguada entre la codena e l’os, o es agreguada dejos le os sobre le ciphac.	And this moisture is either added between the membrane and the bone, or added to the bone itself.
Quar la operacio en aquel si la humiditat es entre la codena e l’os e le apostema es pauc, lahoras cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am una fissura en la latitut, e sia la longitut de la fissura cays dos notz entro que corra la humiditat, e aquesta es la forma del spatum:	When the operation in that case where the humidity is between the tendon and the bone and the abscess is small, then cut into the middle location of the lump making a crack in the width, and let the length of the crack be two fingerbreadths so that the humidity flows out, and this is the form of the spatium:
E donc si la humiditat es mays augmentada e l’apostema es major, lahoras son aqui dos fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	And so if the humidity is much increased and the abscess is larger, then here make two cracks in this manner:
E si la humiditat es dejos le os, senhal de lu es que tu vezes la comissuras del cap ubertas de tota partida e l’aygua es spremuda quan tu compremes aquela am la tieua ma a las partidas dedintz e no es aquo a tu amaguat.	And if the humidity leaves the bone, a sign of this is that you see the edges of the lump open from all sides and the water oozes out when you compress it with your hand on the inside parts; this is not what you want to hide.
Cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am tres fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	And cut into the middle location of the lump making three cracks in this manner:
e aprop la inscizio extratz ne tota la humiditat; e aprop strenh las fissuras am draps e plumassols; e aprop enbroca aquo de sobre am vi e oli entro al quint dia, e aprop deslia le liament e cura la plagua am tentas e enguentz, e strenh le cap am equalitat; e mange le malaute am vianda secca de pauca humiditat entro que·l membre sia confortat e sanat.	And extract all the humidity by the incision; strengthen the cracks with bandages and feathers; on the fifth day, pour oil over it; remove the bandage and heal the wound with cloths and ointments, strengthening the lump with equal parts; let the patient eat dry food with little humidity until the limb is comfortable and healed.
E es autra manieyra de incisio, que consideras hon apar la magnitut del apostema e la colleccio de l’aygua, quar alcunas veguadas es mays en le occipicii, o en la partida denant, o en la destra, o en la sinistra; e donc aten am la incizio on appar le apostema e la replecio de l’aygua, e fen aquo segon que a tu es miels possible.	And there is another way of making an incision, which you consider according to the size of the abscess and the collection of the water; for sometimes it is more in the occiput, or in the front part, or on the right side, or on the left; and therefore attend to the incision where the abscess and the filling with water appear, and do so as what is most convenient for you.
Et observa que no inscindas la arteria e endevengua flueys de sanc e mora le malaute per aquel flux de sanc am evacuacio de humiditat.	And observe that you do not incise the artery and try to let blood flow from the wound, for it would harm the patient through this flow of blood by evacuating humidity.
Capitol .ii.	Chapter II.
De inscisio de las arterias las quals so aprop las aurelhas, apeladas hilasseysse.	Of the incision of the arteries which are near the ears, called halcyons.
Capitol segon.	Chapter II.
Quan endeveno ad alcu catars o raumas als huelhs o al pietz, e es antiquat aquo, e no confereys en aquo la curacio de las medicinas, lahoras la deriera curacio en aquest es incizio de aquelas dos arterias.	When an abscess or wound is found in the heels or the feet, and it is customary to treat this without incising the two arteries, then the delayed cure in this case is the incision of those arteries.
E donc cove quan tu vols inscidir aquelas que le malaute raza lo sieu cap, e aprop fregua le loc am drap aspre per so que aparan las arcerias, e aprop sia strengut le col del malaute am alcu drap; e aprop considera on polsa la vena; e les locs de quascuna sobre les locs les quals so aprop las aurelhas depremutz, e tant se occultan sino en alcus homes.	And when you want to incise where the disease reaches its head, then rub the area with rough cloth so that the arteries appear, and tie the neck of the patient with some cloth; and consider where the pulse is at the vein; and the places above these over which the auricles are pressed, and they are hidden in almost all men.
E aprop senha sobre la arceria am tenta, e aprop inscideys quascuna am le spatum de quascuna partida agut am inscizio pervenient entro al os, e sia aquo per la latitut del cap.	And then touch over the artery with your finger, and incise each part sharply with a blade penetrating into the mouth, and do this for the width of the head.
E si vols, entromet le spatum dejos la arteria e trenqua aquala a las inciden a las partidas desus.	And if you want, insert the blade between the artery and leave it there, cutting it at the incisions on the parts above.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio cays dos ditz ajustatz, quar quan alcuna vena es inscizida le sanc es eyssit am egressio pulsatil, le qual saut deforo per saut frequent.	And the length of the incision should be two digits wide, for when a vein is incised, the wound is closed with a pulsating outflow, which flows through frequent spurts.
Mays si la arceria no apareys al cintiment, lahoras cove que tu mesures de la aurelha la quantitat del spazi de tres ditz, e aprop senha am tenta, e fen entro al os.	And if the artery does not appear in the incision, then measure from the auricle the width of three digits, and then touch it with your finger, and insert it into the mouth.
E aquo que cove getar del sanc es quantitat de vi unc., e fort leu ne geta de lu mays o mens, e tot aquo es segon la quantitat la qual appareys de la vertut del malaute e de la replecio de la arceria de lu.	And that which flows from the wound is a quantity of blood one uncia, and much lighter or heavier in its flow, and all this is according to the quantity which appears from the virtue of the malady and the filling of the artery of the limb.
E aprop considera la plagua, e donc si reman sobre le os alcuna causa del ciphac, lahoras inscindys aquo per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then consider the fracture, and therefore if there is any cause on the bone from the fracture, then incise this so that no abscess forms.
E aprop strenh la plagua am plumassols e am liamentz de drap de li, e aprop cura aquela am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then strengthen the fracture with feather down and cloth lint, and then cure that by applying ointments until it is healed.
Capitol .iii.	Capitol III.
De extraccio de las arcerias las quals so en las templas.	Of the extraction of the arteries which are in the temples.
Quan ad alcu accideys emigranea antiqua o catertz agutz, per humiditatz agrimonials e per qualiditat en les lacertz des templas, o sodo antiqua vehement e semblantz ad aquels, e es medicat am las manieyras de curacio de medicina e aquo no comfereys, lahoras nos hem sproatz en aquestas malautias extraccio de las arcerias en les templas, o cauterizacio de aquelas ayssi cum havem mostrat.	When an old or acute headache occurs due to unpleasant humidity and the quality of the blood in the temples, or is very severe and resembles those, and is treated according to the methods of medical cure, and if this does not bring relief, then we have resorted to the extraction of the arteries in the temples, or cauterization of those as we have shown.
E la manieyra de la operacio e extracio de aquelas es que·l malaute raza les pels les quals son en les templas; e entenda a la arceria apparent en le templar quar ela es a tu mostrada per le sieu pols, e·s occultada sino en paucs homes per vehemencia de freg.	And the manner of the operation and extraction is that the surgeon raises the skins which are on the temples; and understand the apparent artery in the temple where it is shown to you by your own pulse, and is hidden in only a few men due to the strength of the cold.
E si a tu es occultada, lahoras le col del malaute sia strengut am alcun drap; e aprop fregua le loc am un drap aspre o evapora le loc am aygua cauda entro que aparesca a tu la arceria manifestament.	And if it is hidden to you, then strengthen the neck of the patient with some cloth; and then rub the area with a rough cloth or evaporate the place with water until the artery becomes clearly visible.
E lahoras tu pren le spatum del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then you take the spatum of which this is the form:
E aprop tu scorja la codena am aquel am facilitat entro que pervenguas a la arceria; e aprop geta en lu onti e extratz aquela a las partidas sobiranas entro que extraguas aquela de la codena e descobras aquela de las tunicas las quals so dejos aquela, de tota partida.	And then you insert the needle there easily until you reach the artery; and then heat it in oil and extract that from the superficial parts until you remove that from the needle and discover those of the tunics, leaving that, from all parts.
Mays si la arteria es subtil, lahoras envolveys aquela am la extremitat del oncii, e aprop inscindeys de aquela una partida segon la quantitat per la qual sian alonguadas las extremitatz de lu e sian contraytas, e no endevindra flux de sanc, quar si no so inscididas no pujara le sanc de tot.	More if the artery is fine, then envelop it at the extremity of the needle, and then incise a part thereof according to the quantity for which the extremities of the thread are long and contracted, and will not permit the flow of blood, for if not incised, the blood will not rise up.
E aprop evacua del sanc de vi unc. entro a tres.	And then evacuate from the wound one. in three.
E si la arceria es gran, lahoras cove que tu lies aquela en dos locs am fiel dopble fort de ceda o am cordas a lonc, e no coyte a lu putrefaccio denant la consolidacio de la plagua e endevengua flux de sanc.	And if the artery is large, then divide it into two locations with a single strong ligature or with long cords, and do not allow it to putrefy before the healing of the wound.
E aprop incideys la superfluitat la qual es entre dos liamentz; e fay aquo en aquela hora o aprop autra ora.	And then cut the excess fluid between two ligatures; and do so at that time or soon after.
E si vols, cauteriza aquela am cauteri entro al os am cauteri cutellar entro que sian incididas las extramitatz de lu, e stara en loc de aquela meteyssa obra.	And if you wish, sear it with a cautery on the bone and with a surgical knife at the points where the extremities are cut; it will serve in place of that operation.
E es milhor obra sino que·l malaute aia febre o es de escalfada compleccio; quar cauteri es de aquelas causas que ajudan a las humiditatz finidoras, e donc es milhor en juvament.	And it is better to do so unless the patient has fever or is from a heated condition; for a cautery is of those causes that help in resolving humidity, and therefore it is better for recovery.
E cove aprop la extraccio de las arcerias que huomplas le loc de coto antic, e sian pausatz sobre lu polvils decentement fayt, e aprop sia curat am medicinas seccas fazen naysser la carn e am calguas entro que sia sanat.	And then remove the ligatures that you placed at the site of the cut, and let them rest on the properly prepared powder, and soon after apply medicinal powders to promote healing and with oils until it is healed.
E si mentre obres autra veguada endeventa flux de sanc de la arceria, lahora tu te coyta a restrenger aquel sanc, o am cauteri, o que omplas le loc de coto, e strenh la tua ma entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if while working another time you encounter flow of blood from the artery, then you should constrict that blood, or with a cautery, or what you fill the place with cloth, and strengthen your hand so that the blood is restrained.
E si deguna causa de aquelas no es a tu present, lahoras pausa le tieu dit sobre le loc entro que·l sanc sia congilat, e enbroca le loc am aygua de vehement fregiditat entro que la acuitat repausa, e sia strengut segon que cove.	And if for any of those reasons it is not at your present, then place your hand on the location until the bleeding stops, and apply the area with water of strong refrigeration until the acute condition subsides, and strengthen according to what is needed.
E aquo que es pus leugier en extraccio de arceria es que tu cauterizes la vena am aquest cauteri haventz dos cotels, pus que tu has senhat les dos locs am tenta, e depausa quascus, mot ignitz, entro que pervenguan al os e inscindan la vena en dos locs, per so que sia elonguat aquo que es entre las extremitatz de lu, quar no son consolidadas de tot am aquest cauteri.	And that which is lighter in the extraction of an artery is that you cauterize the vein with this cautery having two knives, after you have marked the two areas with tentative marks, and place hot coals over them until they reach the bone and incise the vein in two places, so that what is between the extremities of it is elongated, which are not completely cauterized by all of this.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri:	And this is the form of the cautery:
E sia la acuitat dels dos cotels esemps.	And the sharpness of the two knives is essential.
Mays empero si so mendres acuitat que dos cotels es milhor, quar si so agudas cum dos cotels propera a quascuna freg, e no enscideysso la carn am velocitat.	But if the acute pain is such that two knives are better, for if sharp like two knives it affects each wound quickly without cutting the flesh hastily.
Donc cum en aquels es alcuna grossitut, es tenguda la calor del foc en aquels e la carn es abscindida leugierament.	Therefore, when there is some swelling, hold the heat from the fire at those places and the flesh is incised slightly.
E aquesta obra es milhor en tota obra e pus leugiera.	And this method is better in all works and more slight.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre dos cotels la quantitat de la grossesa del dit.	And let the space which is between two knives be the quantity of the swelling of the digit.
Capitol quart.	Capitulum quartum.
De la cura de cors de lagremas agudas e aciduas dels huels.	Of the cure for bodies affected by sharp and acidic tears of the eyes.
Quan so lagremas aciduas, e es le cors de aquelas venas las quals so sobre le test del cap deforo, e no comfereys en aquo alcuna causa de la curacio de medicina, e vezes la cara del malaute ja enrogesir e sent en le sieu front deambulacio ayssi cum si era deambulacio de formiguas, e·ls huels de aquel so extenuatz, humitz enayssi que ja les pels de lor son conodutz, e las parpelas so scalfadas per la acuitat de las lacrimas, les antics agro mesties en la curacio de aquelas de aquesta operacio, e nompnero aquela curacio am spassa.	When the tears are acidic, and the body of those veins which are on the side of the head are inflamed, and you find no cause for the cure in medicine, and sometimes the face of the patient turns red and feels a crawling sensation on their forehead as if it were ants crawling, and the eyes become thin, moistened as if the skin is known, and the eyelids are scalded by the sharpness of the tears, they use anti-inflammatory remedies in the cure of those from this operation, and they number that cure among the passing things.
E es que tu comandas al malaute rayre les pels les quals son en le sieu front, e aprop inscideys en le front tres fissuras engualment distans segon la longitut del front.	And you command the patient to stretch the skin which is on his forehead, and then incise in the forehead three equal distances according to the length of the forehead.
E si’ la longitut de la fissura cays dos ditz: la una fissura sia engualment distant a la longitut del nas en le mieg loc del front, e la segonda segon la longitut un petit del movement dels lacertz les quals so en le lacrimal, e la tersa del autre part.	And if the length of the incision is two digits: the first incision should be equally distant from the length of the nose in the middle of the forehead, and the second according to the length of a small movement of the tears which are in the lacrimal glands, and the third from the other part.
E guarda te de la incizio de las arcerias las quals so en dos latz, e elongua la tua ma de la continuacio de amdos las mandibulas.	And guard yourself from the beginning of the arteries which are in two branches, and keep your hand away from the continuation of both jaws.
E si’ l’espazi de quascuna inscizio la quantitat de tres ditz ajustatz.	And if the space of each incision the quantity of three digits adjusted.
E si’ a tu una pessa d’espongua apparelhada o draps seccatz motz am les quals exsiccas le sanc.	And if you have a piece of sponge equipped or dry cloths at hand, place them on those which absorb the blood.
E aprop entremet le spatum de dos agudas extremitatz, del qual aquesta es la forma de la inscisio de lu:	And then insert the tip of two sharp instruments, of which this is the form of the incision:
que es de la partida des templas entro a la segonda inscizio.	that is from the temple part into the second incision.
Exxcorja am aquel tota la codena la qual es entre dos incizios am le ciphac le qual es sobre le os, e aprop fay aquo de la inscizio migera entro a la segonda inscisio.	Excise all the tissue that is between two incisions near the capsule which is over the bone, and then do this of the middle incision into the second incision.
E aprop stratz ne aquest spatum e entromet en la primieyra inscizio autra vetz un autre instrument le qual es apelat cutellar, agut de una part e del autre no agut.	Then cut into this muscle and insert it into the first incision; or use another instrument called a scalpel, sharp on one side and blunt on the other.
E pausa le latz de aquel agut deves la carn annexa deves la codena, e le latz de lu leon dintz le os, e empelley aquel entro que pervengua a la fissura migera, e abscindeys am aquel totz les vaysels que descendo del cap als huels.	Then hold the flap of the sharp part, detach the adjacent flesh, and keep the edge inside the bone. Push that into the middle crack, and cut away all vessels that descend from the head to the heels.
Mays que sia continuada la inscizio ad aquo appar de la codena, e aprop fay aquo en la fissura migana entro al autra fissura.	More than that, continue the incision to where the tendon appears, and then do this in the middle crack between the other crack.
E pus que corr del sanc quantitat engual, exprem les locs de las pessas del sanc congilat.	And when the bleeding has ceased in equal quantity, squeeze the locations of the ankles to stop any remaining bleeding.
E aprop pausa en quascuna fissura calgua de coto vielh, e pausa sobre aquels polvils enbegutz en vi e oli e vi agre, e vegas que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then place your hand over any gouty fissure of old skin, and place it above those powders mixed in wine and oil and vinegar, and ensure that no abscess forms.
E en le tertz dia deslia le liament e aministra gran enfusio de aygua cauda o tebeza, e aprop cura aquo am enguent bazilicon am oli rozat e autres entro que las plaguas sian sanadas.	On the seventh day after the ligation, administer a large infusion of horse chestnut water, and then apply an ointment of basilicum mixed with olive oil to other areas where the sores have healed.
Capitol .v.	Chapter V.
De la cura de lagramas per catartz e als huels descendentz de las partidas dedintz del cap.	For the cure of tears due to catarrh and the phlegm descending from inside the head.
Quan ad alcu veno catartz agutz e continuantz, e vezes les huels del malaute extenuatz petitz, e ja le reguardament de lor es debelitat, e las palpebras ulceradas e de lor cazo les pels, e en le preon del cap es dolor aguda ledent e extrenutacio consequent, lahoras sapias per aquestz accidentz que las materias e catartz no veno sino de motas venas de las partidas dedintz procedent.	When there is an acute and continuous catarrh with phlegm from the feet of the gouty person being small and weak, and their general condition showing debility, and the eyelids are ulcerated along with the skin in that area, and in the prefrontal region of the head there is sharp pain and subsequent extreme tension, then you can perceive from these occurrences that the materials and catarrh do not come from the small veins within the body.
E la milhor curacio en aquels es aquesta: que comandes al malaute que raza lo sieu front, e aprop inscideys en aquel una fissura al mieg loc del front, un petit per la latitut (e comensa am la fissura del templar senestre entro al dextre templar; e sia inscisio entro al os; e eslongua la tua ma dels lacertz del templas lesquals son maugutz deves la mastigacio), entro que sia le os descubert.	And the best cure in such cases is this: command the gouty person to rub their forehead, and then incise a small fissure along the middle of the forehead, about the width (starting from the left temple between the right temple; and make the incision into the bone; extend your hand to the wrinkles of the temples, which are prominent, and should be well incised), until the bone is exposed.
Exsicca tot le sanc am espongua o am drap secc e aprop repleys entre las doas labias de la fissura am coto vielh o am draps de li.	Dry all the blood with sponge or dry cloth and then place between the two lips of the fissure a piece of lint or a clean cloth.
E aprop estrenh desus am polvils enbegutz en vi e oli per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	Strengthen on top with powders infused in wine and oil so that no abscess forms.
E quan deslias aquo e veses que l’apostema ja es diminuit, lahoras cove que fregua le os entro que comensa en lu nayser carn, e aprop cura aquel am regiment exsiccatiu le qual fassa neysser la carn, ayssi cum si tu prenes de farina de froment dos partidas e de colofania quatre partidas e mescla o, e de lor sia fayt emplastre e sia aministrat en aquestas plaguas a de la carn nativitat.	And when you lift this and see that the abscess has already diminished, then wash the bone where it begins to have new flesh, and then cure it with a drying regimen which causes the flesh to shrivel, as if you take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of resin and mix them, and from them make an ointment and administer it to these wounds of the flesh's nativity.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter VI.
De la cura de aquo que catz en las aurelhas.	Of the cure for that which affects the ears.
Tota causa que catz en las aurelhas es una de quatre specias, quar o es peyra mineral o causa semblant a peyra, ayssi cum ferr e veyre, o es de planta ayssi cum ceze o fava, o es causa fluxtibla ayssi cum aygua e vi agre e a lor semblantz, o alcuna bestia.	All cause that affects the ears is of four species: either it is mineral stone or a cause similar to stone, such as iron and flint, or it is from plant, such as mustard or vetch, or it is a fluxible cause, such as water and mixed wine, or something like them, or some beast.
E donc quan peyra catz en l’aurelha o autra causa semblant de aquelas causas que no ajustan ne creysso en l’aurelha, e pausa la aurelha al solelh, e si vezes la peyra, lahoras distilla en aquela alcuna causa de oli violat o sizami, e aprop aministra la extraccio de lu, e fay le stornudar am condizi, e oppila las nars deve le aveniment de stornutacio.	And when the ear is pierced in the ear or another cause seeming like those causes that do not fit nor cause in the ear, and pause the ear in the sun, and if you touch the ear, then it distills in that certain cause of violated oil or sesame, and then administer the extraction of it, and make him sneeze with a condition, and plug the nostrils to prevent the occurrence of sneezing.
E aprop pausa en le circuit de la aurelha alscunas pessas de drap o lana, e dextendas la aurelha a las partidas desus, quar motas veguadas es foro-getada am aquestas causas.	And then place some pieces of cloth or wool around the ear circuit, and extend the ear to the parts above, where motas (a type of medication) are applied to these causes.
E si no n’es getada, lahoras aministra extraccio de lu am le instrument apelat gesti epicicarios subtil del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if it is not cured, then administer the extraction of it with the instrument called gesti epicicarios subtil, of which this is the form:
E si es foro-getada am gesti, bo es; e sino, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am onci subtil de pauca duplicacio.	And if it is cured with the gesti, that is good; and if not, then administer the extraction of it with the fine onci of little duplication.
E donc si no es foro-getada per aquo, lahoras fay una canula de aram e entromet la extremitat de la canula en le trauc de la aurelha e claus a l’enviro de la canula am cera e am oli mollificada per so que no sia ubert sino la canula.	And if it is not cured by this, then make a cannula of wire and insert the end of the cannula into the tract of the ear and close around the cannula with wax and with oil softened so that only the cannula is open.
E aprop extratz am le tieu vent am fort atraccio, quar tropas veguadas cum aquo que havem recontat.	And then extract the thigh muscle with strong traction, for too many times as we have recounted.
Mays si no es foro-getada en aquesta manieyra, lahoras pren de halka alumbat o de vecz aparelhat am le qual son preses les ausels una patita quantitat, e pausa aquel en la extremitat de ray, e aprop envolopa sobre aquel coto decentment pausat.	If it is not successfully reduced in this manner, then take some damp cloth or previously prepared bandage with which the thighs are tied a sufficient quantity, place that at the extremity of the thigh, and then properly wrap around that area carefully.
E aprop entromet aquel en le trauc de la aurelha am facilitat, e aprop excicca la aurelha de la humiditat.	And then insert that into the canal of the ear with ease, and then dry the ear of its moisture.
E donc si no es foro-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recontadas, lahoras tu coyta a talhar aquela denant que endevengua apostema caut o espasme.	And so, if it is not successfully reduced by all the causes we have recounted, then you incise that area where an abscess or spasm is likely to occur.
E la manieyra de talhar aquela es que tu al comensament sancnes le malaute de la vena sephasica e extratz del sanc segon la mannieyra de la vertut de lu, e aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas e converteys l’aurelha a las partidas desus, e fen am petita fissura en la razit de la aurelha deves lo greys de lu en le loc be premegut de lu.	And the way to incise that is to begin by sacking the patient at the point of the femoral vein and extract the blood according to the manner of its virtue, then make a cut between your hands and turn the ear upwards, and make a small fissure in the rim of the ear, pressing the gray tissue into the well-packed location.
E sia la fissura de figura lunar entro que pervengua a la peyra, e, la peyra atrobada, osta aquela si podes am instrumentz apropriatz; e aprop cos la fissura en aquela hora am velocitat, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And let the crack be of lunar shape through which it reaches the heel, and if the heel is damaged, obstruct it if possible with appropriate instruments; then, when the crack is in that position, give it speed and cure it while it is still healthy.
E si la causa cazent en la aurelha es un dels gras que creysso e so inflatz, lahoras aministra la curacio e la extraccio de lu; mays si no obezeys a tu ad eyssiment, lahoras tu pren spatum teune subtil segon aquesta forma:	And if the cause settles in the ear is one of the wax that accumulates and is swollen, then administer the treatment and extraction of it; but if it does not yield to your attempt, then take thin subtle suction according to this method:
e aministra am aquel la abscizio de aquel gra lo qual es cazut en l’aurelha.	And administer to him the extraction of that wax which has settled in the ear.
E no fassas aquo quan cogitas que aquel ja es humectat per la vapor del aurelha, e pausa aquel en motas pessas, e prop extratz ne aquelas am les oncis o am gesti subtil, o ab inscizio ayssi co dit havem, quar es alleujada la extraccio de lu.	And do not do this when you think that it has already become moistened by the vapor of the ear, and place it on fine wicks, and then extract it there using tweezers or with a gentle gesture, as we have described, for this makes the extraction easier.
Mays en l’aygua la qual es intrada en l’aurelha cove que·l malaute use de sternutacio am condizi al comensament, e omple la sieua aurelha am alcu coto vielh, e jagua sobre aquela aurelha en la qual es l’aygua, e si per aquo es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, lahoras pren tropas peyras teunas e leons segon la longitut del dit, e calfa aquelas en le foc un pauc, e le pacient entrometa una de aquelas en le trauc de la sua aurelha e saute sobre la un pe sieu de aquela partida e percussia am una autra peyra sobre la peyra la qual es dintz la aurelha.	But in the water which has entered into the ear canal where the illness uses coughing to condition its onset, and fills the ear with a certain amount of old wax, and pour this wax over the ear in which the water is, and if by this it is washed out, that is good; but if not, then take threads of flax or woolen yarn according to the length of your finger, heat them in the fire for a little while, and have the patient insert one of those threads into the canal of his ear and draw out a piece of that portion and strike it with another stone over the stone which is against the ear.
Donc no cesse aquo am peyra entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada.	Do not stop applying the pere until all the water has been expelled.
E ja l’aygua sira foro-getada enayssi que tu prenguas de papier o de gonc i, e met la una extremetat de lu en l’aurelha e estendas l’autre extremitat am foc entro que sia comburit le may de lu.	And once all the water has been expelled, try taking a piece of paper or cloth, and put one end in the ear and extend the other end into the fire until the paper is burned.
E prop met i autre gonc e fay aquo tantas veguadas entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada, e stratz aquel am canula ayssi co desus es dit de la peyra extrasadora.	And put another piece of cloth and do this as many times as needed until all the water has been expelled, then squeeze it with a cannula as previously described.
Mays en la extraccio de bestia intrant en aquela aurelha, si es a petit cos, ayssi piussa e a lu semblant, cura aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio; mays si es de gran cos la qual causa apar al sen del vezement, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am gesti e oncis, e la causa de lu es pus leugiera de totas las autras causas que cazo en l’aurelha.	In the extraction of a small foreign body entering that ear, do this more carefully and as it seems fit. Treat it as we have described in the division. But if it is a large object causing immediate symptoms, then perform the extraction quickly and with precision, for the cause is less severe than other causes found in the ear.
Mays en la extraccio de verm engendrat en la aurelha, quan tu curas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e en le tractat de distillacios e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu reguardes la aurelha al solelh.	In the extraction of a worm generated in the ear, when you treat it as we have described in the division and in the tractatus de distillationibus, and if your treatment does not take effect, then you should look into the ear in the sunlight.
E donc si apar aqui alcuna causa dels verms, lahoras extratz aquel am gesti o am onci subtils, mays si no apar deguna causa, lahoras pren una canula dejos streyta e desus ampla de la qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And therefore if any cause of worms appears here, then extract that by means of a worm-gatherer or fine hook, but if no cause appears, then take a cannula and stretch it open.
E entromet la extremitat subtil en la aurelha segon la quantitat la qual suffertar puesca le malaute; e aprop sucgeys am aquela per succio fort, e fay aquo motas veguadas, entro que totz les verms sian foro-gitatz.	I introduce the thin end into the ear according to the quantity that the patient can endure; and then suction it out strongly, performing this several times until all the worms are expelled.
Mays si no obezeysso a tu al ayssiment, lahoras tu opila e claus en le circuit de la canula am cera ayssi cum havem dit; lahoras aministre distillacios las quals han ja esproadas les antics en la curacio dels verms, e atrobaras aquo en le tractat de distillacios.	But if it does not obey to your suction, then open and close the circuit of the cannula with wax as we have said; then administer distillations which have already been proven effective in the treatment of worms, and you will find this in the treatise on distillations.
E sia la tua efusio am la qual efundas les olis medicinas en la aurelha am aquest strument del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And your effusion should be such that you apply medicinal oils to the ear with this instrument, which is in the form shown here:
E fay aquela de argent o de eram, dejos streyt, en le qual sia un petit trauc, e am pla desus.	And make it of silver or copper, stretch it out, in which there is a small tube, and a flat surface above.
E donc sia cum empellent a que es en la conquavitat de la canula de continent aqui on sira necessari.	And so they should be pushed to be in the cavity of the catheter here where it will be necessary.
E si vols, pren le ray e envolveys en la extremitat de lu decentment coto, e aprop gieta oli en la concavitat del auziment, o suc de alcuna herba, o aquo que vols de aquestas medicinas en la canula — e aquela es en la aurelha —, e aprop entromet le ray am coto desus e exprem am la tua ma aquel am compressio temprada de lu entro que l’oli sia expellit en la concavitat del auziment e le malaute senta le oli dedintz.	And if you wish, take the wick and wrap it properly around its end, then place oil in the cavity of the ear, or the juice of some herb, or any of these medicines into the catheter — which is in the ear —, and then insert the wick carefully above while pressing with your hand to apply a gentle compression until the oil is expelled into the cavity of the ear and the pain feels the oil inside.
E aquo que sia enfundut en la aurelha sia ja scalfat am foc un petit.	And what is infused into the ear should be slightly heated over a fire.
E guarda te que la causa la qual distillaras en l’aurelha no sia trop frega, quar las medicinas de aurelha no suffertan aquo.	And make sure that the medicine you distill into the ear is not too hot, for ear medicines do not tolerate that.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter VII.
De curacio de opilacio de aurelhas.	On the treatment of ear abscesses.
Alcunas veguadas alcus enfantz yeysso dels ventres de lors mayres no-perforatz, e aquo ja accideys en alcus homes, opilacio en le meat de la aurelha per plagua o per carn nada en aquela; e aquesta opilacio alcunas veguadas es fayta en le preon del trau de la aurelha la qual no consiec le vezement, e alcunas veguadas es en las partidas defora.	Sometimes children suffer from abscesses in the ears of their unperforated parents, and this occurrence happens in some adults as well, with an abscess forming in the meat of the ear due to a wound or without any clear cause; sometimes these abscesses form in front of the auricle which does not close properly, and sometimes they form in the outer parts.
E aquela que accideys en le preon de lu, la qual no comprehen le vezement, es en las majors disposicios de dificil sanacio.	And that which happens in the region of the loins, which does not affect the surface, is in the major dispositions of difficult recovery.
E en aquela en qual consegueys le vezement, cove que tu pauses la aurelha del malaute al solelh e reguarda en aquela.	And in that where you can see the surface, make sure that you place the patient in the sun and look at it.
E donc si vezes oppulacio apparent, obre aquela am espatum subtil del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if you see an apparent abscess, open that thin layer under which this is the form of it:
Si’ la extremitat de lu en la qual sia petita la latitut, del qual la una partida sia aguda e l’autra no; e le spatum sia de dos latz leon per so que no fassa lizio al aurelha.	If the extremity of it where it has small breadth, where one part is acute and the other not; and the layer be of two lion heads wide so that it does not irritate the ear.
E donc si la opilacio es per carn nascuda en la aurelha o en le meat de lu, lahoras te aquela am oncis subtils e incidiys aquela vehement facilitat entro que sia ostada tota la carn.	And if the abscess is in hidden flesh in the ear or in the meat of it, then you have those thin oncises and cut there with great facility until all the flesh is exposed.
E si opilacio es en le preon de la aurelha, lahoras pren ray subtil leon e escalfa aquel am foc un pauc, e aprop met aquel en le meat de l’aurelha.	And if the abscess is in the region of the ear, then take a thin lion's claw and heat that piece of metal slightly, and then place it in the flesh of the ear.
E donc si as scentit oppulacio am aquo que le malaute atroba am facilitat, per gravetat de ausir, esforsa la oppressio de lu am facilitat; e guarda te que no plagues les nervis del aurelha.	And so, if you sense an accumulation of fluid that the patient finds difficult to expel due to its weight, relieve the pressure on it by facilitating its expulsion; and be careful not to damage the nerves of the ear.
E aprop pausa en l’aurelha drap de li segon la quantitat del ample del trauc lo qual tu as envolvutz en l’enguent egipciac; e fay aquo per alcus jorns entro que sias segur de la consolidacio de la plagua; o que prenguas qualgua e enfon aquela en ayguaros e pulveriza sobre lu segi trissat e usa de lu; e si vezes la aurelha ja esser apostemada, lahoras cove que tu estraguas la qualgua e permutes aquela am autra qualgua la qual tu envoloparas en cerot que sia fayt am oli rozat, entro que sia le apostema caut cedat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then place a cloth in the ear according to the size of the wound which you have wrapped in Egyptian ointment; and do this for several days until you are sure of the healing of the sore; or that you dip it in water and powderize it over the dried triac and use it; and if you see the ear already healed, then scrape away the sore and replace it with another part which you wrap in cerote made from olive oil, until the swelling is reduced; and cure it as it heals.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras submergeys esponga o drap en aygua frega e pausa sobre la aurelha, e usa del autra curacio la qual restrengeys le flux del sanc, la qual es dita en le tractat de distillacio.	But if a flow of blood occurs, then immerse the sponge or cloth in cold water, wring it out, and place it on the ear, and use the other treatment which constricts the flow of blood, as described in the treatise on distillation.
Capitol .viii.	Capitol Viii.
De cura de athezil le qual endeveno a las palpebras.	For the care of an eyelid that has become inflamed.
Athezil les quals endeveno a las paupebras dels huels alcuna veguada so humitz, alscunas veguadas son secs.	Eyelids that sometimes become moist, and at other times dry.
Donc cove que tu tenguas aquels am tenhalhas o am onci, e inscindas aquels am espatum de las suas razitz, e aprop pausa sobre les locs segi trissat.	Then take those flax or linen cloths, soak them in the foam of their juice, and place them over the areas after they have dried.
Mays si dolor am flux de sanc veno, lahoras tu cauteriza aquels am cauteri lanticular subtil.	But if there is pain from a flux of venous blood, then burn those with a thin cautery under the surface.
E la milhor cauterizacio es aprop las inscizios e tropas veguadas retornam quan reman alcuna causa de sas razitz; e quan so cauterizadas am foc, aquelas razitz son comburidas e no retornan.	And the best cautery is applied near the incisions, and the wounds return when there remains any cause of their juice; and when they are burned with fire, those juices are consumed and do not return.
Capitol .ix.	Capitulum ix.
Cura de grandeyssa que veno a las palpebras dels huels.	Care for the inflammation of the eyelids caused by venous blood.
Motas veguadas endeve en las palpebras dels huels alcuna causa la qual es asemblada a grandissa en sa fortalicia e duricia, e per so grandissia es apelada.	Spots appear on the eyelids and are sometimes accompanied by swelling and hardness, which is why they are called inflammation.
E es agreguacio de humiditat grossa en la palpebra dejos e desus.	And this is an addition of large humidity in the eyelid below and above.
Donc la opperacio en lor es que consideras lahoras si la grandissia es procedent en lu en aquo que apar de la palpebra e es mauguda a tota partida; e la causa de lu es leugiera.	And the operation in this case is to consider whether the enlargement is present in it where appears from the eyelid and is spread to all parts; and the cause of it is slight.
Donc fen sobre aquela am fissura per la latitut, e aprop escorga aquela de tota partida am facilitat entro que evasesca, e aprop suspen aquela am onci e abscindeys aquela.	And make a incision there for the width, and then probe it from all parts with a tool to facilitate the discharge, and then suspend it and cut it off.
Mays si a tu no es apparelhada la incizio de lu si no pus que penetras la palpebra am inscizio pauc a pauc, lahoras aquo no notz en deguna causa.	But if you do not have means for the incision there, so that you penetrate the eyelid with a small incision bit by bit, then do so without noting any cause.
E si la figura es gran, lahoras tu l’ajusta am sutura; e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the figure is large, then you adjust it with sutures; and care for it until it is healed.
E si es pauca, a tu no sobrevindra mal per aquela quar l’anguent de lu restaura aquela e encarna.	And if it is small, you will not suffer ill from it because the ointment restores and heals it.
E si la grandissia es declinant a las partidas dedintz de la palpebra deves la superficia dedintz, lahoras evesa la palpebra e suspen la grandissia am onci, otra que tu indigescas de incizio, e prem aquela de tota part, e si la palpebra per inscizio es alonguada, aquo no notz en deguna causa.	And if the enlargement is decreasing inside the eyelid, you should probe the inner surface, then lift the eyelid and suspend the enlargement with a tool, or one you will choose for an incision, and press it from all parts. If the eyelid is lengthened by an incision, then do not note any cause.
E aprop la incizio, lava le huel am aygua salada; e cura le loc am aquo que encarna entro que sia sanat.	And at the beginning, wash the wound with salt water; and dress the area with a dressing until it is healed.
Capitol .x.	Capitol.
De la cura axcirnah en la palpebra desus del huel.	For the cure of excision in the upper eyelid.
Axcirnath es grays le qual es engendrat en las tunicas de la palpebra desus, e majorment endeve als enfantz, agrava les huels de aquels et accideyso a lor catartz le mayti; e no podon reguardar la claror del solelh per aquo quar lagremas se coytan ad aquels.	Excision is caused by gray matter that is generated in the tissues of the upper eyelid, and particularly in children, it worsens their conditions and may even lead to their death; hence they cannot look at the brightness of the sun, as tears congregate in their eyes.
E per so tu vezes aquels jaser sobre les lors caras tot temps, e sobre les lors caras dormen; e so a las palpebras de lor dejos les sobrecils humidas, las quals ja ha cuberta imflacio, e iminencia de accernac apparent es en l’uelh; e que quant tu premes le loc am les tieus ditz, tu centes accernac entro aquels.	And for this reason, they often weep on their own faces all the time, and sleep with tears on their cheeks; only their eyelids are wet, which are already covered by inflammation, and the apparent precursor of excision is evident in the wound; and when you press the area with hot compresses, you can feel the excision within.
E alcuna manieyra de opperacio es en aquel que le malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop pausa drap de li e de lu fay calgua, e fay de lu cercle segon la quantitat la qual contena arthernach de tota partida, e aprop pausa aquel sobre aquela e prem am les tieus ditz de tota per que sia agreguat arcernac en le mieg del cercle, e aprop fen en le mieg de aquela humiditat am spatum inscident am fissura per la latitut, e la fissura no sia major que la fissura que es fayta en flaubotomia.	And some method of operation is in that the patient rests his head on a hot cloth, then places another cloth over it and wraps them both tightly. A circle is drawn according to the size containing all the parts, then places this over the circle and applies hot compresses around it so that excision increases at the center of the circle. Then, in the middle of this wetness, incises along a line, ensuring the crack is not larger than that made in a ventral celiotomy.
Mays en le preon cove que tu fendas la codena tota entro que pervenguas ad arcernach, quar en las mays desposicios proceseys arcernach per fissura segon la forma de grayseza blanca.	More in the preceding part where you cut the cord entirely until you reach the artery, for in later stages you process the artery through a fissure according to the form of whitish greasiness.
Donc extratz aquela am draps los quals tu as envolopatz entre les tieus ditz a las partidas deforo e revolv entre la ma dextra e sinistre entro que sia dispargut.	Therefore, remove those from the cloths which you have wrapped around your thumbs and spread between your right and left hand until they are dispersed.
E guarda te que no ajustes en la fissura per so que am le spatum no pervenguas al huel e ladescas aquel.	And be careful that you do not press too hard at the fissure, so that you do not miss the pus and drain it out.
Mays si no apar a tu arternach en le comensament de la fissura, mays que tu ajustes en la fissura un petit am fecilitat entro que procesisca arternach; e aprop extratz aquela ayssi quo havem dit; e aprop submargeys draps de li en aygua e vi agre e pausa les sobre le loc e estrenh aquels am polvils.	More if no pus appears at your artery in the beginning of the fissure, then press slightly at the fissure with your finger as you process the artery; and then remove those as we have said; and soon immerse cloths in water and vinegar and place them over the area to strengthen those with powders.
E so alcus que trissan sal e pausan aquel en la conquavitat de la fissura per so que aquo que es remas de aquela humiditat.	And then apply salt and place it over the cavity of the fissure to prevent what is removed from that humidity.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then cure it until it is healed.
Mays si accideys en le loc apostema caut, lahoras cura aquel am emplastres cedatils entro que sia sanat.	But if an abscess occurs in that area, then cure it by applying flax linens until it is healed.
Capitol .xi.	Capitol.
De manieyras de tactimi del huel.	Methods of palpation of the whole body.
Quan en las palpebras dels huels so natz pels ajustatz dejos les pels naturals e so antiquatz, lahoras aquels noso al huel e fan endevenir manieras de malautias ayssi cum lacrimas assiduas e mollificacio de palpebras e tela entro que aquo sia causa de destruccio del huel que s’apela tactinir del huel, e cura se en quatre manieyras: o per cauteri am foc; o am medicina acuta segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri; o es fayt atactini per inscizio e sutura; o per cannas segon que yeu diyre.	When in the eyelids of the eye, after making incisions, the natural skins are loosened and hardened, then those noxious qualities of the eye become signs of illness such as constant tearing, softening of the eyelids, and inflammation until this is a cause for destruction of the eye. This condition is called tactinir del huel, and it is cured in four ways: by cautery with fire; by acute medicine as previously mentioned in the Capitol on cautery; by surgical incision and suturing; or by cannulas as I will say.
E donc cove que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se; aprop converteys la palpebra del uelh am la tua ma sinistra, e si es convertida, bo es; e sino, entromet agulha en aquela en la qual sia fiel de la partida pus dejos de la palpebra, e fay penetrar la agulha am fiel desus, e aquo sia — prop del marge de la palpebra en le qual naysso les pels — prop dels pels, e tira le fiel a las partidas desus am la palpebra, e converteys aquela am le ray.	And thus cover that you place the head of the eye in your right hand; then convert the eyelid of the eye with your left hand. If it converts, well; otherwise, insert a needle into that part where the thread from the incision is located on the eyelid, and make the needle penetrate with the thread above, and this should be — near the margin of the eyelid where the skins are born — near the skins, and pull the thread to the parts above the eyelid, then convert it.
E aprop fen en la partida dedintz de la palpebra dejos les pels ajustatz am spatum inscidentz del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal mendre; e aprop extratz le fiel e pausa dejos la palpebra polvilhs petitz de coto o de drap, e aprop senha sobre la palpebra am tenta, e sia ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirt.	And then in the inner part of the eyelid, place the skins fittingly moistened with drops from the major lacrimal gland into the minor lacrimal gland; and extract the fluid and place the skin covered with fine dust of cotton or cloth, and then cover the eyelid with a tent, as shown in the figure of a leaf of myrtle.
Mays empero cove que sia la figura segon la quantitat de helevacio de la palpebra, quar aquo ja es diversificat en les homes, quar de aquels es le quals indigeys que sia inscidit de la palpebra gran quantitat segon la quantitat per la qual la palpebra es mollificada.	But more importantly, I see that the figure should be according to the amount of excision of the eyelid, for this already varies in women, and those among them who need a large portion of the eyelid excised according to the amount by which the eyelid is softened.
E aprop fen am le spatum sobre las doas linhas las quals has senhadas, e comensa del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal menor.	And then place the drops along the two lines you have marked, and start from the major lacrimal gland into the minor lacrimal gland.
E si’ la tua fissura prop dels pels naturals ayssi cum es la grossetut del rey.	And if your incision near the natural skin is as thick as the king's thumb.
E aprop met le onci en un dels dos angles de la codena, e aprop excoria aquela tota, e aprop ajusta am la scitura las doas labias am gula o fiel de lana subtil, e abstergeys le sanc, e fay adherir aquo que superflueys dels fiels sobre dos sobrecils am alcunas causas enviscans, si voles far aquo, e sino, non cures.	And then place the needle in one of the angles of the wound, and incise it completely, and then suture the two edges with gut or fine wool thread, and clean the exudate, and apply what remains of the threads over two eyebrows for some viscous causes, if you want to do this, and otherwise, you are done.
E aprop leyssa la sutura dels fiels entro a tres dias o quatre, e aprop cura aquo.	And after that, leave the stitches of the wounds between three and four days, and then cure this.
E si vols, layssa la plagua ses sutura, e cura aquela am aquo que exsicca e constrenh, quar la palpebra es alevada deves la sigillacio de la plagua e la agreguacio de lu; mays sutura es milor E donc aysso diysso les antics de taxanir.	And if you wish, leave the wound open without stitches, and cure it by what dries and tightens it. For when the eyelid is swollen, you should apply the dressing to the wound and add to it; but stitches are better. Therefore say this to the ancients of Taxanir.
Mays empero en lu sia sollicitut sobre le malaute, e es de bona operacio, e no es en lu temor.	But if it is necessary to stimulate the patient, and it is for good operation, and not out of fear.
E es autra manieyra en taxmir, e es que senhes sobre la palpebra figura ayssi cum fuelha de mirt, e aprop eleva la palpebra am tres uncis segreguatz e congreguatz segon aquesta forma:	And another method of applying it is to figure the eyelid as a leaf of myrtle, and then lift the eyelid by three unciae, arranging and gathering it according to this form:
Mays si no es possible aquo, tener les uncis, e aquo no es engualhat, lahoras pren una agula en la qual haia fil e met aquela en le mieg de la figura, e entromet le autre fiel prop le lacrimal major, e·l fiel segon prop le lacrimal mendre, e ajusta entre les tieus ditz les fiels am equalitat, e aprop am aquels eleva la tua ma am elevacio engual, eleva tota la codena sobre la qual es senhat ayssi cum havem recomtat.	But if this is not possible, take the unciae, and since this is not feasible, then take a needle with thread and place it in the middle of the figure, and insert the other thread near the major lacrimal gland, and the other near the minor lacrimal gland. Adjust the threads equally between the ties, and then lift your hand for elevation evenly, lifting the entire codena over which it was marked as we have recommended.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then adjust the two edges of the wound with sutures, and cure what is inside until it is healed.
Mays si accideys apostema deves la tua inscizio o la tua fissura, seda aquel apostema am cerot e a lu semblantz, e am enguentz.	If an abscess occurs, make your incision or cut, drain the abscess with a cloth and keep it clean, and apply ointment.
E alcunas veguadas endeve a la palpebra que·ls sieus pels sian convertitz, adonc cove que tu uses en aquela de aquo que havem dit de inscizio; mays sutura en quascus es mays artificial.	And in some cases on the eyelid, where its skin should be removed, then use the incision method as we have said before; but suture in a few places that are more artificial.
Ataxinir am cannas es segon aquesta forma:	To cauterize with a cautery is done in this manner:
e es que tu convertas la palpebra e scindas la figura qu’es dedintz segon que he recontat; e aprop per art fay doas cannas o doas astelas subtils de las quals longitut sia segon la longitut de la palpebra e la latitut de lor sia mendra de la latitut del spatum.	And you remove the eyelid and split the figure that is inside as I have recounted; then, by art, make two cautery rods or two thin sticks whose length is according to the length of the eyelid and the width of theirs is similar to the width of the space.
E tu ja has inscidit en las extremitatz de quascunas partidas, la on tenes les fils.	And you have incised at the extremities of each part where you have the threads.
Aprop agregua quascuna am subtilitat subre aquo que superflueys de la palpebra del huel, e constres las cannas de quascunas partidas am fort strictura, e layssa aquela per alcus jorns, quar la codena per la strictura morira e sira denegada e se poyrira entro que per si meteyssa cayra.	Then add some subtlety over what you have removed from the eyelid of the wound, and tighten the canals of each part with strong stricture, and leave it for a few days, so that due to the stricture the pus will die and be rejected and will fall out by itself.
Mays si es tardat, lahoras trenca la am las toroyras, e aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanat.	But if it is delayed, then cut the thread of the wound, and proceed to cure the sore as it heals.
Donc cum es solidada, la palpebra es elevada e les pels no pungo.	Then, when it is healed, the eyelid is raised and the skin is not pricked.
E aquesta es la forma de doas cannas las quals faras segon aquesta forma:	And this is the way of two canals which you will make according to this form:
e haia la quantitat de la longitut e de la latitut ni mays ni mens.	and has neither more nor less in the length and width.
Capitol .xii.	Capitol. xii.
De elevacio de pels pungentz en le huel am agula quan le pel es dur.	For the elevation of painful skin in the wound, use an awl when the skin is hard.
Quan son pels no-naturals, durs e aspres e pungentz les huels, lahoras la operacio en lu es que tu prenguas agula subtil e pauses en aquela fiel de ceda subtil e leon, e aprop que tu ajustes las extremitatz de lu e nozes quascu en manieyra mot subtil.	When they are unnatural, hard, rough, and painful skins in the wound, for the operation in it you should take a thin awl and place it on that fine fiber of each thin hair, and then adjust the ends of it with nuts in a very subtle manner.
E sia la longitut dels fiels de quantitat de una palma.	And let the length of the threads be equal to the width of one palm.
E aprop tu compon2 autre fiel subtil dejos lu en breu, e nuza las extremitatz de aquel si tu·t vols.	And then make another thin thread and place it briefly under the one you·t want, using its ends.
E aprop pause le malaute le sieu cap en le tieu se, e sia prop del solelh per que la tua obra sia declarada, quar es operacio subtil e menuda.	And then place the patient's head in a warm bed, and keep it close to the sun so that your work is effective; for it is a subtle and delicate operation.
E aprop intromet la agulha en la razit del pel ajustat la qual ha necessitat de engen, e fay aquela penetrar en la palpebra festinantment entro que extraguas aquela desus le pel natural.	And then insert the needle into the cut in the tightened skin, adjusting it as needed, and make that penetration deep into the eyelid, ensuring that you remove the one above the natural skin.
E aprop tire le pel entro desus e intromet aquel en alixati, e sian les pels un o dos o tres e no mays.	And then pull the skin upward and insert the other one under it, with the skin being one or two or three layers, but not more.
E aprop tira la tua ma am aquel entro que·l pel sia fora-gitat am alixolati en la palpebra am le pel natural.	And then pull your hand through that so the skin is tightened under the eyelid with the natural skin.
Mays si es atirat alixalati e non es gitat le pel, atiraras alixati a las partidas dejos am le fiel le qual tu has compost am aquela, entro qu’en sia gitat alixalati del trau sobira.	Otherwise, if the skin is not tightened with the cauterized thread, pull the cauterized thread to the sides with the needle you have made, so that in doing so the cauterized thread from the wound will remain.
E vegas aquela am la visio del huel, quar lahoras tu gitaras alixati e lo fiel, e grotan quascu e clautz le huel, e laysse le claus per dos dias o tres, entro que·l pel adheresca al sieu loc e nasque sobre aquel bona carn.	And then close the wound, for when you have tied the thread, and cut the hemp, clamp the wound, and leave it open for two or three days until the hair adheres to its place and grows over that good flesh.
E si es mays breu le pel, lahoras tu ajusta un pel lonc dels pels naturals, e es elevat am aquel, o que·l leysses entro que sia alonguat aprop alcu spazi, e lehoras tu eleva aquel.	And if the hair is shorter, then you adjust a longer piece of natural hair, and elevate it at that place, or let it grow for some time until it lengthens somewhat, and then you elevate that.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter XIII.
De la cura de ehacratir la qual ve en la palpebra desus.	For the cure of eyelid inflammation that occurs above.
Quan ve en le huel ehacratir, e es contraccio de la palpebra quan es contrayta en sus, o a dextra o a sinistra partida, per mala consolidacio de plagua o de seccio o de cauteri, e es apelada leporina, e aquesta ahercrati o es natural o accidental, e es fayta per consolidacio de plagua o de seccios o de cauteri, o per semblantz a lor malcuratz.	When there is eyelid inflammation, and it is a contraction of the eyelid that contracts in its upper or lower part, due to poor healing of a wound or a section or a cautery, it is called lupine. This inflammation can be natural or accidental, caused by the consolidation of a wound or sections or cauteries, or resembling them in nature.
May la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que tu fendas aquela consolidacio e que separes las labias de lu, e pauses en lu en aquo que es entre aquelas una meca de drap de li, e ligues aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	For the method of the operation, you should cut through the consolidation and separate the eyelid layers. Place a strip of linen between them and ligate them until they are healed.
E no cove que tu uses de curacio de lu de las causas las quals exsiccan, constrenho; quar si tu fas aquo retorna alixacratir pus mal que nulh temps no foc habantz.	And you must use the cure for those causes which dry up and constrict; for if you do this it will result in a worse affliction than none at all.
Usa en aquela de causas que mollifico ayssi cum es fenugrec, e embroca am la aygua en la qual son coytz altea e semensa de li, o enguent dyaquilon, le qual sia liquefayt am alcu dels olis, e submergeys en aquel la meca, e cura am aquel.	Use for those causes that soften, such as fenugreek, and soak in water in which it is steeped or seed of lily, or unguent of aquilaria, which is liquefied by some oil, immerse the hand in that, and cure with that.
E lo tesaur de la tua curacio es que tu perforsses am tot engen que no sia consolidat segon la forma que foc al comensament.	And the treasure of your cure is that you puncture only where it is not consolidated, according to the form that it was at the beginning.
E aquesta operacio la qual havem dita, no es sino alcuna rectificacio de ehalixacrati que no retorna la forma del loc segon que foc denant.	And this operation which we have said is nothing but a slight correction of abscesses that do not return to the form of the area as it was before.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter XIV.
De la cura de ehacrati le qual es fayt en la palpebra dejos.	On the cure of abscesses that occur in the eyelid.
Aquesta alxacrati la qual es fayta en la palpebra dejos, la qual es nompnada vertadierament alxacrati; e es de lu alcuna natural, autra accidental.	This abscess that occurs in the eyelid is called an orbital abscess; and it can be either natural or accidental.
Mays accidental es fayta per plagua o per scissura o per cauteri o per autres semblantz.	More accidentally it is caused by wound or by cut or by cautery or by other similar means.
E la via de la operacio de lu es que tu prenguas una agula en la qual haga fil doble, e fiques aquela en la carn, e que la fassas passar del lacrimal de senestre entro al lacrimal dextre, entro que·l fil pervengua en las doas extremitatz de la carn.	And the way of performing the operation is that you take a needle on which you make a double thread, and place that in the flesh, making it pass from the left lacrimal to the right lacrimal, so that the thread reaches the two ends of the flesh.
E aprop exten la carn a las partidas desus am la agula e cus aquela am la agula, e inscideys am spatum ample.	Then stretch the flesh at the upper parts with the needle and sew it with the needle, and incise with a broad blade.
E donc si retorne la figura de la palpebre segon que cove, bo es; e sino, pren le ray e pausa aquel en la figura fenduda, e am aquel converteys la palpebra, e fen las doas fissuras en le latz de la palpebra dejos.	And therefore, if you restore the figure of the eyelid as it should be, that is good; otherwise, take the ray and place it in the divided figure, and with it convert the eyelid, and make the two fissures in the edge of the eyelid.
E sian las extremitatz de las doas fissuras de dos angles de la inscizio, la qual has fayta entro que concurren, e sia de lor fayt angle entro que quan se congreguan sia fayta figura de lor.	And let the ends of the two fissures be at the angles of the incision, which you have made where they converge, and form an angle between them so that when they meet, they form the figure.
E aquesta figura es letra greca: la landa.	And this figure is Greek: the lambda.
E aprop osta la carn aquela per la quantitat que es le latz de lu agut dejos de lu, aquo que siec la palpebra.	And then hold the flesh there with forceps at the amount that is the length of its sharp point, what we call the palpebra.
E aprop ajusta las partz seperadas e cos aquelas am le fil de lana; e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit de las medicinas mollificativas e de las calguas entro que sia sanat.	And then adjust the separated parts with thread; and cure those with what we have said about the moistening medicines and the plasters until it is healed.
E si alxacrati endeve per fissura o sutura o cauteri, lahoras cove que tu fendas am fissura plana sobre les pels de la palpebra segon que es precedit.	And if you incise for a fissure or suture or cautery, then make the incision in a flat fissure on the skin of the eyelid as previously described.
E aprop separa am la calgua entre doas labias segon que havem dit.	And then separate with the scalpel between two layers as we have said.
En la suma del sermo de la cura de alxacrati quan es desus o dejos, que corra en lu operacio, segon que es preparat de la forma de alxacrati, e aquela es en forma de motas diversitatz.	In the end of the discourse on the cure of incision when it is above or below, let it run in the operation, as prepared in the form of the incision, and that is in the form of diverse spots.
E le artifexs savi totz temps prepara engen en quascuna manieyra la qual es possibla a lu entro que fassa retornar la figura a la forma natural, o prop de aquela, e aquel malaute segon que a lu conveneys de la operacio e dels strumentz en las majors disposicios.	And the skilled artisans always prepare everything in any manner that is possible for them to do so as they return the figure to its natural form or close to it, and the patient according to their needs from the operation and the instruments in the major dispositions.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter XV.
De la adherencia de la palpebra am la conjunctiva o am la cornea.	Of the adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea.
Quan accideys aquesta consolidacio a motz homes enayssi que sia solidada la palpebra pus desus am le album del huel, e sia prohibida de la facilitat del movement e de las suas obras naturals, donc cove que tu entrometas la extramitat del ray dejos la palpebra, e eleva en sus aquela, o exten aquela am le unci.	When this consolidation occurs in men, they try to secure the eyelid above by fixing it to the tarsal plate, and to prohibit its ease of movement and its natural functions. Therefore, you should insert a needle through the edge of the lid, let the eyelid, and elevate or extend it over the tarsal plate.
E aprop tu inscideys la adherencia am spatum subtil, le qual no sia am acuitat de las inscisios, habantz obtus un petit per so que·l malaute no sia inquietat deves la operacio, e remau le spatum que no ledesca le huel am la sua acuitat.	And then you incise the adhesion with a fine needle, which should not be of great sharpness, having an obtuse tip so that the patient is not disturbed by the operation. You should remove the fluid to prevent it from impairing the vision.
E sia la tua inscizio quays excorjan aquela adherencia am facilitat entro que sia retornada la palpebra segon la sua forma natural e que sia sanada tota la adherencia.	And let your incision be such that it releases the adhesion with ease, so that the eyelid returns to its natural form and all the adhesion is healed.
E aprop tu met en le huel aygua salada am la qual tu laves; o distilla en lu de zunia dissolvut en l’aygua.	And then place salt water in the eye, with which you wash it; or use distilled water dissolved with zinc.
E aprop separa entre la palpebra e l’huel am calgua de li, e pausa sobre le huel lana infuza en album de huou, e aprop le tertz jorn usa de causas consolidativas entro que sia sanat.	And then separate between the eyelid and the sore of the eye, and place over the sore infused wool in honey album, and for the third day use conservative treatments until it is healed.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter XVI.
De inscizio de ungla e de eminencia de carn dels lacrimals.	On the incision of the eyelid and the prominence of flesh of the lacrimal glands.
Sapias que ungla es segon dos manieyras, quar o es nervosa, e es semblant a ciphac dur subtil; o es no-nervosa, semblant a humiditat blanca congilada, la qual quan ferr la toca, o es forsat aquela prendre am onci, es abscindida e le onci no es ficat en lu.	Know that the eyelid is divided into two ways: one is nervosa, resembling a thin hard fiber; the other is non-nervosa, resembling a white congealed moisture. When you touch it, if it must be cut, it is divided and the moisture is not inserted into it.
E amdos las specias no comensan sino del lacrimal major entro que va petit a petit que cobre la vista e prohibeys le lum e·l movement de huel.	And both species do not begin until the major lacrimal gland, which gradually covers the eye and prevents light and the movement of the eyelid.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en la inscizio de lu es que·l malaute pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop obre les huels de lu, e eleva la palpebra am la tua ma, e aprop colligeys la ungla am onci de pauca duplicacio e exten aquela a las partidas desus.	The way to act in the incision of the eyelid is that the patient rests his head in a tilting position, then opens the eyes, and lifts the eyelid with your hand. Then collect the eyelid with little moisture and extend it to the upper parts.
E aprop pren una agula e entromet en aquela un pel de cavalh o de buou o de vaqua, o de semblantz, o de fiel fort, o duplica la extremitat de la agulha petit a petit e fica aquela en le mieg de la ungla, e penetra aquela am la agulha, e lia am fiel la ungla; e exten aquela a las partidas desus, e excorja am le pel le latz de la ungla lo qual siec la pupilla.	And then take a needle and insert into it either a hair of horse or bull or cow, or one that resembles them, or strong silk, or gradually double the tip of the needle little by little and place it in the middle of the nail, and penetrate it with the needle, and tie it with thread; and extend it to the parts above, and scrape off the skin the liquid of the nail which cures the pupil.
E ayssi tu sieguas aquela am le pel entro al derier de lu.	And then follow it with the skin into the depth of the wound.
E aprop tu inscideys le romanent en la razitz del lacrimal am spatum subtil o am petitas forfexs, e leysa la carn del lacrimal natural per so que per inscizio de aquela no endevengua fluxs de lagremas continuabla.	And then incise the wound in the socket of the tear duct with a subtle spatula or small forceps, and let the flesh of the tear duct remain so that due to the incision, it will not cause continuous flow of tears.
E alscunas vetz la ungla am le sol onci estenduda o am fiel, ayssi co havem dit, e aprop sia excurjat am spatum leon del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And sometimes the nail with the sole of the toe stretched or with thread, as we have said, and then scraped off with a lion's spatula, which is the form of this:
E guarda te que am le spatum no toques la tunica cornea e que avengua en lu ruptura, e que la pupilla sia perforada.	And be careful that with the spatula you do not touch the corneal membrane, and even if there is a rupture in it, and that the pupil is not perforated.
Aprop la inscizio geta en le huel un pauc de sal trissa o di cief fayt de siniar, e leyssa aquel entro al autre dia; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	Near the incision make a small cut on the skin with salted iron or steel made of tin, and leave that in for another day; and cure that which is within so that it heals.
E si la ungla no es nervoza e no podes metre la agulha, ni es ficada en aquela le onci, lahoras motas veguadas aquesta specia de ungla es curada am medicinas, e es sanada ayssi cum yeu e recomtat en la divisio.	If the ulcer is not nervous and you cannot put the needle in it, then spots of this kind of ulcer are cured with medicines, and it is healed thus as described in the division.
E si tu vols inscindir aquela, lahoras tu obre le huel del malaute e pren spatum subtil leon de freul acuitat segon aquesta forma:	If you want to incise it, then open the ulcer of the malady and take fine pus from the sharp blade according to this form:
am subtilitat.	with subtlety.
E si vezes que aquela es rarificada e es confugida e empren en aquela razit, lahoras distilla de la tua ora en le huel de cief fayt de siniar o am cief rog o am sal trissat, e opila le huel entro a l’autre dia.	And if you see that it is rarified and congested and embedded in that rash, then distill from your mouth into the cut of iron made of tin or of rusty iron or of salted steel, and plug the cut with another day.
E aprop itera sobre aquela la operacio entro que sia remaugut tot aquo que es de lu, sino que·l contrari apostema caut sia en le huel, quar lahoras tu leyssa aquela, e cura al comensament la apostema entro que sia sanat.	And repeatedly perform the operation while all that is of it is removed, otherwise if a counter-boil forms in the cut, then you leave it, and cure the beginning of the boil while it heals.
E aprop itera la tua operacio sobre aquela am razo entro que sia sanat.	And then continue your operation where it reasonably should be healed.
La emenencia de la carn lacrimal, si notz en le huel per gran nocument, sia suspendut am onci; e inscideys aquela de aquela una partida, e no ultimes la inscizio per so que no inscidesqua fluxs de lagremas.	The eyelid, if noted for great pain, should be suspended with a needle; and incise part of it, and do not complete the incision so that it does not cut the flows of tears.
E aprop distilla en le lacrimal cief rog e fayt de siniar entro que sia sanat.	And then let the tear duct rest and dry up before it is healed.
Capitol .xvii.	Capitol. xvii.
De inscizio de alguazardenic e de aquo que es nascut de carn ajustada en le huel.	Of the incision of algazardenic and what is born from flesh pressed in the wound.
Alcunas veguadas en les huels de alcus es nascuda carn roga, e es sobre-pausada entro que cobre la pupilla, o apropinqua o estrenh sobre las palpebras e fort leu comprem las palpebras a las partidas deforo e es assemblada a roza de balaustra.	In some wounds of the eye, flesh presses and grows, and is pressed over to cover the pupil, or it approaches and strengthens against the eyelids, forcing them outward and joining to the sides of the orbit.
Mays la operacio en lu es que·l malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se; e aprop obre les huels de aquel e colligeys tota aquela carn am oncis convenientz ad aquo, e te aquo am una forcep o am cesti; e aprop inscindiys la carn el comensament entro que tot sia finit am le encisori, e guarda te del huel que no ledescas aquel deves la tua operacio.	More importantly, the operation is that the patient places his head in the proper position; then open the wounds there and collect all that flesh with appropriate incisions, using forceps or tongs; and continue to incise the flesh at the beginning until everything is finished with the scalpel, and keep the wound clean so as not to hinder your operation.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscides aquelas o am espatum le qual nos havem recomtat en la inscizio de la ungla, o am petitas forfexs am las quals es colligit ascebel segon que vindra la forma de lu aprop aquest capitol.	And let your incision be where you cut those or with forceps which we have recommended in the incision of the elbow, or with small pincers from which thread is gathered according to the form it will take near this chapter.
Donc cum es complida la tua inscizio e es remauguda tota aquela carn, lahoras omple le huel de sal trissa, o destilla en lu polvera roga e semblantz a lu de las medicinas corrossivas, e pausa sobre le huel deforo coto am album de huou entro que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	So when your incision is completed and the entire flesh is cauterized, then fill the wound with salted honey, or sprinkle in it a powder resembling that of corrosive medicines, and place over the wound externally as one would use a plaster until an abscess is assured.
E si roman alcuna causa de alguardenici e es senhoragat sanc caut, e temes apostema caut, lahoras leyssa le huel e cura aquela apostema am aquo que ceda aquela apostema, e aprop itera sobre aquel am operacio entro que sia sanat, e semblantment fay en la carn ajustada la qual accideys en le huel de aquesta especia.	And if any cause of gangrene and is seared with cauterization, and fears an abscess by cauterization, then leave the wound open and cure that abscess as one would treat that abscess, and repeatedly perform upon that area until it is healed, and similarly do for the flesh adjusted which you have encountered in the wound of this kind.
Mays empero tu cove que alienes tota curacio del huel freul per via natural o per via accidental, obran am ferr, e no metas la tua ma en alcuna de aquestas operacios entro que veges que aquel membre sia suffertant aquela operacio.	But you must ensure that all healing of the wound naturally or by accident proceed through iron, and do not place your hand in any of these operations until you see that that limb is suffering from that operation.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter XVIII.
De colleccio de sabel en le huel.	From the collection of salts in the wound.
Sabel so venas rogas las quals son testudas sobre le huel e prohibeysso al vesement la sua operacio, e develican le huel am longitut de dias.	Salts so veins roses which are rough in the wound and prohibit their operation, and swell the wound over a length of days.
Donc necessari es al comensament que tu consideres si le huel en le qual es sabel es fort e en lu no es autra malautia que sabel, lahoras tu colligeys aquel sabel.	Therefore, at the beginning, you must consider whether the wound in which salts are applied is strong and contains no other illness than salts, then you collect that salt.
E es que tu comandes al malaute que pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop suspen aquelas venas am un onci o am dos segon la tua prudencia; e sia aquel onci de subtil duplicacio segon aquesta forma:	And you command the patient to place his head in cold water, and then suspend those veins at one or two ounces according to your prudence; and let that ounce be of subtle duplication according to this form:
o so dos oncis gradantment en un cos segon aquesta forma:	or those two ounces gradually in one container according to this form:
E aprop sian colligidas aquelas venas am forses subtils, am subtilitat, e abstergeys le sanc hora aprop hora, entro que vegas aquelas venas esser remaugudas del huel e sian revolgudas.	And let those veins be collected with strong subtlety, by subtlety, and wash the salt hour by hour, while you observe that those veins are removed from the wound and are rotated.
E guarda te que tu no ledes le huel am las extremitatz del spatum; e si’ la tua operacio en le miegjorn denant le solelh, e sias mot ferm en la tua operacio que no inscidas sino aquelas venas.	And take care that you do not touch the skin at the extremities of the spine; and if your operation in the morning before the sun, and be firm in your operation that you enter only those veins.
E quan tu auras complitz, lahoras tu distilla en le huel cief vert o rog per que am sa acuitat corrodesca aquo que es remaugut del sabel.	And when you have completed, then distill in the green vinegar or wormwood to cause its acidity to corrode what is removed from the body.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible colligeys tot en aquela hora, e lahoras tu emplastra tot am aquo que cede la dolor de lu, e leyssa lu per alcus dias entro que sia sedada la dolor de lu e que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	Mais if that is not possible for you to collect all in that hour, then plaster everything with what relieves its pain, and leave it for a few days until its pain is subdued and an abscess secured.
E aprop itera sobre lu segon que la mateyssa manieyra entro que sia sanat.	And then iterate over it according to how the patient improves.
E aquesta es la forma de las forfexs:	And this is the method for extracting:
Capitol .xix.	Capitulum XIX.
De reduccio de arizati al nas.	On the reduction of hernias to the nose.
Quan tu curas arisati am cauteri o am medicina aguda comburent segon que es precedida la narracio de lu e no es sanat, lahoras no es engen en lu sino que fendas sobre le apostema deves la maturitat de lu, e que extraguas tota la humiditat la qual es en lu e·l poyre entro que sia descubert le os.	When you treat hernias with a cautery or with sharp burning medicine according to the preceding narrative and it is not cured, then do not rely on it but instead incise over the abscess, allowing its maturity, and extract all the moisture which is within it until the bone is revealed.
E donc cum es descubert le os e vezes en lu corrupcio o negror, lahoras tu ratz lu am un sturment del qual aquesta es la forma:	And when the bone and veins within it are revealed in corruption or blackness, then you treat it with an instrument of which this is the form:
E es nompnat de aspre cap, e sia feyt de fer indi, e sia le cap redon ayssi cum asir le qual sia fayt punctat per punctacio de lima o aliskalfati per punctacio subtil (ayssi cum es en la forma seguent).	And it is named "asper cap," and is made of iron, and is the round head such that when one holds the which is made pierced by sawing or finely punctured (as in the following form).
E pausa aquel sobre le loc corrumput del os, e aprop revolveys aquel entre les tieus ditz, e prem la tua ma petit a petit entro que sapias que aquela corropcio es rasa.	And place it over the corrupt part of the bone, and then rotate it between your tongs, and press your hand little by little until you know that the corruption is superficial.
E aquo sia fayt alcunas veguadas, e aprop restaura le loc am causas exsiccativas e stipticas.	And do this several times, and then restore the area caused by drying and constrictive treatments.
Donc si·l loc es consolidat e es en lu nascuda bona carn e es abscindit le cors de la sania e roman per xl dias, e no es renovat e no es apostemat e no accideys en lu accident, lahoras tu sapias que es sanat.	Then if the area is consolidated and there is good hidden flesh and the healthy flesh is cut from the diseased part and removed for 40 days, and does not regenerate and does not become suppurated and no accident happens to it, then you know that it is healed.
E sino, lahoras no es en lu engen sino reduzir la fissura a la forma del nas, e segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu descuebras de segon os am ferr o am medicina acuta, e cum sira descubert le os, lahoras tu pren tribo segon aquesta forma:	And if not, then reduce the fissure to the shape of the nose, and do it according to this manner: and you expose the bone with iron or with sharp medicine. When the bone is revealed, then take a piece according to this form:
Sia la extramitat de lu ferr triangulada, e·l fust de lu sia prim extenuat entro a la extremitat ayssi cum vezes assi.	Let the end piece be triangular, and let the stem be thickened at the extremity as you see.
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le os, e sia aquel prop del lacrimal; e alongua la tua ma un pauc del huel, e aprop revol la tua ma am le tribo entro que penetre tot le os, e aquel sente le malaute per asso que atroba vent yssir per so quan te la sua ma.	And then place that on the bone, and let it be near the lacrimal; extend your hand a little towards the length, and then turn your hand in the socket so that it penetrates the entire bone, and that feels the pain through the wind that exits when you move your hand.
Donc lahoras restaura le loc am medicinas stipticas exsiccantz ayssi cum t’e eyssenhat.	Then restore the place with medicinal powders drying as they are given.
Donc cum nays la carn e·l loc es endurazit, lahoras la materia la qual effundia a las partidas deforo retorna al nas, donc aquo es pus leugier sobre le malaute.	Then, when the flesh is dried and the place is hardened, the matter which it was exuding to the surroundings returns to its place, so this is lighter over the pain.
Capitol .xx.	Capitol.xx.
De reduccio de la eminencia del huel.	For the reduction of the prominence of the hernia.
Quan le huel emineys am la sua totalitat e no accideys en le vezement nocument ni diminuacio, lahoras cove que laxas le malaute, e aprop que·l segues, e aprop que pausas ventozas en le cervitz ses scarificacio e succa per bona succaccio; e aprop pausa sobre le huel liniment le qual sia fayt de acatra e aloe e enses e sarcocolla, e aprop strenh le emplaustre sobre le huel am motz polvils.	When the hernia protrudes completely and there is no damage or diminution of sensation, then you should relax the pain, subsequently follow with scarification at the neck, and apply good suction. Then place liniment made of acatra, aloe, enses, and sarcocolla over the hernia, and strengthen the plaster with motz powder.
E la manieyra dels polvils es que prenguas draps de li leons motz, e quascun drap sia duplicat en quatre plecs; e fay de aquels motz.	And the manner of powders is that you take linen cloths from lion's mane, and each cloth be folded into four parts; and make use of those hairs.
E aprop pausa aquels la un sobre le autre segon la quantitat de la qual ha le huel necessitat.	And then place them one over the other according to the quantity that it has of the powder.
E aprop strenh sobre aquels am drap dur am fort strictura; e itera las ventosas am succio ses scarificacio; e aprop osta las ventosas e leyssa le huel streyt le dia e la nueyt.	And then press firmly on those cloths until they are tightly bound; and repeat the cups with suction several times after scarification; and then place the cups and leave the powder straight for the day and night.
Mays si entretant le liguament es mollificat, lahoras cove que sia mot streyt.	But if in the meantime the ligature becomes softened, then change it to be tight again.
E aprop osta le liament aprop le dia e la nueyt ayssi cum havem dit.	And then place the ligature on the wound day and night as we have said.
E si vezes le huel ja esser redusit, bo es, e sino, lahoras itera le emplastre am les polvils e la strictura e las ventosas entro que sia sanat.	And if the swelling has already subsided, that is good. Otherwise, then repeat the poultice with the powder and the binding with cups until it is healed.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI.
De la inscizio de la eminencia de la tunica uvea.	On the incision of the prominence of the sclera.
Quan endeve disrupcio en la tunica uvea, e aprop es eminent e procezeys fora las palpebras ayssi cum un gra de rasim, e es orrazada la forma de home per aquo, e vols aquo inscidir, lahoras la operacio en lu es ayssi cum havem recomtat, que tu entrometas la agula en la razitz de la uvea de la partida dejos en la partida desus, e aprop met la agula autra en la qual sia fil doble de la part del lacrimal, e fay aquela penetrar e leyssa la primieyra agula segon la sua disposicio; e aprop inscideys le loc del fiel doble e leva am aquel la partida de la uvea en le circuit de la agula, e strenh aquela mot.	When there is a disruption in the vitreous membrane, it bulges and protrudes like a degree of cataract, and its form resembles that of a person. If you wish to incise this, then the operation is as we have described: you introduce the needle into the rupture at one side and bring another needle with a double thread from the lacrimal part on the other side, making the latter penetrate while leaving the first needle in place according to its position; subsequently, you incise the location of the double thread and remove the segment of the vitreous membrane within the circuit of the needle, strengthening this action.
E aprop extratz la agula e pausa sobre le huel lana infusa en album de huou e leyssa entro que cayha le fil am la uva.	Then remove the needle and place it over the wet wool infused with honey, allowing the thread to stay in the vitreous.
E aprop cura le huel am aquo que conforte aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	Then apply something warm to this, to comfort it while the wound heals.
E alcunas veguadas aduna de tota partida am cercle de drap entro le huel ajuste eminencia gran, e aprop sia perforat am le spatum subtil que vengua al preon del huel, e corra la humiditat albuginea, e descen le huel e intra tantost.	In some cases, gather all the parts in a circle of cloth over the swelling, then apply a fine needle puncture under the wool, allowing the humor to drain and descend quickly.
E aprop strenh entro que sia sanat.	And then strengthen as it is healed.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXII.
De curacio de alconati.	On the cure of ulcers.
Aquesta malautia que es apelada alconati no es sino sania la qual es ajustada en le huel semblant a aygua dessendent e no es aquela.	This illness called ulcers is nothing but a disease that affects the skin, resembling water descending and is not the other type.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en ela es que fasses le malaute sezer sobre la sela aparelada e dreyta, e aprop pren le cap sieu en las tuas mas de doas partz e mau aquel entro que veias la sania pervenir a las partidas dejos, e aprop sia siccada e no descenda, e sia ostat le lum, e·l malaute veia las causas ayssi cum vezia.	The method of treating it is to place the patient on a prepared bed and straighten them. Then take their head in your hands at two parts and lower it until you see the disease reach the extremities, ensuring it dries up and does not descend further, and keep the light nearby so that the patient can see what is being done.
E si no descendra en jos, sapias que es aygua.	And if it does not descend below, you may know that it is water.
Mays si no es preparat le descendement a la sania am aquo que havem dit, lahoras fay le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e aprop pren spatum subtil e fen am aquel sobre le pannicol cernent un petit deves la continuacio de la conjunctiva am la tunica cornea en la corona (entro al loc vuet), entro que sia fora-getada la sania.	And if the descent of the disease to healing is not prepared as we have said, then place the patient on your lap and carefully take a small spurt and apply it over the gauze, continuously moving it along the conjunctiva towards the cornea in the area (in the location of the wound), until the disease is expelled.
Donc cum es fora-getada, lahoras tu distilla en le huel aygua cauda en la qual has mesclat mel o aygua en la qual ja has bulit fenugrec e mel.	Then, as is forgotten, when you distill into the shoe in which you have mixed honey or water in which you have steeped fenugreek and honey.
E aprop sia curat am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And then treat the other causes until it is healed.
Capitol .xxii.	Capitol.xxii.
De la curacio de la aygua descendent del huel.	Of the cure for water descending into the foot.
Ja havem dit las specias de la aygua en la divisio e qual conveneys a perforar am sermo declarant, lahoras aquel segon la sanetat.	We have already mentioned the species of water in the division and which one is suitable for piercing as we declared, according to its healthiness.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre un cayrat e lia le sieu huel sa, lu mot stringent.	Then you must tie up the thigh between your hands on a cushion and lay its foot there, with a tightstring.
E aprop pausa prop de la palpebra del sieu huel la tua ma senestra, si le huel en le qual es l’aygua es le huel senestra; o am la tua ma dreyta, si le huel es le dextre.	Then place your left hand near the sole of the foot in which the water is; or with your right hand if the foot is on the right side.
E aprop am la tua ma dextra pren almagda, si le huel es senestre; o am la tua ma senestra, si le huel es de dreyt.	Then with your right hand take the wick, if the foot is on the left side; or with your left hand, if the foot is on the right side.
E aprop pausa la extremitat de almagda prop de la corona per la grossesa del ray en le album del huel de part del mendre lacrimal, e aprop enpelleys almagda am vertut e revol la tua ma am aquel.	And then place the extremity of the thumb near the crown for the swelling of the vein in the white of the eye from the overflow of the tear duct.
E aprop penetre en le album del huel e sentas que almagda ja es pervenguda a causa vueda.	And then penetrate into the white of the eye and feel that the thumb has already reached due to swelling.
E cove que sia la masura del cami de almagda al preon la mesura del spazi le qual es de la pupilla entro a la fi de la negror, e es la corona del huel; quar tu veyras am aquel pupilla am la visio de l’huel per la clartat de la tunica cornea.	And measure the size of the thumb's passage when pressing against the space which is between the pupil and the edge of the black part, for this is the crown of the eye; you will see the pupil through the clarity of the corneal layer with the vision of the eye.
E aprop pausa almagda entro al loc en le qual es l’aygua, e aprop tu la atira en jos una veguada aprop autra, e donc si la aygua descen tantost, lahoras vetz le malaute aquo sobre le qual huebre la sua vista tantost, e almagda en le sieu huel.	And then place the thumb in the location where the water is, and then pull it down several times. Therefore, if the water descends quickly, then see that the patient under whose vision it overflowed quickly, and the thumb in his eye.
E aprop repausa se un pauc; donc si la aygua es descenduda, lahoras tu depausa aquela autre veguada abantz que almagda ne sia getada.	And then pause for a moment; therefore, if the water has descended, then you pause again before pulling the thumb out so that it is not removed.
E donc quan es sicada e no descen, lahoras tu extrat almagda am facilitat, e revol am aquel la tua ma pauc a pauc, e aprop dissolveys en l’aygua un petit de sal clara de gemma e am aquela lava le huel dedintz; e aprop pausa fora le huel coto o stopa o lana infusa en oli rozat e album de huou e ligua am aquo le huel sa.	And when it is drawn out and does not descend, then you extract the mass with ease, and roll it little by little with your hand, and return a small amount of clear salted gem water inside; and place a cloth or stopper or infused wool in olive oil and egg white over it, and ligature it with this.
Mays nos e aquels que so de nostre temps pause sobre aquel comi trissat am album de huou.	May we and those who are of our time pause over it with egg white.
E si no obezeys a tu almagda al intrament de l’huel per la sua duricia — quar es alcu dels homes del qual le huel es dur mot —, lahoras cove que prenguas le spatum le qual es nompnat alberid del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if you do not extract your mass with the instrument of heat due to its hardness — which is often the case with those whose flesh is hard and tough —, then seek that you take the spuma which is named alberid, of which this is the form:
E donc perfora am aquel aquela conjunctura, e no ultimes la tua ma en le trauc, e no es si no que fassas via ad almagda loc subtil.	And then puncture that conjuctura, and do not bring your hand too deep into the tissue, but rather make a way to the location of the mass.
E aprop entromet almagda segon que havem dit.	And then introduce the mass as we have said.
E deves le compliment de la tua obra, sia preparat al malaute dormitori descentment fayt en le qual dorma sobre le sieu dos en mayson tenebrosa, e sia prohibit de totz movementz .	And you should complete your work, so prepare a bed for the patient properly made in which they lie on their back in a dark house, and prohibit all movements.
E pausa en la natura de lu aquo per que sia linida la sua natura, e no maugua le sieu cap a la partida dreyta ni senestra de tot.	And pause in his nature for that it may be aligned with his nature, and not disturb his head to the right or left part completely.
E sia le liament segon la sua disposicio entro al tertz dia.	And let the ligament be placed according to its disposition on the third day.
E aprop deslia aquel en aquela maysso tenebrosa e exproha la freol vista, e fay li vezer alcunas causas, e aprop retorna le liament entro al dia .vii.	And then remove that in the more obscure and irritating sore, and apply some cold compresses, and then return the ligament on the seventh day.
E no cove que fassas aquo en la hora de las curacios o tantost aprop la infusio.	And do not do this at the time of the incisions or very soon after the infusion.
Habantz cove que tu alienes aquo per so quar la aygua puega leugierament per gran e vehement de reguardament.	Have you already decided to remove this so that the water may flow slightly freely and abundantly through regard for it.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que deslias le huel denant le vii dia, e rectifica aquel am aquo que ceda apostema.	If an abscess should occur, then remove the pus on or before the seventh day, and correct that with this to allow the abscess to heal.
Lahoras tu absol la vista de lu e pausa sobre la cara de lu oral per le qual sia regit le vezement de lu dejos lu per alcus dias, lu existent en la mayszo tenebrosa.	Then close the wound and place your hand over the face of the wound for which it may heal properly, leaving the wound open for a few days, especially in the more obscure sore.
E aprop sia gitat de aquela mayzo gradantment e conversa8 en las suas causas.	And then it should be gradually extracted from that hand and transferred to its causes.
E sapias que in alchatea no es excusat le discipol de visio alcunas veguadas, e lahoras tu sias ardit sobre la operacio.	And know that in surgery it is not necessary for the apprentice to have a vision on some occasions, and then you stand by during the operation.
E ja es pervengut a nos de alcu de aquels les quals so al Artach , e alcu disse que fayt foc en al Ayrac magdaam perforat am le qual es succada la aygua.	And we have been informed of some cases where they are affected by Artach, and some say to make fire in Ayrac magnam perforated with which water is drawn.
Mays empero yeu non e vist degu en la nostra terra le qual haia perfeyt aquo, ni e aquo legit en alcu dels libres dels antics; e es possible que aquo sia novel.	But I have not seen anyone in our land who has done this perfectly, nor is it mentioned in any of the ancient books; and it is possible that this is a new method.
E aquestas so las formas de las specias de magdaan per que sia sobre aquelas aquel le qual ignora aquelas:	And these are the forms of the species of magdaan so that they be known to those who are unfamiliar with them:
E sian faytas de eram o de ferr propriament, e sian las extramitatz de lor am aquesta subtilitat triangulada, la extremitat aguda ayssi cum aquela es la forma.	And they should be made of elm or iron properly, and their extremities should have this subtlety in the form of a triangle, with one point as sharp as the other.
Capitol .xxiv.	Capitol.xxiv.
De la curacio de carn nada en le nas.	Of the treatment of flesh nothing in the nose.
Quan en le nas so nascudas carns diversas ajustadas de las quals es alcuna causa la qual es assemblada a scorpio de motz pes, o a polip peys; e aquesta malautia es apelada polipus quar es a semblansa de aquel peys representat.	When in the nose there arise various growths that are caused by certain causes gathered from heavy mucus or from polyps; this illness is called polypus and is similar to that polyp represented.
E de lu es carn cancrosa, lapadea, de fusca color; e de lu es que es carn leon no de color fusca.	And of the polyp it is fleshy, dark in color; and from it comes fleshy growths that are not dark in color.
Donc en aquela que es en aquestas carns leon no fraudulenta ni cancroza, cove que fassas le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e posat al solelh, e huebre las nars de lu, e picoys le tieu onci en aquelas carns.	Therefore, in that which is among these fleshy growths neither false nor cancerous, first separate the illness by pressing your fingers and place it in the sun, and rub the nostrils with it, and prick the tip in those fleshy growths.
E aprop extrat aquela a las partidas deforo, e aprop inscindeys aquo que has comprehendut de aquelas am spatum agut subtil de la una partida entro que sapias que tota la carn ja es ostada; que si roman de lu deguna causa de la qual la abscisio es possibla, lahoras tu ratz aquo am la un dels estrumentz subtils am facilitat entro que de lu romangua denguna causa.	And then extract it from the deep part, and carefully divide what you have grasped with a sharp thin knife where you can feel that all the flesh has been reached; if any part remains due to some cause for which the division is possible, then quickly use one of the fine instruments to facilitate its removal.
Mays si senhoreja am sanc o accida apostema caut, lahoras tu pausa a lu aquo que cove; o es dels apostemas malignes, lahoras tu coyta e cauteriza aquel entro que sia abscindit sanc e sian ostadas las cavas totas.	If a wound or abscess occurs, then pause at that which fits; if it is of malignant abscesses, then incise the wound and cauterize within where the blood has escaped and all cavities are exposed.
E aprop sia getatz en le nas aprop la inscizio vi agre e aygua o vi.	And then set it on the nose near the incision and apply either honey or grease.
Mays si le nas es ubert e de lu procezeys humiditat entro al palat, lahoras sapias que ja es sanat.	If the nose is already opened and there is a process of humidity in the palate, then you can see that it is already healed.
Mays si la humiditat no penetra segon que cove, lahoras tu sapias que dedintz lu es carn nada en los pus sobiras osses de las nars als quals non es pervengut abscizio.	If the humidity does not penetrate as it should, then you can see that inside there is no flesh but pus will remain bones of the nose which have not been reached by an incision.
Donc lahoras cove que entromitas fiel de li al qual sia alcuna grosseza, e nuza en lu motz nuzes, e pausa entre quascun nutz la quantitat del dit o mens, e engene le malaute e entromet una extremitat del fiel en le nars am lo ray o am autra causa la qual es a lu possibla.	Then when it is appropriate that you insert the juice of the plant from which there is any swelling, use nuts in its place, and pause between each nut the quantity of a finger or less, and open the patient and insert an extremity of the juice into the nose with a probe or for another reason which is within your capability.
E pus que aquo aura fayt, que atire le sieu odorament entro que pervengua a las canals de las nars, e sia eyssit sobre le sieu golayro, quar tropas veguadas le semblant ad aquesta accio fan les enfantz a las scolas, e es leugiera causa ad aquel que ho vol far.	And after he has done this, he should breathe his odorament into it so that it reaches the canals of the nose, and sit over his bowl, for too frequent actions like this make children at schools laugh, and is a light cause for him who wants to do it.
E aprop pausa las dos extramitatz del fiel, una extremitat que iesca sobre le nas et l’autra que romangua en le nas, e aprop aministra serratura de carn am les nuzes que so en le fiel, e fay aquo entro que sapias que las carn ja so am les nuzes del fiel.	Then place the two ends of the cord, one end that ties over the nose and the other that loops in the nose, and then apply a flesh stitch at the nuts which are in the cord, doing this while you can feel that the flesh is against the nuts of the cord.
E aprop extratz le fiel, e pausa en le nas aprop la abstraccio del sanc una calgua , e fay aquo per tres dias o mays entro que l’enguent corrodo tot aquo que es romas de las carns.	Then extract the cord, and place a pledget in the nose near the edge of the wound, and do this for three days or more until the ointment dissolves everything that is rotten from the flesh.
E aprop en la fi de la causa, pausa en le nas una canula de plom per alscus jorns entro que sia sanat.	Then, at the end of the cause, place a lead cannula in the nose for several days until it is healed.
Mays si endigeys de curacio que exsique, usa de aquela.	If you need to promote healing that dries out, use that one.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument a capipurge fazedor am le qual son distillatz olis e medicinas en le nars:	And this is the form of the instrument for nasal distillation where oils and medicines are put in the nostrils:
E fay aquo de argent o de eram, la qual sia semblant a una petita lampesa uberta, ayssi cum petita conqua, e le meat semblantment.	And make it of silver or of copper, which should resemble a small open lamp, like a small basin, and the mouth similar.
E si vols, fay una canula clausa ayssi cum cana, e la cancula del estrument a capipurge fazedor e sia plana, descuberta; a la qual sia manubre en lo derier de lu, am le qual tenguas aquela quan escaufas en lu oli o aquo que tu vols dels sucs e de las causas suctiblas.	And if you wish, make a closed cannula like a reed, and the mouth of the instrument for nasal distillation should be flat and open. Insert a tube at the rear end of it, with which you will place there whatever oil or liquid you want from the secretions and extractable causes.
E aquestz capipurgi es precios: recipe de enforbi de castor, de balayra blanc, de giengiebre, e piletre de safra, de pebre lonc, de escafragia, de epetum de spic ana unc. vi cumfizeys am suc de bleda e de caul, e sian faytas pillulas, e sia destemprada una pillula am aygua tebeza, e sia gitat en las nars del malaute jasent envers.	And these nasal probes are precious: take castor oil, white balata, grainy ginger, yellow peel, long pepper, rue, and one scruple of anise. Mix them with wheat and oat juice, and make pillules from this mixture. Then, temper one pill with clear water, and administer it into the nostrils of the patient facing forward.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter XXV.
De theyls natz en las extramitatz del nas.	From the roots to the extremities of the nose.
Motas veguadas es nat theyl en las extramitatz del nas, e es magnificat e omentat en alscus dias entro en que mot es leg le reguardament de lu.	Nodules are observed at the roots to the extremities of the nose, and these are enlarged and palpated over several days as the swelling becomes more noticeable.
E per aquo cove que tu inscidas aquel en le comensament de la apparissio de lu, e erediques tot aquel.	And for this reason, you should examine it at the beginning of its appearance, and remove all of it.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc o cauteri o medicina comburent la qual estia en loc de lu.	And place the cautery or burning medicine over the area where it was.
Mays si es tardada la sua inscizio entro que sia magnificat, lahoras considera si es lapificat, dur, de fusca color e de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr quar es apostema crancos; quar motas veguadas ad aquel que inscideys aquesta apostema endeve per lu granda malicia sobre aquel le qual aquel havia.	But if its examination is delayed until it has enlarged, then consider whether it is solid, hard, of dark color, and with little sensation; in this case, do not touch that with a hot iron as it is an abscess; for nodules often accompany this abscess due to its great malignity on the part where it was.
E si le apostema es de leon tocament e no es de fosca color, e vezes que inscizio es possibla en tot aquel, lahoras evacua le malaute e inscideys aquel senes temor, e cura le loc am aquo que exsique e costrenh entro que sia sanat.	And if the abscess is due to a blow and not of dark color, and examination is possible throughout it, then drain the poison and cut it out without fear, and treat the area with something that dries up and constricts until it is healed.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter XXVI.
De sutura del nas e de las labias e de la aurelha quan la continuitat es dissolvuda per plagua o per semblantz.	For the suturing of the nose and lips when the continuity is dissolved by disease or similar conditions.
Sapias que quan accideys solucio de continuitat en una de aquestas cartillages, pauc confereys en aquela operacio sino en alcus homes.	Know that when there is dissolution of continuity in one of these cartilages, you have little to rely on in that operation except skilled people.
Donc cove, quan endeve ad alcu alcuna causa de aquelas, que consideres si es plagua fresca am le sieu sanc, e lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Then, when there is any cause of those, consider whether it is fresh disease with its secretion, and then adjust the two lips of the wound with sutures, and proceed to cure that until it is healed.
E si las labias de solucio de continuitat so ja separadas, e quascuna es fayta sana, lahoras cove que tu excorjes quascuna partida de la sua codena apparent entro que n’iesca sanc.	And if the lips of dissolution of continuity are already separated, and any one is made healthy, then you must strip each part from its visible edge until it exudes pus.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias am sutura e strenh aquelas, e sobre aquelas pulveriza sanc de drago e enses trissat, e pausa sobre la polvera una pessa de emplaustra diafinicon, o de alcu autre dels emplastres consolidatius, e leyssa aquel liat per dos jorns o per tres, e aprop deslia aquel e permuta aquel emplaustre e leyssa aquel entro que·ls fiels per si sian abscinditz, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Then adjust the two lips with sutures and strengthen them, and sprinkle dragon's blood and threefold tin on those. Place a piece of diafinicon plaster or another consolidated plaster over the powder, and let that mixture remain for two to three days. Remove that and replace it with another plaster, letting it dry until the roots have resolved themselves, and proceed to cure with ointment until it is healed.
Mays la manieyra de la sutura es que tu agregues la solucio de continuitat o am agulhas ayssi cum havem recomtat en la sutura del ventre, o agregua la solucio de continuitat am fiel ayssi cum a tu e fayt saber.	The manner of suturing is that you add the solution of continuity or use needles as we have recommended in the belly suture, or add the solution of continuity with thread as you are made to know.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter XXVII.
De extraccio de aquela causas que veno en las doas labias en las partidas dedintz.	For the extraction of those causes that venous problems occur in the two lips within the internal parts.
Motas veguadas endeve a motz homes en las partidas dedintz de las suas labias alcus apostemas durs semblantz a gras de errs, e alscunas de lors son mendres e alcunas son majors.	Spots appear in the internal parts of their lips, turning into hard abscesses resembling lard, and some are smaller while others are larger.
Donc cove que tu convertas las labias e fendas quascuna de aquelas duricias de tota part, e aprop la abscizio umpliscas le loc de sagi trissat entro que·l sanc sia restrengut, e aprop sia lavat am vi agre e sia curat le loc am aquo que es stipticitat, entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, cut out the lips and openings of each of those hardnesses from all sides, and then fill the wound with three layers of cloth while the wound is tightened, and subsequently wash it with wine and treat the area with water that is astringent, until it heals.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter XXVIII.
De inscizio de la carn ajustada en las gengivas.	For the incision of the flesh adhered to the gums.
Granre de veguadas nays sobre la gengiva carn ajustada la qual les antics apelero albulus, adonc cove que tu suspendas aquela am onci o que tenguas aquela am las forfecs e inscidas aquela deves la sua razit, e leyssas la sania correr o le sanc.	Great care in touching the gum where they call albulus, then withdraw that which you grasp with your finger or forceps and let the pus drain out or bleed.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc sagi trissat o autra polveras stipticas o excicativas.	Then place something warm on the area for three days or other styptic or excitatory powders.
E si aquela carn retorna, lahoras inscideys aquela segundariament, e cauterisa aquela, quar aprop le cauteri no retornara.	And if that flesh returns, then incise it again, and cauterize it, for after the cauterization it will not return.
Capitol .xxix.	Capitol.xxix.
De razo de dentz am ferr.	On the reason for teeth aching.
Quan en la superficia de las dentz de las partidas dedintz e de las de foro e entre las gingivas so ajustadas escorsas aspras, legas, e alcunas veguadas son de nigradas e son faytas citrinas o vertz entro que a la gingiva ve per aquo corrupcio e son faytas las dentz legas.	When on the surface of the teeth both inside and outside and between the gums there are sharp, rough edges, some are blackened and are caused by yellow or green substances that affect the gum through this corruption, causing the teeth to become loose.
E donc cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas e pausar le cap de lu en le tieu se, e ratz las dents en las quals apareysso aquelas escorsas e causas semblantz arena entro que de lor no romangua deguna causa, e aquo fay de la negror e de la citrinitat e de las autras entro que sian mondificadas.	And therefore make sure that you cut the patient's thigh between your hands and place the head there in hot water, wash the teeth where those edges and similar causes appear, ensuring that nothing breaks from any cause, and do this with the blackness and yellowish substances as well as others that have been changed.
Donc si es ostat aquo que es en aquelas del comensament de la razio, bo es; e sino, lahoras tu itera la razio sobre aquelas al autra dia e al segon e al tertz entro que vengua al derier stament en aquo que tu vols.	Then if what remains from the beginning of the reasoning is good, well and good; otherwise, then you repeat the reasoning on those points the next day and the second and the third until it comes to the final statement in what you want.
E sapias que las dentz han necessitat de motz rezoris de diversas formas e de motas figuras segon que es preparat a la tua operacio.	And know that teeth have needed various forms of extraction and different shapes according to how your operation is prepared.
E per so quar le razori am le qual la dent es raza de la partida dedintz es autre del razori am le qual es ras entre las dentz segon autras formas, e aquestas formas de razoris sian deves tu preparadas las quals veyras tantost:	And so, some razors for extracting the tooth from the inside are different from those razors for extracting between the teeth according to other forms, and these forms of razors you should prepare yourself, which you will often see.
Capitol .xxx.	Capitol.xxx.
D’eradicacio de dentz.	For the extraction of teeth.
Cove que tu cures la dent de la sua dolor am tot engen e tardes en tota eradicacio de lu, quar no es denguna causa que suplisqua la veguada de lu quan es eradicada, quar es sustancia sublima entro que es excusacio en la eradicacio de lu.	Cave that when you cure the tooth of its pain with great skill and take a long time in its extraction, for no cause can substitute the natural process when extracted, for it is a substance that sublime during the process of its extraction.
Mays cove quan le malaute es forsat aquela dent eradicar, que fermament deves tu sia certificat quala es la dent dolent, quar motas veguadas la dolor descep le malaute e cuga que sia en dent sana, e tu eradicas aquela e aprop la dolor no cessa entro que la dent malauta e dolent sia eradicada, quar nos ja havem vist aquo per operacio dels barbies.	More importantly, know that when the gout is forced to extract that tooth, you must firmly be certain which tooth is painful, for many times the pain departs from the gout and affects a healthy tooth, and you extract that one, and soon the pain does not cease until the painful and diseased tooth is extracted, for we have seen this in the operations of barbers.
Donc cum deves tu es sertificat qual es la dent dolent, e que o sabes be, lahoras cove que tu scarifiques en le circuit de la dent am spatum en le qual sia alcuna vertut, entro que sia dissolvut de la dent de la gingiva de tota partida, e aprop mau aquel am les tieus ditz, o am forfexs subtils al comensament petit a petit entro que aquela concucesquas.	So you must be certified what is the painful tooth, and knowing well, when you incise along the circuit of the tooth with spatum in which some virtue may be contained, within which it should be dissolved from the root of the gingiva from all parts, and then those thongs or fine scissors at the beginning gradually until those concussions.
E aprop alogua en lu fortz tenalhas grans per bona loquacio o estuptura fort, e pausa le cap del malaute entre les tieus denolhs que be le tengues que no·s maugua, e aprop tratz la dent segon rectitut en manieyra que no trenques aquela, ni al malaute major dolor no dones.	And then wet it well with strong water for good speech or strong fracture, and place the head of the patient between thongs below which you must hold so that they do not loosen, and then draw the tooth straight according to the correct manner so as not to break it, nor give more pain to the patient.
E donc si no es foro-getat, lahoras pren un de aquels instrumentz, e met aquel dejos lu de tota part am facilitat e esforsa la remocio de lu ayssi que es feyt al comensament.	And so, if it is not forced out, then take one of those instruments, and place it well on the patient from all sides with ease and effort to facilitate its removal as it is done at the beginning.
Mays si la dent es trauquada o corrosa, lahoras cove que tu comples de drap aquel trauc e estrenguas aquel am la extremitat de ray subtil per so que no sia trinquada en la hora de la tua constriccio sobre aquela am tenalas.	But if the tooth is broken or corroded, then you must wrap it with cloth and tighten it at the end of a fine rod so that it is not broken during your manipulation over it.
E cove que tu obres exquesitament am scarificacio en le circuit de tota part de la gingiva e guarda mot la tua fortaleza que no trenques aquela e romangua partida de lu, e retorne sobre le malaute per la malicia que sia majo que la primieyra dolor de lu.	And ensure that you operate meticulously around the circuit of all parts of the gum and guard well your strength so as not to break any part of it, and return over the patient for the mischief that is greater than the first pain.
E guarda te que no fassas aquo que fan alscus ignorantz barbiers en lor fistinacio e audacia sobre la eradicacio de lor, ses que no aministran aquo que nos havem recomtat; quar motas veguadas fan venir sobre les homes malautias grans las quals son pus dificils que sian trinquadas, e las razitz de lor remaugudas totas, o alcunas de aquelas, o que extrayguas aquela am alcus osses de la mandigula ayssi cum motas veguadas havem testificat.	And guard that you do not do what some ignorant barbers do in their circumcision and audacity regarding the eradication of their own; for they do not administer what we have recommended; whereas false notions bring great illnesses upon men which are harder to cure, and the reasons for their failures all, or some of those, or extract that membrane from certain bones of the jaw as false notions have testified.
E aprop la eradicacio de lu sia lavada la boca am vi caut o vi agre am sal.	And after the circumcision, wash the mouth with one or two cautions of salt water.
E si endeve fluxs de sanc per aysso, ayssi cum motas veguadas endeve, lahoras trissa alcuna quantitat de zegi e aspergeys sobre la plagua, e si no confereys aquel zegi, cauteriza.	And if there are fluxes of pus for this, as false notions might suggest, then take some saffron and sprinkle it over the wound. If this does not work, cauterize.
La forma de las forceps e tenalas subtils am las quals es mauguda la dent al comensament sia de longua extramitat, de breu manubre e gros, per so que no sian doblatz quan am aquels deves obrar.	The form of the forceps and fine tongs used to extract a tooth should be long-tipped, short-handled, and thick, so as not to bend when those you use them.
E sian ayssi cum vezes de gros manubre entro que quan estrenhas am aquelas no sian dobladas, sian breus extramitatz.	And thus when you insert large instruments there where they are narrow, make them short and well-equipped.
E sian faytas de ferr de India descentment faytas de dreytas extramitatz, e en las extramitatz de aquelas sian dentz de las quals las unas intron en las autras e estrenhan per constriccio descent fort, e alscunas veguadas las extramitatz de aquelas sian la forma del bec d’un auzel le qual ha nom ciconia, so es guanta, e son de fort constriccio.	And they should be made of iron from India, straight and well-equipped, and at the ends of those, there are teeth of which some enter into others and widen by strong construction, and sometimes the ends of those are in the shape of a cuckoo's bill, known as a guantia, and they are of strong construction.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter XXXI.
De erradicacio de dentz e d‘estraccio dels osses de las mandibulas trincadas.	On the extraction of teeth and the removal of fractured jawbones.
Quan deves la eradicacio de dent le qual es trinquat roman alcuna causa, lahoras cove que tu pauses sobre le loc coto am boder per un jorn o per dos entro que·l loc sia mollificat; e aprop entromet algesti o tenalhas las extramitatz de las quals so asembladas al bec de un auzel apelat ciconia o guanta, la forma de las forceps:	When you need to extract a tooth that is fractured by some cause, first ensure that you place your hand firmly over the area for one or two days until the area becomes softened; then insert forceps or tongs at the ends of which are shaped like the bill of a cuckoo (ciconia), the form of the tweezers:
Las extramitatz de lor sian faytas dedintz ayssi cum lima o alfagi.	The ends of the forceps should be made like a rasp or file inside.
E si no obediys a tu a eyssiment am aquestas forceps o tenalas, lahoras cove que tu caves sobre la razit e descrobas tota la carn e entrometas le instrument le qual ha nom atali, so es palanca petita del qual la forma es aquesta:	And if your attempt with these forceps or tenacula does not obey you, then cut over the crack and spread all the flesh apart and insert the instrument which is named atrial, that is a small lever whose shape is this:
E sia de breu extremitat grossa un petit, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	And briefly, the extremity is large but small at the end, and should not be twisted.
Donc si per aquo la razit es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, ajuda te am aquestz autres instrument dels quals aquestas son las formas: la forma del primier instrument es de triangulada extramitat en la qual sia alcuna grossesa:	So if the crack is already open, that is good. Otherwise, help me with these other instruments, the forms of which are as follows: the form of the first instrument is triangular in extremity, in which there is some swelling:
La forma del segon instrument es que sia de triangulada e de pus subtil extremitat.	The form of the second instrument is triangular with a finer extremity.
E ja so ajudatz am aquest instrument havent dos ramps del qual aquesta es la forma aprop la seguent:	And now help me with this instrument having two ramps, the form of which is as follows:
e am autres instrumentz les quals precidero en rasura de dentz; quar juvament es fayt am aquest instrument le qual es asemblat a onci gran, e aquesta es la forma:	And with other instruments which are used for the rasuration of teeth; for this young instrument is made similar to a large hook, and this is its form:
de la triangulada extremitat torta o curta, la qual sia alcuna grossesa, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	From the triangular extremity twisted or bent, which is some swelling, and not buried so that it is not twisted.
E otra sapias que·ls instrumentz de las dentz motz so e semblantment les autres instruments.	And another note that the tooth extraction tools resemble other instruments.
Mays le artifexs savi e subtil en l’art, atroba per si mateys segon aquo que a lu significa la operacio e las malautias diversas; quar son de las malautias a las quals les antics no diysero ni pausero propri instrument, per las formas de diversas specias.	But the skilled and subtle craftsmen find suitable instruments for themselves according to what the operation and various ailments signify; which are of the ailments to which the ancients would neither apply nor pause with a proper instrument due to their diverse forms.
Mays si es trinquat l’os de la mandibula o dels autres osses de la boca, o si poyreys, lahoras sia pes curat sobre aquel en son loc am aquo que es a lu convenient dels instrumentz e de las forceps las quals havem dit en la extraccio de las razitz de las dentz, e ajuda te am gesti del qual aquesta es la forma:	But if the bone of the jaw or other bones in the mouth are twisted, or if you must, then place the affected area on that spot and use what is convenient from the instruments and forceps we have mentioned in the extraction of roots of teeth, and control the gesture of which this is the form:
E sia en lu alcuna grosseza petit a petit, e sia instringida o tenguda am la boca per que no evasesca o fuga entro que l’os de tot sia foro-getat; e aprop restaura le loc am medicinas convenientz ad aquo.	And let it be some small swelling gradually, and tightly hold or maintain it in the mouth so that it does not escape or flee until the bone is completely removed; then place the area with suitable medicines.
Mays si en l’os es petita poyredura, lahoras ratz aquel de aquela poyredura e de la sua negror, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If there is a small abscess in the bone, first drain that abscess and its blackness, and cure it until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter XXXII.
De la cura de las dentz eminentz sobre las autras.	Of the treatment of prominent teeth above others.
Quan las dentz so eminentz no segon lor cors natural per aquelas la forma es laga, e majorment quan endeve a las femnas, e majorment a las piuselas venerablas; donc cove que tu consideras: si dent es nada aprop autra dent, e no es possibla sarradura ni linament de lu, lahoras radica aquela; mays que no sia annexa am autra dent, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am aquest instrument del qual aquesta es la forma; e es semblant a morr de porc, e sia feyt de ferr de India de extramitat mot aguda.	When the teeth are prominent not according to their natural alignment, especially when they protrude in women, and particularly in venerable old ladies; therefore consider this: if a tooth is close to another tooth and there is no possibility of extraction or separation from that tooth, then extract it. However, if it is not attached to another tooth, use an instrument similar in shape to the head of a pig, made of Indian steel with an extremely sharp edge, to extract it.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscideyses aquela en trops dias per la duricia de la dent, e que no sia comauguda autra de las dentz.	And make your incision with the instrument you will use to extract that tooth over several days due to its hardness, and ensure it is not too close to any other teeth.
E si es dent eminent expausat a limadura, lahoras lima aquel am lima de ferr de India del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if the tooth is prominently exposed and needs to be smoothed, then smooth it with an Indian steel file of this shape:
E sia tot de ferr de India e·l margua eysament; e sia de motz menutz puntz ayssi cum lima am la qual son faytas agulhas, am la qual la dent sia limada pauc a pauc en motz dias am fecilitat, per so que no sia autra dent comauguda e caga.	And let it be all made of iron and steel; and let there be small pointed points like those of a file, on which the teeth are filed little by little over several days for ease, so that there is not another sharp tooth.
E aprop lineys aquela en la fi, e ratz aquela am alscus razoris.	And then draw one there at the end, and cut that with a few razors.
E si es dent del qual una partida es trinquada e lideys la lengua, lahoras cove que tu limescas aquel entro que l’aspretat de aquela fraccio sia ostada e engualhada, e sia aplenada per so que la lengua no ledesca ni la paraula no corrumpa.	And if the tooth is such that a part of it is broken and pries the tongue, then you must file that area where the sharpness of that fracture is stopped and leveled, so that the tongue does not pierce and the word does not become corrupted.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Capitol.xxxiii.
De restauracio de dentz maugudas am fiel de aur o de argent.	For the restoration of decayed teeth with gold or silver foil.
Quan accideys a las dentz devant concussio e remossio per percussio o per cazament, e le malaute no pot strenher sobre aquo que manga, e tu has curat aquel am medicinas stipticas, e no ha valgut la tua curacio, lahoras per so que no cagan es engen en aquelas que sian strengudas am fiel de aur e no de argent, quar argent se fa vert e aprop se poyreys aprop alscus dias, mays aur nul temps no es mudat.	When the front teeth suffer from concussion and extraction due to impact or a blow, and the patient cannot strengthen the area that is loose, and you have treated it with styptic medicines without successful results, then for those that are strong use gold foil instead of silver, for silver becomes soft and may loosen in a few days, but gold does not change over any length of time.
E sia le fiel en tal subtilitat e grocesa segon la quantitat que puesca entrar entre las dentz; e la forma de la reccio es que prenguas le fiel e pren lo doble de lu entre doas dentz sanas, e aprop que cresques am doas tortuositatz del fiel entre doas maugudas, o si’ una o motas, entro que pervengua la tela a la dent sana del autra partida.	And let the honey be in such fineness and coarseness according to the quantity that can enter between the teeth; and the form of the dose is that you take the honey and place twice its amount between two healthy teeth, and almost as much curvature of the honey between two molars, or if one or spots, until the tissue reaches the healthy tooth from the other side.
E aprop itera le teyssiment entro a la partida de la qual comenciest, e strenh la tua ma am facilitat e savieza entro que no sia mauguda.	And then insert the tendon into the part where you started, and strengthen your hand with facility and wisdom so that it is not a molar.
E sia la tua striccio am la qual strenhas le fiel deves las razitz de las dentz que no evasesca.	And let your tightening be such that you hold the honey in the spaces of the teeth so that none escapes.
E aprop inscindeys las extramitatz del fiel superfluens am las forceps o tosoyras, e agregua aquelas en quascun loc am gesti, e converteys aquelas e las occulta entre la dent sana e la dent mauguda, per so que no fassa lesio a la lengua.	And then divide the excess threads of the honey with forceps or scissors, and add them to any place with your hand, and convert those and the hidden ones between the healthy tooth and the molar, so as not to injure the tongue.
E aprop leyssa aquela ayssi streyta cum roman.	And then let it be held thus tightly as Roman.
Mays si es desliada o rumpuda, strenh aquela o aquelas am autra fiel en tal manieyra en tot son temps.	If it is slipped or broken, strengthen that or those with another sinew in such a manner throughout its entire time.
E aquesta es la forma de las dentz e la figura de la rectacio de doas dentz sanas e de doas maugudas, ayssi cum vezes aquestas liadas:	This is the form of the teeth and the figure of the alignment of two healthy teeth and two molars, as you see these wires:
E quan se fa que retorno una dent o doas aprop le cazement de quascuna en lors locs, e sian recrescutz ayssi cum havem recomtat, e que remauguan.	When returning one or two teeth to their proper places in the jaw, and they have grown back as we have described, and shifting them.
E no fa aquo sino bo artifexs e savi.	And it is not done by anyone other than skilled artisans.
E alcunas veguadas es aptat alcuna causa dels osses de vaca, e es fayt de lor ayssi cum forma de dent, e es pausada en loc en le qual defayl la dent, e es strengit ayssi cum havem dit, e reman e serveys am aquel per lonc temps.	And sometimes it is fitting for certain causes of the bones of a cow, and it is made from them in the form of a tooth, and is placed in the location where the tooth failed, and is strengthened as we have said, and remains and serves for a long time.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Capitol.xxxiv.
De inscizio del liament le qual ve en la lengua e prohibeys loquela.	Of the incision of the ligament which is in the tongue and prohibiting speech.
Aquest liguament le qual ve dejos la lengua alcunas veguadas o es natural am le qual hom nays, o accidental e accideys per plagua la qual ja es consolidada.	This ligament which leaves the tongue in some cases or is natural as one is born with it, or accidental and happens by a wound which already has healed.
E la operacio en lu es que huobres la boca del malaute, le sieu cap existent en le tieu se; e eleva la sieua lengua, e aprop inscideys aquel liament nervos segon la latitut entro que sia solvuda la lengua de la sua recencio.	And the operation is that one opens the mouth of the patient, the head being in the lap; elevates the tongue, and then incises that ligament nerve according to the width between which the tongue can be freed from its recession.
Mays si en aquela es alcuna duricia o denodacio, e aquo es stat per consolidacio de plagua, lahoras tu gieta unci e scindeys aquel per la latitut entro que aias inscindit le liament e sia dissolvuda la nodacio.	But if there is any hardness or induration in that area, and this is due to the healing of a wound, then you cut once and incise that ligament according to the width at which you have already incised the ligament and dissolved the induration.
E guarda te que no sia fayta fissura en le preon de la carn e que scindas aqui arceria e vengua flux de sanc.	And make sure that no crack is made in the subcutaneous layer and that you incise here to allow the flow of blood.
E aprop sia lavat le vestigi de la inscisio am ayguaros o am vi agre o am aygua frega; e aprop pausa dejos la lengua licini; so es meca la qual tengua le malaute dejos la lengua en quascuna nuoyt per so que no sia consolidat autra veguada.	And then wash the incision tracts with wine or with vinegar or with salt water; and then place the tongue to drain; so that it may not heal again in another night.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, pausa sobre le loc vetriol trissat; mays si le sanc ventz, lahoras cauteriza le loc am cauteri lantiginos le qual conveneys ad aquo.	If there is a flow of blood, place a vitreous glass over the area; if the blood continues to flow, then cauterize the area with a pointed cautery suitable for this.
E aprop aquel cura am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And then proceed with other treatments as the patient recovers.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter XXXV.
De extraccio de ranula dejos la lengua.	For the extraction of a ranula, I use the tongue.
Alcunas veguadas accideys dejos la lengua apostema asemblant a nomla petita prohibent la lengua de la sua operacio natural; e fort leu es magnificada entro que huempla la boca.	Sometimes an abscess forms in the tongue, resembling a small boil, and the tongue's normal operation is prohibited; and greatly swells as it fills the mouth.
E la operacio en lu es que huebras la boca del malaute sesent devant le solel e considera le apostema.	And the operation for this is to open the patient's mouth fully facing the sunlight and examine the abscess.
E si tu le vezes de fusca color o de negra, dur, al qual le malaute no atroba sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel quar es cranc.	And if you see it dark brown or black, hard, and the patient does not feel any pain in it, then do not touch that part.
E si es declinat a blancor, en le qual es humiditat, lahoras tu met le onci en lu, e inscideys aquel am spatum subtil, e inscindeys le de tota partida; e si sanc te ventz en la hora de la tua operacio, lahoras tu pausa desus zegi trissat, so es vetriol, entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if it has turned white, which indicates moisture, then place the probe in it and incise that with a sharp blade, dividing it completely. If blood flows during your operation, then cover it with a vitreous glass for a while until the bleeding is restrained.
E aprop retorna a la obra tua entro que lo haias trayt am compliment de lu, entro que sia lavat am vi agre e sal; e cura aquel am l’autra curacio ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And then return to your work once you have brought it to completion of him, once he has been washed with vinegar and salt; and care for that with the other cure when it is healed.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Chapter XXXVI.
De extraccio de apostema de doas aurelhas e de aquel que es nada en le golayro e de las autras apostemas.	On the extraction of apstema from two auricles and that which is located in the glabella and other apstemas.
Quan endeveno en le golayro godat, so son glandulas las quals son asembladas algodat, las quals accideysso deforas e son nompnadas doas aurelhas, las quals quan tu las curas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no es sanat, lahoras tu considera si le apostema es dur, de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr.	When I find a godata in the glabella, they are glands which are woven like godata, which accideysso on the surface and are named two auricles. When you cure them as we said in the division and it does not heal, then consider if the apstema is hard, of dark color, and of little sensation; then do not touch that with iron.
E si es de roga color e la razic es grossa, lahoras no toques aquela am ferr per le flux del sanc; abantz layssa aquel entro sia madurat, e lahoras o tu trauqueras aquel, o sira romput per si.	And if it is of red color and the root is thick, then do not touch that with iron due to the flow of blood; first let that mature, and then either you will remove it or it will break on its own.
E si es de blanqua color, radon, e la razit de lu es subtil, lahoras aquel es que cove esser inscidit.	And if it is of white color, small, and the root is fine, then that should be incised.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras, denant la tua operacio, si ja ha repausat le apostema de lu caut am repaus complit o si es deminuit am alcuna deminucio; e lahoras fay sezer le malaute denant le soleyl, e·l cap de lu sia en le tieu se, e huebre la boca de lu, e le servidor prenent entre las suas mas prema la lengua de lu dejos am instrument mot noble del qual aquesta es la forma:	And the operation on them is that you consider, before your operation, if the abscess has already been treated and fully healed or if it has decreased somewhat; then perform the operation facing the sun, with their head in your lap, and hold their mouth open, and a servant taking between their hands the tip of their tongue, letting go of the noblest instrument of which this is the form:
E sia fayt de argent o de aram, e sia subtil cum cotel.	And it should be made of silver or steel, and very fine like a knife.
Donc cum tu premes am aquel la lengua e es mostrat a tu la apostema, e catz sobre aquel le tieu vezement, lahoras pren onci e fica aquel en l’amenla, e tira aquel a las partidas defora tant quant podes.	So when you press on the tongue and show it to the patient, and apply pressure quickly with your thumb, then take an ounce and place that in the wound, and pull it out to the sides as far as you can.
Otra aquo que tiras alcuna causa de las tunicas, e aprop incideys aquela am instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	Another thing you pull from the tunics, and then apply that with the instrument of which this is the form:
e es asemblat a forceps, empero las extramitatz de lu son corvadas, ayssi que l’orrifici de quascuna de aquelas es en le endreyt del autra, mot agudas, le qual sia de ferr indi enbegut.	and it is similar to forceps, but the tips of the instrument are curved, so that the opening of each one is on the straight part of the other, very sharp, which is made of iron and well tempered.
Mays si aquest instrument no es a tu present, lahoras inscideys aquel am spatum del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: E sia agut de la una part, no agut del autra part.	If this instrument is not at hand, then cut that slit of which this is the form: one end shall be sharp, the other end not.
E pus que has inscidit una mella, inscideys l’autra segon aquesta meteyssa manieyra de inscizio, e aprop la inscizio le malaute guarguarise de aygua frega	And since you have cut one slit, cut the other according to this manner of incision, and nearby the incision the abscess will discharge water.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, guarguarise aygua de decoccio de scorsa de milgrana o de fuelha de mirtra e semblantz ad aquel de las causas stiptiquas entro que·l flux del sanc sia restreyt, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If instead there is a flow of blood, discharge water with an extract of crushed grapevine or of hollyhock leaves and similar to those causes that constrict the flow of blood, and cure that once it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas naysso en le guolayro autras apostemas otra aquelas doas aurelhas, e inscideys aquelas segon que yeu e dit en la inscizio de doas mellas engualment.	And sometimes abscesses appear in the groin or other apertures besides those two ears, and cut those according to need and as said in the incision of two slits equally.
E yeu ja fu medicat una femna de apostema le qual era nat en le golayro de lu, le qual apostema tendia a color fusca, de pauc sentiment, le qual ja havia claus le golayro de lu, e la femna respirava am meat streyt, e ja havia prohibit a lu comestio e beure de aygua, e ja era pervenguda a la mort si mays agues stat per un dia o per dos.	And I have already treated a woman with an abscess which was located in her groin, which abscess had a brown color, little sensation, and which had already closed her groin. The woman breathed directly, and food and water intake had already been prohibited to her, and she was close to death if more water remained for one or two days.
E l’apostema ja tant havia pugat que havia mezes dos ramps entro que eyssiro per dos traucs.	And the abscess had already been puscing so long that there were months between when it would break through two traverses.
Donc yeu me cuytegui fisturalment e fiquegui en un de lor onci, e tiregui aquel, e atirada es de lu gran porcio, e aprop yeu incidigui aquela de on comprendegui del autre trau, e aprop yeu obrigui la boca de lu, e compremegui la sua lengua, e aprop yeu fiquegui le onci en aquela apostema.	Then I cut into the fistula firmly and fixed it in one of its ends, and pulled that end, and drew out the large portion, and then incised that part from which the other tract originated, and then obliged the mouth of it, and controlled its tongue, and then fixed the end in the abscess.
E aprop yeu abscizi gran partida de lu, e no corria de lu sino un pauc de sanc.	And then I incised a large part of it, and there was not running from it anything but a little blood.
Donc absolut es le guolayro de aquela femna, e comensec tantost beure aygua, e aprop presec vianda, donc yeu no cessegui inscidir de aquela apostema motas vetz per lonc temps, e succesia apostema en loc de aquel, le qual inscizia entro que es prolonguat aquel.	Then the swelling of that woman was reduced, and she began to drink water soon, and then eat food. And I did not cease incising that abscess for a long time, and an abscess would form in its place, which continued to be prolonged as long as that lasted.
Donc yeu engen agui e cauterizegui le guolayro de lu, donc astec de addicio; e aprop yeu perambulegui e no saubi que fec Dieus de aquela aprop mi.	Then I shaved and cauterized the swelling of it, according to the method; and then walked around and did not know what God had done to that near me.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Chapter XXXV.
De inscizio de huvela quan es apostemada.	Of the incision of gout when it is acute.
Quan catarr deysen a la huvula, e es apostemada e es longa, lahoras ela es nompnada perpendicular; e si es en la partida dejos grossa e redonda, e lahoras ela es apelada buba.	When the catarr (catarrah) appears on the uvula, and it is acute and long, then it is named perpendicular; if it is in the part large and round, then it is called a bubo.
Mays quan es curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio, e no comfereys la tua curacio, e eyssament ja vezes que apostema caut ja es ostat de lu e es subtil, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquela que es agreguadas redonda; e si es ad aquela longitut, e es sanguina, de fusca color o de negre, e no es a lu centiment, lahoras cove que tu temtes la inscizio de lu, quar en aquela es temor sobre le malaute.	When it is cured as we have said in the division, and you do not find your cure agreeing with it, and thus you often see that the apetema (abscess) has already passed and is subtle, then seek to make an incision where it is added round; if it is at that length, and is bloody, of a dusky color or black, and is not a centimeter, then you should fear the incision of it, for there is fear over the gout.
E quan tu vezes aquela segon la manieyra que yeu he dita de la sua blancor e longuesa, que tu fassas sezer le malaute e premas la lengua de lu am instrument del qual procesic la sua forma e aprop fica le onci en la nuva, e tira aquela en jos e inscideys aquela am un de dos instrumentz les quals e ditz en la inscizio de dos mellas.	And when you see it according to the manner that I have said of its whiteness and length, then seize the gout and press the tongue of it with an instrument of which the shape process is in two, and then fix the needle in the new place, and pull that down and incise that with one of the two instruments, which are called in the incision of two gouts.
E cove que no inscidas aquela sino aquo que es ajustat sobre le terme natural ses addicio, quar si tu inscides de lu mays, lediyras le sieu parlar.	And make sure you do not go beyond what is adjusted over the natural term of addition, for if you go beyond it, you will alter its proper function.
E aprop la inscizio, usa de aquo le qual havem recomtat en la inscizio de dos mellas, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And nearby the insertion, use that which we have described in the insertion of two fingers, and ensure that it is healed within.
Mays si era le malaute espaventat per la inscizio de lu, cove que use de engen en la cauterizacio de lu ses temor, e la manieyra del cauteri en lu no es sino am aygua aguda, e es que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop prem la lengua de lu am le instrument le qual havem dit, e aprop pren de l’aygua la qual havem dita en le capitol de cauterizacio, e comfeys am aquela caus viva, e pausa aquela no spessa ni subtil, e de aquela omple la concavitat de l’estrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	If the patient is scared by the insertion, make sure you use something to ease the cautery with fear, and the way of applying the cautery should be simply with sharp water. You should place the head of the patient in your lap, and then press the tongue of the patient with the instrument as described. Additionally, take the water we mentioned in the section on cautery and apply it to the head of the patient, ensuring that you apply it living (i.e., hot), not too thin or subtle, and fill the concavity of the instrument, which has this form:
Sia la extramitat de lu conquavitat en la qual sia pausada la medicina ayssi cum la conquavitat de culher de ray, e pausa le strument am la medicina sobre la vula, e·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu latz per so que corro saliva o musellage de la boca de aquel per la intrinscequa medicina, per so que no deyssenda de aquela deguna causa sobre le golayro de lu e que ledesca aquel.	Let the exterior part of the cavity where the medicine is applied be as wide as the width of a ray's head, and place the instrument on the medicine over the vagina, and the patient should hold it with her hand so that she secretes saliva or mucus from her mouth through the internal medicine, thus not deviating from this for any cause related to the loincloth and that it adheres to her.
E aprop te la tua ma am la medicina, e exprem aquela sobre la uvula per l’espazi de miega hora entro que vegas aquela esser denegrada e sedada per la mordicacio de la medicina.	And then place your hand on the medicine, and express it over the uvula for half an hour between each time you let it darken due to the bite of the medicine.
E si vols, prengues coto e envolopes aquel sobre la extremitat del ray, e submergeys le coto en la medicina, e entrometas le ray am le coto en una canula de sobre entro que·l coto adheresca en aquela canula, e fay aquo tantas vetz entro que consiegues aquo que vols de la cauterizacio de la uva, e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela se seccara e cayra aprop tres dias o quatre.	And if you wish, take some cloth and wrap it around the end of the ray, submerge the cloth in the medicine, and insert the ray with the cloth into a tube such that the cloth adheres inside the tube. Do this as many times as necessary to achieve what you want from the cauterization of the uvula, then let it dry and fall off after about three or four days.
E si indigeysses que iteras la medicina, itera aquela, e aprop la cauterizacio abstergeys en le circuit de la uva am coto enbegut en boder, e mondifica am aquel aquo que es en le circuit de lu de la medicina, e sia lavat am aygua frega, e sia curat deforo am embrocacio, e dedintz am guarguarismes entro que sia sanat.	And if you need to apply the medicine again, apply it, then cauterize the uvula with a cloth soaked in borde, and modify what is in the circuit of the uvula from the medicine, and wash it with water, and treat externally with embrocation, and internally with guarismes until it is healed.
E aquesta especia de curacio es pus salva que inscizio e pus long de temor.	And this method of treatment is both safe and lasting without fear.
Alcunas veguadas es curada la uvuola am aquo que es pus subtil que cauteri e inscizio, quar es curat am subfumigacio en aquesta manieyra: recipe calament, ysop, origua, ruda, scicados arabic, camamilla, broyda e semblant ad aquels de las erbas, e ajusta totas aquelas causas, o alcunas de lor, en una ola, e sian submergidas am vi agre, e bulhan; e la ola sia be lutada am lut decentment, e sia en le mieg loc de la ola un trauc, sobre le qual sia pausat un instrument conquau de aram segon aquesta manieyra; sia fayt de argent o de aram.	Sometimes the uvula is cured with what is finer than a cautery and incision, which is treated by subfumigation in this manner: take calamus, hyssop, origanum, rue, scikados arabic, camomile, grind them and prepare those of the herbs, adjust all those causes or some of them in one ointment, and be submerged in vinegar and boil; and let the ointment be well mixed with good paste, and in the middle of the ointment place a wick, on which is placed a hollow vessel made of reed according to this manner; make it of silver or reed.
E sia entromesa la extremitat en la boca del malaute entro que la vapor poge a la uvula sobre la quanula, entro que la uvula sia mot ofuscada.	And the extremity be inserted in the mouth of the patient where the vapor rises to the uvula over the quulka, where the uvula is somewhat obscured.
E aprop itera sobre aquela motas veguadas entro qu’es secca, e guarda te que no fassas aquesta curacio al comesament de l’aveniment de apostemas, quar trop ajustaria en le apostema, e no cove que tu fassas aquo, sino deves la declaracio de apostema de lu caut.	And then repeat over those spots several times where it is dry, and guard that you do not make this cure at the beginning of the onset of carbuncles, for it would too tightly constrict the carbuncle. You should not do this, but rather declare the presence of a carbuncle with a cautery.
Mays si no es a tu present aquest instrument, lahoras pren una cana e compon en la extramitat de lu un clos de huou, per so que la boca del malaute sia comborida, quar le closc del huou prohibeys la vapor comburir la boca.	But if you do not have this instrument at hand, then take a cane and place a cork at the end of it, so that the opening of the patient's anus is narrowed, for the cork prevents the vapor from burning the opening.
E aquesta curacio es bona am salut.	And this cure is good for health.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter XXXVIII.
De extraccio d’espinas e de aquo que adhereys en le golayro e de las autras causas.	On the extraction of thorns and what adheres in the wound and other causes.
Motas veguadas adhereys en le guolayro o spina de peys o alcuna autra causa.	Spots or thorns that adhere in the wound or from a thorn prick or some other cause.
Adonc cove que tu extraguas aquo que de aquels es apparent, sobre le qual catz la vista, pus que tu premes la lengua am instrument denant solelh, per so que a tu sia declarat aquo que es en la guola.	Then carefully extract what is obvious and visible from the wound. Afterward, touch the tongue with an instrument in the sunlight, so that you may determine what is in the throat.
E aquo que no apar e es a tu occultat en le guolayro, cove que tu fassas vomir le malaute denant que la vianda sia degerida en l’estomac, quar fort leu la causa annexsa le golayro sira foro-getada per vomit; o que deglusia le malaute una pessa de nap o de razit de laytuga o un boci de pa sec; o prengua una pessa de sponga marina sequa leon, e lia aquela fortment am fiel, e aprop le malaute transglussia aquela, quar cum perve al loc en le qual so spinas e es extrahuda, lahoras so foro-getatz.	And what is not obvious and hidden in the wound, make the patient vomit before the food is digested in the stomach, because if the cause attached to the wound is strong, it will be expelled through vomiting; or have the patient swallow a piece of napkin or rue cloth or a chunk of dry bread; or take a piece of sponge soaked in wine, tie it firmly with thread, and make the patient swallow that, for it will reach the place where the thorns are located and be expelled.
E mays pren una anguila e be am fiel liada, e sia dedintz mesa e soptament sia extrayta; o pren un porr e soptament le metas e soptament l’en tratz.	And take an eel and bind it with honey, then place it inside the mattress and secretly extract it; or take a pomegranate and secretly place it inside and extract it.
Mays si no so foro-getatz am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas, lahoras husa de un instrument de plom segon aquesta forma:	And if none of these causes are the ones we have said, then use an instrument of lead in this form:
E sia pus gros que ray un petit, e en la extramitat de lu sia conquavitat la qual tu entrometas en la sua guola am facilitat.	And let it be as thick as a small finger, and at the end of it, have its cavity where you can insert it into his throat with ease.
E el aga le sieu cap elevat en sus, e guarda te que·l tocament del sieu os de la gola, per so que endevengua a lu cos e am aquela que enpellesca le os o la spina, o que aquel le metge am la sua ma.	And lift his head up, and guard that the touch of his bone in the throat reaches his body, or that the doctor places his hand there.
Mays empero que·l malaute aquel entrometa es miels, per la sua sciencia del loc de la causa annexa e enpellisca en jos, e tira la sua ma am le instrument en sus, tot aquo segon la quantitat la qual es a lu preparada entro que sia foro-getada.	And instead, if the patient can insert honey, by his knowledge of the location of the cause, he should apply it downwards and place his hand on the instrument, doing all this according to the quantity prepared before it is forgotten.
Capitol .xxxix.	Capitol.xxxix.
De extraccio de sancguisugua annexsa al golayro.	From the extraction of gouty blood associated with gout.
Quan es medicada sanguisugua am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la curacio am medicinas e no comfereys, considera lahoras en le guolayro del malaute al solelh, pus que tu aias compremuda la lengua de lu am instrument le qual a tu havem recomtat.	When the gouty blood is treated with what we have said in the division of the treatment with medicines and you do not agree, consider at the gout spot in the foot under the sun, for you have understood the language of the disease with the instrument we have recommended.
Donc si tu vezes la sancguisugua, extratz aquela am onci petit o am gesti subtils decentment.	Therefore, if you see the gouty blood, extract it either through a small needle or with fine, subtle means.
E si no es a tu possible estrayre am aquel, lahoras pren una canula concava e entromet aquela en lo guolayro del malaute, e aprop pausa en la concavitat de la canula un ferr ignit, e fay aquo tantas vetz (entro que la sancguisugua sia morta e se osta del guolayro) e abstengua se le malaute tot lo jorn de aygua.	And if it is not possible to extract it through that, then take a concave cannula and insert it into the gout spot in the foot. Place a heated iron in the concavity of the cannula, and do this as many times (until the gouty blood is dead and comes out of the gout spot) and keep the patient without water for the whole day.
E aprop prengua una veyria plena de aygua frega, e obra la boca de lu en aquela, e lava la boca am aquela; e no trasglucia de aquela alcuna causa e maugua l’aygua una hora aprop autra am la sua ma, quar la sancguisugua tantost cum sent l’aygua catz.	And then take a sponge full of water and squeeze it, opening its mouth over the gout spot, and wash the area with it; do not swallow any of it, and pour the water again for about an hour using your hand, as soon as you feel the gouty blood coming.
Mays si no es foro-getada am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras subfumigua le malaute am cimetz o am assafetida per le instrument le qual havem recomtat en la sufumiguacio de uvula.	If not treated as we have advised, then fumigate the patient with cypress or saffron through the instrument we have recommended in the fumigation of the uvula.
Fay aquo, so en quar cayra.	Do this, so that it may take effect.
E es un’autra manieyra de operacio en sufumiguacio de aquela, es que tu prenguas una ola en la qual sian carbos ignitz e la ola sia cuberta am una cobertora en le mieg de la qual sia un trauc, e sia compausat en aquel trauc la extremitat del instrument; e aprop dega desus la subfumigacio; e pause le malaute la sua boca en la extremitat de la canula, e claugua la sua boca per que la subfumiguacio no sia foro-getada entro que sapias que la subfumigacio es pervenguda a la sancguisugua, quar la sancguisugua tantost cayra.	And another method of fumigation is this: you take a bowl in which are burning coals and the bowl is covered with a cloth in the middle of which there is a hole, and into that hole you place the end of the instrument; and then proceed with the fumigation; and have the patient's mouth at the end of the cannula, and seal his mouth so that the fumigation is not lost until you can see that the fumigation has reached the uvula, for the uvula will soon fall.
E si no catz, lahoras tu itera la subfumiguacio motas vetz, e abstengua le malaute de beure, e mange causas saladas e alhs, e no begua aygua, e ayssi necessari es que am aquest regiment sia fora-getada.	And if it does not heal, then you repeat the fumigation several times, and have the patient abstain from drinking, eating salty foods and other things, and do not let him drink water; and so this must be done according to this regimen.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument am le qual es trayta sancguisugua del guolayro quan es vista; e es semblant a forceps ayssi cum vezes, sino quar es en lu alcuna curvitat:	And this is the form of the instrument used to treat gout when it appears; and it resembles tongs as you see, but there is some curvature in it.
le qual sia mesa al guolayro, e la extremitat de lu es semblant a bec de ciconia, que es guanta, en la qual es aspretat de lima, per so quar, quan comprem alcuna causa, aquela no leyssa.	And the instrument is placed over the gout, and the extremity of it resembles the beak of a stork, which is curved, and it is filed with a file, so that when any cause is applied, it does not slip.
Capitol .xl.	Capitol.xl.
En le qual es la suma del sermo en apercio de apostemas e en seccio de lor.	In which is the summary of the speech concerning abscesses and on their section.
Les apostemas so motas specias, de motas manieyras, segon que ve rememoracio de lor, de quascuna en aquest libre.	Abscesses are special kinds of boils, according to various methods as remembered, for each one in this book.
E so diversas en perforacio e seccio de lor per doas manieyras, de las quals la una es per la specia de apostemas en si meteys; e per aquo que comprem de las humiditatz.	And they are diverse in puncturing and sectioning them through two methods. Of these, one is according to the kind of abscesses themselves; and by this, we deal with the humidity.
E la segonda manieyra es prop les locs en les quals accideys del cos, quar le apostema accident en le cap es autra de la apostema accident en le cul; e le apostema en le loc carnos accident es autra del apostema accident en junctura; e a quascun de lor es son juguament per operacio.	And the second method is according to the places where bodily accidents occur. For an abscess in the head is different from an abscess in the buttocks; and an abscess in a fleshy part is different from an abscess in a joint. Each of them has its own treatment through operation.
E mays de apostemas so alcunas las quals cove que no sian perforadas sino aprop maturacio de la sania en aquels o compliment de lor.	And more of abscesses some of which cover that they not be perforated but rather at maturity of the healing in those or complement of their.
So autras apostemas les quals cove que sian traucatz quan son cruzes, e no son maturatz segon lor compliment, ayssi cum apostemas que son propdas a las juncturas, quar apostema quan ve prop junctura, lo esser de lu es prolonguat entro que·s poyreys aquo que es en le circuit de lu, e fort leu son corromputz les liamentz o les nervis de aquela junctura, per que es fayta causa de contraccio de aquel membre; o es apostema prop de membre principal, e si tu tardas la perforacio de lu entro sia madurat nosira al membre principal; o es prop le cul, donc perfora aque no-madurat; e no cove que·l perforas cru, de no-complida degestio, sino aquel que es prop del cul, per so que no poyresca le preon de lu e sia elonguat a las partidas dedintz del cul, e sia fayta fistula, o que sia fayt en le terme de lu que no sia sanat.	And other abscesses some of which must be drawn out when they are ripe, and not matured according to their complement, as with abscesses that are near joints, for an abscess that is near a joint, its nature is prolonged into what is within the circuit of it, and greatly corrupts the ligaments or nerves of that joint, making it cause contraction of that limb; or it is an abscess near the main member, and if you delay the perforation of it until it is matured, it will affect the main member; or it is near the anus, therefore perforate what is not ripe; and you must not perforate crudely, due to poor digestion, but one that is near the anus, so that you do not cause pain and be elongated inside the parts of the anus, and a fistula may be formed, or it is made in the term that has not healed.
Mays cove que tu sapias la hora de la perforacio de la apostema, e aysso es quan es maturat.	And you must know the time for the perforation of the abscess, and this is when it is ripe.
E sapias que es madurat quan es la cedacio de la dolor e la cessacio de la febre, e aprop la diminucio de la rogor e de la pulsacio, e la acuitat del cap del apostema, e les autres senhals.	And note that it is cured when there is a decrease in pain and fever, and the reduction in swelling and pulse, and the subsiding sharpness of the abscess head, and other signs.
E quar cove que sapias la perforacio cazer en le loc pus dejos del apostema e de pus venient de curacio de la eminencia.	And know that when you note the perforation occurring in the location just below the abscess and of pus coming from the healing of the prominence.
E perforacio tostemps sia per le lonc de la carn o del cors, si las apostemas son en las partidas de las mas o dels pes, e en loc dels lacertz, de las cordas dels nervis, de las arcerias; e, al derier, en totz locs enguals en les quals no es reflecio; quar en aquels que so reflectitz, usa de perforacio segon aquel membre.	And the perforation should be made along the length of the flesh or body, if the abscesses are in the parts around the eyes or the feet, and at the location of the lacertae, the nerves, the arteries; and, accordingly, in all similar locations where there is no reflection; but in those that are reflective, use perforation according to that member.
Mays quan le apostema es en loc carnos, lahoras miels es que leysses la perforacio de lu entro que sia confermada la digestio de lu segon compliment, ayssi quo havem dit; quar si tu perforas aquel denant aquo, es prolonguat le cors del poyre de lu e de mota sordicia, e fort leu las labias de lu so enduradas e la profunditat de lu.	When the abscess is in fleshy tissue, it is better to delay the perforation until the digestion of the pus is confirmed according to custom; as we have said. For if you perforate it before this, it will prolong the course of the disease and increase the hardness and depth of the abscess.
Mays alcus apostemas so perforatz segon la latitut de la carn o del cos deves la necessitat, o segon aquo del qual lo membre indigeys.	More abscesses are perforated according to the width of the flesh or body as the necessity demands, or according to that from which the limb suffers.
E cove que administres petita perforacio , e·n les apostemas grans gran perforacio e ampla o motas seccios segon la diversitat de la grandesa dels apostemas.	And ensure that for small abscesses, you administer a small perforation, and in large abscesses, a large and wide or multiple sections according to the diversity of the size of the abscesses.
E autras so dels apostemas en les quals cove que la codena sia conquavada e sia encidida, quan es fayta ayssi quo pan e fayta es en terme que ja stigua, ayssi cum aquel que accideys en trops de dubelec e de bubos.	And in other abscesses, ensure that the cord is returned to its cavity and tied, when this is done as with bread, it should be done while already stiff, just as one does for clavos and buboes.
E de aquels so que so insciditz am seccio havent tres angles; e de aquels es en le qual es inscidit ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirtra, ayssi cum las apostemas dels angonars.	And of those that are incised with a section having three angles; and in which it is incised as the shape of a mulberry leaf, just as with abscesses of scrofula.
E de lor so en les quals es administrada seccio redonda e seccio lunar, e semblantz ad aquels.	And of these, there are those in which a circular section and a crescent section are administered, and similar to those.
Mays aquel al qual no es cap ayssi cum son apostemas leons superficials, cove que tu perforas aquel am perforacio superficial, o plana tant solament.	More for those where none is done thus, as with superficial abscesses of lions, ensure that you perforate them with a superficial perforation, or flat one only.
E cove quant le apostema es gros e ya ha colligit mota sania, que perfores aquel e no te coytes que extraguas tot le poyre en aquela hora; habantz extratz de aquel una partida, e aprop opila le apostema entro al autre dia, e aprop extratz una partida major, e aprop fa aquo motas veguadas segon graduacio entro que sia foro-getat.	And when the abscess is large and has already gathered a healthy pus, you should puncture it but do not cut so that all the poison does not come out at that time; having extracted one part, then on another day raise the abscess into another, then extract a larger part, and proceed to make cuts repeatedly according to degree until it is fully drained.
E majorment si·l malaute es de freol vertut, o femna prens, o enfant petit, o viel en decrepitut, quar l’esperit animal motas vetz es resolvut am la egressio de la sania, e fort leu mor le malaute, e tu operte les.	And more especially if the patient is of verdure virtue, or a woman in labor, or a small child, or an old person in decrepitude, because the animal spirit resolves into the exit of the healthful fluid, and greatly weakens the patient, and you must open up.
Don guarda aquest capitol am gran cautela, e aprop la tua perforacio en la qual perforas aquestz apostemas, cove que abstergescas las plagues e consideras donc si la plagua del apostema es pauca, o es una seccio plana, lahoras tu aministra las qualguas de li o de coto antic; e si le apostema es gran, e las fissuras de la perforacio son motas, lahoras cove que tu pauses meca en quascun trauc entro que pervenguan ensemps.	Take great care with this chapter, and when you puncture these abscesses, ensure that you clean the wounds and consider whether the wound of the abscess is small or a flat section; then administer either honey or garlic as appropriate. If the abscess is large and the punctures have significant openings, then you should place your finger in each to ensure they heal together.
E si en le apostema es abscindit una partida de la codena o has concavada aquela en le circuit, lahoras cove que tu la complescas de coto viel o de fil fayt de drap de li, ayssi cum quan has traytz pans o razizos, ses humiditat; e strenh aquel entro al tertz dia; e aprop proceseys aquel e cura le am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if in the abscess you have cut a part of the vein or have concaved it in the circuit, then you should suture it with old linen or a thread made of linen, just as when you have removed skin flaps or roots, preserving their humidity; strengthen it on the third day; and proceed with it and cure it as what is appropriate from ointments until it is healed.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc en la hora de la operacio tua, lahoras tu aministra aygua frega e vi agre en les quals mules un drap de li, e pausa aquel sobre le loc del fluxs del sanc motas veguadas.	But if you happen to experience a flow of blood during the time of your operation, then administer hot water mixed with wine in which you soak a cloth, and place that over the location of the bleeding several times.
Mays si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras cove que tu aministres regiment e curacio e polveras las quals he recomtadas en motz locs de aquest nostre libre e de divisio.	But if the bleeding persists, then you must administer treatment and cure using powders which I have recommended in many places of this our livre and division.
Mays si es en temps de hivern, e·l loc de la apostema es loc de motz nervis, lahoras cove que tu enfundas pulvils en vi e oli caut, e pauses aquels sobre les locs.	But if it is in the time of winter, and the location of the abscess is near strong nerves, then you must infuse powders in wine and oil with a cautery, and place those over the locations.
E si es en estiu, e les locs son carnoses, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils enbeguts am aygua e oli o am vi e oli, e tot aquo sia freg entro que sia le ters dia, ayssi cum havem dit, e lahoras cove que tu deslies le apostema e abstergescas aquel e aministres en la curacio de lu aquo que a lu conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if it is in the summer, and the locations are fleshy, then you must place powders soaked in water and oil or in wine and oil, all of which be infused within the first three days, as we have said, and then you must incise the abscess, cleanse that, and administer to it what is appropriate for its cure until it is healed.
E aysso es aquo que es necessari de la cognicio de la curacio de apostemas universalment, mays segon la via de distinccio ja he dit de tot apostema en qual manieyra es via de la cura de lu per capitols singularment.	And this is what is necessary concerning the knowledge of the cure of abscesses generally, but according to the way of distinction, I have already said all about the abscess in how the cure thereof is conducted by chapters singly.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter XL.
De seccio de apostemas les quals veno en la codena del cap.	Of abscesses where the vein is in the scalp.
En la codena del cap petitz apostemas, e so de specias de nodes les quals conteno tunicas que so a lor factz ; e las specias de lor so motas.	In the vein of the scalp, small abscesses occur, and these are of nodules which contain tunics that form them; the natures of these tunics are spotted.
E de lor son pingas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditat semblant a lima.	And they are soft to the touch, and those that contain moisture resembling lime.
E de aquelas so las quals conteno humiditat semblant a pols, et asemblantz a lor; e de aquelas so que son lapideas, durs.	And those that contain moisture resembling powder, similar to it; and those that are hard, lithiasis.
E en la seccio de totz, e en la extraccio de aquels no es temor, cum deves la exteccio de aquels no fa contrariat arceria.	And in the section of all, and in the extraction of those, there is no fear, as you should perform the extraction without causing arterial obstruction.
E la operacio en seccio de aquels es que tu esproes aquels am instrument la forma del qual ve aprop aysso, le qual es apelat entromes, entro que sapias que contengua.	And the operation to extract those is that you express them using an instrument of the form which is described nearby, which is called an entremes until you know it contains the moisture.
Quar si aquo que conte es humiditat, lahoras scindeys aquel am seccio segon la longitut per seccio superficial segon aquesta forma:	If what it contains is moisture, then divide that along the length by superficial section according to this form:
E comensa en la seccio de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G. Donc cum la humiditat es evacuada, lahoras tu excoria aquela pel que conte aquela humiditat, e no leysses de aquela alcuna causa de tot, quar tropas veguadas retorna, si roman de aquela alcuna causa.	And start at the section of B line between G line. When the humidity is evacuated, then scratch that skin which contains that humidity, and leave none of that cause all, for too many times returns if there remains any such cause.
E aprop submergeys coto en enguent egipciach, si es present, e sino, en aygua e sal; e umpleys am aquel la plagua e layssa aquel entro ad autra dia, quar am aquo corrodeys tot so que es romas de aquela pellicula.	And then immerse it in Egyptian ointment if available, otherwise in water and salt; and fill it with this and leave it for another day, for with this you will dissolve everything that is rotten of that skin.
E aprop itera sobre aquel coto am enguent egipciach segondament e tersament si indigeyses de lu, entro que·t comfides que no y haia romas alcuna causa de aquela pellicula; lahoras cura la plagua am enguent entro que sia sanada.	And then repeatedly treat that area with Egyptian ointment gently if you need it, until you are confident that there is no rotten cause of that skin; then cure the wound with ointment once it is healed.
E si apostema conte nodi gras, lahoras tu inscideys aquel segon aquesta forma:	And if there is an abscess containing fatty nodes, then incise that according to this form:
am seccio havent forma de crotz, e geta oncis entre doas labias de la seccio e scorsa aquel de tota partida, e esforsa la tua vertut en extraccio de la tunica la qual conte aquel.	In the section having a cross-like form, make an incision between the two halves of the section and thoroughly drain it, exerting your virtue in the extraction of the membrane which contains it.
Mays si a tu arceria fa contrarieta, lahoras fay aquo que yeu t’e recontat primieyrament.	But if your artery resists, then do what I recounted to you first.
E semblantment fay en le apostema lapificat de seccio e de curacio segon que a tu havem dit; e seccio sobre apostema lapificat es pus leugiera, quar es de pauc sanc e de pauca humiditat.	And similarly perform on the abscess incised and for its section and cure as we have said; the section on an abscess incised is lighter, because it has little bleeding and little humidity.
E alcunas vetz so alcus de aquestz apostemas les quals so en le cap en alcus homes am los quals de tot no es humiditat; la qual causa es quar yeu inscindigui sobre un apostema en le cap de una femna vielha e atrobegui le apostema ayssi cum peyra sorda, aspra, blanqua, la qual no podia esser trinquada, e si a alcu fos am aquela percussit, plaguera aquel.	And sometimes some of these abscesses which are in the head, in some people for whom there is no humidity at all; the cause is that I incised not on an abscess in the head of an old woman and scraped the abscess thus like a deaf, rough, white pear, which could not be cut, and if any were subjected to percussion, it would burst.
Mays en les autres apostemas accidentz en le cap otra aquest no es aquest capitol, ayssi cum les apostemas que veno als caps dels enfantz e deves las razitz de las aurelhas, mays la seccio de aquestz totz sia seccio superficial.	But in other abscesses in the head, this is not covered by this chapter. As with abscesses that occur in the heads of children, you should lance the auricular regions; but the section of all these should be a superficial incision.
E pausa la perforacio de aquels de la partida pus bassa de lor per so que sia alleujat le cos de la sania a las partidas pus bassas.	And place the incision of those lower parts low, so that the body is relieved of the disease in the lower regions.
E aprop cura aquelas am aquo que conveneys ad aquel de curacio.	And then attend to what needs to be done for the sake of the patient's cure.
Capitol .xlii.	Capitol XLII.
De seccio de scrophulas las quals accideyso en le col.	Of the section on scrofulas which occur in the neck.
Motas veguadas endeveno aquestas apostemas en le colh e en las aysselhas e en les angonars; e alcunas veguadas accideyso en las autras partidas del cos.	Black spots often cause abscesses in the neck, in the armpits, and in the groin; and sometimes they occur in other parts of the body.
E so aquelas que accideysso en le colh, e so motas que so engendradas entre lor, e tota scrofula de aquelas es dintz la sua tunica propria, e ayssi cum en les nodis e apostema del cap, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And those that occur in the neck, and the spots that are generated within them, and all scrofula of these is drained of its own tissue, just as in the nodes and abscesses of the head, as we have recounted.
E las specias de aquestas scrophulas son motas, quar de aquelas so alcunas lapideas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditatz, e de aquelas so malignas las quals no obeseysso a curacio.	And the species of these scrofulas are spots; some are hard, and some contain moisture, and some are malignant, which do not yield to cure.
Donc en aquela la qual tu vezes de bona disposicio en le Tocament, de la qual la color de aquo que es manifest es propda a la color de la codena, e es mauguda a tota partida, e no es annexsa am le nervi del colh, ni am las venas, ni am la arceria, e no es preonda, cove que tu inscidiscas aquela am siccio superficial de la partida desus a la partida dejos del cos de la linha de .G. entro la linha de .B., e scorja aquela de tota partida, e exten dos labias de la codena am onci, o am motz oncis si has necessitat de aquels, ayssi cum havem dit en las apostemas del cap, e extratz aquela petit a petit.	Therefore, in that one which you find to have good disposition in the Touchement, where the color of what is manifest tends towards the color of the codena, and is diffused throughout the body, and is not attached to the nerves of the neck, nor to the veins, nor to the artery, and is not hard, cut that one with a superficial incision from above to below along the line of G. to the line of B., and scrape it out completely, and extend the edges of the codena outward with a scalpel or several small cuts if you need those, as we have said in the abscesses of the head, and extract it little by little.
E es mays cautela que no sia inscidida la vena o nervi.	And it is more careful that the vein or nerve not be cut.
E sia le spatum no mot agut, que no ajuste a tu la tua ma am inscizio, o que enquiete le malaute, e que inscidas aquo que no es necessari inscidir; quar si inscideysses vena o arceria e prohibeys tu de la tua operacio, lahoras pausa en la plagua vetriol trissat o autras polveras las quals ostan fluxs de sanc, e estrenh la plagua, e layssa aquel entro que·s repausa la acuitat de la apostema e sia mollificada la plagua e comense esser poyrida.	And let the incision not be too deep, that it does not reach your hand when cutting, or to calm the patient, and cut only what is necessary to cut; for if you were to cut a vein or artery and stop your operation, then apply a plaster of vitriol trioxide or other powders which are fluxes of salt, strengthen the wound, and leave that in which allows the inflammation of the abscess to rest and soften the wound and begin to suppurate.
Quan le sanc es abscindit.	When the blood is incised.
Donc retorna a la tua operacio entro que l’aias complida.	Then return to your operation until it is completed.
E aprop inquireys am le tieu dit indic si es romas alcuna causa de las autras petitas scrophulas, donc inscideys aquelas e munda aquelas.	And then inquire again as you have previously instructed if there are any other small scrofulous swellings, then incise those and cleanse them.
E si es en la razit de la scrophula gran vena, cove lahoras que no inscidas aquela scrophula de la sua razitz.	And if there is a large vein in the vicinity of the scrofulous swelling, avoid incising that part of the scrofulous swelling.
Abantz cove que lies aquela am fiel doblat fort e que leysses aquela entro que caia per si ses nocument.	Before covering that which you have folded strongly at the side, leave that which will fall by itself.
E aprop omple la plagua de coto vielh le qual tu has ja submirgit en enguent egipciac, e aprop cura aquel.	And then fill the wound with old cloth which you have already soaked in Egyptian ointment, and then dress it.
E si inscides aquela scrophula tota, lahoras cove que tu ajustes las doas labias de la plagua e cuzas2 tantost pus que no y ha romasa deguna superfluitat.	And if you incise the scrofula completely, then cover the wound and stitch it tightly so that no fluid leaks out.
Mays si tu vezes que haia romasa superfluitat per la grandeza de la scrofula, cove que tu entendas a inscidir la razit de aquela, e astrayra aquela e aministra sutura e aquo que es dit.	But if you see that there is excessive exudation due to the size of the scrofula, then understand that you should incise the edge of it, remove it, and administer stitches as indicated.
E aquela de las scrophulas que conteno humiditatz, perfora aquela am perforacio superficial aqui la on appar a tu le loc de maturacio de lu, e pausa perforacio de aquo que siec le pus bas del cos, ayssi cum havem dit.	And for those scrofulas containing moisture, make a superficial perforation at the place where it appears, and stop the perforation when you reach the dry pus beneath the body, as we have said.
E aprop aministra perforacio, calguas am enguent e semblantz ad aquels, per so que corroda aquo que es romas de la corropcio.	And then administer the perforation, apply ointment and similar substances to it, so that it heals the part affected by corruption.
E aprop quan tu vezes la plagua ja esser mundada, lahoras tu cura aquela am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanada.	And when you see that the wound is already clean, then apply the ointment of generative flesh while it is healing.
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter XXXIV.
De seccio del pilhot del apostema accident dintz le guolayro.	Section of the base of the abscess under the heel.
Diyssero les antics aquesta seccio en le epilhot, e no vist alcu hom en nostra terra que aquela aia fayta.	The ancients performed this section of the base of the abscess, and no one in our land has ever seen it done.
E aquesta es la inscriptura del sermo de aquels.	And this is the inscription of the speech of those.
Mays en les homes haventz esquinencia, cove que sia esquivada la extraccio del epilhot, cum per aquo no sia fayt juvament per so quar totas las venas e las majors del malaute so aqui.	More in men with curvature, a cavity should be avoided during the extraction of the base of the foot, for if this is not done properly, all the veins and major arteries of the leg may be damaged.
Mays en aquels que han apostemas cautz en la boca o guolayro o dos aurelhas, quan la malautia no es en la cana, cove husar de la seccio de epilhot a fugir la perdicio la qual es fayta per perfocacio.	More in those who have abscesses on the mouth or heel or ears, when the illness is not in the brain, it is advisable to use the section of the base of the foot to avoid the damage caused by puncture.
Donc cove quan volem aquo, que inscidam le epilhot dejos tres cercles dels cercles del epilhot, o quatre am petita seccio per la latitut en aquel que es entre dos cercles per quantitat, que la seccio sia en ciphac, no en la cartillage, e aquest loc es convenent a seccio, quar es privat de carn e les vayselhs de sanc de lu son luhen.	When we want to do this, incise the epilhot and leave three or four small circles of the epilhot circles, each in the space between two circles by quantity, that the section be circular, not in the cartilage, and this place is suitable for section, which is devoid of flesh and the vessels of blood within are laid open.
E si le metge es pauruc, cove lahoras que extenda la codena del golayro am onci, e aprop fenda la codena entro que pervengua a la canal, mays evite les vaysels de sanc si vetz de aquelas alcuna causa.	And if the doctor fears this, do it when he extends the thread of the needle, and then cut the thread before it reaches the canal, but more avoid the vessels of blood if you see any cause.
E aprop inscida li ciplach segon que havem recomtat; e es significat sobre la seccio de la canal per le flacma le qual es de aquela eyssit am aquo que es de lu disromput e per la abscizio de la votz.	And then incise the cicatrix as we have recounted; and it is significant on the section of the canal by the flame which is from that issue to what is of its disruption and by the abolition of the voice.
E layssa la plagua uberta per alcun temps.	And leave the wound open for some time.
Donc cum la hora es remauguda en la qual perforacio es temuda, agregua doas labias de la codena de la plagua, e cus aquela sola ses la cartillage.	And when the hour is prolonged in which the perforation is feared, add two loops of the thread of the wound, and sew that one to the cartilage.
E aprop administra medicinas que fan naysser la carn entro que sia sanat.	And then administer medicines that cause flesh to grow where it is healed.
E diyssec Albucasis que la summa del sermo le qual havem recomtat, exposicio no es sino que veias que alcus de aquetz apostemas ja han opilat lo guolayro del malaute, e le malaute es vengut entro a mort, e le ale de lu es entresecat, e alcus van a inscidir le epiglos per so que respire le malaute sobre le loc de la plagua per alcuna respiracio, e sia salvat de mort.	And Alcubasis says that the main point of the discourse we have recounted is simply that you may see some of those abscesses already have opened the wound of the thigh, and the thigh has come into death, and its artery has been severed, and some go on to cut the epiglottis so that the thigh breathes over the place of the wound through some respiration, and thus be saved from death.
E per aquo comandero layssar la plagua uberta entro que sia consumida la malicia de la malautia; e es la malicia de lu per tres dias; e donc lahoras comandero cosi la plagua, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And for this, I order to leave the wound open until the malignity of the disease is consumed; and the malignity of the disease lasts for three days; and then, accordingly, I order to treat the wound until it is healed.
E aquo que yeu he vist per mi meteys, es que una sirventa pres un cotel e mesec le en le sieu golayro e inscidic am aquel una partida de la cana del pulmo, e yeu fu apelat a la curacio de lu, e atrobegui la mugen ayssi cum es mugit del moridos, e descubrigui la plagua e atrobegui le sanc le qual era yssit de la plagua petit.	And what I have seen with my own eyes is that a servant took a knife and placed it on her thigh and cut out a piece of the root of the lung, and I was called to treat this case, and gathered mugwort as it grows from the dead, and exposed the wound and stopped the bleeding which came from the wound.
Donc yeu fo confessat que aquela no havia inscidit vena ni guidegi, e le vent yssia de la plagua, e curegui aquela entro que foc sanada.	Then I have confessed that she had not injured a vein or artery, and the wind from the wound, and cured her so that it healed soundly.
E no accidic a la sirventa si no rauquiera en la votz, e aprop alcus dias retornec ad miloracio de las suas dispozicios.	And she did not suffer any injury at all, not even in her voice, and after a few days she returned to her usual disposition.
E ara dic yeu que en la seccio del epilhot no ha temor.	And now I say that in the section of the felon there is no fear.
Capitol .xliv.	Capitol. XLIV.
De seccio sobre apostema le qual accideys en le golayro defora, e es apelat hernia del golayro.	On the section about an apostema that occurs on the eyelid, and is called an eyelid hernia.
Aquest apostema nompnat hernia del golayro es apostema gran segon la color del cors, e es mot en las femnas.	This apostema, named eyelid hernia, is a large apostema according to the color of the body, and it occurs in women.
E es segon dos manieyras, quar o es natural o accidental.	And it can occur in two ways: either naturally or accidentally.
E en le natural no es engen de curar.	And in the natural case, it is not easy to cure.
E l’accidental es segon dos manieyras del qual la un es semblant a nodes grasses, e l’autra manieyra es semblant apostema le qual es fayt per nodacio de arteria, e en aquel es temor.	And the accidental occurs in two ways: one resembles fatty nodes, and the other way is similar to an apostema caused by the obstruction of an artery, and in this case, there is fear.
E no cove que·s fassa presumpcio a lu cum ferr sino en aquel que es petit.	And do not make the patient think that you are doing this to him only for your own sake but for his benefit.
E tu proha aquel e investigua aquel am le dit, e si atrobas lu semblant a nodi gras, e no es suspendut am alcuna de las venas, lahoras tu inscideys aquel ayssi cum les nodes, e extratz aquel am aquo que conte lu de la pel e bursiclam; e sino, lahoras es perscrutat tot le sieu esser, e aprop cura le loc am aquo que cove de curacio entro que sia sanat.	And you probe that area and examine it closely. If you find a hard swelling resembling a knot, and it is not attached to any of the veins, then you incise it like a knot, extracting what it contains from the skin and subcutaneous tissue; otherwise, you thoroughly examine its entire nature, and place it where it needs treatment until it is healed.
Capitol .xlv.	Capitol. xlv.
De seccio de las specias de nodes.	On the section of types of knots.
Dels nodes so motas specias e yeu ja he dit totas las specias de lor en la divisio.	Of the joints, these are the main types, and I have already described all the types of joints in the division.
E cove que yeu recomte assi la diferencia entre node e exitura cum fassa dubitacio.	And ensure that you distinguish between a knot and a hernia so that there is no doubt.
Donc yeu dic que am exitura es caliditat e febre e dolors vehementz entro que es sedada la ebullicio de la superfluitat; e es complida putrefaccio que lahora cessa la febre, la dolor e la calor.	Therefore, I say that in a hernia there is a quality of heat and fever and vehement pains until the boiling of the excess is subdued; and when complete putrefaction occurs, then the fever, pain, and heat cease.
Mays am node no es caliditat ni febre ni dolor, e conte aquel ciphac leon le qual es al u sac propri.	But if there is no heat nor fever nor pain, and concerning that ciphac lion which is at or in the sac itself.
E es segon la color del cors, e le comensament de lu es cum un ceze e es fayt ayssi cum vace, sia major o minor, e son segon dos specias, quar o so grassas e conteno humiditat, e las colors de la humiditat son motas, segon que yeu diyssi en la divisio.	And it is according to the color of the body, and the beginning of it is like a swelling and is made thus, whether greater or lesser, and they are according to two species, either fatty and contain humidity, and the colors of the humidity are spots, as I said in the division.
Donc cove, quan pervenas a la curacio de node, que exprohes aquel e inquiras aquel al comensament am sturment le qual es apelat intromes, segon que vindra la sua forma en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	Therefore, when you come to the treatment of nodes, express that and inquire about that at the beginning from the flesh which is called intromes, according to its form that will appear in the capitol which is nearby.
E es manieyra de inquisicio de apostemas e de totz nodes, e es que tu prenguas aquest sturment e entromet aquel en le loc pus humit le qual atrobas en le apostema, e tu revolveras les tieus ditz am aquel petit a petit entro que sapias que·l sturment ja ha penetrat la codena.	And this is the method of inquiring about abscesses and all nodes, and it is that you take this flesh and insert it into the location most humid which you find in the abscess, and you will mix the tissues gradually with it until you know that the flesh has penetrated the core.
E aprop ultima la tua ma segon la mesura de la grandeza del apostema, e aprop extratz le entromes e considera aquo que es yssit en le vestigi de lu.	Then place your hand according to the measure of the size of the abscess, and then extract the intromis and consider what is set in the cavity left by it.
E si es fora-getada la humiditat corrent, de qualque color sia, lahoras tu le inscideys am seccio superficial segon que he dit en les autres apostemas.	And if the running moisture of any color is neglected, then you incise according to a superficial section as I said in the other abscesses.
E si del vestigi de l’intromes no hieys humiditat, lahoras sapias que es gras.	And if there is no moisture from the intruded substance, then you know it is fat.
E secca sobre lu am seccio havent forma de crotz segon aquesta forma:	And if it is dry on the surface in the form of a cross as shown:
ayssi cum t’e ensenhat, e suspen aquel am oncis, e excorja la codena de tota part am facilitat, e guarda la pel o sac, si podes, sobre aquel e extraguas aquela sania am le node.	As I have shown you, suspend it with a thread, and completely remove the cord from all parts with ease, and keep the skin or sac if possible over it, and extract the clean part at the knot.
Mays si es romput en la operacio, no es possible extrayre aquela sana, e motas veguadas endeve aquo, e lahoras tu la extratz a pessas entro que de lu no romangua denguna causa.	But if it breaks during the operation, it is not possible to extract that clean part, and you mark it several times to prevent it from breaking for any reason, and then you remove it in pieces so that it does not break.
Quar si de lu roman denguna causa, pauc o trop, le node retorne segon le mays.	But if it breaks for any reason, either a little or too much, the knot returns according to the best method.
E si tu vezes que de lu roman alcuna part petita, lahoras comple la plagua de alcunas polveras corrosivas agudas e strenh la plagua, e pausa sobre aquela que sede apostema caut, e cura aquel del autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And if you see that it breaks any small part, then fill the wound with some sharp and strong powders, strengthen the wound, place your hand over the area where the abscess is located, and cure the rest of the wound as it heals.
E si es node gran, lahoras tu cus las doas labias de lu e cura aquel am aquo que encarna.	And if it is not large, then you close its two lips and treat that which is inside.
Mays si vena pulsatil es a lu contraria, o no-pulsatil, lahoras tu coyta e huemple le loc de zegi trissat que es vetriol e leyssa aquel streyt per dos dias o per tres entro que·s poyresca la plagua e que repause la ebullicio del sanc; e aprop retorna a inscindir aquo que es romas del node.	And if the vein is pulsatile on the opposite side, or non-pulsatile, then incise and fill the area with a third part that is vitriol and let that stand for two days or three until the swelling subsides and the boiling of the blood calms; and then return to divide what is ruptured from the node.
Capitol .xlvi.	Capitol. xlvi.
De las formas del sturmentz necessaris en seccio e perforacio.	Of the forms of instruments necessary for section and perforation.
De aquels so las formas dels intromesas, e so de tres specias, que de aquels es alcu gran, e de lor es migier, e de lor es petit.	Of those, these are the forms of the instruments, and they are of three species: some are large, and others are medium, and others are small.
La forma de intromes gran es aquesta:	The form of the large instrument is this:
La forma de intromes migier es aquesta:	The form of the medium instrument is this:
La forma de intromes petit es aquesta:	The form of the small instrument is this:
Sian faytz de ferr, de alfulud, de extremitatz cayradas decentment, per so que festino le intrament en les apostemas.	Let instruments be made of iron, of copper, of fallen edges properly, so that they penetrate into the abscesses.
E aquestas so las formas dels experientz, e son nompnatz albered, e un de aquels es apelat berid.	These are the forms of the experienced [physicians], and they are named Albed and Berid.
E so de tres especias, quar de lor es gran, migier e pauc.	These are of three spices, of which one is great, the other half and little.
La forma de experient gran, forma de lu:	The form of the experienced [physician] is great, the form of his/her hand:
La forma de experient migier, forma de lu:	The form of the experienced [physician] is half, the form of his/her hand:
La forma de experient pauc, forma de lu:	The form of the experienced [physician] is little, the form of his/her hand:
Conveneysso que sian per aquels apostemas e exituras e fistulas e bubos per so que entre aquelas so dels osses e de autras causas.	It is advisable that they be for those abscesses, wounds, fistulas, and buboes, so that among them are those of the bones and other causes.
E so faytz redontz, grosses, leons, ayssi cum grans agulhas am las quals son cosidas las selhas, e son faytas de eram citri, o de eram o de ferr, o de argent, E las milhors so quan so faytas de eram citri.	And let them be round, large, like large needles to which the threads are sewn, and they are made of copper, or of iron, or of silver. The best are those made of copper.
E son faytz les experient de plum negre, les quals se acordan que per aquels sian ubertas las fistulas en la conquavitat de las quals so reflexios, que sian reflectidas am la sua levitat am aquelas refleccios.	And they make experiences with black goose feathers, which are said to work because those with openings in their cavities have reflections that are reflected back due to their lightness.
E so de tres specias, quar alcus de lor so loncs, e dels autres migiers, e dels autres breus, segon la quantitat del ample de la fistula e de la strictura de lu.	And from three species, some are long, and others medium, and others short, according to the width of the opening and its narrowing.
Forma del experient gran de plom:	Form of the large experience with lead:
Forma del experient migier de plom:	Form of the medium-sized lead experience:
Forma del experient petit de plom:	Form of the small lead experience:
Las formas dels oncis so de motas specias, quar de aquels so alcus simples, als quals es una curvitat solament, e so de tres specias: grans, paucs e migiers.	The forms of the pins are of three species. Some are simple long ones with only a curvature, and they are of three species: long, few, and medium.
E de lor so uncis orps, e so de tres specias.	And some are solid pins, and they are of three species.
E de aquels so uncis haventz doas curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And some of those pins have two curvatures, and they are of three species.
E de lor so haventz tres curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And from them you have three curves, and they are of three species.
E totz aquetz so necessaris en lor loc.	And all these are necessary in their place.
Forma de unci simple gran, forma de lu:	Form of a single large curve, its form:
Forma de unci simple migier:	Form of a single medium curve:
Forma de unci simple pauc, forma de lu:	Form of a single small curve, its form:
Forma de unci orp gran:	Form of a single very large curve:
Forma de unci orp migier, forma de lu:	Form of a single rather medium curve, its form:
Forma de unci orp pauc, forma de lu:	Form of a single rather small curve, its form:
Forma de unci gran havent dos curvaturas:	Form of a large single curve having two curves:
Forma de unci migier havent dos curvatas:	Form of a medium single curve having two curves:
Forma de unci pauc havent dos curvaturas:	Form of a small single curve having two curves:
Forma de unci gran havent tres curvaturas:	Form of a large single curve having three curves:
Forma de unci migier havent tres curvaturas:	Forma of a woman having three curves:
Forma de unci pauc havent tres curvaturas:	Forma of a woman having three curves:
E aquestas so las formas dels scalpels am les quals son seccatz e scorjatz les nodes e le apostemas, e so de tres specias, quar de aquels es gran, migier, e pauc.	And these are the forms of the scalpels which are cut and scored with nodes and apstemes, and they are of three species, some of which are large, female, and small.
Forma de scapel gran:	Forma of the large scalpel:
Forma del scapel migier:	Forma of the female scalpel:
Forma de scapel pauc:	Forma of the small scalpel:
Las extramitatz de aquels am les quals es fayta seccio so agudas e las autres extramitatz so no-agudas, e no so pausadas en tal manieyra, sino per que sia fayt juvament en la excorjacio dels nodes la temor de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e per aquels sia sanat le malaute e atrobe tranquilitat un petit per la adustio la qual atroba deves la excoriacio del apostema.	The ends of those which are cut for making sections are acute, while the other ends are non-acute. They are not held in such a manner, but rather so that it is done judiciously during the excoriation of the nodes to avoid injury to veins or nerves, and for this reason they ensure the healing of the illness and bring about some tranquility due to the slight burning which facilitates the excoriation of the apsteme.
E aquestas son las formas de almagidas, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc, ayssi cum veyras.	And these are the forms of the amedies, and they are of three species: large, female, and small, as you will see.
La forma de magda gran:	The form of great maggots:
Forma de magda migier:	The form of female maggots:
Forma de magda pauc:	The form of small maggots:
Sian faytas de eram e so semblantz de ray am le qual e fayt alcofol.	If they are made of mercury and resemble rays from which alcohol is produced.
E es en la extramitat lada punctada am spatum occultada e en aquela corr a las partidas dedintz e defora, quan tu vols, ayssi cum veses.	And it is in the outer side punctuated with spatium hidden and there flows to the parts inside and outside, as you want, as you see fit.
Las formas de spatimis, les quals so amaguatz entre los ditz deves la perforacio dels apostemas e no les percebo les malautes, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc.	The forms of spatia, which are hidden between the fingers and do not perceive the patients, are of three species: great, female, and small.
E aquestas so las formas de aquels:	And these are the forms of those:
Las formas de ventozas am las quals es abscindit le flux del sanc, e so de tres specias; gran, migiera e pauca; las formas de lu:	The forms of ventosa, in which the flow of blood is cut off, are of three species: great, female, and small; the forms of which:
Sian faytas de eram citri, redondas am alcuna longitut , e sian subtils.	They are made of mercury citri, round in some length, and are subtle.
E cove que sian aquestas specias de ventosas deves tu grans, migieras e paucas, per so que per aquelas abscindas flux de sanc am velocitat en necessitat, e lahoras quan a tu primieyrament no es medicina.	And you should use these suction cups of different sizes, large, medium, and few, so that through those incisions the flow of bad blood occurs with speed in necessity, and when first not treated.
Enpero no uses de aquelas ad abscidir sanc en tot loc del cors, e non uses sino en locs carnoses, ayssi cum en les lacertis de las cambas e de las coyssas, e en les lacertz dels brasses, e de las mamillas e del ventre e dels engonars, e semblantz a lor dels lacertz carnoses humitz.	But do not use those to bleed in all parts of the body, and use them only on fleshy areas, such as the creases of the legs and thighs, and the creases of the breasts, and the belly, and the armpits, and similar fleshy creases.
E alcunas veguadas son faytz de aquels strumentz autres petitz semblantz scorsas de fisacs segon aquesta forma; per les quals lo sanc es abscindit quan es fayt per fleubotomia, o deves inscizio de vena o de arceria.	And sometimes small ones are made with those instruments, resembling small cups according to this form; through which the bad blood is drawn when performed by venesection, or by incision of a vein or artery.
E alcunas veguadas son faytas redondas segon aquesta forma:	And sometimes they are made round according to this form:
Capitol .xlvii.	Capitol. liv.
De la cura de las mamillas dels homes las quals so asembladas de femnas.	For the treatment of the breasts of men which are often affected similarly to women.
Alcunas veguadas so infladas las mamillas de alcus homes deves le compliment del dormir cum comensan esser pellutz, e aprop so infladas las mamillas, e so asembladas las mamillas de las femnas, e romano apostemosas, lejas.	Some times the breasts of certain men are swollen; you should give the compliment of sleep as they begin to be hard, and then the breasts swell, and the women's breasts gather together, like Roman women.
E ad aquel que avoreys aquo, cove que inscidisca aquelas am seccio lunar segon aquesta forma, de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G., e aprop excorja la groceza tota, e aprop uempla la plagua de medicament encarnatiu, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am cosidura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And to those for whom you have this, cut along those sections according to this form, from the line of B to the line of G, then remove the growth entirely, fill the wound with red medicine, suture the two edges of the wound together, and cure it until it is healed.
Mays si la mamilla declina a las partidas dejos e es mollificada per la sua magnitut ayssi cum endeve a las femnas, lahoras sia fendut en dos latz sieus pus sobiras, am dos seccios semblantz a figura lunar, de las quals quascuna sia contenguda en l’autra deves la fi de quascuna, entro que sia que la linha major contengua la menor segon aquesta forma de la linha de .B. e la linha de .G. E aprop excorja la codena la qual es entre dos labias de la plagua, e osta la pingueza, e aministra aquo que havem dit de la sutura e de las polveras aquo que es necessari en la curacio entro que sia sanat.	If the breast droops towards the sides and is softened by its size, like in women, then cut it into two lobes so that each lobe is contained within the other according to this form from line B to line G. Then remove the core which is between the two edges of the wound, drain the pus, and administer what we have said about suturing and powders as necessary during the cure until it is healed.
E si tu non conpleysses la inscizio de aquo que cove inscidir per la inquietut del malaute, e per flux de sanc, lahoras cove que huemplas la plagua de coto submergit en enguent corrosiu e layssa aquel entro que aquo corroda que es romas de la grayssa, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you do not complete the incision that needs to be made due to the discomfort of the patient and the flow of blood, then you must fill the wound with cloth submerged in corrosive ointment and leave it there until what corrodes are removed from the fatty tissues, and then cure that which is left to heal.
Capitol .xlviii.	Capitol. xlviii.
De perforacio de apostemas que veno dejos le titillic.	Of the perforation of abscesses where blood leaves through titillation.
Aquetz apostemas que veno dejos le titillic so de las specias de scrophulas, durs, las quals conte una pel que es sac.	These abscesses where blood leaves through titillation are of the kinds of scrofulous, hard swellings, which contain a boil that is extracted.
E de aquelas so alcunas que conteno humiditatz; e aquelas que conteno humiditatz cove que sian inscididas am seccio lunar segon aquesta figura: de la linha de .G. a la linha de .B. E cum es tot evacuat aquo que es en le apostema de la sania, lahoras tu le comple de coto viel e leysa le entro al autra dia.	And of those that contain humidity, they must be incised at the lunar section according to this figure: from the line of G to the line of B. And when all that is in the abscess of the sore has been evacuated, then you complete it with new cloth and leave it for another day.
E aprop le coto sia ostat e sia curat am enguent convenient ad aquo, entro que sia sanat.	And then the cloth be left there and treated with appropriate ointment until it heals.
E si le apostema de las specias dels nodes es, e de las scrophulas, lahoras tu scindeys sobre aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la seccio sobre las scrophulas engualment.	And if the abscess of the glands and scrofula is, then you incise thereupon in this way as we have said in the section on scrofula equally.
May si la plagua es extenduda en aysso que yesca poyredura, lahoras administra en lu cauteri segon que en aquo havem denant dit.	And if the wound is extended to the point of becoming gangrenous, then apply a cautery to it according to what we have previously said.
Capitol .xlix.	Chapter XLIX.
De seccio de apostemas que accideysso per arceria o per vena.	Of the section on abscesses that occur through an arrow or vein.
Quan arceria es rompuda, e la codena es consolidada la qual es sobre aquela, lahoras motas veguadas accideys apostema E les senhals per les quals es conoguda que imflamacio e apostema sian per la arteria o per vena: quar quan apostema es per arceria es lonc agreguat en le preon del cors; e que quan inpelleysses le apostema am les tieus ditz, sentes en lu quays sia stridor.	When an arrow breaks an artery and the chain (vein) above it is consolidated, then dark spots appear as abscesses. And the signs by which it can be known that inflammation or abscess is due to the artery or vein: for when you apply heat to the abscess, you feel a stridor in it.
E aquel que es per vena es redon al manifest del cors.	And that which is due to the vein is round in appearance on the surface of the body.
E seccio sobre aquest apostema es error, e majorment en aquel que es dejos las aysselhas, e en les angonars, e en le col, e en motz locs del cors; e es mot gran, donc cove que la sua curacio am ferr sia esquivada, e aquel que es en las extramitatz, o al cap, cove que sia evitat.	Of the section on this abscess, it is dangerous, and especially in those that affect the axillae, the inguinal regions, the neck, and other localized areas of the body; and since it is large, it should be avoided as much as possible, and those near the extremities or the head should be particularly avoided.
Mays sobre aquel que es de lor per imflacio de l’orrifici de la arceria, scindeys en la codena seccio en le lonc; e aprop huebre la seccio am uncis e aprop la arceria, e deliura de las tunicas entro que sia descuberta.	More about that which is due to the inflammation of the opening of the artery, cut the longitudinal section in the tendon; then open the section with forceps near the artery, and deliver the tunics so that they are exposed.
E aprop met sobre aquel agulha e fay aquela penetrar entro al autre latz, e estrenh la arceria am fiel doble en dos locs, — la qual causa yeu a tu eyssenhegui en extraccio de doas arcerias les quals so en les templars.	Then place a needle over that area and make it penetrate into the other layer, and strengthen the artery with double thread in two places, — which causes you to stitch in the extraction of two arteries which are in the temporal region.
E aprop punh le loc le qual es entre dos liamentz am spatum entro que yesca le sanc tot que es en lu, e sia dissolvut le apostema.	Then puncture the area which is between two layers with a spatula so that it fills with the blood, and dissolve the abscess.
E aprop administra curacio en la qual es engendrat poyre entro que caian les liamentz; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz convenientz ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	Then apply treatment in which powder is administered so that the layers fall; and cure it with suitable ointments until it is healed.
E si es apostema per seccio de vena, lahoras cove que tu tenguas am la tua ma aquo que es a tu possible del apostema am la codena, e aprop intromet la agulha dejos le loc le qual tu has tengut dejos la tua ma, e fay aquela penetrar; e sia en aquela fil doble entro que tu extraguas aquel del autre latz, e aprop ligua le apostema am bo liament segon que yeu he dit a tu en le liament de uva4 de doas partz am doas extremitatz del fil.	And if it is an abscess due to venous obstruction, then take what you can of the abscess with your hand; then insert the needle at the place where you have taken out the abscess with your hand, and make it penetrate; and put a double thread there, extracting that from the other side, and tie the abscess with good thread as I said to you in the grapevine thread of two parts on both ends of the thread.
Mays si temes que extraguam le fil, lahoras entromet le fiel am aquela agula dejos tot le apostema deves la inscizio de la agulha primieyra, e strenh les tieus fiels en quatre locs.	But if you fear that the thread will come out, then insert wax at that needle and leave all the abscess from the first puncture site, strengthen the other threads in four places.
Aprop secca le apostema en le mieg loc de lu entro que quan es yssit aquo que es en lu, lahoras tu inscideys la superfluitat de la codena, e layssa aquo que de lu es liat.	Then dry the abscess in its middle location where one sits on it, and when you incise the excess of the cord, leave what is attached to it.
E aprop pausa sobre lu pulvil le qual has submergit en vi e oli, e aprop administra la curacio la qual es fayta am calguas e enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Then place the powder you have submerged in wine and oil over it, and administer the cure which is made with ointments when it is healed.
Capitol l del apostema le qual accideys per torcio de nervis.	Capitalize the abscess that occurs due to torsion of nerves.
Ayssi cum accideys apostema en arceria e en vena, e semblantment accideys apostema en les nervis quan accideys en lor percussio o accideys per trebal superfluable, e per semblantz.	Similarly, when an abscess occurs in an artery or a vein, and similarly, an abscess occurs in the nerves when there is percussion or work of superfluous matter.
E es fayt le mays de lu en les locs dels adjutoris o del talo, o en tot loc en le qual so maugudas las juncturas.	And it is most frequent in the areas of the assistants or the thigh, or in any area where the joints are relaxed.
E es apostema greu, e es asemblat a la color del autre cors, e es en las majors de lu disposicios ses de lor e quan es streyt am vehementia, sent en lu le malaute semblant stupor.	And it is a heavy abscess, and it resembles the color of the rest of the body, and it is in the major parts of his body several of them, and when stretched by strength, one feels in it the patient's semblance of stupor.
E no es apostema agreguat en le preon del cors, e per so es dejos la codena, e el es maugut a tota partida e no va a las partidas denant ni detras.	And it is not an abscess attached to the front of the body, and for this reason, the chain is left off, and he is allowed to move freely in all directions and does not go to the parts front or back.
Donc aquo de aquels que es en las juncturas no cove que sia envasit am ferr, quar fort leu endevenguera contracio.	So those that are in the joints do not need to be drawn out with iron, for strong pain will induce contraction.
Mays aquel que es en le cap o en le front fen la codena am spatum.	But that which is in the head or on the forehead, apply the chain with trepanation.
Mays si es apostema pauc, lahoras te aquel am les forfecs e abscindeys aquel de razitz.	But if the abscess is small, then use it with force and cut away that part with flax.
E si es gran, lahoras tu le suspen am unci, e excorja aquel, e aprop osta aquel; e ajusta la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if it is large, then suspend it with a hook, and excise that part, and place something in its stead; and suture the wound, and cure that until it is healed.
Capitol .li.	Capitol li.
De seccio de apostema le qual accideys de cheil que accideys al ventre.	The section on abscesses that occur on the cheek and those that occur in the abdomen.
Endeveno ad alcus homes motas veguadas en les ventres de aquels e en las autras partidas del cors de aquels theils les quals son apelatz funguals per similitut de aquels am funges, dels quals la razitz es subtil e·l cap de aquel es gros; e ja las labias de aquels so conversas, e es de aquels que es petit, e es de aquels que es mot magnificat.	Sometimes in some people, abscesses appear in their abdomens and in other parts of their bodies. These are called fungous abscesses due to their similarity to fungi; the core of these abscesses is fine, but the head of the abscess is large; and the pus from them can be small, and they can also be greatly enlarged.
E yeu ja e vist un, e en le ventre de lu eran dos theils les quals eran mays a funges semblantz, e no era diferencia entre aquels blancs, de menuda razitz.	And I have seen one myself, in the abdomen of which there were two abscesses that resembled fungi, and there was no difference between those white cores, all with fine pus.
E ja las labias de aquels eran enversadas e se fendian, e humiditat corria de aquel tot temps.	And the pus from those abscesses was discharged and would裂开，且有湿液不断地从其中流出。
Donc yeu inscidegui aquels e atrobegui en la un en pes quays xviii unc. e l’autre quays vi unc.	So I incised them and treated one foot with 18 inches and the other with 6 inches.
E la operacio en la inscizio de lor es que consideres lahoras si·l malaute es humit, e la color de atheil es blanca, humit, de subtil razitz; lahoras tu le inscideys am spatum lat, e sian en la presencia tua cauteris en le foc, quar motas veguadas deves la seccio de lu es expellit mot sanc; e si te ventz le sanc, cauteriza aquel.	And in the incision of them, consider whether the patient is cold and wet, and if the color of the abscess is white, wet, with a fine core; then incise it with a broad cut, and let it be cauterized in your presence with fire, for the discharged pus should be completely removed without infection; and if you see the pus, cauterize that area.
E si vezes le malaute pauruc e temeros, guarda te de inscizio am ferr; mays lahoras pren fiel de plom recent fayt, e strenh am aquel atheil, la manieyra del qual es aquela que havem dita; e leyssa aquel per dos dias.	And if the patient is afraid and nervous, guard yourself from iron; rather when you take recently made lead powder, and strengthen that part, the manner of which we have said; let it remain for two days.
E aprop ajusta en la strictura del fil de plom; donc, no cesses strenher le plom granre devetz en theil, entro que sia abscindit e cayha per se ses trebalh.	And adjust closely to the constriction of the lead wire; therefore, do not cease strengthening the lead gradually in that part, between which it is severed and falls by itself.
Mays si theil es de grossa razitz, lahoras en la inscizio de lu es alcuna causa de temor e de paor, e majorment en aquel que es en le ventre.	But if the part is of large size, then in cutting it there is some cause for fear and terror, especially in that which is in the abdomen.
Mays possibla es que tu inscindas la maytat de lu , e aprop cauteriza aquel per que no retorne.	But it is possible that you cut the majority of it, and then cauterize it so that it does not return.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanada la plagua.	And then cure the area in which the wound is healed.
E guarda te que tu no presumas inscidir theil le qual es de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, de leg reguardament, quar aquel es absi cancros.	And beware that you do not presume to cut part which is of dusky color, with little sensation, and looks bad; for such a part is thus cancerous.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio de cranc aprop aysso.	And I will now recall the patient's condition nearby.
Capitol .lii.	Capitol.lix.
De curacio de eminencia del umbilic.	For the cure of hernia around the navel.
Eminencia del umbilic es fayta per motas causas; o per fissuras del ciphac le qual es sobre le ventre, e yeys de lu la tela o budel segon que endeve en las autras rupturas; o per sanc le qual flueys de vena o de arceria segon que es denant dit, o per ventositat coarctada en lu.	Hernia around the navel is caused by various reasons; or by fissures in the cipha, which is over the abdomen, and through it the membrane or intestine protrudes according to the nature of other ruptures; or by a wound where fluid flows from a vein or artery as previously mentioned, or by constricted ventosity within it.
Mays si es per fissura del ciphac e per yssiment de la tela, lahoras la color del apostema es semblant a la color del cors; e es leon ses dolor, e aprop appar de divers situament.	If it is due to a fissure in the cipha and the swelling's color resembles that of the body, and the pain is severe and appears in various locations.
E si es per egressio del budel, lahoras le situament de aquel am lu de aquo que havem recontat, de mays vehement diversitat, e cum tu premes aquel am les tieus ditz es occultat, e aprop retorna; e fort leu es am lu so, e es magnificat mot deves le introt de banh e vehement trebalh.	And if it is due to the protrusion of the intestine, then the location of that area differs from what we have described, with greater diversity. When you press on that area, it becomes hidden under your fingers and quickly returns; it is firm in that place and requires frequent bathing and vigorous work to introduce water.
Mays si per humiditat, lahoras es leon e no es occultat quan premes am la tua ma, ni es constrengut, ni es cregut.	If by humidity, when you press with your hand it is clear and not obscured, neither constricted nor creased.
E si es per sanc, lahoras am aquestz senhals apareys le apostema a negror declinant.	And if by scald, when these signs appear the abscess in black diminishing.
Mays si es per carn nada, lahoras es apostema greu, gros e dur, e es ficat segon una quantitat.	If by no flesh, when it is a heavy abscess, large and hard, and is situated according to a quantity.
Mays si es per ventositat, lahoras le tocament de lu es leon.	If by humidity, when you touch it, it is soft.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras lahoras si la eminencia de l’umbilic es per sanc de arceria, o de vena, o per ventositat; lahoras cove que sias prohibit de la curacio de lu, quar en aquela es temor e paor ayssi cum t’e ensenhat en le capitol en le qual he dit les apostemas per arceria e per vena.	And the operation in it is that you consider when the prominence of the navel is by scald from an artery, or a vein, or by humidity; then dig a little that you may avoid the cure of it, for there is fear and anxiety as you have been taught in the Capitol where I said about abscesses from arteries and veins.
E si la eminencia del umbilic es per le budel o per la tela, lahoras cove que comandes al malaute que tengua le ale sieu, e sia stant extendut; e aprop senha am tenta en le circuit de tot le umbilic, e aprop comanda a lu que stia envers entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e aprop circunda am spatum lat en le circuit del umbilic sobre le loc le qual has senhat am la tenta; e aprop exten la maytat del apostema a las partidas desus am unci gran; e aprop lia en le circuit am fiel fort o am ceda e la manieyra del liar decent.	And if the prominence of the navel is by the intestine or the hernia, then dig a little that you may command the patient to have his/her own urine, and stand extended; then examine carefully around the circumference of the navel, and command him/her to stand with your hands on his/her sides over his/her lower abdomen; then circumscribe with a line in the circumference of the navel above the area you examined with the examination; then extend the size of the abscess upwards by about an inch; then draw a strong string or thread around the area and tie it properly.
E aprop huebre le mieg del apostema extendut sobre le liament e intromet le dit tieu en aquel indic e quereys le budel; e si tu l’as atrobat ni guardat per le liament, lahoras tu extratz alxorati e impelleys le budel a las partidas dedintz del ventre.	And then push the center of the abscess outward over the intestine and insert your finger in that space to find the hernia; and if you have touched it or handled it with respect to the intestine, then you extract it quickly and push the hernia into the internal parts of the abdomen.
E si has atrobada la tela, lahoras pren aquel am unci; e inscideys las superfluitatz de lu.	And if you have touched the tissue, then take it with forceps; and incise the superfluous parts of it.
Mays si es contraria a tu arceria o vena, lahoras circunda aquel mot, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio; e pren dos agulhas e met en aquelas dos fiels fortz e entromet dos agulhas en le circuit le qual has feyt entorn le apostema en manieyra de crotz, las quals fassas penetrar; e aprop strenh le apostema en quatre partidas sobre las agulhas.	But if it is contrary to your artery or vein, then circumvent that knot, and then return to your operation; and take two needles and put them into those strong threads and insert two needles in the circuit you have made around the abscess in the manner of a cross, making them penetrate; and then strengthen the abscess in four parts over the needles.
E si tu vols, osta las agulhas e leyssa le loc entro que poyresca la carn extenduda e caia per si; o inscideys aquel quan es subtiliat e se poyreys, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if you want, hold the needles and let the area extend and fall by itself; or incise that which has become thin and can drain, and then cover it with ointment until it heals.
E si la eminencia del ombilic es de carn nada en lu o per humiditat, lahoras cove que tu conquaves le apostema ayssi cum havem dit e estraguas le sanc o la humiditat, la qual atrobas en lu, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove e que consolide le loc.	And if the prominence of the navel is fleshless or due to moisture, then you must treat the boil as we have said and drain the pus or moisture, which you find there, and proceed to cure that which has been treated and strengthen the area.
Capitol .liii.	Capitol liiii.
De curacio de cranc.	Of the cure of pain.
Ja havem dit, en la divisio, de specia de cranc e en qual manieyra es via a la curacio de lu am medicinas, e que es squivador en lu la curacio am ferr per so que no sia ulcerat; e havem dit cranc engendrat en la mayra e cautela de la curacio de lu.	We have already said in the division about the types of pain and how they are treated with medicines, and that the cure is valid when it is not ulcerated; and we have said that pain generated by the method and care of its treatment.
E diyssero les antics que alcunas veguadas cranc es en loc on es possibla la eradicacio de lu, ayssi cum de cran le qual es en las mamillas o en la coyssa e a lor semblantz dels membres allocat a estrayre tot aquel, e majorment quan es comensant petit.	And the ancients said that some types of pain are in a location where the eradication of it is possible, just as with a boil which is in the mammary glands or in the groin and similar areas, one should extract all of it, especially when it begins small.
Mays quan es antiquat e es gra, no cove que te propries a lu, quar yeu non pogui sanar de aquel alcu ni no he vist autre, ni que sia pervengut ad aquo.	But when it is old and hard, do not attempt to treat it as such, for I cannot heal from that alone nor have I seen another like it, nor one that can be treated this way.
E la operacio en lu es quan es allocat ayssi cum havem dit, es que tu precedescas e laysses le malaute e purgues de colera negra alcunas veguadas, e aprop sagna aquel, si es atrobada replecio manifesta.	And the operation on them is when it is allocated thus as we have said, that you first expose and leave the patient and purge of black bile several times, and then drain it, if found, if present refill it clearly.
E aprop prepara le malaute am preparacio en le qual sia locat am operacio, e aprop prohiceys en le trauc uncis les quals cove ad aquel; e aprop concava de tota part am la codena sego bona perexcrutacio entro que no romangua alcuna causa de las razitz de lu.	And prepare the patient for the preparation in which the operation is located, and then proceed with the cuts that lead to it; and ensure a concave surface all around with the needle for good excision without damaging any vital part of the body.
E layssa correr le sanc, e no abscidas aquel leugierament, e exprem les locs, e abstergeys le sanc gros tot am la tua ma o am instrument am le qual es a tu possible dels instruments.	And let the blood flow, and do not stop it lightly, and squeeze the wounds, and cleanse the thick blood with your hand or with an instrument at your disposal.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat de sanc gros inscizio de vena o de arceria, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que·l flux del sanc sia cessat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	But if you find it difficult to control the thick blood from an incision in a vein or artery, then cauterize that area once the flow of blood has stopped, and treat it with another method until it is healed.
Capitol .liv.	Capitol. liv.
De curacio de ydropici.	Of the cure for dropsy.
Nos ja havem recomtat, en la divisio, de las specias de ydropici de l’aygua, e les senhals de quascuna especia, de la curacio de lu am medicinas.	We have already discussed, in the division, of the species of dropsy of water, and the signs of each species, and the cure for it with medicines.
E aquela la qual es curada am ferr no es sino la specia de althitas sola, e no es aproximat am ferr a la specia de timpanistres ni a la especia de yposarcha, quar aquo es mortal.	And that which is cured with iron is nothing but the species of rickets alone, and it is not approximated with iron to the species of dropsy nor to the species of hydropsy, for that is fatal.
E quan tu ja has medicat aquesta especia de ydropici timpanistre am medicinas e no comfereys la tua medicacio, lahoras considera, quar si al malaute ja es conseguida debelitat, o es am aquel autra malautia otra ydropici, ayssi cum si es en lu tos o cos de ventre e semblant ad aquels, lahoras guarda te que no le mediques am ferr, quar temor es sobre aquo.	And when you have medicated this species of dropsy (timpanistre) with medicines and do not find your medicine effective, consider that if in the patient already exists debility due to another illness or another dropsy, such as it is in their cough or stomach issues and similar to those, then do not medicate with iron, for there is fear concerning this.
Mays si tu vezes le malaute de vertut exuberant, e am lu no es autra malautia sino ydropici tant solament, e no enfant ni vielh, lahoras la manieyra de la operacio de lu es que tu eleves le malaute entre las tuas mas, e le ministre aprop lu exprema le ventre de lu am la sua ma, enpellen la aygua a la partida dejos del pentenilh, e aprop pren spatum spinos segon aquesta forma:	But if you see the patient with an excess of virtue, and in them there is no other illness but dropsy solely, neither child nor old man, then the way of the operation for this is that you lift the patient between your hands, and apply your hand to their stomach to express it, pushing the water to the lower part of the body, and then take a spinal tap according to this form:
sia de dos partz agudas lonc, de aguda extremitat ayssi cum spatum; mays empero sia en lu alcuna brevitat petit a petit, per so que en la operacio am aquel no passes entro al budel, e que ledas aquel.	It should be of two sharp parts long, with acute extremities like a spear; yet in it there is some brevity little by little, so that in the operation you do not pass into the intestine, and let it alone.
E aprop considera si la generacio de ydropici es de part dels budels, quar lahoras cove que tu am la seccio te alonhes del ombelic per la quantitat de tres ditz a las partidas dejos, en le dreyt de lu sobre le pentenilh.	And then consider if the generation of dropsy is from the intestines, for when you examine the section you move away from the navel by the quantity of three digits to the sides, on its right above the pubis.
Mays si la generacio de hydropici es per malautia del fietge, lahoras la tua seccio sia sinistra del ombilic per tres ditz.	Yet if the generation of dropsy is due to illness of the kidney, then your section be leftward from the navel by three digits.
E si la generacio de lu es per la melsa, lahoras la tua seccio sia en le las dreyt.	And if the generation of it is due to the spleen, then your section be on the right side.
E no cove que la tua seccio sia sobre le costat sobre le qual vol jaser le malaute per que no corron las superfluitatz ad aquel loc freul.	And do not examine your section on the side where the illness is located to prevent superfluities from flowing to that area.
E aprop perfora am le instrument tota la codena, e aprop entromet en aquela seccio, e eleva la tua ma am le spatum entre la codena e·l siphac, e tu excorja aquel; e si’ la quantitat de una ungla o enviro.	And then pierce the instrument completely through the length of the cord, and insert it into that section, elevate your hand with a spear between the cord and siphon, and you draw out that part; if it is the quantity of an ounce or so.
E aprop perforo le ciphac entro que pervengua le spatum al loc vuoyt, e es loc de l’aygua.	And then perforate the cavity so that the phlegm reaches the desired place, and this is the location of the water.
E aprop extratz aquel e entromet un instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then extract that and insert an instrument of which this is the form:
e es semblant a canula de argent subtil; es fayt de argent o de eram o de lato leon, al qual en la partida pus bassa de lu es un petit trauc, e en les costatz de lu so tres traucs: dos de una partida e un del autra partida; e fayta es la extremitat de lu insciza segon la manieyra de pluma, ayssi cum vezes:	And it is similar to a thin silver cannula; it is made of silver or copper or tin, on the lower part of which there is a small hole, and on its sides are three holes: two in one part and one in another part; and the end is incised in the manner of a pen, as you see:
E en la extramitat de lu pus sobirana es armilla, quar quan le instrument perve al aygua, lahoras aquela tantost deysen sobre le instrument, donc evacua de l’aygua en la ora miega quantitat, quar si tu evacuas de aquela mes que no cove en la hora, fort leu mor le malaute per resolucio del sieu spirit animal, o accideys a lu cincopi que es appropinquada la mort.	And at the end of the instrument above is a ring; when the instrument reaches the water, then it quickly indicates over the instrument, so that it evacuates a small quantity of water in half an hour. If you evacuate more from there than can fit in the hour, the patient will soon die due to the resolution of his animal spirit, or accidents may occur as death approaches.
Mays evacua de aquela segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu e segon que significan a tu las disposicios del malaute de la vertut del pols de lu e de la bontat de lu.	But evacuate from there according to the quantity of the virtue of the instrument and according to your interpretation of the patient's condition based on the virtue of his pulse and the goodness of the remedy.
E aprop extrats le instrument, e rete l’aygua la qual causa es quar tantost es retenguda per la codena la qual rete le trauc que es sobre le ciphac del qual e recomtat a tu que perfores aquel segon aquela manieyra.	And then extract the instrument, and stop the water which causes it; so soon as it is stopped by the cord which stops it that you puncture it according to that manner.
E aprop itera le instrument al autra dia si vezes le malaute tollerant aquo, e extratz de la aygua petita quantitat, e fay aquo per alcus jorns sobre temor, e guarda te de error entro que no romangua de l’aygua sino pauc.	And then repeatedly apply the instrument on another day if the patient tolerates it, and extract a small quantity of water, and do this for several days with caution, and be careful not to become wet from the water but only slightly.
Mays si tu temes sobre le malaute, e leyssas de l’aygua gran quantitat, lahoras cura aquel am sepultura en arena cauda, e mota suzor en banh, e al solelh espere per lonc temps; e cura aquel am medicinas dessicativas entro que sia sanat.	But if you fear for the patient, and let a large quantity of water remain, then cure that with burial in sandy soil, and washing with pure water, and in the sun wait for a long time; and cure that with drying medicines until it is healed.
E cauteriza sobre le stomac, e la melsa e·l fitge aprop la extraccio de l’aygua, segon que yeu he recontat en aquo que es precedit.	And cauterize on the stomach, and the mesentery and liver near the extraction of the water, as I have recounted in what was previously mentioned.
Capitol .lv.	Capitol lv.
De la curacio dels enfants les quals so natz les locs de la urina no-perforatz.	For the cure of children who have urine collection sites that do not perforate.
Alcunas veguadas alcun dels enfantz es eyssi del ventre de la sua mayre e·l cap de la sua mixtio no es perforat (o es trauc streyt o no es en son loc).	Sometimes some of the child is expelled from the mother's belly and the opening of the mixture is not perforated (or it is pulled straight or is not in its place).
Donc cove coytar am perforacio de lu tantost que es nascut am spatum mot subtil segon aquesta forma:	So the aperture should be perforated soon after birth with a subtle spatium according to this form:
E aprop pausa en le trauc un clavil subtil de plom e ligua aquel, e te per tres jorns o per .iiii.tre.	Then place a thin lead nail and stitch it up, and let it be for three days or for four.
E quant vol urinar sia remaugut e hurine; e aprop retorne aquel.	And when he wants to urinate he should be helped and urinates; then return it.
E si tu no pauses le plom, ja es possible que la urina la qual va sobre le loc, no leysa aquest claure.	And if you do not stitch the lead, it is possible that the urine which falls on the area will prevent this from closing.
Mays aquel del qual le trauc es streyt sia medicat am clavil de Plom, ayssi cum havem dit, per trops dias entro que sia amplificat.	But the one that you pull out should be treated with a lead nail, as we have said, for several days before it is enlarged.
Mays aquels en les quals es le trauc no en son loc, so leditz, la qual causa es quar de aquels, aquel que es nat e·l trau es deves la fi del cap de la vergua per que no pot urinar a las partidas dedintz, entro que eleva la vergua am la sua ma a las partidas desus; e no es a lu generacio, per so quar le sperma no pot pervenir a la mayre segon rectitut, e es malautia mot laga.	But those in which it is pulled out of its place, as said, the cause is due to those where at birth the defect is located at the end of the head of the vagina, so that it cannot urinate internally; while elevating the vagina with his hand above the parts above. This is not a generation defect, because the sperm cannot reach the mother according to rectitude, and this is a malady that lasts.
E la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que·l malaute sia envessat sobre le sieu dos, e aprop exten le cap de la vergua de lu am la tua ma sinistra am vehement extraccio, e inscideys le cap del cap de la vergua del loc del perpucii am spatum agut, ayssi cum es inscizio de pluma, o que tu ne razas alcuna partida, per so que·l mieg de lu vengua semblant al cap de la vergua e que le trauc caia en le mieg loc segon que cove.	And the manner of the operation on him is that the patient lies on his back, and then extend the head of the penis with your left hand in strong extraction, and incise the head of the head of the penis at the place of perforation with a sharp blade, thus like the cutting of a feather, or any part you do not wish to leave behind, so that the vein comes out resembling the head of the penis and that I pull it down into the middle location as needed.
E guarda te que en la tua operacio de flux de sanc, quar motas vetz accideys aquo; e pausa te a lu am aquo que abscindeys le sanc, e cura la plagua entro que si’ sanada.	And watch that in your operation for the flow of sand, if you see any spots arise; and pause there where you are cutting the sand, and care for the wound until it is healed.
Capitol .lvi.	Capitol.lix.
De albater le qual accideys en le prepucii en le cap de la vergua e de corropcio e negror e adherencia del prepucii del cap de la vergua.	When this occurs in the prepuce at the head of the penis, with corruption, blackening, and adhesion of the prepuce to the head of the penis.
Motas veguadas accideys aquest albater en la vergua e es eminencia de carn laga.	Spots appear in this condition on the penis and form an excrescence of raw flesh.
E de aquela una es maligna e autra es no-maligna.	And of those two, one is malignant and the other is non-malignant.
No-maligna, cove que suspendas am unci subtil e abscindas aquela entro que aquela mondes tota; e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto submirgit en enguent egipciac; e aprop aquel, cura le am enguent diafinicon entro que sia sanat.	And of those two, one is non-malignant, cover it with a thin ligature and cut into that in which the disease resides entirely; then place your hand over it to immerse it in Egyptian ointment; then treat it with diyafic ointment until it heals.
E si albater es maligna, de lega color, lahoras cove que tu aministres cauteri aprop la inscizio de lu e la razio de lu.	And if the abscess is malignant, of a white color, then you should apply a cautery near the incision and around it.
Mays si albater es en le prepuci del cap de la vergua no-circumcis, e la una partida de albater es dedintz le prepucii e l’autra partida es defora, lahoras cove que tu ostes albater le qual es dedintz al comensament entro que es consolidat; e lahora tu cura aquel deforo, quar quan tu curas aquel ensemps le prepuci, no es asegurat que no sia trinquat.	But if the abscess is in the foreskin of the head of the penis in an uncircumcised man, and one part of the abscess is inside the foreskin and another part is outside, then you should remove the part inside at the beginning before it becomes consolidated; and then treat the part outside. For when you treat the outside simultaneously with the foreskin, it is not assured that it will not be infected.
E ja eysamen accideys en les genetius e en le prepuci negror e corruccio, adonc cove que tu conquavas tot aquo que ja es denigrat e que ja se vol corrompre o que ja es corrumput; e aprop lineys sobre aquel aprop aquo am mel, le qual es contusit am farina de scorsa de milgrana e de errs trissatz e crivellatz.	And we have examined accidents in the genitals and in the black foreskin with corruption. Then you should reduce all that is already degenerated and that is about to腐烂或已经腐烂；然后在其上画线，使用蜂蜜，它是由新鲜大黄粉、提炼过的铁锈和筛过的粉末制成的。
E aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sana.	And then attend to the other cure while it is still fresh.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, lahoras aministra cauteri lunar segon aquesta forma:	And if there is a flow of blood, then administer a lunar cautery according to this form:
quar cauteri juvatiu es a dos disposicios ensemps, so es a flux de sanc e a la plagua quan es corrumpuda.	A lunar cautery is used in two positions together, either for a flow of blood or during the plague when it is broken out.
E si le cap de la vergua es corrodut e es destruit tot en la hora, lahoras cove que tu intrometas en lo meat del prepucii una canula de plom per so que le malaute urina per aquela.	And if the head of the abscess is corroded and destroyed entirely in an hour, then you should introduce a lead cannula into the flesh of the prepuce so that the disease drains through it.
En la adherencia del prepucii am le cap de la vergua (et aquesta adherencia no accideys sino en aquel del qual le prepucii es sa, e sobre lu no es exhigida circumcizio; e quan accideys adherencia per plagua o per apostema) cove que excorjas am spatum obtus entro que sia dissolvut le liament e sia deliurat le cap de la vergua de tota partida.	In the adhesion of the prepuce (where this adhesion occurs only in that from which the prepuce is derived, and over which circumcision is not required; and when adhesion occurs due to the plague or abscess), you should excoriate with a blunt instrument while the glue dissolves and the head of the abscess is completely released.
E si es dificil desirnir aquelas exquisidament, lahoras cove que tu excorjes am spatum alcuna causa del cap de la vergua e del prepucii, e aysso es quar le prepucii, quan es subtil, fort leu es perforat per la sua subtilitat leugierament.	And if it is difficult to excoriate them thoroughly, then you should excoriate with a blunt instrument some part of the head of the abscess and the prepuce, and this is because the prepuce, when thin and light, can be perforated slightly by its thinness.
E aprop separa entre·l prepucii e·l cap de la vergua am dra7 de li subtil, le qual ja es mulhat en l’aygua frega per que no adherescan autra veguada.	And then separate between the prepuce and the head of the penis a strip of the fine skin, which is already softened by the cold application to prevent it from sticking again.
E aprop sia curat am vi stiptic entro que sia consolidat.	And then apply a styptic substance when it is consolidated.
Capitol .lvii.	Capitol. lvii.
De mundificacio dels enfants e de la curacio de aquo que accideys ad aquels de circumcisio.	On the purification of infants and the treatment of what occurs to those who have been circumcised.
Circumcisio no es solucio de continuitat ayssi cum las autras plaguas: mays empero cum sia de la nostra operacio e de nostra voluntat, e lus de aquela sia propriament en les enfants, es necessari que asignem en aquela milhor operacio e via pus leugiera perdusent a salut.	Circumcision is not a solution for continuity as are other infections: nevertheless, since it is of our operation and our will, and those related to it are properly in infants, it is necessary that we assign to it the best operation and the lightest way, losing nothing for health.
Donc dic que les antics no diyssero circumcisio en alcu dels lors libres, quar no n’usan en las suas leys, e no es sino quar havem aquisit per speriment, la qual causa es que yeu he atrobat la major partida dels artifexs e dels barbies usar circumcisir e mundificacio am novacula e am torores; e usan de liament am fiel e de inscizio am la ungla.	Therefore, it is said that the ancients did not use circumcision among any of the free peoples, for they do not use it in their laws, and this practice was merely acquired through experience. The reason is that I have examined the majority of craftsmen and barbers who use circumcision and purification with a knife and with cautery; and they use lint with honey and incisions with ungual blades.
E yeu ja he prohadas totas aquestas manieras e no atrobegui milhor mondificacio am forfexs, am liament am fiel que en mondificacio cum la ungla, quar motas vetz efugeys la codena pus desus, quar la codena del prepucii a dos tunicas, e roman la tonica pus dejos, e fort leu es forsat ad autra inscizio e dolor sicura.	And I have already tried all these methods and cannot find a better modification using scissors, or frankincense, or myrrh in the modification like unguent, because motas of the cord escape above, because the cord of the prepuce is doubled into two tunics, and remain one tunic down, and light pressure is forced to another incision and certain pain.
E am mundificacio le qual es fayta per alphecati, e es digital, del qual usan les sabatiers, no es segurada la inscizio de la extremitat del membre viril, quar fort leu intra en le trau de lu.	And concerning the circumcision which is performed by apprentices, and is digital, of which cobblers use, it is not secure regarding the incision at the extremity of the male member, for strong pressure enters into the wound.
Mays en la operacio am ungla, fort leu obazeys ferr e corromp la tua operacio.	In the operation with unguent, strong pressure you apply and corrupt your operation.
E la codena del enfant es breu per natura, e motas veguadas nays en tal manieyra que no ha necessitat de mondificacio, e yeu he vist aquel.	And the cord of the child is short by nature, and when seen in such a manner that it does not require modification, and I have seen it.
Mays de la mondificacio que·s fa am forfexs e liamentz am fiel, la bontat, experiment descrobic a mi, quar las forfexs so de proporcional inscizio, per aquo quar la acuitat que es desus es ayssi cum la acuitat que es dejos; e donc cum tu premes la tua ma so proporcionadas dos acuitatz, e inscideysso segon una comperacio en un temps; e es fayta compressio del fiel am figura contenent la codena de la vergua de tota partida, am le qual no catz error de tot.	More of the modification that is performed with scissors and unguents of myrrh, its quality, I have learned from experience, for the scissors are of proportional incision, therefore their sharpness above is thus as sharpness below; and so when you press your hand proportionally on two sharp points, and cut accordingly according to a comparison in one time; and it is made compression of the myrrh in a figure containing the cord of the penis from all sides, by which no error occurs at all.
E la manieyra de la operacio primeyra es que tu fassas estar le enfant majorment si es de aquels que entendo un petit, que no fassas sino que tu lies le fiel en la sua vergua tant solament, e que leysses aquel entro al autra dia.	And the manner of the first operation is that you make the child remain mostly if it be of those who understand a little, that you bind the penis only in its foreskin, and let it out the next day.
E aprop fay aquel alegrar en tota aquela manieyra que es a tu possibla de aquo que recep la sua intelligencia.	And properly make that alleviation in every way that is within your ability of what receives its intelligence.
E aprop fa aquel estar entre las tuas mas estatuir preparadament, e no sia ges cezent; e occulta las forfexs en la tua ma o dejos le tieu pe, que l’enfant no veia aquelas ni degun autre dels instruments.	And properly place the child among your knees preparedly, and do not be more than a hundred centimeters away; hide the scissors in your hand or hold the child's foot, so that the child does not see those or any other of the instruments.
E aprop entremet la tua ma a la vergua de lu e suffla en la codena, e tira aquela entro que sia eyssit le cap de la vergua, e aprop mondifica aquel de aquo que es agregat en ela de sordicia.	And properly insert your hand into the foreskin and blow into the urethra, and pull that out so that the head of the penis is erect, and properly modify it from what is aggregated in it due to impotence.
E aprop lia le loc signat am fiel dobla, e aprop ligua pus bas de aquel un petit le segon liament, e aprop te am le dit pous e endic tieu le loc del liament dejos am bona retencio, e inscideys entre dos liaments.	And properly tie the marked area with doubled string, and properly tie a little below that with a second ligature, and then have your finger on the location of the ligature with good tension, and incise between two ligatures.
E aprop eleva la codena sus leugierament e estratz le cap de la vergua; e aprop leyssa le sanc corre petit e petit, quar es milhor ; e pausa polvera desus e sobre la polvera pausa drap en le qual es spandut mugol de huou coyt en ayguaros concosit am oli rozat recent bo; e layssa aquel sobre aquel entro al autra dia; e cura aquel am curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then lift the leg slightly and extract the head of the boil; and let the pus flow little by little, for that is better; place powder above and on top of the powder, cover with a cloth in which is soaked mullein down in water well mixed with fresh rubbed olive oil; leave that there until the next day; cure that with healing treatment until it is healed.
La forma de las forfexs a mondificacio, aquesta es la forma:	The shape of the forceps after modification, this is the form:
Sian las unas extramitatz no-talhantz e las autras sian talhant, que non sia yssit le ram del clau, e sia la longitut de las doas acuitatz ayssi cum la longitut de dos manubres engualment.	If the handles are uncut and the others are cut, let the stem of the key be inserted, and the length of the two curved parts should be as long as the length of two equal-sized handles.
Mays la error en mundificacio es quar fort leu efugeys la codena intrinseca tota, o partida de lu deves la inscizio.	More importantly, the error in modification is that if you inadvertently remove the intrinsic tendon entirely or partially, you must make an incision.
Donc cove que tu extendas aquela de la tua hora am la tua ungla denant la apostemacio del loc e que inscidas aquela segon equalitat.	Therefore, make sure that you extend that of your hour along your finger in front of the incision site and mark it according to equality.
E si no la podes tenir am la tua ungla, lahoras extratz aquela am unci e inscideys aquela.	And if you cannot hold it with your finger, then mark it with a pin and make the incision there.
Mays si son passatz tres dias, e roman aquo que es imflat dejos la vergua apostemat, lahoras tu leyssa aquo entro que sia cedat le apostema caut, e excorja aquel am fecilitat, e inscidex aquel segon que a tu es preparat.	If they have passed three days and remain what is swollen due to the inflamed inguinal abscess, then you let this be until the abscess is lanced with a cautery, and excoriates that for facilitation, and incises that according to how it is prepared.
E guarda te del cap de la vergua, quar no nosera a lu aquo.	And guard the head of the swelling, for that will not be in it.
E donc cura aquel am aquo que la plagua consolida de las polveras las quals havem recomtadas en le tractat de las polveras.	And therefore treat that part where the wound consolidates with the powders which we have recommended in the treatise on powders.
E si es inscidit de la codena sobre mesura, e obezeys a las partidas desus, aquo no notz a lu.	And if it is incised beyond measure, and you obey the rules above, this will not harm it.
E mays cura aquel am aquo que havem dit entro que sia sanat.	And therefore treat that part as we have said until it is healed.
Capitol .lviii.	Capitol. lviii.
De curacio de urina retenguda en la vesiqua.	On the treatment of retained urine in the bladder.
Retencio de urina en la vesica es fayta per oppulacio fayta per peyra o per sanc congilat, o per poyre o per carnada, e semblantz ad aquels de aquo que havem dit de las manieyras de curacio en la divisio.	Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by an obstruction due to a stone or a stricture, or by pus or flesh, and resembles those we have said about the methods of treatment in the division.
E si no es dissolvuda la urina, e veses retencio de lu esser per peyra le qual ja es en le col de la vesica, lahoras cove que le malaute sia encorbat sobre les sieus denolhs.	And if the urine is not dissolved, and you see retention of it due to a stone which is at the neck of the bladder, then suspect that the patient has an encumbered bladder.
E aprop conponeys les pes de aquel sobre le sieu dos e extendas le sieu ventre de la partida pus desus del sieu dos, e le malaute estrengua le sieu ale tant quant es a lu possible.	And then place his feet on his own buttocks and extend his abdomen from the part above his back, and the patient should arch his back as much as possible.
Donc lahoras le col de la vesica es costreyt ha espulsio de la peyra a las partidas detras, per que la urina es absolta.	Then when the neck of the bladder is stretched there will be expulsion of the stone to the rear parts, so that the urine is released.
E si no es dissolvuda am aquo que havem dit he vehement es fayta la causa sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que aministres extraccio de lu am instrument le qual es apelat siringua, del qual aquesta es la forma: Sia de argent e sia subtil leon conquau, ayssi cum canula de pena de ausel am subtilitat de ray lonc en similitut d’un palm e mig, al qual sia cana subtil en le cap de lu.	And if what we have said is not dissolved, then strongly make the cause known to the patient, then give him an extraction through an instrument which is called a syringe, of which this is the form: It should be made of silver and should be very fine, like a long quill in length similar to half a palm, with a very thin cane at its head.
E la manieyra del eyssiment de la urina per aquel es que prenguas le fiel doblat e lies en la extramitat de lu lana o coto per bona liadura; e entrometas las extramitatz del fiel en la partida dejos de la ciringua, e inscideys am las forfexs si superflueys alcuna causa de la lana, mays intromet la en la canula am vehemencia E aprop enongeys la ciringua am boder e am album de huou.	And the method of urination through this is that you take a tube folded and tie it at the end with wool or cotton for good closure; and insert the ends of the tube into the part where the syringe left off, and cut with scissors if any part of the wool needs to be removed. Then strongly insert it into the tube with vigor; and quickly withdraw the syringe with force.
E fay cezer le malaute sobre la selha, e embroca la vesiqua de lu e la vergua am olis umitz, e oli de oliva e ayguaros.	And make a cut on the patient's thigh, and pour the bladder and the penis with a mixture of oils, olive oil, and vinegar.
E aprop entromet la ciringua am facilitat entro que pervengua a la razit de la vergua; e aprop dobla la vergua desus a la partida del embelic; e aprop empelleys la ciringua dintz aquela; e aprop empelleys aquela entro que pervengua a la vesica, e aquela centa le malaute esser pervenguda a la causa vuoda, e no es fayt asso segon aquest orde, sino le meat en le qual va a tortuositat.	And then introduce the probe to facilitate its passage to the urethra; and then fold the penis upwards at the point of insertion; and then push the probe inside until it reaches the bladder; and then push it further until it arrives at the cause of the pain, ensuring that the meat in which it passes is not tortuous.
E aprop exten le fiel am la lana petit a petit, quar la urina siec la lana.	And then slowly insert the needle into the wool, for the urine will moisten the wool.
Aprop extratz aquela e fay per curacio urina, e usa ciringua, no cesses fer aquo e usa ciringua entro que sia evacuada la vesica e le malaute atrobe alleviacio.	And then extract it and apply urine for treatment. Use the probe continuously until the bladder and patient are fully relieved.
Capitol .lix.	Capitulum 6.lix.
De qualitat de clisterizacio de la vezica am clampcedra e am semblantz instrumentz les quals sian acordants ad aquo.	Of the quality of the catharsis of the bladder, we must use and prepare instruments which are suitable for this.
Quan accideys en la vesica ulceracio o apostema, o sanc congilat en aquela, o es coartat poyredura, e vols en aquela destillar ayguas e medicinas, lahoras sia fayt am instrument le qual es apelat clampcedra, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When there is an ulcer or abscess in the bladder, or a fistula, or it is constricted by a tumor, and you wish to drain fluids and medicines into it, then a device called a clampcedra should be made. This is its form:
sino que en la extramitat de lu es sorda, so es clausa.	so that at the end of it is closed,密封的部位。
Et en aquela so tres traucs: dos de la una partida , ayssi quo vezes.	And in it there are three openings: two on one side, thus placed.
En le comensament es loc concau, en le qual es aquo que es enpellit, e sia segon quantitat que oppile aquel, ses addicio, entro que quan alcuna causa es ab aquel tirada de las humiditatz, sia atirada, e quan es expellida, am aquo sia atirada, e quan es expellit lonc, segon que fa clampcedra am la qual es phicat naphta en las batalhas de mar.	At the beginning, it is concave, in which the contents are contained. Its size depends on how much it fills. When any cause draws out the humidity from within, it should be drawn out, and when expelled, it should also be drawn out. When expelled for a long time, naphtha is applied to the cloth in the openings of the instrument to serve as a clampcedra.
Donc cum tu vols prohicir humiditatz en la vesica, entromet la extremitat de clapcedra en la humiditat, e atira am aquel aquo que es empellit a las partidas desus, quar la humiditat es atirada en la conquavitat de clapcedra.	So, when you want to expel humidity from the bladder, insert the end of the clampcedra into the humidity, and draw out what is pushed towards the upper parts, so that the humidity is drawn into the cavity of the clampcedra.
E aprop entromet la extramitat de clapcedra en la vergua segon que havem recomtat en la ciringua; e aprop empelleys la humiditat am aquo que empelleys, quar aquela humiditat perve a la vesica tantost, e le malaute cent aquela.	And then insert the end of the reed in the vagina as we have advised in the incision; and then press out the moisture with what you press, for that moisture will quickly reach the bladder, and the malady will center there.
Forma del cristeri subtil am le qual la vesica es cristerizada, e es aquela la forma:	The form of the subtle crest where the bladder is located, and that is the form:
E sia fayta de argent o de lato, de la qual le cap pus aut sia semblant a petita pluma, e dejos lu cana dedintz liament.	And it should be made of silver or tin, the top of which resembles a small feather, and place the wick inside cotton.
E aprop pren vesica de moto, e pausa en aquela la humiditat que vols cristirizar en la vesica, e aprop lia aquela entre dos am fort liguatura am fiel doble, e escalfa aquela humiditat sobre le foc.	And then take a bladder of mule, place the moisture you want to crest in it, and tie it between two strong bands with double thread, and heat that moisture over the fire.
E aprop entromet la extremitat del cristeri en la vergua.	And then insert the end of the crest into the vagina.
E aprop estrenh la tua ma sobre la vesica am la humiditat am strectura descent entro que·l malaute centa que aquela humiditat ja es pervenguda a la vesica.	And then strengthen your hand over the bladder with moisture in a descending structure so that the malady centers where that moisture has reached the bladder.
Mays si a tu no es present vesica, lahoras tu pren una pessa de parguames e fay de aquel cercle; e perfora aquel de tota la sua retonditat; e aprop entromet fiel fort en aquels traucs, ayssi quo so revolgut; e aprop agregua le cercle ayssi quo es agreguat alsofatur, pus que tu pausas en aquel aquo que tu vols de las humiditatz, e olis e ayguas.	But if you do not have a bladder present, then take a piece of parchment and make from that circle; perforate it completely round; then insert strong thread through all those stitches, as they are turned; then return the circle as it is returned, for when you stop at what you want from the humors, smell and waters.
E aprop tu lia aquel en le instrument e fay am aquel ayssi cum has fayt am la vesica, e exprescio am la tua ma entro que la humiditat pervengua a la vesica.	Then you tie that with the instrument and do so with it as you did with the bladder, and place your hand there where the humidity will reach the bladder.
Capitol .lx.	Capitol lx.
De extraccio de peyra.	Of the extraction of pear.
Nos ja havem dit en la divisio las specias de peyra e curacio de lu am medicinas, e la diferencia entre peyra engendrada en los ronhos e peyra engendrada en la vesica, e les senhals de aquela.	We have already discussed in the division the species of pear and its cure with medicines, and the difference between a pear generated in the ovaries and a pear generated in the bladder, and the signs of that.
E havem dit la peyra en la qual catz operacio am ma, e seccio.	And we have discussed the pear in which surgical operation is mainly performed, and sectioning.
E la peyra engendrada en la vesica propriament es aquela que es ficada en la vesica.	And the pear generated in the bladder properly is that which is placed in the bladder.
E yeu so narrant aquel am exposicio manifesta e abreviacio.	And I proceed with that account in a clear and abbreviated manner.
Donc dic que peyra engendrada en la vesica majorment ve als enfantz; e dels senhals de lu es que la urina que es eyssida de la vesica es semblant a aygua en la sua subtilitat, e apar en aquela arena; e le malaute fregua la sua vergua, e motas veguadas pen, e aprop es dressada; e am aquo yeys foro le cul en motz de aquels.	Therefore, it is said that a stone formed in the bladder mostly affects children; and the signs of this are that urine excreted from the bladder resembles water in its subtlety, and appears with that sand; and gout rubs its genitals, with reddened penile skin, and soon becomes swollen; and thereupon it bores into the anus instead.
E es laugiera la sanacio dels enfants de aquela entro que han conseguitz xiiii ans; e es dificil curacio en les viels.	And the recovery of children from this condition typically occurs within four years; and it is a difficult cure in the elderly.
Mays en les joves es migiera per aquo quar es entre aquels.	More in young people, it often affects those between them.
E de aquel del qual la peyra es major e la curacio es pus leugiera; E si es pauca, es contraria ad aquela.	And of that in which the stone is larger and the cure is easier; And if it is small, it is contrary to that.
Donc cum pervenem a la curacio de aquela, cove al comensament de aquela que mondifiquem le malaute am cristeri le qual extragua tota la fenda la qual es en les sieus budels; quar aquela fenda alcunas veguadas prohibeys la envencio de la peyra deves la inquisicio de lu.	Therefore, when we reach the cure of this, we begin by modifying gout with a hot application which warms the entire opening which is in their intestines; for that opening sometimes prohibits the passage of the stone and we then investigate it.
E aprop sia pres le malaute am les sieus pes e sia contosit e maugut enjos per so que la peyra descenda al preon de la vesica, o que saute de loc aut alcunas veguadas.	And then place the patient on their side with their feet elevated and compress and massage gently so that the swelling descends to the base of the bladder, or rises only a few times.
E aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas preparat, e las mas de lu sian dejos las coysas de lu, per so que la vesica tota sia fayta declinant a las partidas dejos.	And then place those cushions under your hands, and the others under the patient, so that the bladder is made to incline towards the side being treated.
E aprop perquier aquela e tota aquela deforo.	And then apply that and all that area.
Donc si sentes la peyra en l’espazi, lahoras tu te coyta tantost am seccio sobre lu.	Then if you feel the swelling in the space, immediately apply heat to the area.
E si no catz de tot dejos le tieu tocament, lahoras cove que tu untes am oli le tieu dit indic de la ma sinistra, si malaute es enfant, o le dit miga si es jove complit, e entrometas aquel en le sieu cul.	And if the swelling does not subside with your touch, then take some oil with your left hand index finger and insert it into the patient's anus.
E perquier de la peyra entro que stia dejos le tieu dit.	And apply heat to the swelling while keeping your finger in place.
E converteys aquela petit a petit entro al col de la vesica.	And gradually insert that into the neck of the bladder.
E aprop prem sobre aquel am lo tieu dit, e expelleys aquel a las partidas defora ves le loc del qual vos la seccio.	And then press upon that area as you have said, and drive out that which is in the parts outward, see the place from which you are separating it.
E comanda al ministra que prema la vesica am la sua ma; e comanda a un autra ministra que am la sua ma dextra extenda les genetius a las partidas desus, e am la sua autra ma remaugua la codena la qual es dejos les genetius, en partida del loc en le qual se fa la seccio.	And command the minister to press the bladder with his hand; and command another minister to extend the genitals upwards with his right hand, and with his other hand draw back the codena which is placed above the location where the separation is being made.
E aprop entromet espatum be inscident del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then insert a spatulum; this is the form of it:
e scindeys en lu aquo que es entre·l cul e·ls genetius, no en le mieg loc, abantz al latz de la coyssa sinistra; e sia la seccio sobre aquela peyra e·l tieu dit sia en le cul, e sia fayta seccio transversa, per que la seccio defora sia ampla e dedintz streyta segon la quantitat que egrecio de la peyra sia a lu possibla, e no major, quar fort leu comprem le tieu dit le qual es en le cul la peyra deves la seccio, e es foro-getada ses defacultat.	And cut in it what is between the anus and the genitals, not in the middle location, before the fold of the left thigh; and let the separation be over that stone which you said is at the anus, and let the separation be transverse, so that the separation outward is wide and inward narrow according to the quantity that flowed from the stone is possible, and not greater, for we understand well the separation which you said is at the anus the stone should have the separation, and it is a surgically created opening.
E sapias que de la peyra es alcuna a la qual so angle e margers, per que le eyssiment de lu es fayt deficil per aquo.	And you shall know that from the heel there is some angle and margins, because the insertion of it is made difficult by this.
E de aquela aquo es leon semblant a glan, e es redonda, e es fayt de lu leugier eyssiment.	And of that which resembles a lion's claw, and is round, and is made of it a slight insertion.
Donc si es aquela al qual so angles e marger, ajusta en la fissura.	And if that which has angles and margins is adjusted in the fissure.
E si no es ayssi foro-getada, lahoras cove que tu engenes sobre aquel, o que strenguas sobre aquel am gesti decentment, la extremitat del qual sia ayssi cum lima am le qual strenguas sobre la peyra, e no evasesca de lu; o que entrometas dejos lu instrument subtil de curvada extremitat.	And if not thus perforated, then you must engrave upon it, or strengthen it with a gesture decently made, the extremity of which should be thus like a file on which you engrave the heel, and do not deviate from it; or you must insert a thin instrument under its curved extremity.
Mays si tu no podes sobre aquel, lahoras tu amplifica le trauc un petit, e si tu veus flux de sanc, abscindeys en strenh aquel am vitriol trissat.	But if you cannot do this, then you enlarge the hole a little, and if you wish a flow of blood, incise strongly in it with vitriol triossate.
Mays si la peyra es mays de una, lahoras al comensament tu impelleys la ma a la boca de la vesica, e aprop inscideys sobre lu; e aprop impelleys un petit aprop aquo; e semblantment fay si son motas mays de doas.	But if the heel is more than one, then at the beginning you push your hand to the mouth of the bladder, and then incise over it; and then push a little in that place; and similarly do if its spots are more than two.
E si es peyra mot gran, lahoras ignorancia es que tu inscidas aquel am gran seccio, quar accideys al malaute una de doas causas: o que mora o que endevengua a lu destillacio de urina continuabla, per aquo quar le loc no es de tot consolidat.	And if the stone is very large, then ignorance leads you to make an incision in that great section, for which accident happens to the patient one of two causes: either that he dies or that he ends up with continuous urinary distillation, because for this reason the place is not fully consolidated.
Mays aministra expulcio de lu entro que sia fora-getada, o engenia en la fractura de lu am las forfexs entro que extragua aquela en pessas.	Administer the expulsion of the stone when it is within so that it may be expelled, or use forceps in the fracture to extract it from the parts.
Donc cum tu auras cumplit la tua opperacio, lahoras omple la plagua de enses de aloe e de sanc de drago, e strenh aquel.	So when you have completed your operation, fill the wound with slices of aloe and dragon's blood, and strengthen it.
E pausa sobre aquel drap enfus en oli e vi, o en oli rozat e aygua frega, per so que apostema caut sia cedat.	And place it over that soaked cloth in oil and wine, or in rubbed oil and cold water, so that the abscess may yield.
E aprop resupina le malaute sobre le sieu col, e no deslias le liament entro al tertz dia.	Then lift the patient's leg above the side of the bed, and do not remove the bandage on the third day.
E cum aquel auras desliat, embroca le loc am aygua e mot oli, e aprop cura aquel am enguent diafinicon e am enguent diabazilicon entro que sia sanat.	And when you have removed it, sponge the area with water and some oil, and then treat it with ointment containing diafinicon and ointment containing diabazic acid until it is healed.
Mays si en la plagua accideys apostema caut, adhust e corrosiu, e de aquel semblantz ayssi cum si le sanc es en la vesica congelat, e per lu es la hurina prohibida (e aquo es conogut per la egressio del sanc am urina), a donc entromet lo tieu dit en la plagua e extratz aquel sanc, quar si roman provoca la vesica a corropcio de la vesica e de lu putrefaccio.	But if in the abscess you encounter a carbuncle, adjust and corrode it, resembling as if the blood is in the bladder congealed, and through it urine is forbidden (and this is known by the excretion of blood with urine), then interpose your said instrument into the abscess and extract that blood, for if Roman corrosive provokes the bladder to corruption of the bladder and its putrefaction.
E aprop lava la plagua am vi agre, aygua e sal, e am opposicio a tota specia, am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	Then wash the abscess with good wine, water, and salt, and oppose all sorts of substances, using what is most conducive to its healing while it is healing.
E cove en las horas de tota la curacio que tu lies amdos las coyssas e ajustes las medicinas las quals so pausadas sobre le loc.	And keep the hours of the entire cure that you have placed between the thighs and apply the medicines which are laid over the area.
E si la peyra es petita e es en le meat de la vergua, e es ficat en lu, e eyssement de urina es prohibit, lahoras cura aquel am aquo que yeu recomti denant que pervenguas a seccio, quar tropas veguadas per aquesta curacio yest acusat de seccio; e ja yeu e esproat aquo, e es que tu prenguas un perforador de ferr alfelut, del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if the stone is small and is in the meat of the penis, and urine discharge is prohibited, then cure it by applying what I have recommended before you reach the section; for too many applications of this treatment are accused of causing dryness; and now I instruct you: take a metal drill, of which this is the form:
de triangulada extramitat, agut, ficat en fust.	of triangular shape, sharp, inserted in the fist.
E aprop pren fiel, e lia am aquel la vergua dejos la peyra per so que no retorne a la vesica.	And then take honey, and tie it to the swelling, leaving the stone to prevent it from returning to the bladder.
E aprop entromet le ferr en la vergua, perforant am fecilitat entro que·l perforador vengua ad aquela peyra.	And then insert the needle into the swelling, piercing easily where the puncturer will reach the stone.
E revolveys le perforador am la tua ma en aquela peyra petit a petit, e tu perforsa la perforacio de lu entro que fassas aquel del autra part penetrar; quar la urina tantost es absolta.	And rotate the puncturer with your hand around the stone little by little, and you make the initial puncture, then let the other part penetrate; for the urine will soon be released.
E aprop prem la tua ma sobre aquo que es romas de la peyra de la partida deforo de la vergua, quar aquela es trinquada, e es foro-getada am la urina, e le malaute es sanat.	And then press your hand on what is broken from the stone of the part pierced outside the swelling, for that is cracked, and the urine will pass through it, and the patient is cured.
Mays si aquesta curacio no es a tu aparelhada per alcuna causa la qual prohibeys de aquela, lahoras lia un fiel dejos la peyra, e autra fiel desus la peyra.	But if this cure is not available to you for some reason that prohibits it, then tie honey to the stone, and another piece of honey above the stone.
E aprop encideys sobre la peyra en aquela vergua entre doas liaduras.	And then place something hot over the stone on that swelling between two bandages.
E aprop extratz aquela.	And then extract that.
E aprop deslia le liament e mondifica le sanc congilat, le qual es fayt en la plagua.	And then untie the bandage and modify the suspended wound, which is made in the lesion.
E no es necessari liament de fiel dejos la peyra, sino per que no retorne a la vesica, e l’autre liament desus sino, quar quan es desliat le fiel aprop la egrecio de la peyra, la codena retorna a son loc e cobra la plagua.	And there is no need to tie the bandage with linen; do this so that the bile does not return to the bladder. Instead, tie another bandage above, for when the bile is untied near the edge of the wound, the cord returns to its place and heals the lesion.
E per aquo es a tu necessari quan lias le fiel desus, que tu eleves la codena a las partidas desus, o que retorne deves le tieu compliment, e cobra la plagua ayssi co havem dit.	And for this reason, when you untie the bile above, you should raise the cord to the parts above, or let it return by your proper gesture, and the wound will heal as we have said.
Capitol .lxi.	Capitol. lxI.
De extraccio de peyra de las femnas.	On the extraction of stones from women.
Peyra en las femnas pauc es engendrada.	Stone in women is rarely generated.
Mays si ve peyra ad alcuna de aquelas, lahoras dificil es la curacio de lu, e es prohibida per tropas manieyras.	But if there is a stone in any of them, the cure is difficult, and it is prohibited by many methods.
La una de lor es quar la femna fort leu es verges.	One of them is that a strong maiden who is a virgin.
E la segonda es quar tu no trobas femna be scient que descroba si meteyssa al metge quan es casta, o es de las femnas haventz maritz.	And the second is that you cannot find a good woman who can describe whether she has had sex with the doctor when she is chaste, or whether she is one of the women who have husbands.
La tersa es quar tu no hatrobas femna be sabent aquesta art, majorment la operacio am ma.	The third is that you cannot find a good woman who knows this art, especially the operation on the hand.
E la quarta es que·l loc de la seccio sobre peyra en las femnas es longinc del loc de la peyra, per que indigeys de seccio preonda, e en aquela es temor.	And the fourth is that the location of the section for gout in women is far from the location of the gout, so you need a general section, and there is fear.
Mays si necessitat provoca a tu ad aquo, lahoras cove que tu prenguas una femna metga be scient, e pauc es atrobada.	But if necessity prompts you to do this, then find a wise and good woman who knows it, and such a person is not easily found.
Mays si tu es privat de aquela, lahoras cerca metga quast e subtil, o presenta una femna matrona be esenhada en le feyt de las femnas, o femna que en aquesta art ennueys partida del art.	But if you are lacking in that, then seek a wise and subtle woman, or present an experienced elderly woman who is skilled in dealing with women, or a woman who has part of this art.
Donc fay aquela present, e comanda a lu que fassa tot aquo que tu li mandaras, de la enquisicio sobre la peyra al comensament; la qual causa es que reguarde si la femna es verges, lahoras cove que meta lo sieu dit en le cul de lu e quiera la peyra.	Therefore, have her make the presentation, and command her to do everything you tell her, from the inquiry about the gout to the beginning; for this reason, she should check if the woman is a virgin, so she must put her finger in the woman's anus and feel for the gout.
Donc si atroba aquela, coarte aquela dejos le sieu dit, e lahoras comanda a lu que inscida sobre aquela.	Then if you find it, cut it out and leave his said part, and then command him to lie down on it.
Mays si no es verge, lahoras comanda a la matrona que entrometa lo sieu dit en le conh de la malauta e enquiera sobre la peyra, pus que pausa la sua ma sinistra sobre la vesica, e comprem aquela am bona comprecio.	But if it is not a vein, then command the midwife to insert his said part into the vagina and inquire about the stone, while placing her left hand on the bladder, and hold that well with good grip.
Donc si atroba aquela, lahoras cove que gradantment maugua aquela de l’orrifici de la vesica a las partidas dejos am somman de la sua vertut entro que pervengua am aquel a la razit de la coyssa.	Then if you find it, gradually moisten that from the opening of the bladder to the parts, leaving some of its virtue so that it reaches the depth of the thigh.
E aprop inscida sobre aquela apposicio de la maytat del conh deves la razit de la coyssa de qualque part sia a lu parada e cent la peyra en aquela partida, e·l dit de lu no sia remaugut de la peyra coartan dejos lu.	And then lie down on that application of the strength of the vagina, placing the depth of the thigh at any part where it is lying down and center the stone in that part, so that his said part is not moistened by the stone, cut him off.
E la seccio sia pauca al comensament; e aprop entrometa lo ray sobre aquela seccio, e si sent la peyra, lahoras ajuste en seccio segon la quantitat la qual sap que la peyra sira getada de aquela.	And the section be small at the beginning; then insert the probe over that section, and if the stone is felt, then adjust the section according to the quantity which he knows the stone will be removed from there.
E sapias que las specias de peyra son motas: quar de aquelas es pauca e gran, e leon e aspra, e longua e redonda, e havent ramps.	And be aware that the grains of pepper are spots: some are small and large, lion and pungent, long and round, and having ridges.
Donc tu sapias quantas specias so de lu per aquo que tu signifiques sobre aquo que vols.	So you be aware of the grains of pepper that you signify about what you want.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, ajusta en le loc vetriol trissat e te aquela per una hora entro que sia abscindit le sanc, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	And if you want a flow of blood, apply vitriol tincture to the area for one hour until the blood is absorbed, and then return to your operation after the pepper has been removed.
E fay que prepares am tu dels instrumentz les quals e ditz en la extraccio de peyra en les homes, per so que sias ajudat per aquels en la tua operacio.	And make sure to prepare among your instruments those specified for the extraction of pepper in men, so that you can be assisted by them during your operation.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, e sabes que la expulcio del sanc es de la arceria que es insciza, lahoras tu pausa polvera sobre le loc e estrenh aquel am pulvils e strictura descent, e no iteras aquo; e layssa la peyra e no extraguas aquela, quar fort leu morira la malauta.	And if you want a flow of blood, and know that the expulsion of the blood comes from the artery that is incised, then apply powder to the area and strengthen it with powders and allow it to constrict downward; do not repeat this; leave the pepper in place and do not extract it, for strong lifting will cause the illness to worsen.
E aprop cura la plagua.	And then cure the wound.
Donc cum es cedada la acuitat del sanc aprop alcus jorns, e·l loc se poyreys, lahoras tu retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	So when the sharp pain in the tooth has subsided after a few days, then the place will heal, and you return to your operation while the stone is forgotten.
Capitol lxii.	Capitol lxii.
De seccio sobre ernia acoza.	On the section about inguinal hernia.
Hernia ayguoza no es sino agregacio de humiditat en le ciphac blanc lo qual es dejos la codena dels genetius contenent le huou, e es nompnat ciphac.	An inguinal hernia is nothing but the addition of moisture in the white fibrous tissue, which is left when the testicle containing the humor is withdrawn, and it is called a ciphac.
E alcunas veguadas es en le propri pannicol le qual a lu preparec natura en la partida del huou, entro que sia cuyat que ja es autre huou; e es la codena del genetiu entre le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, e no es aquo sino tart.	And sometimes it is in the proper flesh, which nature prepares in the part of the humor before it is cooked and becomes another humor; and it is the testicle between the white fibrous tissue, which we have said, and it is not this but a tumor.
E la generacio de aquest hernia es per debelitat la qual accideys als genetius, per que ad aquels es efundunda aquesta materia, e alcunas vetz accideys per percuscio fayta sobre les genetius.	And the generation of this hernia is due to weakness, which occurs in the testicles, because this material infiltrates into them. Sometimes it occurs due to a blow given to the testicles.
E aquesta humiditat es havent motas colors, quar la color de lu o es declinant a citrina o a sanguinent, o rog, o es negra feculenta, o es ayguosa blanqua, e es aquo que es mays.	And this moisture having spots of color, whether the color of it is declining to yellowish or reddish, or raw, or is black floury, or watery white, and this is what it is most.
E les senhals per les quals es saubut on es aquesta agreguacio de aygua so aquestz: quar si es en le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, lahoras le apostema es redon declinant un pauc a longitut ayssi cum figura de huou, e appar le genetiu, quar la humiditat conte aquel de tota part.	And the signs by which it is known where this accumulation of water is located are these: if in the bladder, which we have said, then the abscess is round, slightly elongated like the shape of a hen's egg, and the root appears, for the moisture contains that from all parts.
E si la humiditat es en le propri pannicol, lahoras le apostema es redon am partida del huou e per aysso hom estima que es autre huou.	And if the moisture is in the proper skin, then the abscess is round, detached from the egg, and for this reason one estimates that it is another egg.
E si la humiditat es entre la codena dels genetius e·l ciphac blanc, lahoras catz dejos le centiment.	And if the moisture is between the root and the bladder, then cut away the root.
E cum tu vols la cognicio de la color de la humiditat, lahoras tu esproa la color de la humiditat en le apostema am entromes cayrat del qual la forma es precedida; e segon aquo que es eyssit en le vestigi del entromes, jutga de aquo que es dedintz lu.	And to know the color of the moisture, you should probe the color of the moisture in the abscess through a small incision that precedes its form; and judging from what happens in the trace of the incision, judge what is inside it.
Donc quan nos vinem a la curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que comandem al malaute que sia fleubotomat si aquo es a tu possibla, e vezes le cos de lu ple.	When we come to the treatment of your arm, then command the patient to bleed if this is possible, and often raise his body.
E aprop sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos sobre alcuna causa un pauc auta, e pausa dejos lu motz draps.	And then let the patient be supine on his back on some kind of cushion, and place your hand on his body.
E aprop setz tu sobre la part sinistra de lu, e comanda al ministra que segua a la dextra de lu, le qual extenda la sua vergua a hun de dos latz a la codena dels genetius e a la partida del mirac del ventre.	And then sit you on the left part of him, and command the minister to stand on the right side of him, who extends his staff to one of the sides at the knee of the thigh and at the side of the navel.
E aprop pren spatum lat e scindeys la codena dels genetius del mieg loc per la longitut entro prop le pentenilh.	And then take a spatula and split the knee of the thigh in the middle location along its length near the patella.
E sia fayta la seccio segon rectetut engualment distant de la linha que deveseys la pel dels genetius, entro que pervengua al ciphac blanc comprehendent.	And make the incision according to the correct method, equally distant from the line where you should cut the skin of the thigh, until it reaches the white fat.
E excorja aquel, e observa, e guarda te per aysso que tu no inscidas aquel; e la tua excoriacio am la qual aquel excorjas per partida jassia que sia suspenduda am le huou mays e subtilment escruta am la excoriacio segon la quantitat a tu possibla.	And excise it, observe, and guard it for this that you do not enter that; and your excision from which you excise it should be suspended at the uppermost and subtlely examine it according to the quantity possible.
E aprop perfora le ciphac ple de aygua am perforacio ampla, e extratz tota l’aygua.	And then perforate the bladder full of water with an ample puncture, and extract all the water.
E aprop separa entre doas labias de la seccio am uncis, e exten le ciphac a las partidas desus; e no toques la codena les genetius comprehendent, e inscideys le ciphac en aquela manieyra que es a tu possible.	And then separate between the two lips of the section with forceps, and extend the bladder to the parts above; and do not touch the chain of the genitalia, and incise the bladder in that manner which is possible for you.
E inscideys aquel am la sua totalitat o en pessas, e majorment le sieu latz subtil, quar si tu no perscrutas exquisidament la inscizio de lu, no es fayta segurtat que la aygua no retorne.	And incise that completely or in layers, especially its thin wall; for if you do not meticulously examine the incision, there is no assurance that the water will not return.
Mays si le huou procezeys de aquela defora de la sua codena en la ora de la tua operacio, lahoras quan tu auras complida la seccio del ciphac, retorna dedintz aquel, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la codena dels genetius am sutura, e aprop cura aquel ayssi cum las autras plagua, entro que sia sanat.	More so, if the humor proceeds from within the chain of the genitalia during your operation, when you have completed the sectioning of the bladder, return inside that, and properly suture the two lips of the genitalia's chain with sutures, and properly care for it as with other wounds until it is healed.
E si atrobas le huou corromput per autra malautia, lahoras cove que tu lies les vayssels les quals so sore le suspensori, e extrat le huou, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit.	And if you find the humor corrupted by another illness, then ligate the vessels which are over the suspensory, extract the humor, and properly care for it as we have said.
Mays si l’aygua es agreguada en doas partidas esemps, lahoras sapias que doas son las ernias; donc inscideys aquela partida segon que has feyt en l’autra engualment; e si es a tu vist que sia una opera, lahoras tu la fay.	If the water is added in two parts, then you should know that there are two hernias; therefore, cut that part equally as you did in the other; and if it appears to you that it is an operation, then you perform it.
E aprop tu abstergiys le sanc, e entramet en las seccios lana submersa en oli o en oli rozat; e pausa deforo autra lana la qual tu as submersa en vi e oli, e expandeys aquela sobre dos genetius e·l mirac del ventre; e pausa desobre draps doblatz e pulvils, e lia aquels desobre am liament le qual es segon aquesta forma:	Then you clean the wound, and insert wool soaked in oil or rubbed oil into the sections; place another piece of wool soaked in wine and oil over it, and extend that over two genitalia and the miracle of the belly; place further on top of this folded cloths and powders, and sprinkle those with grains of wheat according to this form.
e aprop sian preses dos draps e sian humplitz de lana carmenada segon aquesta semblansa; e sian faytas las extremitatz am les quals es premut de coto o de lana humida, e sian agreguatz am strectura en le braguier de las braguas, e la una de las extremitatz prengua del cul entro al dos, e la segonda prengua a la partida del pantenilh, e dos extramitatz sobre dos coyssas dejos e dos extramitatz autras sobre dos angonars, e tota extrictura sia ajustada en le braguier de las braguas.	Then place two cloths and fill them with pounded flax wool according to this likeness; make the ends of which are pressed with a clot or wet wool, and attach them to the structure in the waistband of the trousers. One end take into the buttocks between the two, and the second end attach to the part of the crotch, and leave the four ends on the thighs and other four on the garters, and all the structure be fitted in the waistband of the trousers.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta hernia es medicada artificialment am cauteri en loc de seccio am ferr; e es que tu prenguas cauteri cutellar subtil e que inscidas am aquel la codena dels ginitius, e es ignit segon que havem recomtat entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc contenent la aygua, e lahoras tu pren cauteri segon aquesta forma:	And sometimes this hernia is artificially treated with a cautery at the section with iron; you should take a thin surgical cautery and incise at the cord of the genitals, and ignite it as we have recommended until the white cyst containing the water is uncovered, then take the cautery in this manner:
e es asemblat a letra greca.	and it is similar to the Greek letter.
E aprop perfora am aquel ciphac, e es ignit entro que tota la humiditat sia fora-gitada.	And then puncture the cyst, and ignite it until all the moisture is expelled.
E aprop exten le ciphac am uncis, e excorja am uncis, e excorja am cauteri subtil ignit; e inscideys aquel segon que es a tu possible entro que eradiques tot lu; e guarda te del huou que·l foc no·l toque.	And then enlarge the cyst with incisions, and excoriate it with incisions, and burn it with a thin ignited cautery; and incise it according to what is possible until you remove all of it; and guard well from the smoke that the fire does not reach.
E sapias que aquesta operacio es pus salva e pus longinqua de flux de sanc, e milhor que operacio am seccio.	And know that this operation is safer and further from the risk of infection, better than an incisional operation.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat apostema caut en la hora de seccio o en hora de cauteri, o flux de sanc, lahoras cove que tu cures qual contrarietat fa a tu per aquo, am curacio la qual conveneys a lu segon que es dit.	But if this operation causes you any complications such as an abscess during the incision or cautery, or the risk of infection, then treat it as any complication that arises from this, according to the cure which is said.
Mays si le malaute es pauruc, e no spera la segonda operacio per la sua horribilitat, lahoras administra perforacio segon que yeu recomti aquo; e es quan es certificat deves tu, per aquo que havem dit de las significacios, que aquela hernia es ayguosa.	If the patient is faint and does not expect the second operation due to its horror, then administer perforation as I advise; and when it is certified that you, according to what we have said about significance, know that that hernia is dangerous.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute sobre alcuna cezelha elevada, aprop perfora le apostema en la partida pus bassa de lu am spatum lat, e pausa la perforacio segon la longitut del cos.	When you must place the patient on a elevated cushion, then perforate the abscess in the lower part below the spine, and pause the perforation according to the length of the body.
E sia la apercio ampla entro que corro tota l‘aygua.	And let the incision be wide enough to drain all the water.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc coto e lia aquel e layssa aquel, per so que corro le romanent de l’aygua.	And then place your hand over the correct spot, clamp it, and release it, to allow the remaining water to drain.
E aprop cura aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And then care for it so that the wound heals.
Mays si contrarietat es a la egrecio de l’aygua en aquela hora tu perforas aquela: e aquo no es fayt sino per aquo quar le pannicol blanc en le orrifici de la plagua fa contrarietat e prohibeys le eyssiment de l’aygua, lahoras cove que tu metas en la plagua pena o instrument am la qual es extrayta l’aygua dels ydropitz, la forma del qual es precedida; o ajusta en la opprecio de la plagua un petit.	If, however, there is a contrary movement of the water in that hour, then perforate it: this is not done except because the white gauze in the orifices of the wound causes a contrary movement and prevents the flow of water. Then you should put into the wound a needle or instrument through which the water from the dropsy can be extracted, the form of which precedes; or apply a small ligature to the wound.
E sapias que l’aygua retorna, e es agueguada aprop vi meses o enaviro aquels; e cum es agreguada, lahoras sia perforat segon aquela meteyssa manieyra, quar le malaute ayssi passara les sieus dias.	And you shall know that the water returns, and is agueguada for about six months or sixteen days; and when it is agueguada, then be perforated according to that method, for thus the malady will pass its days.
Capitol .lxiii.	Chapter LXIII.
De seccio sobre hernia carnosa e la curacio de lu.	On the section about fleshly hernia and its cure.
Sapias que en la seccio sobre aquesta hernia es temor perdusent a pernicia en las majors disposicios; per que a mi es vista la dimissio de lu e esser salvat per aquela milhor.	You shall know that in the section about this hernia, there is a danger of losing life due to serious complications; for I have seen its disappearance and been saved by the better method.
E yeu so rememorant la operacio en aquela e las specias dels apostemas.	And I am recalling the operation in that case and the types of abscesses.
Donc, dic que l‘apostemas natz en les cos dels quals les genetius so conponutz e es fayt aquo per motas causas: o per superfluitat aguda agra, la qual es efundida als genetius, o per percuscio.	Therefore, I say that abscesses naturally occur in the parts where the glands are conjoined, and this is done for various causes: either due to acute superfluity that aggravates, which spreads to the glands, or due to percussion.
E es la color de la apostema segon la color del cos, e no es atrobat en lu dolor, e es apostema greu.	And the color of the abscess depends on the color of the part of the body, and pain does not affect it; it is a severe abscess.
E fort leu es apostema lapificada, del qual la color es fosca, e no es centiment a lu.	And if the abscess is firm and black in color, it does not respond to treatment.
E alcunas veguadas es fayt per nodacio de las arcerias, e per imflacio de aquelas ayssi quo ja es perceubut la rememoracio de lu, o per imflacio de venas.	And sometimes it is caused by the concretion of arteries, and by inflammation of those arteries, as can be perceived in the memory of them, or by inflammation of veins.
Mays aquo que es per imflacio de arcerias es conogut per la dispercio de la apostema quan compremas aquela am les tieus ditz; e no cove que aquel toques.	More than that, which is caused by the inflammation of arteries, it is known by the dispersion of the abscess when one compresses that area with the thumb; and it does not come from those touches.
Mays aquel que es fayt per imflacio de vena no es dispergut de lu alcuna causa deves la compressio am les ditz.	More than that, which is caused by the inflammation of veins does not disperse from that area; one should not apply compression with the fingers.
E ja es possible que sobre aquesta specia sia fayta seccio e sobre les autres carns; e es que tu inscida la codena dels genetius, e aprop esten le huou a las partidas desus, e extratz aquel del ciphac blanc, e deliura le suspensori dels vaysels, e ligua les, e inscideys le suspensori pus que tu deliuras aquel de tota partida de las partidas del huou.	And it is possible that sectioning be performed on this type and on the other tissues; for you may incise the channel of the genitius, then extend the hook above, extract that from the white cleft, deliver the suspensor of the vessels, ligate them, and incise the suspensor after you deliver that from all parts of the hook.
Donc si l’huou ja es am aquelas carnadas consolida, lahoras cove que tu extraguas le huou e inscidas aquel.	Then if the humor has already become consolidated in those parts, you must extract the humor and incise there.
E si es adherencia entro alcuna causa del ciphac, o entre aquo que es entre les bayssels, lahoras cove que tu deliures tota aquela adherencia e inscidas aquela per inscizio redonda.	And if there is an adhesion due to some cause in the cavity, or between what is under the flaps, you must release all that adhesion and incise there with a round incision.
Mays si es nativitat de carn en le loc de la adherencia la qual es detras, lahoras cove que tu inscidas tot aquo que es de lu, e extraguas le huou ayssi cum havem dit.	But if it is native flesh in the place of the adhesion, which is behind, you must incise all that is there, and extract the humor as we have said.
Donc cum es complida la tua operacio, lahoras omple la plagua de lana imfuza en oli rozat e vi; e aprop cura aquela am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Then, when your operation is complete, fill the wound with wool soaked in olive oil and vinegar; and place it over the other dressing until it heals.
Capitol .lxiv.	Capitol lxiv.
De la curacio de hernia que es de vitz.	On the treatment of hernia due to vitiation.
Vit es apostema envolut per alcuna envolucio semblant a broto am mollificacio dels testiculs, e es fayt dificil movement exercitiu e deambulacio sobre le malaute.	Vit is an apостиma enveloped by some envelope similar to a sprout, and it makes physical exercise and movement difficult for the patient.
E en la curacio de aquesta malautia es per temor per aquo del qual es precedida rememoracio.	And in the cure of this illness there is fear concerning what preceded it.
Empero cove que diguam opperacio en aquela segon que fero les primiers.	However, know that they will perform an operation according to how the first symptoms appear.
E dic que cove que fassas sezer le malaute sobre una cezelha elevada; e aprop enpelleys le suspensori dels testiculs a las partidas dejos; e aprop te la codena dels genetius am les tieus ditz am les baysels que so probdas a la vergua; e tengua aquels autre ministre que tu, e extenda aquels am extencio vehement.	And I say that you should cut the illness on a raised cushion; and then place the scrotum over the pubic area; and have the cord of the testicles on your thumbs, and another minister by your side to hold them tightly as they are proven by the windpipe.
E aprop inscideys am spatum lat agut per seccio traversa en le dreyt dels vaysels entro que sian les vayssels descubertz.	And then incise sharply with a scalpel across the middle of the vessels between which the vessels are exposed.
E aprop excorja de tota partida ayssi quo a tu havem dit en extraccio de arceria las quals so en las templas.	And then excise all parts as we have instructed in the extraction of arteries which are in the temples.
E aprop fica en aquelas un’agulha en la qual sia fiel doble, e lia aquel en le primier del locs en les quals accideys vit, e lia aquel autra veguada en le derier de lor.	And then place a needle in which there is a double thread, and tie one end of the thread at the first location where you incise the vein, and tie the other end at the last of them.
E aprop inscideys aquels en le mieg loc per seccio dreyta segon la longuesa del cos, e extratz aquo que es agreguat de las humiditatz fetulentas e corruptas.	And then incise those in the middle place according to a straight section according to the length of the body, and extract what is added from the leaking and corrupt humors.
E aprop cura la plagua am curacio de las autras plaguas en las quals vols sania esser engendrada per so que caian les vaysels les quals noyreysso un de dos genetius, quar no es mal per aquo.	And then cure the wound by the healing of other wounds in which you want health to be generated so that the vessels which we do not affect with either genius are not harmed.
Mays si accideys vit a totz les bayssels, lahoras cove que·ls testicols sian extragutz o que les testicols per aquo se cequo am les vayssels, per que sia privat de tot nutriment per la inscizio dels vayssels, e que sian estaborits, o que cequo per so que no sia juvament am aquels.	But if it happens to all the vessels, then consider that the testicles are extruded or that the testicles become cold due to the vessels, because they will be deprived of all nutrition due to the incision of the vessels, and will be established, or that they become cold by themselves and are no longer vigorous.
Capitol .lxv.	Capitol. lxv.
De la cura de hernia entestinal.	Of the cure for intestinal hernia.
Le adveniment de aquesta hernia es per seccio que endeve en le ciphac extendut sobre le ventre de part dels angunars del mirac del ventre, per que deysendo les budels de aquela ruptura ad alcu dels budels.	The occurrence of this hernia is due to a rupture that extends over the abdomen from the groin area of the inguinal ring, because allowing the intestines from that rupture into one of the openings.
E aquesta ruptura es o del ciphac o de excencio de lu, e accideysso aquestas doas specias per motas causas: o percussio, o per sautz, o per clamor, o per elevacio de alcuna causa greu, o per semblantz.	And this rupture is either of the ciphac or excencio of it, and these two species occur due to certain causes: or percussion, or by heat, or by cry, or by elevation due to some heavy cause, or by similarity.
E·l senhal de aquo, quan es per extencio del ciphac, es que accideys pauc a pauc en lonc temps, e no accideys soptament, e es apostema engual entro ves le preon per so quar le ciphac comprem le budel.	And the sign of this, when it is due to extension of the ciphac, is that it occurs little by little over a long time, and does not occur suddenly, and is an abscess equally inside the vein where the ciphac compresses the intestine.
E le senhal de lu es quan es per seccio del ciphac, quar al comensament fa accidir dolor vehement sobtament; e es apostema divers aparent dejos la codena propdana aparent, e aquo es per eyssiment del budel, e·l cos de lu a las partidas deforo del ciphac.	And the sign of this is when it is due to sectioning of the ciphac, for at the beginning it causes sudden and intense pain; and it is an abscess that appears different from the apparent vein nearby, and this is due to compression of the intestine, and its body in the parts outside the ciphac.
E alcunas veguadas es fora-getat am le budel la tela, e es apelada aquesta hernia entestinal zirbal.	And sometimes the intestine protrudes through the skin, and this hernia is called zirbal.
E alcunas veguadas es fayta am ventositat, e alcunas veguadas corr en le budel fenda, e aqui es retenguda, e es am aquo gran pernitia3 del malaute, e alcunas veguadas fa endevenir dolor malvada e majorment quan es premut.	And sometimes it is caused by distension, and sometimes it flows through a tear in the intestine, and here it is retained, and this causes great discomfort to the patient, and sometimes it causes severe and worse pain when pressed.
E en la curacio de las especias de aquesta malautia am ferr es temor, per que cove que sia esquivat le cazament en aquela.	And in the treatment of the symptoms of this illness there must be fear, for it is necessary that the attack be avoided in that.
E la manieyra de la operacio de aquela es que comandes al malaute que redugua le budel am la sua ma a las partidas dedintz de la sua conquavitat si obezeys al sieu retornament, e aprop sia envessat sobre le sieu col entre las tuas mas, e eleva las cambas de lu.	And the manner of the operation is that you command the patient to return the intestine with his hand to the internal parts of its cavity if it obeys on its return, and then place him on his side between your hands, and elevate the patient's legs.
E aprop sten la codena la qual siec la codena dels testicols a las partidas desus, e inscideys la codena dels testicols tota per le lonc; e aprop fiqua en doas labias de la seccio uncis segon que indigeysses a hubrir la seccio am aquels.	And then open the scrotal sac, which is attached to the upper parts, and incise the scrotal sac entirely along its length; and then place two fingers at the incised section according to where you need to cut the section with those.
E si’ la seccio segon la quantitat que a tu sia possible que de aquela le huou sia foro-getat.	And if the section according to the quantity that you find possible, let the wound be thoroughly closed.
E aprop excorja aquela ciphaqueth les quals so dejos la codena dels testicols, entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc dur de quascuna partida.	And then scrape the scrotal skin which covers the scrotal sac, exposing the white tough layer of each part.
Lahoras tu entromet le tieu dit en aquo que siec le testicol, en aquo que es entre ciphac blanc, le qual es dejos la codena del huou, e entre le ciphac segon, e absolve am aquel’adherencia que es en la partida detras del huou.	And then insert your thumb where the testicle is attached, between the white membrane, which covers the scrotal sac, and between the second membrane, and separate the adhesion in the rear part of the scrotum.
E aprop mau am la ma la codena dels testicols a las partidas deforo, e am aysso exten le ciphac blanc en sus am la ma sinestra, e eleva le huou am le ciphac a la partida de la seccio; e comanda al ministre que extenda le huou ensus e tu dissolveys la adherencia que es detras am solucio complida.	And then place your hand on the scrotum and its surroundings, and at this point extend the white cloth with your left hand, and raise the head to the section; and command the minister to extend the head upwards and you dissolve the adhesion that is behind with complete solution.
E cerqua am les tieus ditz que lay no sia alcuna causa del budel envelopat en le ciphac blanc dur.	And near the ties, it is said that this is not any cause of the intestine enveloped in the white cloth.
Mays si tu atrobas de lu alcuna causa, lahoras tu enpelleys aquel al ventre dejos.	But if you find any cause, then you peel it off to the abdomen, leaving it there.
E aprop tu pren una agulha en la qual sia fiel gros fayt de x fiels, e entromet aquel deves le derier del ciphac, le qual es jos la codena dels testicols, la qual siec seccio; e aprop inscideys las extremitatz las quals emineysso del fiel entro que sian quatre fiels, e aprop compausa alcus de lor sobre alcuna figura en manieyra de crotz; e lia am aquel le ciphac del qual havem dit que es dejos la codena dels testicols am fort liament de dos partz.	And then you take a needle made of thick wire, and insert it near the lower end of the cloth, which is at the base of the scrotum, that section; and then incise the extremities from which the wire emerges, ensuring there are four wires, and then arrange some of them on a cross-like figure. Then wrap the cloth around the area we have said is the base of the scrotum with strong stitches in two parts.
E aprop envolveys las extremitatz dels fiels e lia aquelas am liament vehement entro que alcu dels vayssels que noyrrisso aquels no puscan trametre alcuna causa per so que de aqui no accida apostema caut.	And then envelop the extremities of the cords and tie them tightly with linament, ensuring that none of the vessels nourishing those cords can transmit any cause by which an abscess might occur.
E pausa autra veguada liament segon foro le primier liament, lonh de lu mens tres ditz; e aprop aquestz dos liaments layssa del ciphac le qual es dejos la codena dels testicols la quantitat de la grandeza del dit, e inscideys tot le romanent segon redondeza, e osta de lu le huou.	And tie another time with linament according to the strength of the first linament, at least three fingers away; and between these two ties leave the space which is left by the knot for the string of the testicles the size of a finger, and incise the rest according to roundness, and cover it.
E aprop inscideys en la partida dejos de la codena dels testicols per seccio de la qual corra sanc e sania ayssi cum havem recomtat en aquo que havem dit.	And then incise at the part left by the string of the testicles along a section from which flows both blood and lymph as we have recounted in what we have said.
E aprop aministra lana submersa en oli, e pausa en la plagua; e aministra le liament le qual havem recomtat (e alcunas veguadas le ciphac blanc es cauterizat, le qual havem dit aprop la inscizio de lu temen de flux de sanc, quar motas veguadas accideys aquels) e leyssa le liament entro que per si caia.	And then apply wool soaked in oil, and place it on the wound; apply linament as we have recommended (and after several times, the white cloth is seared, which we mentioned near the incision where there is a flux of blood, for several times this occurs). Leave the linament so that it can dry.
Mays si le cazement de lu es tardat, lahoras de aygua cauda sia embrocat, e pausa sobre aquel entro que caia segon que havem dit.	If the onset of the condition is delayed, then apply cold water and place it over that area as we have said.
E aprop cura la plagua am l’autra curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And then treat the wound on the other side of the body where the wounds are not yet healed.
Capitol .lxvi.	Chapter LXVI.
De hernia ventosa.	On hernia ventosa.
En aquesta hernia no e vist alcu que sia estat ardit sus la curacio de lu am ferr.	In this hernia, there is nothing seen that has been burned during the treatment of it.
E les primiers diyssero que es fayta ayssi cum havem recomtat en la hernia que es am vi; la qual es que tu lies les vayssels aprop la seccio sobre aquela am fecilitat de lu; e aprop secca en le mieg loc en enviro le apostema am aquo que obro aquel, entro que caian les vayssels.	And the first doctors said that it should be done as we have recommended in the hernia case; which is to tie the vessels near the section where there is ease of passage for them; then dry out the middle part and apply a poultice with what I did there, while the vessels are falling.
E cura la plagua segon que havem dit entro que sia sanada.	And treat the wound as we have said until it is healed.
Capitol .lxvii.	Chapter LXVII.
De la disropcio que es fayta en les anguonars.	On the displacement that occurs in the ankles.
Alcunas veguadas endeve ruptura en les angonars ayssi cum havem dit, e emineys le loc.	Some times during a rupture in the arteries as we have said before, you should place the area.
E no deyssen als genetius alcuna causa dels budels al genetius; e si deyssen, aquo es pauc; e retorna s’en en totas horas.	And the surgeons do not give any cause of the hernias to the genius; and if they do give, it is few; and return then in all hours.
Mays si es prolonguat le temps am aquo, es ajustada fissura en le ciphac entro que deysenda le budel en le ciphac; e accideys aquo per la extencio del ciphac le qual es en le angonars ayssi cum havem dit, la qual causa es quar le ciphac es estendut, e aprop es mollificat e·l loc es apostemat e emineys.	But if the time is prolonged, an adjustable fissure in the chyle channel occurs through which the hernia descends into the chyle channel; and this happens due to the extension of the chyle channel, which as we have said is in the arteries. The cause is that the chyle channel extends, and soon becomes softened, and the area becomes suppurated, so you should place it.
E la cura de lu es am cauteri ayssi quo es precedida la narracio de lu.	And the cure for it is with a cautery as described in the preceding narrative.
E alcunas veguadas es curada am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: e es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos entre las tuas mas, e aprop secca le loc de la ruptura dels apostemas emineys am seccio per la latitut segon la quantitat de tres ditz.	And some times it is cured with iron according to this method: and it is that the patient lies on his back between your hands, and soon after drying the area of the rupture of the abscesses, you cauterize it by burning according to the width as much as three fingers' breadth.
E aprop strenh le ciphac blanc que es jos la codena entro que sia descubert.	And then firmly strengthen the white cloth that is under the knee once it is uncovered.
E aprop pren le ray e pausa aquel sobre le loc eminent del ciphac, e prem aquel al preon del ventre.	And then take the needle and place one on the prominent part of the knee, and press the other on the pubic bone.
E aprop cus le dos locs eminentz sobre la extremitat del ray del ciphac, e ajusta am la sutura un de aquels am l’autre.	And then stitch the two prominent parts at the end of the needle on the knee, and adjust one to the other for the suture.
E aprop extratz la extremitat del ray, e no inscidas del ciphac de tot, ni no extenda le huou, ni autra causa ayssi cum yeu te fi saber en la curacio de hernia entestinal.	And then extract the end of the needle, and do not go outside the knee area entirely, nor extend the wound, nor other causes as I trust in the treatment of intestinal hernia.
E aprop cura aquela am la curacio de las plaguas, e cum inscideyses les fiels, mundifica aquela e restaura la plagua entro que sia consolidada; quar le ciphac es contrayt e no es ajustada la eminencia de ruptura.	And then care for that during the treatment of wounds, and as you incise the edges, clean it and restore the wound while it is still consolidated; for the knee contracts and the prominence of rupture is not adjusted.
E cauteri es milhor en aquest loc, quar es pus propda a salut.	And use cautery here, for it is closer to health.
Capitol .lxviii.	Capitol. lxviii.
De mollificacio de la codena dels testiculs.	Of softening the scrotum.
Motas veguadas la codena dels testiculs en alcus homes es mollificada per aysso quar las carns que so entre aquela son mollificadas, e es fedat le reguardament de lu.	When the scrotum is swollen in some men, it is softened by this because the flesh that is within it is softened, and one should guard against it.
Adonc necessari es ad aquel que es preguat en la curacio de lu que fassa jazer le malaute segon le sieu dos, e enscida tota la codena la qual es mollificada sobre la codena natural; e aprop que ajuste doas labias am la sutura.	Then it is necessary for the one who is attending to the cure of him that he cause the patient to lie on his back according to his strength, and completely spread the scrotum which is softened over the natural scrotum; and then adjust two folds at the suture.
E si vols, cus en le comensament la superfluitat de la codena mollificada am tres cozeduras o quatre e am ferma sutura.	And if you wish, suture the excess of the softened scrotum at three or four places and make a firm suture.
E aprop inscideys entre las suturas; e aprop cura per curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat e caian les fiels.	And then incise between the stitches; and afterwards cure by the treatment of the other wounds until it is healed and the threads fall out.
Capitol .lxix.	Chapter LXIX.
De castracio.	Of castration.
Sapias que castratio en nostre ley es excomengada, mays per causa es legut a mi que·m remembre de lu en aquest libre; e no es necessaria la rememoracio de lu sino per doas manieyras, de las quals es la una per so que aquo sia en la sciensa del metge quan es enterroguat de aquela, que sapia la curacio de lu al qual accideys; e l’autra manieyra es que nos motas vetz havem necessitat de castracio de autras bestias per les juvamentz nostres per aquelas, ayssi cum de motos, e de bocs, e de porcs, e de semblantz a las bestias.	Know that castration is excommunicated in our law, but by cause it is allowed to me to remember it in this libretto; and the necessity of remembering it is required for two reasons, of which one is that when asked about it as a doctor, one knows how to cure it if it happens; and the other reason is that we may sometimes need castration for our young animals, such as pigs, goats, and similar beasts.
E donc dic que castracio es fayta en dos manieyras: o per atrissio, o per fissura a seccio.	And thus it is said that castration is performed in two ways: either by excision or by incision.
Mays en aquela que es fayta per atrissio, la via de la opera es que nos fassam cezer la bestia en aygua cauda entro que·ls genetius de lu sian mollificatz e sian linhitz e que pendan.	In that which is performed by excision, the way of the operation is to cut the beast in tail water when the seeds of it are softened and relaxed and hang down.
E aprop pren aquels am la tua ma entro que sian resols e no apparescan dejos le tocament.	And then take those away with your hand when they are resolved and do not appear as marks upon touch.
Mays en castracio fayta per fissura e seccio, cove que tu tenguas la bestia e premas la codena dels testicols de lu am la ma senestra.	In castration performed by incision and excision, make sure that you hold the beast and press the cord of its testicles with your left hand.
E aprop lia le suspensori, e inscideys sobre quascun huou am una seccio entro que dos huous proceseysso.	And then locate the suspensory ligament, and incise over each groove between two processes.
E aprop inscideys aquels pus que auras quascu excorjat.	And then incise those pus that you have excoriated.
E no leysses sobre aquels del ciphac alcuna causa, sino le ciphac subtil le qual es sobre les vazes.	And do not incise those of the scrotum for any cause, but incise the thin one which is over the veins.
E aquesta manieyra de castracio es milhor la qual es fayta per atrissio, quar atrissio fort leu layssa alcuna causa dels testicols per que la bestia desira coyt.	And this method of castration is better which is done by traction, for traction firmly leaves some cause of the testicles so that the beast desires copulation.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And when the wound is healed, treat the sore.
Capitol .lxx.	Capitol.lix.
De la cura de hermafrodozia.	On the treatment of hermaphroditism.
Hermafrodozia en les homes es segon dos manieyras: la una es quar o appar en aquo que siec l’espazi en la codena de testiculs, en aquel que es entre dos testiculs figura quar cunh de femna en la qual so pels.	Hermaphroditism in males occurs according to two methods: one is where the space between the testicles becomes enlarged, and in the other, a female-like characteristic appears between the two testicles.
E alcunas veguadas de aquel corr urina le qual es en la codena dels testiculs.	And sometimes from that condition, it urinates, which urine is located in the space of the testicles.
Mays en las femnas es una specia: e es que·l conh de la femna sobre le pentenilh es ayssi cum dos testiculs de home un pauc de tot yminiheys a la partida deforo ayssi cum le perpucii de home e dos testicols.	In females, it is a special case: where the female characteristic over the pubis is like two testicles in a male, slightly more rounded at the front part like a male's scrotum with the testicles.
E la curacio es de tres specias: de dos dels homes e de una specia de las femnas.	And the cure consists of three species: from two of the men and one species of the women.
E es que cove que tu inscidas aquelas carns ajustadas entro que efuga la emprecio de aquela, e aprop que cures aquelas am curacio de las autras plaguas.	And you must cut those tissues apart where the pain escapes from there, and then cure those with the treatment for other wounds.
E en la segonda specia dels homes de la qual yeys urina la qual es en la codena dels testiculs, no es curacio ni opperacio en lu.	And in the second species of men from which urine is in the cord of the testicles, neither cure nor operation is performed there.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI.
De lentinge e de carn eminent per causas de las femnas.	On the womb and flesh protruding due to women's causes.
Lentige fort leu es ajustada sobre causas naturals entro que es etressat e es fayt leg le reguardament; e alcunas veguadas es magnificada en alcunas femnas en tant entro que es spandit ayssi cum en les homes e perve entro al coito.	When the womb is strong, it is tightly positioned due to natural causes; and in some cases, it becomes enlarged in some women to such an extent that it sags like in men and passes during intercourse.
Adonc cove que tu tenguas la superfluitat de lentinge am la tua ma o am unci e inscidas.	Then you must have the excess of the womb in your hand or a cloth and cut it out.
E no ultimes en inscizio, majorment en le preon de la razit, per so que no endevengua flux de sanc.	And do not finish the cut too much in the lower part of the womb, lest it causes a flow of blood.
E aprop cura aquela am curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanada.	And then attend to that cure of the sores until they are healed.
Mays carn nascuda es carn que nays en le horrifici de la mayre entro que umple aquel, e fort leu es eyssit a las partidas deforo segon semblansa de coa (e per aquo alscus primiers appelero aquo “malautia caudada”); donc cove que nos inscidam ayssi cum inscidem lentinge, e curem aquela entro que sia sanada.	Hidden flesh is flesh that arises in the horror of the mother before it fills that space, and strong flesh is situated outside according to the likeness of the cord (and for this some first called this "caudate malady"); therefore we shall cut thus as we cut the membrane, and cure it until it is healed.
Capitol .lxxii.	Capitol.lix.
De curacio de alratica.	Of the cure of alratica.
Alratica es que le conh de la femna no sia perforat, o sia le trauc petit.	Alratica is when the membrane of the woman is not perforated, or is slightly torn.
E es o natural o accidental.	And it can be natural or accidental.
Accidental es per malautia la qual ha precedit, e aquela es fayta o per carn nada ajustada o per ciphac subtil o espes.	Accidental is due to a malady that preceded it, and it is caused either by flesh that is not properly fitted or by a thin or thick cord.
E es fayt o en le preon de la mayre, o en les costatz de lu, o en le pus sobira de lu, o en le pus bas de lu, e prohibeys de cuoyt e de enprenguacio e de enfantament, e fort leu prohibeys las mestruas.	And it is caused either in the womb of the mother, or in her sides, or in the upper part of her abdomen, or in the lower part of her abdomen. It is forbidden during pregnancy, conception, and childbirth, and particularly forbidden during menstruation.
E la cognicio de aquela es fayta per reguardament de la metrona, si la oppilacio es apparent, propdana; mays si no es apparent, lahoras tu cerqua aquela am les tieus ditz o am le ray.	And the knowledge of that is made by looking at the midwife, if the obstruction is obvious, promptly; but if it is not obvious, then you approach that area with your fingers or with the rod.
Mays si oppilacio es per ciphac subtil, e es propda a las doas labias, lahoras tu coyta e disromp aquela.	But if the obstruction is due to fine fluid, and is close to the two lips, then you touch and disrupt that area.
E es que pauses sobre las doas labias pulvils, e aprop pausa les tieus ditz indicz de amdoas las mas encemps.	And you place powder over the two lips, and then place your fingers with the index fingers on both sides near the area.
E la femna sia sobre le sieu dos, las sieuas coyssas extendudas, e aprop exten las doas labias am forsa entro que aquel ciphac subtil sia romput e la oppilacio sia uberta.	And the woman is on her back, her thighs extended, and then spread the two lips forcefully until that fine fluid is broken and the obstruction is opened.
E aprop pren lana e enbeu le4 en oli e pausa aquela sobre·l loc, e jagua am home le dia per so que·l loc inscis no sia consolidat.	And then take some wool and immerse it in oil, place it over the area, and keep someone watching the place to prevent the incised area from healing too quickly.
Mays si le ciphac es gros e espes, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel am spatum lat o am fuelha de mirta.	But if the fluid is thick and substantial, then you must incise that area with a lancet or with a leaf of myrtle.
Mays si la oppilacio es per carnada, lahoras suspen aquela am unci, e inscideys aquela.	If the obstruction is due to flesh, suspend it by an ounce, and incise it.
E sian am tu las medicinas que fan cessar flux de sanc ses mordicacio, ayssi cum ahacatia, e sanc de drago, e enses, ajustat am album de huou.	And use the medicines that stop the flow of venom from bites and wounds, such as aconite, dragon's blood, and enses, mixed with honey.
E aprop aministra una canulha de plom ampla per so que la plagua no sia consolidada leugierament.	And place a wide leaden tube there so that the inflammation does not become slightly consolidated.
E tengua aquela per alcus jorns e aministra calgua de li sec.	And keep it there for some days and apply cold water.
E aprop sia curada am l’autra curacio de consolidacio entro que sia sanada.	And place it there during the treatment for consolidation until it is healed.
E alcunas vetz accideys en la mayre nativitat de autres carns, e lahoras cove que inscidas segon aquesta manieyra.	And sometimes accidents occur in the natural abundance of other tissues, and then incise according to this manner.
Mays si aysso es per apostema crancos, a l’apostema crancos le qual es en la mayre no sia fayta contrarietat am ferr en deguna manieyra.	If it is due to a chronic abscess, in the chronic abscess which is in the mass, do not apply any iron in any manner.
Capitol .lxxiii.	Capitol. lxxiii.
De la cura de emorroydas e de tayl e de botor roja que accideysso en le conh de las femnas.	For the treatment of hemorrhoids and ulcers and red soreness that occur in the vagina of women.
Emorroydas so apprecio dels orificis de motas venas entro que de aquelas corro mot sanc continuadament; e cum so antiquadas emorroydas e son fayts theyls.	Hemorrhoids are appreciated as the result of small veins within which blood continuously flows; and as ancient hemorrhoids, they form lumps.
E ja yeu he dit en la divisio las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e diyre ayssi aquelas que recebo curacio e aquelas que no recebo curacio.	And I have already said in the division of their species and the signs of them, and will say those that receive treatment and those that do not receive treatment.
Donc dic que emorroydas e theyls quan so en le preon de la mayre e no apparo al sentiment, lahoras en aquelas no sia fayta curacio am ferr.	Therefore, it is said that hemorrhoids and lumps when in the prolapse of the anus and do not appear externally, then in those where treatment has not been done, do not proceed with treatment.
Mays aquelas las quals so en le orrifici de la mayre sobre las quals catz sentiment, so aquelas que so curadas.	But those that are in the anus orifice and on which sensation is present, are those that can be treated.
E cove que tu metas la femna en mayso frega e aprop exten atheyl am les forfexs, o am drap aspre, e inscideys aquelas am las razitz.	And it is recommended that you insert the woman into a warm bath and then extend the lumps with scissors, or with a rough cloth, and incise them with reasons.
E aprop pulveriza sobre aquelas deves le fluxs del sanc de una de las polveras insciscivas ses mordicacio, ayssi cum acassia e semblant ad aquels.	And then powder over those veins the flux of blood from one of the powdered inspissative powders by six bites, as you would a face and appearance to those.
E aprop enpellesca les sieus pes per una hora, e aprop pausa aquela en aygua freja.	And then foment the soles of their feet for an hour, and place her in cold water.
E si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras fay aquela sezer en decoccio de sumat e de scorsas de milgranas e de gualas e de semblantz.	And if the flow of blood persists, then apply that paste in a decoction of sumac and of cloves and of walnuts and of appearances.
E aprop pren farina de ordi e comfiys aquela am miel e vi agre e fay emplastre am aquo sobre le dos de lu.	And then take flour of wormwood and mix it with honey and wine, and make an ointment with this.
E si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, fay adherir am dos ventozas, e a las mamilhas ses escarificatio.	And if the blood is absorbed, that is good; otherwise, apply it to two ventosas, and to the breasts make six incisions.
E aprop pren lana e submergeys aquela am suc de coliandre o am suc de arnagloza o am suc de guarravier am vi pentit e fay adherir al loc; e aprop cura le loc am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then take wool and immerse it in the juice of fennel or in the juice of agrimony or in the juice of woundwort with fermented wine, and apply it to the place; and place an ointment on the area until it is healed.
Mays athyl rog le qual es de aspre reguardament, cove que tu inscidas aquo que a tu appar de aquel segon que he dit en theyl engualment.	May I first ask you who has an unpleasant appearance, fear that you delve into this according to what appears to you as I have said previously in the same manner.
E cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And cure him who is sick.
Capitol .lxxiv.	Capitol LXXIV.
De perforacio de eyssedura accident en la mayre.	On the perforation of the eye in the mayor.
Motas specias de apostemas accideysso en la mayre, ayssi cum cranc e apostema lapident e ulceracios e adhubelat e erpetromens e fistulas emorroyas e raguarrias e thyl e autres apostemas.	Various specific cases of abscesses occurring in the mayor, such as carbuncle, abscess, ulcer, adhubela, erythromema, fistula hemorrhoids, and thy, as well as other abscesses.
E yeu ja he dit aquestas malautias e las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e las curacios de lor en la divisio.	And I have already mentioned these ailments and the specifics of them, as well as their signs, and their treatments in the division.
E cove que yeu digua en aquest tractat de apostema caut le qual ve en la mayre quan es dels apostemas que collegeysso sania, e si vols saber en qual manieyra se fa la opperacio de lu am ferr.	And fear that I mention in this treatise on abscesses to cut which appears in the mayor when it is one of the abscesses that gather health, and if you want to know how the operation is performed for it.
Adonc cove que tu consideres si la dolor de la apostema en le sieu comensament es aguda am percussio e flecma e febre, e vezes aquel enrogezir e si catz sobre aquel le sentiment, lahoras no·t coytes am perforacio de lu, e cura aquel am aquo que ajuda sobre la maturacio entro que cesse la acuitat dels accidentz.	Then consider if the pain in the abscess at its beginning is acute with percussion and flux and fever, and sometimes that reddening and if cat over that the sensation, when there are no punctures in it, and cure that with what helps during the maturation until the acuity of the accidents ceases.
E lahoras cove que tu fassas cezer la femna sobre una cezelha que aia doas cezelhas; e recline sobre le sieu dos e ajusta les sieus pes a la partida pus dejos del ventre, e las sieus coyssas sian expandudas, e pausa les sieus brasses dejos les sieus denols, e lia quascus am liament ad aquo convenient.	Then you should place the woman on a pillow that has two parts; recline her on her side and adjust her legs to the part behind her abdomen, and spread her thighs. Place her arms behind her hips, and tie quilts with linen in accordance with what is appropriate.
E aprop la matrona segua del latz dreyt e aministre le instrument am le qual es ubert le orrifici de la mayre, la forma del qual vindra en aquelas causas que·s faran aprop.	Then the midwife should stay by the wound straight and administer the instrument through which the space of the vagina has been opened, the shape of which will be described in the cases that will be discussed later.
E cove quan vols ministrar aquest instrument que tu fiques am lo ray le preon de la mayre de la femna, e aquo que del instrument es intrat en la mayre no sia mays que·l preon de la mayre e leda le malaute.	When you want to administer this instrument, place it along the edge of the vagina of the woman, and what part of the instrument enters the vagina should not be more than the edge of the vagina and help alleviate the pain.
Mays si l’estrument es major que·l preon de la mayre, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils sobre la textura del preon de la mayre per sso que sia prohibit l’intrament de tot instrument en le preon de la mayre.	But if the instrument is larger than the size of the bowels, then cover it with powder on the texture of the bowel's size so that no foreign object enters the bowel's cavity.
E cove que tu pauses le vertitge que corr en le strument del latz pus desus e que le ministre tengua le strument e revolva le vertitge entro que sia ubert le orrifici de la mayre.	And cover it so that the vitrige that runs in the duct of the gallbladder is placed above, and let the minister hold the instrument and rotate the vitrige until the orifices of the bowels are opened.
E cum appar la excitura, e es tocada am la ma e es leon e molh, lahoras cove que tu secces aquela deves le cap de lu am spatum lat.	And when the excitement appears, and it is touched with the hand and is like a lion and wet, then cover that part by washing the head of it with spatum (a type of sponge or cloth).
E cum la sania es evacuada, lahoras cove que tu pauses en la plagua una meca submersa en oli rozat o oli vert en le qual sia alcuna stiptisitat; e pausa la calca7 en la seccio en le preon de la mayre.	And when the bile is evacuated, then cover the wound with a sponge submerged in mild olive oil or green olive oil with some astringency; and place the lint on the area in the bowels.
E pause deforo la mayre e sobre le pentenilh lana munda submersa en aygua en la qual sian bulidas malvas.	And place over the bowels and on the pelvis a clean woolen cloth submerged in water in which mallows have been boiled.
E aprop sia curada aprop dos dias am enguent le qual conveneys ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And then it is to be treated for about two days with ointment suitable for what needs to be healed.
E alcunas veguadas es lavada la mayre e la plagua enayssi que es cristerisat am aygua e mel, e aprop am aygua en la qual es bulhida razit de liri o de aristologia longua, e aprop retorna al enguent.	And sometimes the liver and wound are washed with an ointment made of honey and wine, then immersed in water in which is dissolved juice of rue or wormwood, and then returned to the application.
E si la plagua es dedintz en la mayre ameguada, lahoras cove que tu sias prohibit de la curacio de lu am ferr, habantz cura aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio.	And if the wound is deep inside the liver, then beware that you must not proceed with the treatment, but take care to do as we have said in the division.
Capitol .lxxv.	Capitol.lix.
A ensenhar las matronas en qual manieyre les enbrios bius sian medicatz quan yeysso segon figura no-natural.	To teach midwives how to properly apply medicines to bruises when they appear according to an unnatural figure.
Necessaria causa es que la matrona conogua en le comensament la figura del enfantament natural per senhals de lu, e es que quan tu vezas la femna expremar a las partidas dejos e desira odorar le ayre, e sobre aquo es enleujada per aquo que sobre ela es del part, e festina le eyssiment del enbrio, lahoras sapias que aquest part es segon figura natural, e es l’eyssiment de lu sobre le sieu cap, e la segondina am aquel o suspensa o pendent del ombelic.	Necessary cause is that the midwife know at the beginning the figure of a natural birth by signs. When you see the female expressing pain at the openings and desiring to smell the air, and over this she is washed with what comes from her, and hastens the appearance of the bruise, then you know that this part appears according to a natural figure, and its appearance is on her head, and the second one is either above or suspended or pendant from the navel.
Donc cum tu vezes aquels senhals, lahoras cove que·l ventre de lu sia compremut per so que l’embrio deysenda leugerament quar quan deyssen sobre le sieu cap, deysen a lu la segondina, e es mondada de aquelas superfluitatz am bona mondificacio.	When you see those signs, then cover the patient's abdomen so that the embryo descends gently; when it is on its head, turn the patient and let the second one perform a good cleansing of those superfluities.
Mays aquel que es otra aquest part es no-natural e no-lausable, quar quan le enbrio es eyssit sobre sos pes e·l cos de lu es eyssit devant le cap de lu e·ls pes de lu, e la ma de lu una, o al pe de lu i, o es eyssit le cap de lu e la ma de lu, o al ventre de lu, e fort leu es convertit sobre le sieu col, e semblant de las figuras de lu no-lausablas.	That which is another to this part is unnatural and unclean, for when the embryo is situated on its feet and the body of the patient is situated in front of the head of the patient and its feet, or one of its hands, or at its side, or its head, or its hand, or its belly, and it is firmly attached to its neck, resembling unclean figures.
Don necessaria causa es a la matrona que sia savia e subtil en totas aquelas causas, e que·s guarde de error e de decepcio.	For necessary causes the midwife must be wise and subtle in all those causes, and guard against error and deception.
E yeu so mostrant tota figura de aquelas, e qual engen es en aquelas per so que sia significat per aquo e sia stat sobre aquo.	And I show all the figures of those, and what each figure means so that it is significant and placed accordingly.
Quan le feyt es eyssit sobre le sieu cap per egrecio natural, e aquel es vehement sobre la femna e es fayt a lu part dificil, e vezes la vertut de lu ja debelitada, lahoras fay aquela sezer , o que las femnas tenguan lu, e evapora le conh de lu am fenugrec coyt e am olis humitz.	When the pain is situated on its head naturally, and it is vehement for the woman and made difficult for her, and sometimes weakens her virtue, then do that sezer, or what women have for it, and evaporate the concoction with fenugreek and honey oils.
E aprop entrometa la metrona entre les sieus ditz espatum petit e fenda am aquel la segondina, o secce aquela am la sua ungla entro que corro aquo que es en ela de humiditat.	And then insert the needle between his so-called small spinals and open a gap at the second one, or dry out that one with its nail into which runs what is in it of moisture.
E preme le ventre de la femna entro que deyssenda le fet.	And press the woman's belly until the fetus descends.
Mays si no deyssen, lahoras cove que la femna sia cristirizada de mucellage de ptilli e mucellage de fenugrec am cizami.	But if it does not descend, then cause the woman to be lubricated with oil of pennyroyal and oil of fennel.
E aprop comanda a lu, aprop le cristeri, que sia compremuda e fay aquela stornudar am condisi; e te la boca de lu e·l nas de lu per huna hora, quar le fet sira foro-getat tantost.	And then command her, by the chrism, that she inhale it while in a sitting position; and cover her mouth and nose for about an hour until the fetus is fully expelled.
E si las doas mas del fet so foro-getadas al comensament, lahoras cove que tu redusiscas aquelas am fecilitat petit a petit.	And if the two parts of the fetus are already fully expelled at the beginning, then cause you to reduce them gradually for facilitation.
Mays si no obezeys al intrament, lahoras pausa la femna sobre una cezelha e leva les pes de lu sus, e aprop concuceys la cezelha sobre la terra; e la femna sia tenguda que no caia deves la concussio.	But if you do not obey the instrument, then place the woman on a bench and lift her feet off it, and then hold the bench over the ground; the woman must be held so that she does not fall due to the concussion.
E si las mas no son dedintz tornadas e morr le fet, lahoras inscideys aquelas e extratz le romament del fet o lia le cors a la ma de lu am drap e extratz aquel am equalitat, quar aquel sira foro-getat.	And if the hands are not already turned inside and the cut is closed, then incise there and extract the clot or draw the body with a cloth and extract it equally, so that it will be thoroughly cleansed.
De eyssiment del embrio sobre les sieus pes.	From the embryo over its feet.
Quan le fet yeys sobre les sieus pes, lahoras cove que tu impelliscas aquels en sus, e aprop convertas le fet petit, e aprop que engualhes aquel, e aprop que prenguas un pe de lu e extendas aquels petit a petit.	When the cut is over its feet, then push those parts inwards, and gradually make the cut smaller, and ensure that you pinch a piece of it and slowly stretch those parts little by little.
Mays cum son eyssit entro a las coyssas, lahoras tu comanda a lu que se exprema, e fay aquela extornudar am condizi, quar sira foro-getat si Deus lo vol.	More when it is situated between the thighs, then command him to express it, and make that area expand with a compress, for it will be thoroughly cleansed if God wills it.
E si no es foro-getat am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras tu retorna le fet petit a petit entro que pauses aquel segon figura natural, quar aquel sira lahoras foro-getat am leugier eyssiment.	And if it is not thoroughly cleansed by what we have recommended, then return the cut to its smaller size gradually as you place it according to a natural figure, for it will then be thoroughly cleansed by slight incision.
E si es prohibit am tot aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras pren de musellage de altea e de goma dissolvuda, e percuteys tot en le mortier per bona percussio, e aprop linieys am aquo le conh de la femna, el pus bas del ventre de lu.	And if all that we have recommended is prohibited, then take a mixture of alum and dissolved gum, grind them together in the mortar with good pounding, and apply this to the woman's skin, just below the lower part of her abdomen.
E aprop fay aquela cezer en aygua tebeza, entro que consegua les ypocondias.	And then make that cut in clear water, when you can reach the hypochondria.
E cum vezes que las partidas dejos de lu so lenificadas, lahoras fay a lu subfumiguacio de mirta e sub-pausa aquela a lu.	And when you notice that the parts around the sore are alleviated, then perform a mirtle fumigation on it and place your hand over it.
E quan te la sub-fumiguacio per una hora, lahoras tu la fay sezer sobre una cezelha, e aprop fay aquela stornudar e extrenh la boca de lu, e levas de aquela, e prem la partida pus bassa del ventre de lu am leugiera compressio, quar le fet sira tantost foro-getat.	And when you have performed the fumigation for an hour, then make that incision over a cauterizing implement, and immediately perform a snuffing operation at the mouth of it, and lift it, and apply a light compression to the lower part of the abdomen, which will cause the wound to heal quickly.
Eyssiment del fet sobre les sieus denols e las suas mas.	Place the wound on its side and hold its hands.
Quan le fet eyssira segon aquesta forma, lahoras tu engenies en entrometen las suas mas petit a petit; e aprop la femna stia evessada sobre le sieu col, e les pes de lu pengo en jos, e aquelas sia jasent sobre le lieyt, e complegua las suas mas.	When the wound heals in this manner, then gradually insert its hands; and place the woman reclining on her side, with her feet hanging down, and those should be positioned over the bed, and hold her hands.
E aprop prem sobre le ventre de lu petit a petit, e aprop extratz aquo que es dejos les pes de lu de las aurelhas entro que sia preparada en la partida pus dejos.	And gradually apply pressure to the abdomen, and when the feet are ready to be removed from the pillows, extract them as soon as they are prepared in the lower part.
E si le fet no es fora-getat, lahoras pren les pes de lu e mau aquels am movement vehement, e aprop prem aquo que es sobre les ypocondres petit a petit entro que le fet puege a las partidas desus.	And if the wound is not stitched, then take the feet and move them with vigorous movement, and place what is on the sides of the hypochondria gradually close to where the wound opens above.
E aprop entrometa las suas mas e engualhe le fet petit a petit, e comanda a la femna que se exprema entro que le fet sia foro-getat.	And gradually insert their hands and tie the wound tightly, and command the woman to express it while the wound is not stitched.
Eyssiment del fet latutidinalment pendent una de las suas mas.	Suture the wound longitudinally with one of their hands.
Sia engeniat en reduccio de la ma de lu, mays si no podes aquela reduzir, lahoras eleva la femna e fe aquela anar.	Tighten the hand on the reduction of the patient's hand, but if you cannot reduce it, then lift the woman and apply it there.
E si anar no pot, lahoras fay la jazer sobre le lieyt, e concuteys las coyssas de lu am concussio vehement, e aprop aministra liamentz les quals yeu e recomtatz de mucillages.	And if it cannot be applied, then place the stone on the loins, and shake the patient's thighs with vigorous concussion, and then administer liniments which you have prepared from mucilages.
E si es vengut le enfantament, lahoras fay aquela sezer sobre cezelha, e aprop studia sobre la reduccio de la ma, e enguala le fet segon figura natural, e fay stornudar la femna e comanda a lu que comprema a si entro que sia foro-getat.	And if the childbirth has come, then place the stone on the seam, and study the reduction of the hand, and tie the wound according to its natural figure, and make the woman sneeze and command her to hold it until the wound is stitched.
Eyssiment del fet sobre·l col expandudas las suas mas e la fassia de lu es al dos de la sua mayre.	Raise the foot above the heart spread out their hands and the foot's surface is towards the palm of the hand.
Cove que la matrona tengua la ma del fet e aprop revolva aquel petit a petit, e eque aquel am facilitat.	Make sure the midwife holds the foot and gently rotates it little by little, so that it becomes easier to manage.
E cum es e quant so es engualhat, e lahoras pausa sobre le conh de lu aquo que havem recomtat de oli e de mucellages.	And when it is equalized and settled, then place it over the thigh as we have advised with oil and ointments.
E aprop comandas a lu que·s maugua petit a petit, e quan auras feyt aquo, lahoras fay aquela cezer sobre una cezelha e comanda li que sia inclinada sobre le latz dreyt, e aprop comanda a lu que sia compremuda; e fay aquela stornudar am condizi.	And then command that it be moistened little by little, and when you have done this, then pour the decoction over a cloth and command that it be inclined over the right side, and then command that it be warm. And make the patient breathe through the nostril.
Exitus foetus praeparati super latus.	The prepared fetus is placed on the side.
Quan deyssen a horrifici de la mayre segon aquesta manieyra, considera, e lahoras tu inscideys la segondina am la tua ungla entro que sia evacuada de la humiditat.	When the mother's pains occur according to this method, consider it, and then incise the second stage with your knife so that it is evacuated of moisture.
E si le fet es suspendut sobre la cara e·l col de lu, lahoras tu inscideys aquela del embelic, per so que no sia retengut e mora.	And if the foot is hanging over the face and neck of the mother, then incise the episiotomy, so that it is not retained and leads to complications.
E aprop empelleys le fet a las partidas dedintz entro que pauses aquel segon que cove, e manda a la femna que comprema a si alcunas veguadas, e el sira fora-getat am eyssiment leugier, si Dieus o vol.	And then push the fetus to the internal parts between which you place the other as it fits, and order the woman to hold herself several times, and the pain will be slightly alleviated, if God wills.
Exitus geminorum aut foetuum multorum.	The exit of twins or many fetuses.
Sapias que gemels motas veguadas so natz, e alcunas vetz naysso tres o quatre , mays aquo es estranh e tart s’endeve; mays v so causas foro natura, e no vivo.	Know that twins or spots of many fetuses are naturally born, and sometimes there are even three or four. But this is strange and worth investigating; mostly these are causes from nature, and not from a living cause.
E conte aquelas, ja sia que sian montiplicatz, una segondina, e son seperatz per ciphac, distingen aquels enter le liguament en l’ombilic de cascun de aquels E alcunas veguadas so foro-getatz ayssi cum es un fet per eyssiment natural leugier, e so eysitz alcunas veguadas per eyssiment no-lausabla ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And regarding these, whether they are multiple or a second one, they are separated by ciphac. They distinguish those within the ligament at the navel of each of them. Sometimes they are naturally expelled after several times as if it were a fetus through a light natural expulsion, and some remain for several times as if they cannot be expelled, as we have reported.
E si son dificils alcus de lor deves le enfantament e perveno ad aquo que havem dit de las figuras no-naturals, lahoras tu cura aquels ayssi cum havem recontat.	And if they are difficult to expel, you should induce labor and proceed to what we have said about unnatural figures. Then you care for them as we have reported.
E si’ la matrona subtil e fassa aquo que fa am facilitat e subtilitat, e am tarditat, e sia ingeniat segon tota figura segon que es a lu preparat de l’engen amenant a salut.	And if the midwife is subtle and does what she does with ease and subtlety, and with delay, and be ingenious according to all figure as it is prepared for her bringing about health.
Rememoratio eius quod formatur in matrice ex embrionibus et Abortiuntur.	Remembrance of that which is formed in the matrix from embryos and are aborted.
Alcunas veguadas son formatz en la mayre un, e dos, e tres, e quatre, e v, e vi, e vii, e mays x, e ja es deves mi verificat que una femna abortem ne getet vi, e una autra x totz formatz, la qual causa fo fayta per mensuracio dels glorios savis.	Some gestations are formed in the matrix one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, and more ten, and you must verify that a female aborts bearing a six, and another ten formed, the cause of which is made by the measure of the glorious sages.
E tot aysso cove que sia en la sciencia de la matrona quar fort leu ad aquela parve semblant de aquo, e donc opause se ad aquo am so que cove.	And all this covers what is in the science of the midwife that she holds to it when it seems like this, and therefore places her hand on it according to what is proper.
Capitol .lxxvi.	Chapter LXXVI.
De extraccio del fet quan es mort.	On the extraction of the fetus when it is dead.
Quan tu curas le fet mort am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la medicacio e no es defora eyssit, e tu yest forsat usar de opperacio am ma, lahoras cove que consideras si la femna es de sana vertut e no es am alcu dels accidentz per les quals sobre ela es temuda perdicio.	When you treat the dead fetus as we have said in the division of medication and it is not outside the body, then you must use surgery more. Consider whether the woman is of good constitution and not among those accidents for which her danger is feared.
Lahoras cove que la femna sia envessada sobre le lieyt sobre le sieu dos, e sia le cap de lu enclinat enjos e las coyssas de lu sian elevadas.	When the woman is placed lying on her back, and her head is inclined sideways, and her thighs are elevated.
E·l ministre tengua aquela de doas partz o sia liada en le lieyt per so que·l cos de lu no se extenda deves la extraccio del fet.	The minister should hold that [area] with two hands or tie it to the bed so that the body does not extend during the extraction of the fetus.
E aprop tu humecta la boca de la mayre de lu am olis humitz e am mucellage de altea e de fenugrec e de semensa de li.	And then moisten the mouth of the mare with oils, honey, and juice from alfalfa and fennel and lemon.
E aprop unte la matrona la sua ma am aquels olis e mucellages, e aprop entrometa la sua ma am fecilitat en la mayre, e aprop cerque am la ma loc en le qual fique les uncis en le fet.	And then the midwife should anoint her hand with those oils and honey, and place her hand with facilitation in the mare, and seek with her hand the location where the fingers should be placed on the fetus.
E locs convenient en aquo: adonc tu considera si le fet es preparat que deysenda sobre le sieu cap, e lahoras tu fique les uncis en les huels de lu, o en le col, o en la boca, o en le palat, o dejos la barba, o en la furcula de lu, o en les locs propdas de las costas, o dejos les ypocondres.	Place the fingers accordingly: then consider if the fetus is ready to be delivered through its head, and then place the fingers in the folds of the head, or at the neck, or at the mouth, or at the palate, or leave the beard, or at the furcula, or at the proper locations on the ribs, or leave the hypochondria.
Mays si le deysendiment es sobre les pes de lu, lahoras en le pentenilh, o en le mieg de las costas.	And if the descent is on his feet, at the ankle, or in the middle of the back.
E cove que tengua le unci am la ma dreyta, e pausa la curvitat de lu en aquel loc le qual es entre les ditz de la ma senestra, e entrometa la ma am facilitat e fique le unci en alcu de aquels locs les quals havem ditz, entro que pervengua a la causa boyda.	And let him hold the thumb with his right hand, curve it at that place which is between the fingers of his left hand, and insert your hand easily, placing the thumb in one of those places we have mentioned, until you reach the affected area.
E aprop pause e fique en la apposicio de lu un autre unci, o le tertz si es necessitat, per so que sia atraccio engual, e no sia extencio segon la sua rectetut tant solament.	And then place and keep the other thumb, or the third if necessary, in such a way that it is an equal counterpressure, and not extension according to its straightness alone.
Ans sia maugut a tota partida, per so que l’eyssiment de lu sia alleujat ayssi cum es fayt en dent deves la eradicacio de lu.	And let it be gently moved in all directions, so that the tension of the thumb is alleviated as is done in extracting a tooth.
E cove en lu aquo que es entre lor que la extencio sia mollificada; e si alcuna partida de lu es retenguda, lahoras cove que la matrona unte alcus sieus ditz am oli e entrometa aquels espertament e revolva am aquels aquo que es retengut.	And let it be between them so that the extension is softened; and if any part of it is retained, then let the midwife apply some of her fingers with oil and insert those expertly and rotate them where the retention is.
Donc si la partida del fet es fora-getada, lahoras les uncis sian permudatz entra loc le qual sia pus aut; e fay aysso entro que tot le fet sia fora-getat.	Then if the part of the fetus is left out, let the fingers be inserted where it may be; and do so while all the fetus is expelled.
Mays si la ma es eyssida denant l’autra, e no es possible reduzir aquela per la coartacio de lu, lahoras cove que drap sia envolopat sobre aquela; e aprop extratz aquela entro que tota sia fora-getada, e inscideys aquela o en la junctura de la ma o en le coyde.	But if the hand is inserted first, and it is not possible to reduce it due to the contraction, then cover that part with a cloth; and soon extract it while all of it is expelled, and incise it at the junction of the hand or in the wrist.
E ayssi cove que fassas en l’autra ma e en les dos pes.	And do the same with the other hand and both feet.
Mays si le cap del fet es gran, o accideys a lu coartacio en le eyssiment, o es en le cap de lu aygua ajustada, lahoras cove que entrometa entre les ditz espatum spinos e fenda le cap e extragua la aygua, o que discroba aquel am un instrument le qual es nompnat “alundat”, la forma del qual vindra am las formas dels autres instruments en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	But if the head of the fetus is large, or it experiences contraction during insertion, or there is water retained in its head, then insert a corkscrew between the fingers and cut open the head to drain the water, or use an instrument called "alundat," the shape of which will be described among the forms of other instruments in the chapter that follows this.
E semblantment fassa si·l fet es de gran cap per natura: e lahoras cove que inscida aquel am algematu, o que prengua aquel am alunda ayssi cum havem dit; e aprop extra les osses am les forceps.	And do the same if the fetus has a large head by nature: then incise that area with a ring knife, or use the alundat as we have said; and soon extract the bones with forceps.
E si le cap es eyssit e es coartat deves la furcula, lahoras sia fendut entro que la humiditat la qual es en le pietz sia efunduda.	And if the head is pressed and constricted, you should open the furcula, at which point let the humidity that is in the feet be infused.
Mays si no es complicat, ni obezeys a eyssiment, lahoras tu inscideys le cap tantost segon que a tu sira possible.	And if it is not complicated, nor opposed to incision, then you should cut the head as soon as possible according to what seems possible.
E si le dejos del ventre es apostemat o es en lu ydropici, lahoras cove que tu perfores aquel entro que corro la humiditat que es en lu.	And if the parts below the belly are suppurated or in edema, then you must perforate it at which point allow the humidity that is within to drain.
Mays si le fet es sobre les sieus pes, lahoras la atraccio de lu es leugiera e la direccio de lu a la boca de la mayre es leugiera.	And if the fistula is near the feet, then the attraction of it is slight and its direction to the mouth of the main vessel is slight.
Mays si es coartat deves le ventre e·l pietz, lahoras cove que tu extraguas aquel am drap le qual auras envolopat sobre la tua ma, e que fendes le ventre e·l pietz entro que corra aquo que es en aquels.	And if it is constricted, you should incise the belly and the foot, at which point you must extract that piece of cloth which you have wrapped around your hand, and incise the belly and the foot at the point where what is within flows out.
Mays si les autres membres so ostatz e torna le cap, lahoras la metrona entrometa la ma senestra; mays si la boca de la mayre es huberta, lahoras intrometa la ma en le preon de layre, e cerque am aquela le cap, e atira aquel am les ditz entro a la boca de la mayre, e aprop entrometa en lu un unci, o dos uncis, e atire lu am aquels.	And if the other limbs are swollen and return to their normal state, then the surgeon should insert her left hand; and if the mouth of the main vessel is opened, then she should insert her hand into the groina vein, and search for the head, and push it with her fingers into the mouth of the main vessel, and then insert one or two unciae, and push them there.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada per apostema caut le qual accideys a l’u, lahoras cove que no sia trebelhat sobre lu; abantz cove lahoras aministrar efusio de causas humidas grassas.	And if the mouth of the main vein is constricted by an abscess, when it happens to someone, then ensure that it is not pressed on; first, ensure that you administer an effusion of moist fatty causes.
E aministre emplastres; e segua le pacient en ayguas que mollifican e humectan.	And administer plasters; and follow the patient with waters that soften and moisten.
E si le fet es sobre le sieu costat, lahoras si possible es, sia agulat: e sia aministrat aquo que havem dit en le fet viu.	And if the pus is on his side, then it is possible to lance it: and administer what we have said about lancing the live abscess.
E si aquo no es possible, lahoras sia inscidit en pessas, e sia extrayt.	And if that is not possible, then incise in pieces, and extract.
E cove que non layssas alcuna causa dedintz de la segondina.	And ensure that you do not leave any cause inside the abscess.
E cum tu auras complida tota la tua opperacio, lahoras aministra aquo que havem dit de la curacio en les apostemas cautz les quals accideysso de la mayre.	And when you have completed your operation, then administer what we have said about the treatment of abscesses caused by the main vein.
E si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras deyssendas en ayguas stipticas e aministra l’autra curacio.	And if there is a flow of blood, then apply cold waters and administer the other treatment.
E yeu ja e vist una femna en le ventre de la qual era fet mort, e aprop sobre aquel foc autra veguada emprenhada, e aprop foc mort es le fet autre.	And I have already seen a woman in her womb where one child was dead, and nearby another pregnancy began, and the other fire is the death of another.
Accidit al u aprop lonc temps apostema en le sieu embelic; e inflat es entro que foc ubert, e comensec a getar brac.	It happens that after a long time a boil forms in the same place; and when it inflates open, it begins to discharge pus.
E yeu fu appelhat a la cura de lu, e medicat a lu per lonc temps, e la plagua no es consolidada.	And I was called to treat it, and medicated it for a long time, but the wound did not heal.
Adonc yeu pausegui sobre lu de alscunas causas emplastra de forta atraccio, e eyssic de lu un os, e aprop passero alcus jorns, e eyssic un autre os; e yeu fu trop meravilhat, cum en le ventre no sia os.	Then I placed my hand over it using some strong adhesive plaster, and applied an osseous substance to it, and after a few days, I applied another. I was greatly surprised, for in the wound there is no bone.
E adonc yeu cogitegui que eran dels osses del fet mort.	And then I realized that they were from the bones of the dead fetus.
Donc yeu enguisigui la plagua, e extrayssi de lu motz osses , la femna existent en las sieuas milhos disposicios, e ja visquec en tal manieyra per lonc temps, correc de lu un petit de brac.	Then I cauterized the wound, and extracted the bones from it. The woman was in such a condition as to have passed this way for a long time, and I cured her with a small incision.
E yeu no afermegui asso esser stranh, sino quar en aquo es sciensa e ajutori ad aquo que le metge artifec am la ma per curacio aministra.	And I do not consider this strange, but rather that in this there is science and help for what the physician administers through his hand for treatment.
De las formas dels instrumentz que so necessaris a extrayre le fet.	Of the forms of the instruments that are necessary to extract the stone.
Forma de vertitge am la qual es uberta la mayre:	Form for vertigo at which the liver is opened:
Aquesta es la forma de strenhedor en le qual so engualhatz les libres, al qual engualhament sian dos virtitges en doas extremitatz de dos futz.	This is the form of strengthener in which you join the ligaments, at which joining there are two vertigo stones at the ends of two rods.
May empero aquesta virtitge cove que sia pus subtil de strictori, e sia fayt o de eba o de fust de boys.	However, let this vertigo stone be more subtle in structure, and made of eba or wood.
E sia la latitut de quascun fust quays dos ditz e le marge de quascu amdos quays un dit, e la longitut de quascu es un palm e mig; e en le mieg loc de dos fustz so dos ajustaments de aquel meteys fustz les quals ja son fermatz, dels quals la longitut es la maytat de un palm e un pauc mes, e la latitut de quascu es quay dos ditz, o un pauc mes.	And let the width of each rod be as wide as two fingers, and the margin on both sides as wide as one finger. Let the length of each be a palm and a half; and in the middle location of the two rods, there are two joints of that same type of rod, which are already fixed. The length of each joint is about a palm and a little more, and the width of each is as wide as two fingers, or a little more.
E aquestz dos additamentz sian entromeses en la boca de la mayre per que sia uberta am aquels quan tu revolves las doas prescriptas virtigges.	And these two additional items be inserted in the mouth of the uterus so that they be open when you move the two prescribed virtues.
Forma autra semblant de aquela pus subtil e pus leugiera:	Form another one similar to that, fine and very light:
Sia fayta de fustz de eba o de boys segon la semblansa de forceps.	Make it of silk or linen thread according to the likeness of forceps.
Mays empero en la extremitat de lu so dos additament ayssi cum vezes, e la longitut de aquels additament es quays un palm, e la latitut de quascu es dos ditz.	But at the extremity of each, there are two additional pieces as you see, and the length of those pieces is about one palm, and the width of each is two fingers.
E cum tu vols am aquels ubrir la mayre, lahoras tu fay cezer la femna sobre le lieyt les pes pendentz, ubert aquo que es entre las coyssas de lu.	And when you want to open the uterus, then place the woman on her side with her feet hanging down, opening what is between her thighs.
E aprop obre la tua ma am le instrument ayssi cum fas am forfexs engualment segon la quantitat que vols de la aprecio de la boca de la mayre entro que la metrona fassa so que vols.	Then open your hand with the instrument as you would with scissors equally according to the quantity you want of the size of the mouth of the uterus, so that the pincers do what you want.
La forma de vertitge la qual diysero les antics:	The form of the virtue which the ancients would say:
Forma de impellent am le qual es empellit le fet:	Form of pressing which is applied to the fist:
Forma de amisidat2 am le qual es conterit le cap gran	Form of holding in which the large head is contained
E es asemblat a forceps al qual so dentz en la extremitat, ayssi cum vezes, e alcunas veguadas es fayt lonc ayssi cum forceps segon aquesta forma, ayssi cum vezes, al qual so dentz ayssi cum dentz de ressegua am le qual es inscidit e conterit.	And it is assembled to forceps which have teeth at the extremity, as you see. Sometimes it is made long like forceps according to this form, as you see, with teeth like drawing pliers, into which is inserted and contained.
Forma de amesidat pauc:	Form of holding lightly:
Forma de unci havent una spina:	Form of holding with one hand having a spine:
Forma de unci havent doas spinas:	Form of holding with one hand having two spines:
Forma de forceps a la qual so dentz de cerra am le qual le cap del fet sia conterit:	Form of forceps to which closing teeth are applied, in which the head of the fetus is contained:
Forma de spatum havent dos extremitatz am le qual le cap es abscindit:	Form of spoon having two extremities, in which the head is incised:
Forma de dos espatums latz:	Form of two large spoons:
Totz aquels instrumentz so excersitatz, e quan mes so multiplicadas las specias de aquel e so preparadas deves le artifexs, quant es pus leugier a la sua opperacio e pus aut deves les homes per la sua quantitat.	All these instruments are exercised, and when more species of those are multiplied, the workmen should prepare them, making their operation as light as possible and providing more of them in quantity.
E no obres de aquels instrumentz ja sia qua sia deves tu aparalhat, quar la necessitat de aquels no es excusabla.	And do not delay in preparing those instruments, for the need is urgent.
De extraccio de la segondina.	From the extraction of the second child.
Quan la segondina es retenguda deves le enfantament, lahoras cove que tu comandes a la malautae que retengua le sieu ale, e aprop fay aquela stornudar am condizi, e strenh la tua ma sobre la boca de lu e sobre las nars de lu, e si per aysso es defora eyssit, bo es.	When the second child is retained, you must induce labor, while commanding the patient to hold her breath, and then perform that maneuver with caution, and strengthen your hand over her mouth and nose. If she gives birth by this means, it is well.
E sino, lahoras tu pren una ola e perfora en la cuberta un trauc e pausa en aquela erbas ubrent la boca de la mayre, ayssi cum calament e ruda e anet e camamilla e scicados arabic e cassia lignea e santaurea.	And if not, then take a rod and perforate in the cover a hole and pause there over burning herbs near the mother's mouth, as with calamus, rue, nettle, camomile, scirpus Arabic, and cinnamon bark.
Totas aquestas erbas o alcunas de lor sian submersas en aygua en la ola, e pausa aquela sobre le foc.	All these herbs or some of them may be submerged in water in the rod, and place that over the fire.
E aprop pausa una canula de canaviera en la boca de la mayre, e tengua aquela entro que la evapor vengua a la concavitat de la mayre.	And place a cane tube in the mother's mouth, and hold that there so that the vapor comes to the cavity of the mother.
E aprop fay aquela stornudar ayssi cum havem dit, e la segondina sira fora-getada am velocitat.	And then do that sneezing exercise as we have said before, and the second one shall be done quickly.
Mays si roman aprop aquesta curacio e no es eyssida, lahoras tu comanda a la matrona que submerge la sua ma sinistra en oli sizami o en micellage de altea, e aprop entrometa aquela en le conh e queresca am aquela la segondina, e cum aquela auras trobada, lahoras pren la e exten aquela pauc a pauc Mays si es annexsa en le preon de la mayre, lahoras entrometa la sua ma segon que havem recomtat, e quan aura trobat la segondina, extragua aquela petit a petit segon rectetut per so que la mayre no caja deves la atraccio vehement.	And if this does not work for this cure, then you command the midwife to submerge her left hand in sesame oil or in the herb extract of helichrysum, and then insert that into the womb and seek out with that the second one, as you have found. And then take it and extend it little by little. And if it is attached at the base of the mother's hand, then insert her hand according to what we have recommended, and when you have found the second one, extract it little by little according to correctness so that the mother does not fall due to the strong pull.
Abantz cove que sia permudada als costatz dreyt e sinestre am facilitat.	Before this is performed on both right and left sides with ease.
E aprop sia ajustat en la quantitat de atraccio, quar ela obedira e evasira de adhirencia.	And then adjust the amount of traction so that it obeys and avoids adhesion.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada, nos ja havem recomtat la curacio am sturnutacio e am medicacio de la ola am erbas.	And if the mouth of the mother is constricted, we have already recommended the cure with sneezing and the application of an oil with herbs.
Mays si no es fora-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recomtadas, lahoras guarda te que no fetigues sobre aquela en iteracio de abstracio, mays empero cove que aquo que es eyssit de lu a la boca de la mayre lies a la coyssa de la femna, e aprop cristeriza aquela am enguent e tetrafarmacon; quar aquel fara poyrir aquela aprop alcus dias e sira dissolvuda e sira fora-getada.	If all the causes we have recounted are not exhausted, then guard that you do not fatigue her repeatedly in abstraction, but instead anoint and apply tetra-pharmaca to the area at the entrance of the large intestine near the woman's thigh; thereafter chrismate it with ointment and tetrapharmacon; for this will cause it to diminish and be resolved within a few days and will be forgotten.
Mays quan se poyreys, es de lu elevada mala audor al cap, e al estomac, e aquo ledeys la malauta; e adonc cove que sian aministradas sub-fumiguacios e convenientz ad aquo.	When it flows, raise the bad humor to the head, and to the stomach, and this leads to the illness; then ensure that sub-fumigations and appropriate remedies are administered for this.
Mays alcus dels Antics ja so esproatz sub-fumigacio de nazitort e de figuas seccas.	Some of the Ancients have recommended sub-fumigations with nitre and dry figs.
Forma de instrument am le qual la femna es sub-fumiguada deves la retentio de mestruas e de la segondina:	Form of the instrument with which the woman is sub-fumigated, you should retain her menses and the second passage:
Sia fayta de veyre o de eram.	It should be made of iron or copper.
E sia pausada la extremitat subtil en le conh e la extremitat ampla sobre le foc, e la sub-fumiguacio sia pausada sobre las brazas del foc.	And place the thin end in the cone and the wide end over the fire, and position the sub-fumigation over the flames.
E tengua aquela entro que sia consumida aquela sub-fumiguacio e itera·n autra.	And hold that there while the subfumigation is consumed and they iterate another.
De curacio del cul del enfant no-perforat.	For the treatment of an unperforated anal condition.
Motz enfantz naysso e les culs de lu no so perforatz, les quals ya ciphac subtil e opilat.	When the child is sick and the anus is not perforated, which have already been dressed with a fine and padded material.
Adonc cove a la matrona que perfore am le sieu dit aquel ciphac; e sino, perfora aquel am spatum agut, e guarda se que no toque le lacert.	Then have the midwife perforate with her said dressing; or, if not, perforate it with a sharp spatula, and be sure that she does not touch the wound.
E aprop pause sobre aquel lana enfusa en vi e oli; e aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia senat.	Then place it over the area enveloped in wine and oil; and apply the ointment until it is absorbed.
Mays si temes que sia opilat, lahoras pausa en le trauc una canula per motz dias, e osta la quan le enfant voldra degerir.	But if you fear it has dried out, then place a tube in the tract for several days, and wait until the child is ready to digest.
E ja accideys oppilacio del cul per consolidacio de plagua o de apostema; adonc cove que aquela consolidacio sia inscidida, e aprop sia curada am aquo que avem dit de la curacio e del plom.	And if an abscess forms in the anus for the consolidation of a boil or an apsema; then have that consolidation incised, and treat it with what we have said about the treatment and the lead.
De curacio de las fistulas que endeveno dejos.	For the treatment of fistulas that discharge.
Las fistulas que endeveno en la partida dejos pus bassa so nodacio e grossetut las quals endeveno prop del cul defora o en l’espazi de la una partida.	The fistulas that discharge lower down are nodacious and gross, those that discharge close to the buttocks or in the space of one side.
E es una fistula o motas.	And it is a fistula or spots.
E cum aquela nodacio es antiquada e corr de la humiditat aygosa blanca o poyridura subtil, e alcunas veguadas so de aquestas fistulas alcunas penetrantz.	And when that nodosity is old and flows with watery white or subtle suppuration, sometimes these fistulas penetrate.
E aquelas penetrantz so conogudas per aquo que es eyssit de aquelas per la egressio e per ventosetat; e alcunas vetz use le malaute de egressio, e fort leu es eyssit de aquelas verm.	And those that penetrate are known by what they result from those due to discharge and windiness; sometimes the patient experiences difficulty in discharge, and strongly are they caused by those worms.
E so de aquelas fistulas alcunas veguadas en l’espazi penetrantz entro a la vesica, e entro al meat de la vergua; e so de aquelas penetrantz entro la junctura de la coyssa e entro al notz de la coeta.	And some of these fistulas, in certain cases, penetrate into the space between the bladder and the flesh of the groin; and those that penetrate into the joint of the thigh and into the notch of the scrotum.
E aquo en que es conoguda fistula penetrant entro al cul e no-penetrant, es que tu metas le tieu dit endic en le cul, e entrometas tenta subtil de eram o de ferr en la fistula quan no y es turtuositat.	And to know whether a penetrating fistula goes into the buttock or does not penetrate, insert your finger into the buttock and carefully introduce a fine probe of reed or iron into the fistula when there is no purulence.
Mays si en aquela es turtuositat, lahoras entromet en aquela tenta subtil de plom o de pels de caval entro que tu sentas la tenta o le pel en le tieu dit.	But if there is hardness, then insert a small probe of lead or horsehair between which you feel the tissue or hair.
E si no sentas aquela de tot ni no procezeys del trauc alcuna causa de egestio ni verm ni ventositat, ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras sapias que es no-penetrant, e lahoras coyta te a la curacio.	And if you do not feel it at all, nor proceed from that any cause of evacuation, worm, or hardness, as we have said, then you know it is non-penetrant, and you should apply a cure.
E quan la fistula es penetrant entro a la vesica o entro al meat de la vergua, lahoras la significacio de lu es eyssiment de urina de aquela e prohibicio de lu ad aysso que·l loc am medicina sia consolidat.	And when the fistula is penetrant into the bladder or into the flesh of the penis, then its significance is retention of urine from that and prohibition thereof until the area has been medically consolidated.
Mays si es penetrant entro la junctura de la coyssa o entro al os e envencio de dolor en le circuit, lahoras senhal de lu es que la tenta perve entro aqui si en lu no es turtuositat entro al os, e envencio de dolor en le circuit de la partida; e que de lu yeys poyredura tostemps; e que no val en aquela medicacio, ni es consolidada am enguent.	But if it is penetrant into the joint of the thigh or into the bone and causes pain in the circuit, then its sign is that the tissue permeates here if there is no hardness in the bone, and pain in the circuit of the part; and that it has always been redness; and that it does not respond to that medical treatment, nor is it consolidated by ointment.
E en totas aquelas fistulas penetrant no es curacio de tot, e la curacio de aquelas es trebalh e vanetat dels folyls metges sobre·l qual so fermatz.	And in all those penetrant fistulas, complete cure is not achieved, and the cure of those is work and the diligence of the surgeon over which they are established.
Mays en aquela que no es penetrant e no antiqua, sanacio am ferr es sperada segon que yeu a tu recomtare, e aquo que ja yeu e proat.	In those that are not penetrating and not old, cure them with iron as I will recount to you later, and what is already applied and prepared.
E es que le malaute jagua entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos e eleva las cambas de lu entro sus, las coyssas sian enclinadas al ventre de lu, e aprop entromet tenta de plom, o de eram si es en la fistula turtuositat, entro que sapias le loc on perve la tenta.	And the patient lies on their side with their knees drawn up to their chest, the thighs inclined towards the abdomen, and then insert a lead tube or an iron one if it is in a tortuous fistula, where you can feel the passage of the tube.
E si aquela sent le malaute entorn le cuol, lahora cove que tu entrometas le tieu dit endic en le cuol.	And if the patient feels pain around the throat, then you should insert your thumb along the throat.
E si sentas en le tieu dit la tenta ja per si meteyssa descuberta penetrar, otra aquo que sentas entre le tieu dit e aquela siphac o carn, lahoras sapias certanament que aquela es penetrant; e adonc no trebalhes en aquela, quar no es en aquela sanacio, ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you feel the tube already by itself easily penetrating through your thumb, or something between your thumb and the sore or flesh, then you can be certain that it is penetrating; and then do not work on that, for there is no cure in that area, as we have said.
Mays empero diyssero alcus que es sana en alcus homes tart.	But some may say that it is cured in some men quickly.
E de la medicacio per la qual es sperat juvament en lu es que tu ignes cauteri subtil segon le ample de la fistula, ayssi cum es precedit, e intrometas aquel ignit en la fistula entro que pervengua entorn le cuol; e aprop itera aquel doas o tres vetz entro que sapias que ja son adhustas totas aquelas carns ajustadas fistuladas que so semblantz a cana de pluma de ausel.	And concerning the treatment in which hope for healing lies, you should use a thin cautery according to the width of the fistula, as is previously described, and insert that heated cautery into the fistula until it reaches around the throat; and then repeatedly do this two or three times until you can feel that all those fused flesh areas that resemble feather canes are thoroughly treated.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder entro que en yescan totas aquelas carns que so adhustas, e aprop cura aquela am medicinas la carn engendrantz e consolidantz, e si es sanada, bo es; e sino, lahoras no es sana en degun temps per autra curacio.	And then cure that which is with blisters enveloped by bandages between which all those flesh parts that are adhered, and then cure that which is with medicines the flesh generating and consolidating, and if it is healed, well; and if not, then it is not healed in some time through another cure.
E si la tenta intra, e no penetra entro·l tieu dit le qual es en le cul, e entre aquel e la tenta que es velament spes de carn o de ciphac, e vezes la fistula en aquo que siec la superficia de la codena, lahoras secca la codena del comensament de la fistula, e tu ve seccan am la tenta, e sia en la fistula entro que la seccio pervengua al loc en le qual perve la extremitat de la tenta, e per la tenta es liberat e catz.	And if the probe enters but does not penetrate deeply, you have said that which is in the anus, and between it and the probe that is often of flesh or cloth, and dry the fistula in what seeps from the surface of the wound, then dry the wound from the beginning of the fistula, and you must dry the probe, so that the drying reaches the place where the end of the probe passes, and through the probe it is freed and healed.
E aprop mundifiqua aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so asembladas a canula de pena de ausel e no romangua de aquelas alcuna causa.	And then cleanse those fistula tissues which are similar to the quill of an eagle and do not rot from any other cause.
Mays si flux de sanc vezes que vengua entre tu e la tua opperacio quan ensideysses aquelas carns, lahoras le milh que sia e del pus leugier instrument es cauterizar am foc o am medicina acuta, quar cauteri am foc ajusta bonas doas habitutz: so es adhustio de aquelas carns ajustadas, e abscizio del sanc exseccacio de las humiditatz.	But if a flow of pus comes between you and the operation when inside those tissues, then let it be more severe and of the lighter instrument use a cautery by fire or with acute medicine, for the cautery by fire makes two good habits: it adjusts those tissues, and the removal of pus through the drying.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder o en caus trissat entro que·l loc geta brac, e aprop lahoras cura la plagua am enguentz carn dura engendran e consolidan.	And then cure that which is with cold veins enveloped in skin or cut threads between the areas, and then cure the wound with ointment of hard flesh generating and consolidating.
E so medicinas en las quals so stipticitat e exseccio; quan lahoras es restaurada ja es sanada e no temes iteracio.	And in those medicines where there is stiffness and excoriation; when once it is restored, it is healed, and you fear no recurrence.
Mays si la fistula ja perve entro al preon del cul e es elonguada de lu superficia del cos, lahoras entromet le tieu dit en le cul e inquireys am aquel.	And if the fistula has already penetrated to the depth of the anus and is long from the surface of the body, then insert your finger into the anus and inquire with it.
E donc si centes la tenta e entre tu e ela es velament de ciphac o de carn, e es propda a la penetracio, lahora no es operacio en lu sino segon via di fiducia e de speransa.	And if the wound is touched and between you and her there is a veil of flax or flesh, and is close to the penetration, then it is not an operation in it but according to the way of faith and hope.
La qual causa es aministrar en lu una de tres manieyras: o que cauterize aquela ayssi cum havem dit; o que secces aquela entro que consieguas la conquavitat de lu per que sia a tu possible entrometre las qualcas e la curacio propdana; e no procesiscas mot am seccio per so que no inscidas le lacert contenent le cuol, e que accidisque sobre le malaute eyssiment de la egistio ses voluntat; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit quar fort leu sira sanat; o que elongues aquel velament e mondes aquel pus que seccas aquel entro prop le cul, ayssi cum havem dit, o am tenta o am autre instrument de aguda extremitat, e aprop mondifique aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so en la seccio entro la on podes am percrustacio; e aprop esforsa te a far la restauracio de tota la plagua am seccio, e si le orrifici pus desus no es consolidat, e romangua la fistula uberta en la partida del cul, e sira pus leugier per le malaute.	That cause is to administer in it one of three ways: either to cauterize that as we have said; or to excise it until you achieve the cavity of it so that you can insert and cure it properly; and do not proceed with cutting for fear of injuring the vein containing the cord, and acting against the patient's will; then cure that as we have said which will surely be healed; or extend that veil and cleanse that pus which excise that inside near the anus, as we have said, either by touch or by another pointed instrument, and then modify those fistula-lacerated tissues which are in the region where you can achieve desquamation; then strive to perform the restoration of the entire wound with cutting, and if the opening above is not consolidated, and open the fistula near the anus, it will be easier for the patient.
E alscunas veguadas la fistula es finida segon aquesta manieyra: es quan tu entrometas la tenta en la fistula, e es en le latz del cul entorn la superficia del cos am la codena e en le marge del cul, lahoras pren tenta de perforada extremitat, que es ayssi cum agulha de preparantz les coers segon aquesta forma:	And sometimes the fistula is closed in this manner: when you insert the probe into the fistula, and position it at the cleft of the buttocks near the surface of the body with the needle and along the margin of the buttocks, then test for a perforated extremity as if piercing a needle according to this form.
e entromet en aquela fiel envolopat de v fiels o entorn aquels; e aprop entromet tenta am fiel en la fistula entro que consiegua la conquavitat de lu.	And insert it there, wrapped in several threads or around them; then insert the probe with thread into the fistula until you achieve its cavity.
Mays si es penetrant en le marge del cul prop dedintz, lahoras tu extratz le fiel de aquel trauc ayssi que tu intrometas le tieu dit en le cul; e extraguas la extremitat del fiel e ajustes las duas extremitatz essemps, e estrenh cascuna, e leyssa aquo per un dia o per dos, e quan mays inscideys le fiel en la carn, estrenh be aquel entro que aquelas carns sian inscididas las quals so entre doas extremitatz del fiel e que cajan.	But if it penetrates into the margin of the buttocks inwardly, then you withdraw the thread in such a way that you insert your hand into the buttock; withdraw the end of the thread and adjust both ends evenly, strengthen each one, and leave it for one or two days. When more of the tissue can be incised, strengthen the area where the tissues between the two ends of the thread are incised, which should fit well.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia consolidada e sanada.	And then cure the wound once it is consolidated and healed.
Mays si le orrifici de la fistula no es penetrant, lahoras fay aquel penetrar, en qualque manieyre sia a tu preparat, sino que sia mot en le preon, quar no es a tu que fassas aquo per que no inscidas le lacert; e aprop fay am aquela entro que sia sanada.	If the fistula's openings are not penetrable, make them penetrable in any way you prepare, but do so gently, for it is not your task to injure the patient; and place something inside that will heal.
La forma de spatum spinos am lo qual es fenduda la fistula: la curvitat del qual es mot aguda e l’autra partida es no-aguda, per so que no inscidas aquo que no es necessari, ayssi cum vezes.	The shape of the spatum spinos used when the fistula is slit: the curvature of one part is acute while the other part is not, so as not to injure what is unnecessary, just as you see.
De sutura de emorroydas en las quals corra sanc en la inscizio de aquelas.	For the suturing of hemorrhoids where there is pain at the site of those hemorrhoids.
Emorroydas so segon dos manieyras, quar o so entre le cul semblantz aysi que es de carbos, o quays aquelas sian cum a gras de rasim.	Hemorrhoids can be classified into two ways: one where they resemble charcoal, or those that are like the fat of a date.
E de aquelas so petitas e grans, e que le sanc corr de aquelas tostemps e es una, e so motas, e so fora·l cul, e en las extremitatz de lu.	And of these, they can be small and large, with the pain coming from them for varying times, some permanent, and affect the outside of the anus, as well as its extremities.
Mays empero aquelas que so foro le cul so segon las mes de pauca humiditat, de las quals corr aygua citrina o un petit de sanc am cos continuabla, e so segon la color del cos.	However, those that affect the outside of the anus are according to the degree of low humidity, from which yellowish water or a little of bloody discharge continuously comes, and are according to the color of the body.
E la curacio de aquela que es dedintz le cuol es que comandes al malaute que se assela e que se exprema entro que le cuol yesca e las emoroydas apparescan a tu.	And the cure for that which is inside the bowels is that you command the patient to lie down and to press between where the bowels are and where the hemorrhoids appear to you.
Adonc tu te coyte e suspen am uncis o que tenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, e aprop incideys aquelas deves las suas razitz.	Then you lift up and suspend with your fingers those that you feel at your patient's wrist, and then press down on those to find their pulses.
Mays si les uncis no so tengutz en aquelas per la humiditat de lor e mollificacio de aquelas, lahoras pren aquelas am drap aspre o am coto o am flassada de lana, e extratz aquelas am les tieus ditz, e aprop inscideys aquelas e polveriza sobre lor alcunas polveras caudas aprop la inscizio, per que sian ad aquelas en loc de cauteri; o cauteriza aquelas segon que es precedit en le capitol de cauterizar.	But if the fingers are not felt due to the moisture and softening of those [arteries], then take a rough cloth or thin or flaxen bandage, place them on the ties named, and then press down on them and sprinkle some powdered caustic substances near the incision, so that they act as a cautery; or cauterize them according to what is described in the chapter of cauterizing.
E aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And then cure them with the other treatment until they are healed.
E si le cul no obezeys a egressio, lahoras cristerisa le malaute am cristeri en le qual sia mordicacio petita, e sia lavat am aquel aquo que es en le cuol e que obezesca a egressio leugierament quan le malaute s’esprem.	And if the anus does not respond to evacuation, then apply a small bite of cauterization on the patient with a cauterizing iron, and wash it with that fluid from the bowels which causes slight evacuation when the patient is pressed.
Mays si las emorroydas so defora le cul, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiera, e es que tu prenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, o que prenguas aquelas am unci, e inscidas aquelas, e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit entro que sian sanadas.	If the hemorrhoids are outside the anus and the cause is light, then take them with your finger or pinch them with forceps and cut them off, and then cure them as we have said until they are healed.
E aquel que avoreys inscizio, cove que aministres sutura de lor segon aquesta manieyra: pren fiel envolopat e entromet aquel en agulha e aprop extratz las emorroydas a las partidas dessus, e fay aquel penetrar am la agulha en la razit del autra part, e envolveys las doas extramitatz del fiel en la partida pus dejos de la agulha, e so latitudinalment; e estrenh la emorroyda am strectura fort, e aprop noza le fiel e extratz la agulha.	And if you have an incision, you must suture them according to this manner: take thread wrapped around a needle and extract the hemorrhoids from the parts above, and make that pass through the needle into the opposite part, and wrap both ends of the thread around the part below the needle, and longitudinally; and strengthen the hemorrhoid with strong tension, and then secure the thread and remove the needle.
E fay aquo a totas, e layssa de aquelas una e no la cozes, per so que la superfluitat del sanc corra de aquela.	Do this to all of them, and leave one open without stitching it, so that the excess blood from the wound can flow through it.
E aprop pausa sobre le cul drap enfus en oli rozat o en cerot; e pausa aquel sobre·l cuol e comanda al malaute que·s repause.	And place a cloth soaked in oil rubbed or in ointment over the anus; place it there and command the patient to rest.
E aprop layssa aquela entro que caja; e quan es casuda, cura aquelas am enguentz o am autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then let that which contains it rest; and when it is ripe, cure those with ointment or other treatment until it is healed.
De curacio de fistulas.	Of the treatment of fistulas.
Motas veguadas accideys per exseccacio de fenda o per costriccio de natura.	Wounds that occur due to the opening of a fissure or by natural constriction.
E cum so antiquadas e no val en aquela medicina, lahoras cove que tu razas aquelas am la puncta de spatum o am la tua ungla entro que sian faytas humidas e sia hostada de aquelas la escorsa pus desus, la qual prohibeys aquelas de consolidacio; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian consolidadas.	And since they are old and not useful in medicine, it is custom to cauterize them with the point of a needle or with your finger until they become moist and then apply the ointment on top, which prevents their healing; and then cure those that have healed.
Lahoras tu osta aquelas am razio pus vehement que la primieyra entro que mot sancno e sian excoriadas; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	And when you cauterize them with stronger cautery than the first, until they become scalded and excoriated; and then cure those that have healed.
De curacio de almesamir, so es clau.	Of the treatment of abscesses, this is key.
Sapias que alamermar, so es clau, e no es si no notz redon segon la color del cors semblant a cap de claviel, e es fayt en tot le cors e majorment en las partidas dejos les pes e als ditz, e endeve per aquels dolor deves le anament.	Know that an abscess, this is key, and it is not just any round spot according to the color of the body, resembling a potato, and it occurs throughout the body but especially in the areas around the feet and fingers, and because of these pains you must treat them.
E adonc cove que sia inscidit aquo que es en le circuit del clau, e sia tengut am les forfexs o am unci, e sia eradicat de la sua razit; e aprop cura aquel.	And then cut what is in the circuit of the key and hold it with tongs or forceps, and eradicate it from its root; and place care there.
E si vols, cauteriza le segont que es precedit en le sieu capitol.	And if you wish, cauterize what follows as preceded in its chapter.
Mays de veruca es eminencia petita aspre fistulada redonda sobre la superficia del cos, e motas veguadas veno en las mas dels enfantz.	More commonly, a small sharp, fistula-like protuberance appears on the surface of the body, and veins show visible spots in most children.
E curacio de lu es que estendas e inscidas aquela, o que estrenhas aquela am fiel o am pel entro que caja.	And the treatment is to extend and cut that, or to tighten it with a needle or with a pin that goes inside.
E si vols, cauteriza aquo, segon que havem dit, am foc o am medicina acuta.	And if you wish, cauterize this as we have said, with fire or with sharp medicine.
E ja so eradicadas enversas e no-enversas am le instrument le qual yeu diyre.	And already, these have been eradicated with and without the instrument which we will describe.
Mays formica es eminencia petita feutrada o fistulada grossa sobre la superficia del cos anant mot en le preon, e quan le freg atroba aquela es centit en lu semblant de mordificacio de formigua, e es fayta entorn le cos.	More commonly, a large fibrous or fistula-like protuberance appears on the surface of the body, and when you touch it, it resembles the sting of a wasp, and is formed around the body.
E curacio de lu es que prenguas una canula de pena de auca o de pena de voltor, e sia fort, e pausa aquela sobre la formigua entro que la contengua le cercle de la canula de las partidas de lu; e aprop revolveys la tua ma am la canula entro que inscidas aquo que es en le circuit de la formigua, e pauses aquela en le preon de la carn, e que eradiques la formigua de la sua razit.	And the treatment is that you take a pen needle or a volt meter needle, strong, and place it over the wart between which you contain the circle of the needle from the parts of his body; then rotate your hand around the needle while you insert what is within the circuit of the wart, and pause it in the depth of the flesh, and eradicate the wart from its root.
E si vols, fay aquo am canula de eram o de ferr segon aquesta forma:	And if you wish, do this with a needle of flax or iron according to this form:
Sia la partida desus de la canulha trahent a subtilitat, sorda (so es no-perforada), envolopada per so que sobre le dit la aprencio de lu sia ablaviada e la revolucio de aquela.	Let the upper part of the needle be fine, hard (i.e., non-perforated), wrapped so that above it the learning of the finger is obscured and the rotation of that [needle] is concealed.
E si vols cauteriza la formiga segon que es denant dit en la cauterizacio de atheyl en le capitol de cauteri.	And if you wish, cauterize the wart as described earlier in the cauterization of a warty growth on the head.
De forma dels instrumentz que so aministratz a dar cristeri.	By means of the instruments that you will use to give cautery.
Alcunas veguadas es fayt cristeri de argent o de lato o de eram fondut o malleat; e alcunas veguadas es fayt de aquels instrumentz petit e gran segon aquels als quals so aministratz, quar aquel que es aministrat en la curacio dels petitz enfants sia petit; e de aquel dels quals los culs son freuls o doloyrozes, les cristeris de aquels sian petitz.	Sometimes cautery is made of silver or tin or flax metal that has been melted or hammered; sometimes it is made of those instruments small and large according to those you will use, for the one used in the treatment of small children should be small; and for those of whose buttocks are painful or sore, the cauteries for them should also be small.
La forma de cristeri gran e pauc:	The form of striking hard and little:
Le cap de la canula de lu desus en le qual es liada la borsa sia ampla segon aquesta manieyra; e sia a lu distinacio la on la borsa es liada ayssi cum vezes.	The head of the catheter above which the bag is tied should be wide according to this manner; and there should be a place where the bag is tied as you see.
E la extremitat de lu pus dejus, la qual es entromesa en le cul, sia sorda (so es no-uberta) mot leon, atrasent a subtilita; e en la un del latz de lu sian dos traucs, e en l’autre costat un trauc, e sia la amplesa del trauc segon la groseza dels rays e pus gros un petit.	And the lower end of it, which is inserted into the anus, should be closed (i.e., not open) like a lion's mouth, made subtil; and on one side of the tube there should be two holes, and on the other side one hole, and the width of the hole should be according to the size of the rays, with the larger one a little smaller.
E sia la borsa en la qual sian pausadas las medicinas de vesica de bestia o de pel de ovelha, e la razit de lu sia un palm.	And the bag in which the medicines for the beast's bladder or sheepskin are placed should be a palm's length.
E sia perforada per motz traucs ayssi cum es revolvuda; e si l’espazi le qual es entre les traucs la grossetut del dit.	And it should be pierced with holes like it is wound; and the space which is between the holes the thickness of a finger.
E aprop entromet en aquels traucs fiel fort de fiel cru le qual sia de detz fiels, o enviro aquels; e ajusta am aquel la borsa; e quan es pausada en lu la borsa, sia streyt en le cap del cristeri entre dos distingentz am fort costriccio, e aprop cristeriza am aquel quascun trauc: Mays la qualitat de cristerizar am aquel es que tu omples la borsa de la medicina, que sia escalfada segon la quantitat de la tolleransa del malaute; e guarda te que no sia trop cauda ni trop freja.	Then insert into those holes strong raw honey or something wrapped in them; adjust the bag to that; when the bag is placed in it, make a straight cut in the head of the catheter between two distinguishable places with strong constriction, and then strike each hole: More specifically, the quality of striking each one is that you fill the bag with the medicine, which should be warmed according to the quantity of the patient's tolerance; and ensure that it is neither too hot nor too cold.
E aprop le malaute sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos, e eleva las suas cambas en sus e pausa dejos lu un cuer sobre le qual ja so les homes o un lansol; e aprop unta la extramitat del cauteri am oli o am album de huou o am mucellage de fenugrec o de semblantz; e aprop entromet aquel en le cul am facilitat, e aprop le ministre prengua la borsa e exprema aquel am doas mas e essemps am vehemencia entro que sia evacuat en le budelh tot aquo que es en le cristeri; e aprop extra le cristeri e le malaute leva las suas cambas a la paret.	And the patient is laid on his back, elevates his hips, and places something under them; then applies oil or honey or fenugreek paste to the end of the cautery; inserts it into the anus, and the minister takes the bag and squeezes out two more times with force so that everything in the crista is evacuated into the intestine; finally removes the crista and the patient lifts his hips to the wall.
E si la medicina forsa aquel a eyssiment, tengua le tant quant poyra; e si dorm am aquel per tota una nueyt, es mays derier en juvament.	And if the medicine forces him to void, have as much as he can; and if he sleeps all through the night, it will be more effective.
Mays si tu cristerizas aquel en las malautias de solucio de ventre e l’eyssiment de lu le coyta, lahoras tu itera le cauteri entro que sia sanat.	More so if you circumcise him for abdominal distension and the voiding of urine, then repeatedly apply the cautery until it is healed.
E si en le cul so emorroydas o apostemas ledens, lahoras sia le cristeri mot subtil e leon, dels cristeris am les quals les enfantz so criterisatz.	And if there are hemorrhoids or apstemes in the anus, then use a fine, lion-shaped catheter from among those catheters for which children are considered criteria.
De curacio de las plaguas.	Of the cure for the plagues.
Yeu ja e dit en la divisio de la curacio de las plaguas aquo que convenia al libre, e yeu dic assi la curacio de aquelas am ma e am medicinas segon le conpliment.	And I have already said in the division of the cure for the plagues what was proper for the libera, and I now speak of the cure for those more and with medicines according to the complement.
Donc dic que las plaguas son diversificadas segon aquo en que son faytas las plaguas e segon le loc sobre le qual cazo las plaquas.	Therefore, it is said that the plagues are diverse according to what causes the plagues and according to the place on which the plaques fall.
E las causas per que motas vetz son faytas las plaguas so ayssi cum getament de peyra, o inscisio d’espaza o de cotel, o percussio am lansa, o am fustz, o am sageta, o semblantz ad aquels de motas causas.	And the causes by which stones form in plagues are thus: by a stone in the bladder, or an incision of a sword or knife, or a blow with a lance, or a blow with a rod, or an arrow, or something similar to those causes of motas.
Mays las plaguas que so en les locz del cos so ayssi cum plagua la qual catz sobre le cap, o·l col, o·l pietz, o·l ventre, o·l fitge, e semblantz ad aquels dels membres.	Moreover, the plagues that affect parts of the body are thus: a plague that falls on the head, or the neck, or the foot, or the belly, or the thigh, or something similar to those of the limbs.
E yeu so recomtant la curacio de alcunas plaguas per que pauses aquela ratiocinacio e regla sobre las autras plaguas.	And I am recounting the cure for some plagues so that you may apply that reasoning and rule to other plagues.
E yeu comensare de las plaguas del cap simplas, quar la rememoracio de las compostas vindra al comensament del tertz capitol.	And I will begin with simple head plaques, for the recall of the composed ones will come at the beginning of the third capitol.
Donc dic que quan accideys en le cap plagua simpla e no es fractura, lahoras considera: si es per getament de peyra o de semblant, e ja ha trinquada la codena tant solament e es gran plagla e temes sobre aquel malaute havinement de apostema caut, lahoras tu te coyta e fleubotoma la cephalica tantost, e no tardas aquo; e extrats ad aquel del sanc segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu si no mes alcuna causa prohibent de fleubotomia, majorment si·l sanc que es eyssit de la plagua es pauc.	So say that when an injury occurs in the head with a simple plaque and it is not a fracture, consider: if it is due to a blow by a stone or something similar, and has already cracked the skull so much only and is a large swelling and you fear an impending bad outcome of apostema, then you should incise and perform bloodletting on the cephalic vein as soon as possible, and do not delay this; and you extract from it as much blood according to the quantity of its virtue if no other cause prohibits bloodletting, especially if the blood that results from the injury is little.
E sia la flaubotomia del contrari de la partida plaguada; e guardase le malaute de replecio e de vi e de viandas grossas.	And the bloodletting should be from the opposite side of the injured area; and one must guard against swelling, and against bad outcomes from heavy food and drink.
Mays si de la minuicio prohibeys alcuna causa, lahoras sia aminorat de la vianda e no apropinque a carn ni a vi.	But if some cause prohibits the incision, then reduce the food and do not approach meat or wine.
E pausa sobre la plagua, si a lu accideys apostema caut, coto enfus en oli rozat solet o en vi en le qual es stipticat.	And place your hand over the plaque, if there is an apostema, applying cold fomentations in olive oil or in wine that contains astringents.
Mays si est segur de apostema caut, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua, si es recent am le sieu sanc e le ayre no ha mudat aquela la polvera la qual yeu recomtare aprop petit.	But if it is certain that an abscess has formed, then place yourself over the wound, if it is recent with its own secretion and the air has not changed there, apply the powder which I will describe shortly.
E si le ayre ja ha mudada aquela, lahoras pausa sobre alscus enguentz entro que sia sanada.	But if the air has already changed there, then place yourself over some ointments until it is healed.
Mays si la plagua es gran o es per inscizio d’espaza e de semblantz, e no so ajustadas las labias de lu per puvils, lahoras ajusta aquelas am sutura segon que yeu recomtare de la sutura de lor.	But if the wound is large or due to a cut and the edges do not fit properly due to swelling, then adjust those with sutures as I will describe in suturing them.
Mays si la plagua ja es discuberta del os e pen, e no es retencio de lu sino un petit suspensori, lahoras inscideys aquela e aprop cura la plagua am medicinas e restaura la carn aprop en loc de codena, e comanda al malaute que sia pescut de viandas en las quals es groceza: caps e formen coyt e semblantz a lor, entro que sia compost.	But if the wound is already exposed to bone and flesh, and it is not a retention but only a small suspensory ligament, then incise that area and properly cure the wound with medicines, restoring the flesh in its place. Command the patient to eat foods in which they take pleasure: meats and vegetables similar to their usual diet, until they recover.
E si atrobas en la codena putrefaccio e no adhereys al os, lahoras tu inscideys tot aquo poyrit e geta aquo, e aprop cura aquo.	And if you find putrefaction in the flesh and it does not adhere to the bone, then you incise all that area and drain it, and properly cure it.
Mays si en aquestas plaguas es arteria o vena de la qual fluxs de sanc pot evenir, e no es abscindida per medicinas, lahoras tu inquier sobre la arteria, e si atrobas aquela no-inscidida, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am spatum, o lia aquela; e si necessitat te provoca que aquo que havem dit no comfereys, lahoras tu cauteriza entro que·l sanc sia abscidit.	If in these swellings the artery or vein from which the flow of blood can occur is present and cannot be severed by medicines, then you inquire about the artery. If you find that unsevered one, then you incise it with a spatula or ligate it; if necessity compels you such that what we have said does not apply, then you cauterize where the blood flow is abscindit.
E si aquestas plaguas son simplas e petitas, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiere; enayssi que tu polverizas sobre aquelas aquesta polvera, quar consolidada aquela denant que l’ayre mude aquelas.	If these swellings are simple and small, the cause of them is light; sprinkle this powder over them, having first prepared that which prevents the air from affecting those.
E la manieyra de la polvera es aquesta: recipe oli de enses partida una, de sanc de drago partida doas, de caus no-extincta partidas tres; sia tot mot trissat e crivellat, e de lu sia la plagua omplida, e sia constrengida per bona constriccio entro que be sobre aquela aderesca, e sia coagulada am le sanc.	The manner of the powder is this: take one part olive oil, two parts blood from a dragon, and three parts cauterized fat; mix them all together thoroughly and sieve them. Fill the swelling with this mixture, bind it well with a good bandage, and let it coagulate with the blood.
E aprop strengeys aquela desus am pulvils e leyssa aquela, e no la deslias mentre esta ayssi que no es apostemada, quar no es eredicada de lu la medicina entro que sia sanada.	Then bind it above with powder and leave it, and do not loosen it while it is not poulticed, for the medicine will not penetrate it until it is healed.
E alcuna vetz fa aquo sola cautz, quan no es a tu en present enses e sanc de drago.	And sometimes this is done solely with a cautery, when in your presence there is none of dragon's blood.
E ja fa aquesta meteyssa operacio en las grans plaguas quan conveneys que sia pausada sobre aquelas e sian streytas, e so plaguas recentz am le lor sanc, las quals le ayre no ha alteradas.	And this operation is performed on large boils when you determine that they should be paused over those and stretched, and on recent boils close to their surface, which the air has not yet altered.
E si le ayre las ha alteradas, e majorment quan es en temps d’estiu, lahoras no es entencio a la posicio de aquesta polvera, mays adonc cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit, enayssi que tu pauses sobre aquelas alcus enguents degistius, o que pauses sobre aquelas pols de la farina del ordi am aygua e mel entro que getan poyredura; e aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And if the air has altered them, especially when it is in the summer season, then I do not place this poultice in its position. But then treat those as we have said, try placing it over those warm, digestible ointments, or place it over those mixtures of flour from the oven with water and honey that produce heat; and place the other treatment over them until they heal.
Mays si accideys am la plagua fractura en os, e es petita, lahoras tu extratz aquo am gesti.	But if a fracture occurs in the bone of the boil, and it is small, then you extract that with tweezers.
E yeu diyre la cura de las fracturas del cap en aquo que es envenidor.	And I will speak of the treatment for fractures of the head in what is venomous.
De las plaguas del col.	Of the boils on the neck.
Mays si la plagua accideys en le col, lahoras no es en lu differencia en medicacio, e entre la plagua del cap quan es simpla.	If the pain occurs in the neck, there is no difference in treatment, and between head pains when they are simple.
Mays si ja le nervi del col es inscis o arteria, lahoras si es nervi, no es en lu engen sino que sia evitada curacio de lu am aquo que fa vehement stipticitat, ayssi cum ziniar e zegi que es vetriol e semblantz a lor quar nozo als nervis e contrazo aquel.	But if the nerve of the neck is incised or an artery, then if it is a nerve, there is no engine but that it should be avoided, curing it in such a way as zinc and zegi are said to be vitriol and resemble them in corroding the nerves and opposing those.
E no pauses sobre la plagua alcuna causa de tot freja, quar la sustancia dels nervis es freja e la continuacio de lu es am le cervel, le qual es le pus aut de totz les membres.	And do not place any cause of cold on the pain, for the substance of the nerves is cold and their continuity is in the brain, which is the root of all members.
E si’ aquo am que es curat de medicinas leugieras, ayssi cum es caus lavada am aygua dousa, alcuna veguada enfusa en oli rozat o no-rozat, e thucia quan es lavada am aygua dousa e las autras peyras minarantz segon aquesta manieyra, e enguentz humitz.	And if what is cured by light medicines, such as is caused by washing with water twice, some times infused in olive oil rosy or unrosy, and treated when washed with water twice and the other soles mined according to this manner, then apply a moisturizing ointment.
Mays si la plagua es gran, lahoras aministra sutura, o coarta las labias de lu, e aprop cura aquela am pulvils entro que sia sanada.	But if the pain is great, then perform缝合，或收紧其边缘，然后在治愈后用粉末处理。
Mays si a la plagua es profunditat o accideys en lu a la pus bassa partida poyredura, lahoras perfora aquela en le loc mays depremegut.	If at the wound there is depth or accidents in the lower part beneath it, then perforate that in the most compressed area.
Mays si en la plagua ja es inscisa arteria e es conseguit flux de sanc, lahoras separa o secca aquela, o lia aquela, o cauteriza aquela si necessitat te provoca ad aquo.	If the wound has already incised an artery and there is a flow of blood, then separate or dry that, or bind it, or cauterize that if necessity prompts you to do so.
Mays si ja ha insciditz les spondils del golayro o tot, e so salvadas las venas del col, lahoras tu ajusta las labias de la codena am sutura sobre la cana del golayro e no toques aquel; abantz egala aquel e reduzeys aquel sobre la sua figura natural, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent, e leyssa aquela per alcus jorns; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz en les quals es stipticitat e excitacio entro que sia sanat.	If the vertebrae of the collarbone are already incised or completely cut, and the veins of the neck have been saved, then you adjust the edges of the wound by suturing over the bone of the collarbone and do not touch that; proceed equally with that and return it to its natural figure, and strengthen that with a proper structure, leaving that for some days; then treat that with ointments in which stiffness and excitation are mixed until it is healed.
Mays si la plagua ja en le os a fayta enprecio, lahoras percuireys aquela, e lahoras si en lu ha fragmentz de hos, extratz totz aquels que podes de lor; e aquo que a tu no es apparelhat, leyssa aquo entro que la plagua se poyrisca, e sia separat e la egrecio de lu sia alleujada.	If the wound in the bone has already been cleaned, then tap that, and if it has fragments of bone, extract all those that you can; what appears unremovable, leave that until the wound becomes suppurated, and is separated, with relief to the swelling.
E si la plagua es recent lahoras polveriza sobre aquela polvera la qual t’e recomtada.	And if the injury is recent, then powder it over that powder which you are recommended.
Mays si en la plagua es fayta fistula, lahoras cura aquela am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra aprop en le sieu capitol.	But if in the injury a fistula is formed, then cure that as you will recall from the following chapter which will come soon in this section.
De las plaguas del col o de semblantz quan fayta entre las spallas e es fayta am spaza o am cotel o am lansa o am semblantz.	Of the injuries to the neck or similar ones when made between the shoulders and affect the spine or the arm or the spear or similar ones.
Si es percussio de lansa o de cotel, e vezes de lu la profunditat, lahoras considera mays si de la plagua yeys ventositat quan le malaute elena; lahoras sapias que la plagua es mortal.	If it is a wound from a spear or a sword, and you percuss its depth, then consider more whether the injury has any swelling when the patient faints; then you know that the injury is fatal.
E si en lu no es profunditat e la plagua es recent am le sieu sanc, lahoras tu pauses en lu de la primieyra horo polvera, e no strenhas aquel per que no sia le sanc retengut en la profunditat de lu e que retorne al cor e que aucigua le malaute, mays pausa en lu enguent atractiu, e deslia aquela doas veguadas le dia.	And if there is no depth and the injury is recent with its bleeding, then you apply powder for the first hour, and do not strengthen it so that the blood does not remain deep in the wound and return to the heart, which might cause further fainting; instead, apply an attractive ointment and remove it after two days.
E si l’enguent no es a tu present, lahoras tu pausa en le orrifici de la plagua coto viel per que sucque aquo que yeys de las humiditatz; e fay que le malaute dorma sobre la plagua per que corra aquo que es en lu ajustat.	And if the ointment is not at hand, then you pack the wound with lint to let it drain what comes from the moisture; and make the patient sleep on the wound so that what is in the injury drains properly.
Mays si ja de la plagua son passatz tres dias o mays e no accideys al malaute spasme ni tremor de cor mal ni strictura de ale, e vezes las autras dispozicios bonas de lu, lahoras sapias que plagua es salva; e adonc cura aquela am calguas e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanada.	If however more than three days have passed since the onset of the plague and no spasms or heart tremors nor constriction of the lungs occur, and other good dispositions improve, then you may conclude that the plague is healed; then treat both with calamine and other therapy until it is cured.
Mays si la sanacio de lu es excusada, e ja tot temps es uberta, lahoras sapias que ja es fayta fistula; cura donc aquela per le sieu capitol.	If the healing of the wound is impossible, and all the time has been opened, you may conclude that a fistula has formed; then treat it according to its own rules.
E si la plagua es per inscisio de spaza o de cotel, e es simpla en la superficia del pietz o del dos, lahoras cura aquela am aquo que es precedit de sutura, si es gran, o am polvera, si es petita.	And if the plague is due to a wound from a sword or dagger, and it is simple on the surface of the foot or toe, then treat it according to what was previously mentioned for suturing, if it is large, or with powder, if it is small.
Mays si ja ha fayta enprecio en le os, e so ja de lu inscizas pessas, lahoras tu torqua la plagua e coyta ad extrayre aquelas pessas, si so separadas.	If it has already perforated the bone, and you are now incising the flesh, then you should torque the wound and probe to extract those pieces, if they are separate.
Mays si no so separadas, lahoras leyssa las entro que se poyresca la plagua, que la extraccio de lor es alleujada.	If they are not separate, then leave them alone until the wound drains, as their extraction is alleviated.
E de las autras plaguas accidentz en les autres membres le juvament en curacio es le juvament de aquo que havem dit.	And for other accidents of pain in other members, the treatment in cure is what we have said.
De las plaguas del ventre.	Of the pains in the abdomen.
L’indisposicio la qual accideys en le ventre es o gran, o pauc, o migiera.	The discomfort that occurs in the abdomen is either great, little, or moderate.
De la gran alcunas veguadas yeys le budel o nervi del budel, per que es fayta intromissio de lor e la sutura de lor esser pus vehement e pus subtil.	For the great pain, sometimes the intestine or nerve of the intestine is inflamed, so that there is an interference in their sutures, making them more violent and finer.
E disrupcio petita es fayta dificil per autra manieyra, e siec se que la reduccio de lor es pus dificil, si no te coytes de la intromissio de lor al sieu loc tantost, quar se ubre e es engrossat per que le intrament de lu es fayt difficil.	And a small disruption is made difficult by another method, and I believe that the reduction of them is more difficult if you do not take care to prevent their interference in their place soon, for it opens up and becomes swollen, making the instrument difficult to use.
E donc la milhor disrupcio es migiera, quar en aquela no es dificil la reduccio del budel, ayssi cum es dificil en las doas specias denant ditas.	And therefore the best disruption is moderate, for in that case the reduction of the intestine is not difficult, as it is in the two species mentioned above.
E sapias que sutura del ventre es segon quatre manieyras, mays doas suturas son comunas que conveneysso en suturas de las autras plaguas del cors.	And know that the suturing of the abdomen is according to four methods, but two sutures are common and suitable for the sutures of other body pains.
E duas autras suturas proprias comunican a las autras plaguas, mays empero so mays proprias en la sutura del ventre.	And two other proper sutures communicate to the other wounds, more importantly, most proper in the suture of the belly.
E yeu recomti a tu quascuna am exposicio e declaracio.	And I advise you each on every exposition and declaration.
Donc dic que quan la plagua es petita e es eyssit alcuna causa del budel per aquela, e es fayt dificil a reduzir aquel, lahoras aquo es en una de doas manieyras: o per parvitat de la disrupcio ayssi cum havem dit, o quan al budel es venguda inflacio per la frigiditat de l’ayre.	So say that when the wound is small and some cause of the intestine escapes through it, making it difficult to reduce that part, this is in one of two ways: either due to the smallness of the disruption, as we have said, or when the intestine is brought about by inflammation due to the coldness of the air.
E donc quan aquo es ayssi, lahora cove que tu scalfes aquel enayssi que tu submerges una sponga ho drap humit en aygua tebeza sola, o que coguas en aygua squinant, e cyperum, e spic, e embroques am aquela le budel entro que la imflacio sia resolvuda.	And so when this is the case, then you should soak that attempt by submerging a sponge or a moist cloth in clear water, or take in water squinianum, spicatum, and embrocate the area with what is inside to resolve the inflammation.
E alcunas veguadas fa aquo vi en le qual ha stipticitat, e es milhor que la aygua sola en resolucio de la imflacio.	And on some occasions, I have seen this with stiffness, and it is better than water alone in resolving the inflammation.
E donc cum tu vezes la imflacio esser resolvuda, lahoras tu humecta le budel am aygua en la qual es coyta altea e malvas, quar per aquo es alleujat le intrament de lu am pauca causa.	And so, when you see the inflammation being resolved, then moisten the intestine with water in which there is aloea and marigold, for by this the instrument within him is alleviated due to little cause.
Mays si es escusat le intrament de lu aprop aquesta curacio, lahoras scindeys la disrupcio un petit am strument am le qual so inscididas emorroydas.	If it is necessary to use an instrument near this cure, then cut the disruption with a small instrument on which blood vessels are embedded.
E la curacio primieyra es milhor, quan es propriada que no es seccio, e no sia occupacio a seccar aprop necessitat e defaliment.	The primary cure is better when it is appropriate that no sectioning is done, and there is no occupation to dry out nearby and prevent malnourishment.
Del instrument, sec se la forma de lu:	Of the instrument, note its shape:
La una partida de lu torta aguda, e l’autra partida no-acuta, e la extremitat subtil, e no sia am la subtilitat de spatum, abantz sia obtusa un pauc.	One part of the blade is sharp, and the other part is blunt. The tip is fine, but not too fine like a needle; it should be slightly rounded.
E donc cum la plagua es amplificada e yeys fora le budel, lahoras cove que la sua reduccio sia segon la forma de lu natural, en le sieu loc propri, si es possible sobre aquo, quar milhor es.	And therefore, when the wound is enlarged and the intestine protrudes, ensure that its reduction follows its natural form, in its proper place. If possible, do it over the original area, for this is better.
Mays quan la disrupcio es ampla, e es en la partida pu bassa del ventre, lahoras cove que tu fassas jazer le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa las suas cambas pus autas que·l sieu cap; e si es en la partida pus desus del ventre, lahoras tu pause le cap de lu e·l pietz pus autz que las partidas dejos.	If the disruption is large and located in the lower part of the abdomen, then place the patient's back on a surface, and position their legs higher than their head. If it is in the upper part of the abdomen, then hold the patient's head and feet lower than the rest of their body.
E semblantment si la disrupcio es en una de las doas partz del ventre, lahoras pausa la tua entencio e la tua consideracio tostemps en aysso per que la partida en la qual es la plagua sia pus auta que l’autra.	And if the rupture is in one of the two parts of the abdomen, then pause your understanding and consideration for a while so that the part where the injury is may be more prominent than the other.
E ayssi cove que tu aministres aquo en las plaguas grans e en las plaguas migieras.	And thus you should administer this in large wounds and in wounds that are only slightly injured.
E en las plaguas petitas, pausa aquo que es a tu preparat, e aprop fay que·l ministre sia entre las tuas mas pyatados, le qual tengua la disrupcio tota am la sua ma e ajusta las labias de lu, e aprop descuebre de aquela ad aquel que siec la sutura alcuna causa aprop autra.	And in small wounds, pause what you have prepared, and then make sure that the administration is done by your most skilled assistants, who hold the wound with their hand and adjust its edges, and then uncover it to the one who will suture for any cause nearby.
E aquesta es la manieyra de sutura comuna: una que prenguas la agula, o comte de agula segon la cantitat de la amplitut de la plagua; e aprop layssa de la extremitat de la disrupcio del dit anular, e strenh la agula una, otre que tu no metas fiel en las doas extremitatz de la codena, am doas extremitatz del ciphac que es dejos la codena de las partidas dedintz, entro que fassas aquela penetrar de aquela partida; e tu ja has agreguadas doas extremitatz de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, e so faytas quatre ordes.	And this is the common suturing method: take the needle, or a count of stitches according to the width of the wound; then leave the end of the disruption at the tip of the ring finger, and secure the needle once, or make sure you do not insert a thread in both ends of the gap, leaving two ends of the thread from the inner parts, until you make that thread pass through from one part; and now you have added two ends of the thread and two ends of the clip, and so four orders are made.
E aprop strenh am fiel doble en le circuit de la agula, e alcunas veguadas de doas partz ensemps, e aprop agregua las doas labias e la plagua per agreguacio decent; e aprop layssa la grossitut del dit e fiqua una autra agulha en aquela, e aprop lia aquela am fiel ayssi cum fiest am la primieyra agulha; e no cesses far aquo si es necessitat am las agulhas entro que ajas complida tota la contriccio de la plagua.	And then strengthen the double thread in the circuit of the needle, and several times on both sides together, and then join the two edges and the flap by decent joining; and then let the thickness of the digit and put another needle there, and then that one with thread as you did with the first needle; and do not cease to do this if necessary among the needles until all the contraction of the flap is complete.
E sian las agulhas migieras entre groceza e subtilitat, quar las agulhas subtils mot leugierament insciden la carn; e las grossas so de dificil intrament en la codena, e donc per aquo cove que sian migieras en subtilitat e grosseza.	And let the needles be of medium size between coarseness and subtlety, for the fine needles penetrate the flesh lightly; and the coarse ones are difficult to handle in the thread, and therefore it is necessary that they be of medium size in terms of fineness and thickness.
E no cove que la agulha sia ficada en doas extremitatz de la codena propdana mot, per so que la carn no sia inscidida leugierament e que la plagua se huebra devant la sua consolidacio.	And it is not advisable to place the needle at both ends of the thread close together, for fear that the flesh be penetrated lightly and that the flap open before its healing.
E no sian prolonguadas de sutura per que la plagua no sia prohibida de consolidacio.	And do not make the sutures too long so that the flap is not prevented from healing.
E aprop inscideys las extremitatz de las agulhas per so que no ledescan le malaute deves le sieu dormier; e pausaras sobre la sutura pulvils expanduts de tota partida, les quals tenguan las extremitatz de las agulhas; e layssa aquelas entro que sapias que la plagua ja es consolidada.	And then incise the ends of the needles so that they do not ledges the patient awake during sleep; and place powders expanded from all parts over the sutures, which cover the ends of the needles; and leave them until you can tell that the flap is already consolidated.
E aquestas specias de sutura am agulhas en cal manieyra es pus convenient en las plaguas petitas, quar habasta en la sutura de lor una agulha o doas o entorn aquelas.	These kinds of stitches with needles are more convenient in small wounds, as only one or two needles are needed for their缝合。
Mays la segonda sutura es cominal: e es que tu aministres am sutura las quatre extremitatz, de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, en una veguada, am agulha en la qual sia fiel envolopat engual en subtilitat e grosseza.	The second stitch is made as follows: and you perform the suture of the four ends, from the thread and two ends of the needle, in one go, with a needle wrapped evenly in fine and moderate thickness.
E aprop quan am la agulha auras penetrat aquestas quatre extremitatz, reduzeys la agulha de aquela meteyssa partida de la qual comensest, per so que le fiel retrayt caja de la pus subirana partida a la plagua, per so que la sutura sia segon sutura de drap am la qual les draps so strengutz.	And when the needle has penetrated these four ends, you return the needle from that thread end where you started, so that the thread retracts and comes up from the other part to the wound, so that the suture resembles a suture of cloth where the threads are tightened.
E pausa entre quascuna sutura la quantitat del gros del dit mendre.	And pause between each stitch the width of a little finger.
E aquesta sutura sabo les homes.	And this suture I know well.
E am tal sutura yeu cozegui la plagua la qual era accidida a un home en le sieu ventre le qual era stat plaguat am un cotel, e era la disrrumpcio de la plagua major de un palm, e era eyssit dels budels entorn dos palms del budel del mieg loc e era la disrupcio en le mieg del membre; e adonc yeu reduzegui aquel depus que le budel havia stat foro la plagua per xxiiii horas.	And with this suture I closed the wound which was inflicted on a man in his abdomen, which had been cut by a knife, and it was the rupture of a major wound about two palms wide, situated around half a palm from the center of the member; and then I returned it after the intestine had passed through the wound for twenty-four hours.
E la plagua fo consolidada en le spazi de xv dias o entorn, e curegui aquel e es sanat; e aprop aquo visquec per motz ans, e es conversat en las suas disposicios.	And the swelling is consolidated in the space of fifteen days or so, and treat it; and then those vesicles by natural means, and they are converted into their normal states.
E les autres metges havian jutgat que no fora sanat; e per miracle foc, quar yeu no curegui aquel am enguent, quar era en loc en le qual enguent no era atrobat ni deguna medicina, mays pausegui sobre la plagua coto viel dos veguadas lo dia e ablucio assiduo am aygua de mel entro que foc sanat.	And other doctors had judged that it was not healed; by miracle fire, for I did not treat it with ointment, for it was in a place where ointment could not reach nor any medicine, but placed my hand over the swelling like an old woman two days a day and applied frequent wet dressings with honey water until the fire was healed.
Mays yeu diyre dos specias de sutura proprias segon narracio de Paraula.	And I will speak of two types of suturing properly according to the word of Paracelsus.
E es que tu comenses am sutura de la codena, e entrometas agulha de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz.	And you should start with the chain stitch, and insert the needle from one side through to the inside of the other side.
E donc cum la agulha penetra en la codena e en aquel meteys lacertz segon rectetut e en longetut de tot le cos, e layssa la extremita del ciphac en le qual has entromesa la agulha; e fay penetrar en la autra extremitat la agulha de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo en l’autra extremitat del mihat.	And so, as the needle penetrates through the chain and along that path straight and lengthwise throughout the entire body, you leave the end of the thread on which you have inserted the needle; then pass the needle from inside to outside in the other end of the wound.
E don cum tu auras fayta aquela penetrar, lahoras tu fay aquela penetrar autra veguada en aquela meteyssa extremitat del mihat de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz; e leyssa la extramitat del ciphac que es en aquest latz, e fay penetrar la agulha en l’autra extremitat de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo.	And when you have made the penetration, then make another penetration in that same limb from the external part to the internal part; leave the extremity of the probe that is on this side, and penetrate the needle into the other internal part from the external part.
E fay penetrar am aquela la tua penetracio am la qual fas aquela penetrar en le ciphac en la extremitat del mirat la qual es en la partida de lu entro que tot aquel penetre.	And make the penetration with your penetration which you make penetrate into the probe at the extremity of the limb which is in the part of the body until all of it penetrates.
E aprop comensa de aquest meteys costat e cus aquel am la extremitat que es del ciphac en l’autra latz, e extratz la agulha de la codena la qual penetrec, e aprop redutz aquela en aquela codena e cos la extremitat del ciphac que es en l’autra costat am aquesta extramitat del mirat; e extratz aquela de la codena la qual es de part de lu.	And then start from this lateral side and pierce it at the extremity that is on the probe in the other side, and extract the needle from the codena which you penetrated, and return it to the codena with the extremity of the probe that is on the other side; and extract it from the codena which is on his side.
E fay aquo una veguada e autra, e fay aquo una veguada aprop autre veguada entro que tu cozes tot aquo que es deforo segon aquel eysemple.	And do this one time and again, and do it another time or two more as you cook the area thoroughly according to that example.
E la suma de aquesta manieyra de sutura es que tu cozes am sutura de pellicies am la qual cozo las pels, enayssi que tu cozes le ciphac una veguada de la part de la extremitat de la codena, e que leysses aquela autra veguada entro que la ajas complida.	And the sum of this manner of suturing is that you sew with a thread of skin on which you suture the skins, endeavoring that you sew the ciphac one time from the part of the extremity of the groin, and that you leave the other half inside until the operation is completed.
Mays la segonda specia de sutura propria la qual dieys eyssament Gualia , e aquest es de sermo de lu e per lu recomtat, es que tu cozas aquela segon semilitut am la qual alcus medicantz cozo aquela, enayssi que agreguan tota partida a la sua compar partida a lu convenient per natura; e aplican la extremitat de autre de lu e la extremitat del mirat al autra extremitat de lu, e aquo es fayt segon que yeu a tu recomti.	And the second species of suture which Gualia often uses, and this is by sewing it and then tying it, is that you sew that part with a needle and thread on which skilled surgeons sew it, endeavoring that all parts are added to their corresponding part according to nature; and apply the extremity of one to another and the extremity of the other to the other extremity of it, and this is done as I have instructed you.
Cove que tu fiques la agulha en la extremitat del mirat a tu propdana de la partida deforo, e fassas aquela penetrar a la partida dedintz en aquel sol, e leysses dos extremitatz del ciphac; e aprop revolveys la agulha e fay aquela penetrar de foro a la dedintz en dos extremitatz del ciphac.	And you place the needle at your own discretion at the extremity of the wound on the outside, making that thread penetrate inside the part in that direction, leaving two ends of the thread; then you turn the needle and make it penetrate from the outside to the inside with the other two ends of the thread.
E aprop revolveys aquelas cascunas, e fay penetrar quascunas de la partida dededintz entro a la partida deforo en dos extremitatz del mirat autras que so en le latz contrari.	And then turn those parts, making some from the inner side penetrate into some from the outer side at the two extremities of the affected area rather than in the opposite lateral direction.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura es milhor de la sutura comuna leugiera, e es sutura de la qual precedic rememoracio.	And this method of suturing is better than the common light suturing, and it is a suturing method about which we have previously recalled.
Aquest es le sermo de Gualia	This is the saying of Gualia
E mays le diyssero alcus, sutura del ventre es rectificada am dos agulhas, so es que tu entrometas en aquestas a quascunas un fiel, e comensa am intromiccio de agulha de aquo que es deves tu, e fay aquela penetrar entro al autra latz segon sutura de aquels les quals cozo les cuers engualment.	And some would say that for suturing the abdomen, it is corrected with two needles, so that you introduce into these some thread, and start with the insertion of the needle from where you should, making that one penetrate through the other side according to the stitch in which I sew the hearts equally.
E sapias que quan disrupcio es en le mieg loc del ventre, lahoras la sutura de lu es pus difficil que dels autres locs del ventre.	And know that when the disruption is in the middle part of the abdomen, the suturing of this area is more difficult than of other parts of the abdomen.
Mays le juguament de medicacio de plagua es jutgament de las autras plaguas.	And the judgment of medicinal treatment for plague is the judgment of other plagues.
La qual causa es quar quan tu consieguas la plagua recent am le sieu sanc denant que l’ayre altera aquela, e reduses le budel e cozes aquela e aptas aquela decentment, lahoras pausa sobre aquela polvera encarnativa.	When you succeed in extracting the wound recently from his flesh before the air alters it, reduce the hernia and suture it properly, then place over it a carmine powder.
E si le ayre ja ha alterada la plagua, lahoras pausa sobre aquela alcus enguentz les quals so a tu presens entro que fassan peyra dura e cajan les fiels, e sian consolidatz ciphac e mirat; e aprop cura aquela ayssi cum es la curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And if the air has already altered the wound, then place over it a dressing of those which you have prepared while they soften and fill the cavities, and may be consolidated and examined; and apply treatment to it as is the cure for other wounds until it is healed.
Mays si a tu no so presens las medicinas, lahoras pausa sobre aquela tantost, pus que comensa a getar brac, coto viel, e permuta aquel dos veguadas le dia, ayssi cum a tu e ensenhat, entro que sia sanat, quar tu no indigeysses de autra medicacio en motas disposicios quan las plaguas so simplas.	But if you do not have the medicines at hand, then place over it frequently, until it begins to granulate well, and change it twice a day as I have shown you, until it is healed, so that you will not need other dressings in minor arrangements when wounds are simple.
Mays si tu temes que la plagua comunique en lesio als membres principals, lahoras cove que tu submergas lana leon en oli de trempada qualiditat, o en oli rozat, e pausa aquela en le circuit dels locs que so entre les angonas e dejos las aysselas.	But if you fear that the wound might communicate infection to the main limbs, then soak a lion's wool in well-pressed oil or in rubbed oil, and place it around the area between the groins, and leave the axillae.
E si sent dolor o putrefaccio en les sieus budels, quar motas veguadas aquo s’endeve, lahoras cristeriza aquel am vi stiptic negre tebe, e majorment si la poyredura es pervenguda en le budel e es fayta exitura penetrant entro la conquavitat de lu.	And if there is pain or putrefaction in their intestines, which matters we should observe, then charcoals those areas with a cautery using stiff black terebinth wood, especially if the inflammation has reached the intestine and made an exit wound penetrating into its cavity.
E sapias que aquela que es del budel gros es de pus leugiera sanacio que aquela que es en les budels subtils.	And know that the one from the large intestine is of slight pus and more easily healed than that from the fine intestines.
E es de dificil sanacio quar le budel le qual es apelat “gegunu” no recep sanacio de plagua que caja en lu de tot; e aquo es per la gran multitut de venas que so en lu e per la magnitut de lu que so en aquelas, e per subtilitat del cos de aquel, e per propinquitat de aquel a natura de nervis.	And it is difficult to heal, for the intestine which is called "gungun" does not receive healing from any plague that falls into it; this is due to the great number of veins in it and its large size, as well as the subtlety of that part and its proximity to the nature of nerves.
Mays si aquo que procezeys de la plagua es la tela, e conseguas aquela recent, redutz aquela segon la tua rectetut am la qual reduzes les budels engualment.	But if the process of the plague is through the tissue, and you manage to obtain the recent one, treat that according to your discretion using which you reduce the intestines equally.
Mays si es passat a lu spazi e ja es feyt vert o negre, lahoras que tu strenguas aquela am fiel sobre le loc que es denigrat de lu, per so que vengua fluxs de sanc, quar en la tela so venas e arterias.	But if it has passed to that space and is already red or black, then when you strengthen those threads over the area that is darkened, so that it produces flows of pus, for in the tissue are veins and arteries.
E aprop inscideys aquo que es otra aquel liament, e pausa dos extremitatz del fiel pendentz de la partida dejos de la plagua foro lu, per que sobre tu sia alleujada la atraccio de lu deves le cazement de la tela e emissio del brac de la plagua.	And then incise what is another of that ligament, and place two ends of the bowel hanging from the cut edge of the wound, so that above you may alleviate the tension of it by securing the fabric and emission of the arm of the wound.
Rememoracio de las plaguas quan accideysso en le budel.	Remembrance of the wounds when they occur in the intestine.
Quan accideys disrupcio en le budel e es petita, lahoras es possibla que sia resteurada en alcus homes, per aysso quar yeu vi aquel le qual era stat plaguat en le sieu ventre am percussio de lansa et era la plagua de la part dreyta del stomac, e la plagua era antiquada e fayta fistula, e eyssic de lu gestio e ventositat.	When there is a disruption in the intestine and it is small, it is sometimes possible to restore it in some people. This is why I saw one who had been wounded in his belly by the impact of a lance, and the wound was old, having become a fistula, and he healed from the treatment and recovery.
Adonc yeu pansegui la curacio de lu ja sia que no era confizat en la sanacio de lu, mays cessegui subtiliar aquel entro que foc sanat e le loc es consolidat.	Then I sought the cure for it, even though it was not fully integrated into the healing process, but I managed to subtly integrate it into what is healthy and where the area has become consolidated.
E yeu pus que vi le loc ja consolidat, timegui sobre le malaute que endevengues sobre lu accident de mal en le sieu ventre; e no endevenc alcu per aquo mal accident e romas en las suas milhos disposicios mangant e bevent, e aprop entrec en banh e es exercitat en sos ditz.	And I saw that the area was already consolidated. I then treated the wound that resulted from the injury to his belly; and no one recovered from this bad accident by merely eating and drinking, but they often immersed themselves in baths and exercised their hands.
E ja diysero alcus experimentados que quan endeve plagua en le budel, e es petita, lahoras cove que sia liada segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas fromiguas de grans caps; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua e pausa una fromigua de aquelas que aja la boca uberta sobre las doas labias de la plagua; donc quan pren sobre aquelas e strenh la sua boca, abscindeys le cap de lu, quar adhereys e no es dissolvut.	And some experienced ones have said that when there is pain in the intestine and it is small, then one should tie it according to this manner: and you take fireflies from large heads; and then adjust the two lips of the pain and place one firefly of those that have the mouth open over the two lips of the pain; therefore when it takes on those and tightly closes its mouth, cut off the head of it, for it adheres and is not dissolved.
E aprop pausa autra formigua prop la primieyra, e no cesses aquo a far am formiguas una aprop autra segon la quantitat de tota la plagua.	And then place another firefly nearby, and do not cease to make fireflies one after another according to the quantity of the entire pain.
E aprop reduzeys aquela e cos la plagua; e romanguan aquels caps annexces en le budel entro que·l budel sia sanat; e no accideys al malaute degun nocument.	And then reduce that and with the pain; and crush those adjacent heads in the intestine until the intestine is healed; and do not harm the patient in any way.
E ja es possible que·l budel sia liat am fiel subtil lo qual es fayt del budel de bestia annexs am lu, pus que es mes en agulha; e es que tu prenguas la extremitat de aquestz fiels de budel, e sia mot descarnat, e aprop lia la extremitat de lu am fiel de li, envolopat, e aprop entromet aquel fiel en agulhas e cos am aquel le budel, e areduzeys aquel en la disrupcio.	And it is possible that the intestine is tied with fine dung made from the adjacent intestine of an animal; and you take the end of these intestine threads, be it raw, and then place the end of it in dung, wrapping it. Then insert those threads into needles and tie the intestine, reducing it in the disruption.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura am formiguas no es sino segon via de fiducia e d’esperansa.	And this method of suturing with needles is nothing but a matter of faith and hope.
Mays si la plagua es gran e ampla, majorment si es en un dels budels subtils, quar lahoras no es engen sino subtiliacio, e no es sanacio de lu de tot.	And if the wound is large and extensive, especially if it is in one of the fine intestines, where there is no ligature but merely a compression, and does not heal from it.
De curacio de zuchem e fistula.	On the treatment of abscesses and fistulas.
Sapias que tota plagua e apostema quan se envilheseys e se Antiqua, e es fayt ulcus, e no es consolidat e geta braç tot temps e no es abscindit, lahoras, en qualque membre sia, universalment es nompnada fistula e nos la apelam aquela azukem.	Know that any wound or abscess when it is encased and becomes ancient, forming an ulcer, and does not consolidate and discharges continuously over time without resolving, in whatever limb it may be, universally it is named a fistula and we call it an abscess.
E fistula segon veritat es nodacio feutrada, dura, blanqua am la qual no es dolor e a la qual es conquavitat ayssi cum es conquavitat de pena de ausel; e per aysso nompnat aquela alcus rizatz, id est pena.	And a fistula, according to truth, is a fibrous node, hard and white, upon which there is no pain and around which the skin is contracted as if by the pain of an abscess; for this reason, it is called a hard ulcer, that is, a pain.
E es en alcus homes humida, la qual geta brac; e fort leu la humiditat es abscidida en alcunas horas.	And in a soft ulcer, which discharges pus; and strong moisture is absorbed within a few hours.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta humiditat es mota, e es pauca, e es grossa, e es subtil.	And sometimes this moisture is hot, and it is small, and it is large, and it is subtle.
E yeu ja he denant dit en la divisio, lahoras cum yeu diyssi las plaguas, que tot ulcus que no es sanat ni no es en lu nuda carn, no es aquo sino per una de ix causas: de las quals la una es o per pauquesa de sanc en le cos; o per malicia de lu; o quar entre lu e las labias es carn dura prohibent nativitat de carn; o quar es de mota legesa; o quar aquel ulcus en si meteys es poyrit e la materia que es a lu tramesa es de mala qualitat; o quar la medicina es enconvenient en la curacio de lu; o quan corrupcio catz en la regio, e es pestilencia; o per proprietat de regio ayssi cum endeve a Saragossa , en la qual es fayta difficil degestio de las malautias, e es tardada en aquela sanacio de apostema per natura; o quar en lu es os un, o motz osses.	And I have already stated in the division, when I spoke of the plaigues, that any ulcer that is not healed nor has naked flesh in it, is not this but by one of nine causes: of which the first is either from lack of sanguine in the body; or from malice of it; or between it and the lips there is hard flesh forbidding natural flesh growth; or it is caused by a hot legease; or that ulcer itself contains pus and the matter that is transited to it is of bad quality; or the medicine used in its cure is inappropriate; or corruption arises in the region, and it is pestilential; or by virtue of the region as in Saragossa, where there is a difficult digestion of diseases, and the healing of an apostema is delayed by nature; or that in it is bone or bones.
Ja e mostrat totas aquelas causas, e·ls senhals de aquelas e la curacio de lor am medicinas en la divisio.	And I have shown all those causes, the signs of them, and the treatment for each with medicines in the division.
E cove assi que yeu fassa a tu saber la curacio de fistula la qual es fayta per via de operacio am ma.	And cover thus so that I may make known to you the cure of fistula which is made by way of surgical operation with my hand.
E sapias que fistula accideys en totz les membres del cos; quar de aquelas son fistulas que perveno a las venas grantz e arterias, o als nervis, o al ciphac, o al budel, o a la vesica, o ad alcuna de las costas, o ad alcu dels spondils del dos, o ad alcuna de las juncturas compostas per composicio ayssi quo de la ma e del pe; e de aquelas so que dan a lu propinquitat del membre principal e de semblantz.	And know that fistula occurs in all parts of the body; some of these fistulas lead to the large veins and arteries, or to the nerves, or to the liver, or to the intestine, or to the bladder, or to some of the ribs, or to one of the vertebrae, or to some joint composed thus like that of the hand and foot; and these are those that are near the main part of the body and similar.
E donc aquela de aquestas fistulas que es segon aquesta manieyra es de las malautias de dificil sanacio, e no recep curacio, e occupacio am aquela es trebalh e ignorancia.	And know that some of these fistulas, occurring in this manner, are of difficult healing, and do not receive cure or occupation; and that such treatment is labor and ignorance.
E si es de las fistulas alcuna la profunditat de la qual no perve ad aquestz locs que e dit, e esperas e confizas en la curacio de lu, e vols pervenir a cognicio de lu, lahoras pren tenta de eram o de ferr, e si la fistula va segon rectetut, e perquireys aquela am lu.	And if any of these fistulas is so deep that it does not reach the locations mentioned, and you hope and confide in its cure, and want to come to know it, then take a probe or a needle, and if the fistula runs straight, and inquire about it.
Mays si la fistula es tortuissitat, lahoras investigua aquela am tenta de plom subtil, quar plom am la levitat del sieu cors es alleujat e curvat deves la tortuositat.	If the fistula is tortuous, then investigate that with a fine lead wire, for lead being light of its body is relieved and curved to alleviate the tortuosity.
E si la fistula es havent motz horrificis, no es a tu possible que signifiques sobre lu am tenta.	And if the fistula has horrific movements, it is not possible for you to signify about it with a probe.
Adonc cristeriza le orrifici per sos orrificis, quar la humiditat per la qual clisterizas aquela va deves las autras orrificis e corr de lor.	Then cleanse the openings through those openings, for the moisture with which you cleanse that one should relieve the other openings and flow from them.
E aprop inquier exquisitament, segon qual manieyra a tu es possible que conoguas si aqui has os o nervi, e es la conquavitat de la fistula longinqua o propdana, o es una fistula a la qual so motz orrificis e esta sobre aquo tot am la suma de la tua fortaleza, am la tua enterroguacio, am la qual enterroguas le malaute, e la invencio de la dolor deves la tua compressio am la ma sobre le loc, e semblantz de las significacios e de las causas accidentz al apostema.	And then inquire precisely, according to the manner by which you can know if here lies a vein or a nerve, and whether the cavity of the fistula is distant or nearby, or whether it is a fistula with only opening movements and this surpasses all with your strength, in your examination, where you examine the patient, and in your compression over the area with your hand, and the appearance of the significations and the causes of the swelling.
E cum tu auras stat sobre totas aquelas causas am stacio veraya, lahoras ve a la curacio segon confidencia: e es que tu consideras lahoras si es fistula apparent propinqua o en loc sal, longinqua de junctura, o de nervi, o de arteria, o de vena, o de un dels locs les quals yeu a tu e ditz.	And when you have stood over all those causes in true station, then proceed to the cure according to confidence: and it is that you consider then whether it is a nearby apparent fistula or in some place far, distant from the joint, or from the nerve, or from the artery, or from the vein, or from one of those places which I tell you.
Lahoras tu secca la fistula segon que denant es dit de la naracio de lu, e osta aquo que es en aquela filtracio e de carns corrumpudas, e aquo que es nascut en le orrifici de la carn, o de theil e de semblantz, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	When you dry the fistula as described earlier from its narration, and plug what is in that filtration and of corrupted flesh, and what is born in the orifice of the flesh, or vein and similar, cure that within until it is healed.
Mays si la fistula es de longinqua profunditat, e es segon rectetut, lahoras cove que inscidas aquela en le preon atant quant a tu sira possible, e aprop mondifica aquela de totas las suas carns corrompudas; e aprop administra calguas envolopadas en medicinas acutas, e intromet aquelas entro a la conquavitat de la fistula, la qual has conprenduda am ferr.	But if the fistula is of great depth and straight, then delve into the preon until it is possible for you, and thereafter modify it with all its corrupted flesh; and then apply wrapped leeches in medicated substances, and insert those into the cavity of the fistula, which you have understood with iron.
E fay aquo am aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la medicina acuta corroda tot aquo que es romas en la conquavitat de la fistula de la corrupcio.	And do this with the leeches for several days until the sharp medicine corrodes everything that is rotten in the cavity of the fistula.
E aprop restaura aquela am enguentz les quals engendran carn sana entro que sia sanada.	And then restore it by applying ointments that generate healthy flesh until it is healed.
Mays si no es sanada per aquo, lahoras tu cauteriza aquela segon que havem recomtat.	But if it is not healed by this, then cauterize it as we have recommended.
Mays si la causa de fistula es os e es deves tu certificat aquo, lahoras tu inquireys aquela e secca aquela segon que havem recomtat, si tu no prohibeys alcuna causa de vena o de nervi o de membre principal ayssi cum havem dit.	If the cause of the fistula is bone and you must certify this, then inquire about that dry and that moist one according to what we have recommended, if you do not prohibit any cause of vein or nerve or of principal member as we said.
Mays si le os es a tu descubert e es en lu alcuna corrupcio e negror, lahoras tu ratz aquel entro que la corrupcio sia hostada tota; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que lu encarne entro que sia sanat.	But if the bone is exposed and there is some corruption and blackness in it, then probe that area where the corruption has set in completely; and place a dressing over it as the flesh inside heals.
E si no es sana e gieta brac ayssi cum fazia, lahoras sapias que tu no est pervengut a la eradicacio tota de la corrupcio; e adonc tu descuebre sobre lu segondanament e exquisitament fay la razio de lu e la mundificacio de lu am la deriera fortalasa tieua, e aprop restaura aquel.	And if it is not yet healed and strong enough, then you know that you have not completely eradicated the corruption; then uncover it again thoroughly, and make a diagnosis of it and its purification with your last strength; and then restore it.
E donc si es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras sapias que aquela corrupcio es en la profunditat longinqua del cors, la qual no ha conseguida, e adonc a tu en aquel no es engen sino laysar aquela.	And if it is healed, that is good; but if not, then you know that the corruption is deep within the body, which you have not reached, and then in that case, there is nothing for you to do but leave it as it is.
E si le os corromput es petit, o es a tu possible atirar aquel, lahora tu le atira am forceps subtils las quals conveno ad aquo.	And if the corrupt bone is small, or if it is possible to extract it with forceps, then use fine forceps suitable for this.
E si so motz osses, lahoras exquisitament fay la extraccio de totz aquels, e de aquels no laysses denguna causa am la tua fortaleza.	And if it is a matter of bones, then you must thoroughly perform the extraction of all of them, and from them you must not leave any cause for your strength.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat alcuna causa de las humiditatz, e en lor inscizio no ha temor ni error, lahoras inscideys aquelas liaments o carns si so aqui, e deliura les osses.	And if it is due to some cause of the humidities, and in their incision there is neither fear nor error, then you must incise those ligaments or muscles if they are here, and deliver the bones.
Mays si a tu no es preparacio de ostar les osses de la tua hora, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua aquo que poyresca la plagua aquela, e layssa aquela entro que aquo es al enviro de aquels osses de carns e de liamentz, e guarda la plagua que no sia consolidada, e sia constrengida la seccio la qual tu has inscidida en la tua operacio.	And if you are not prepared to expose the bones at your convenience, then pause over the area that can be freed from it, and leave that part within which this is near those bones of muscle and ligaments, and keep the area unconsolidated, and constrain the section which you have incised in your operation.
Habantz, si temes, pausa sobre lu coto submers en sopre trissat am oli, o coto submers en anguent egipciac, o en alcu dels enguentz vertz, quar quan poyriran aquelas liaments, e les osses son de lor seperatz la ablacio, e de aquels atraccio es alleujada.	Having done this, if you fear, pause over the joint submerged in a warm bath of oil, or a joint submerged in Egyptian ointment, or in some of the green ointments, for when they can be freed from it, and the bones are separated from it, then the pain is alleviated.
Mays si es un gran os ayssi cum le os de camba o de coyssa o semblantz ad aquels, e aquo que de lu es corromput es la facia de lu tant solament, lahoras ratz aquela am resio tant solament derriera entro que sia ostada aquela negror e corrupcio, e aprop restaura la plagua.	If it is a large bone such as the thigh or similar, and what is corrupted in it is only its surface, then quickly apply the cautery only behind where the blackness and corruption are obstructed, and then restore the wound.
Mays si aquo que de lu es corrumpyt es gran partida, e la corrupcio ja ha conseguida la medulla del os, lahoras es causa necessaria cerrar aquel e aquel tot inscidir entro al loc on es pervenguda la corrupcio, e lahoras cura aquel entro que sia consolidada.	If what is corrupted in it is a large part, and the corruption has already reached the marrow of the bone, then it is necessary to close that area and incise into the place where the corruption has spread, and then cure that once it is consolidated.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc ad un home en la sua coyssa per que pausez aquela a eyssempli e adjutori sobre la tua operacio.	And I advise you that when dealing with a patient in the thigh, have them lie on their side and use this example and aid for your operation.
Foc un home jove per etat entorn xxx ans, al qual accideys dolor en la sua cueyssa, e de las partidas dedintz mauguda es sobre la materia dedintz le cors entro que la materia es pervenguda a la cueyssa, e es materia de apostema am gran apostema, e no foc a lu causa extrinseca.	Let there be a young man around 30 years of age, who experiences pain in his thigh. The gout affects the internal parts and enters the body, reaching the thigh, and the matter is that of an abscess, a large abscess, and it is not due to an external cause.
E adonc foc extendut le temps am aquela per la error dels metges entro que l’apostema es hubert, e acorrero de lu materias motas, e la sua curacio foc aprop pausada entro que la camba foc fistulada, e faytz son en lu motz orrificis les quals totz getavan poyredura e las humiditatz del cos.	And then the abscess was extended over time due to the error of the doctors as it matured, and the matter moved inward. The cure was almost paused when the thigh became fistulized, and you made orifices in the pus where all drained pus and the body's moisture flowed out.
E adonc le curec multitut de metges entorn dos ans, e no foc en aquels savia ma en la art, entro que yeu fu appelat.	And then the master of doctors around two years, and not fire among those who know better in the art, until I was called.
E vi la camba de lu e las materias que corrian de lu aquels orrificis per gran cors; e ja le cos de aquel home era tot stabozit e la color de lu era citrina.	And there you see the leg and the fluids flowing from it through those openings; and already that man's body was stiffened, and his skin was yellowish.
E adonc yeu intromesi la tenta ad un de aquels orrificis e pervenguec la tenta al os.	And then I inserted the probe into one of those openings and guided the probe to the bone.
E aprop yeu e perscrutat tostz les orrificis e trobegui aquels pervenir a lor de totas partidas de la camba.	And then I examined all the openings closely and found those that connected to them from all parts of the leg.
E adonc yeu me coytegui e inscidegui sobre un dels orrificis aquels entro que descrobegui una partida del os, e atrobegui aquel corromput, e ja era terros e corrumput e denigrat; e era ja corrumpuda una partida de la camba entro que havia penetrat entro a la mezola.	And then I approached and incised over one of the openings, disclosing a part of the bone, and found the corrupted tissue, which was already terrible, corrupted, and discolored; and a part of the leg had already become corrupted where it had penetrated into the marrow.
E adon yeu serregui aquo que a mi era discubert e preparat del os descubert.	And then I clamped what was revealed to me and prepared the discovered bone.
E yeu cujegui que no fos en le os sino aquela corrupcio la qual abscidigui e serregui, e yeu ja havia derraziguada.	And I conclude that it is not in the bone but in that corruption which will be removed and tightened.
E aprop pausegui la restauracio de la plagua am medicina consolidativas per lonc temps, e no es consolidada.	And then wait for the restoration of the wound with conservative medical methods for a long time, and it is not yet consolidated.
E aprop yeu iteregui e descubregui sobre le os segondament sobre le descubriment primier, e atrobegui continua corrupcio am le os.	And then you iterate and discover over the bone according to the first discovery, and find continuous corruption in the bone.
E serregui aquo que a mi apares de aquela corrupcio, e aprop yeu fo perforsat fayre la curacio de lu e restauracio, e no es restaurat.	And tighten what appears to me to be that corruption, and then you must force the cure and restoration, but it is not restored.
E adonc yeu descubri sobre lu autra veguada e no cessegui inscidir le os petit a petit particuladament e perforsa la restauracio de lu, e no es restaurat entro que inscidigui entorn un palm de lu, e aquel extraxi am la medula sua, e aprop restauregui aquel am medicinas, e es consolidat leugierament e sanat.	And then you discover over the other side and do not cease to incise the bone little by little particularly and force the restoration, but it is not restored until you incise around one palm of it. And that extracted its marrow, and then restore it with medicines, and it is lightly consolidated and healed.
E no es necessaria iteracio en la operacio de lu e seccio de lu sino per la disposicio de la freulesa de lu e per la paucitat de la tollerancia de lu e paor de lu de mort, quar a lu accidia en totas horas per superfluitat de evacuacio sincopi mala.	And there is no need for iteration in the operation of the section of the femur, but rather due to the disposition of the fracture and the scarcity of its tolerance and fear of death. For it accedes at all hours due to excessive evacuation and bad syncope.
E donc sanat es per sanacio entiera, e nada es en loc de os carn dura; e es fayta bona la disposicio de lu en le sieu cors e retornec la vertut de lu; e es conversat en las suas disposicios e no fec a lu contrarietat en ambulacio ni nocument en denguna causa.	And thus health is through complete healing, and nothing replaces the integrity of the flesh; it is well done when his disposition in his body and the virtue within him are restored; and it is by his own dispositions and not contrary to his movements or any cause.
Mays si es os eminent en loc del cors ja trauquat, lahoras cove que tu secces aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas liament e strenh aquel en la extremitat de aquel os eminent, e comanda ad alcu que extenda aquel en sus; e pausa aquel liament de lana pus gros del primier liament; e aprop lia aquel sobre la carn que es dejos le os, e exten la extramitat de lu per que atires la carn a las partidas dejos, e tu descuebras la carn sobre le loc le qual voles serrar per que la serra no leda la carn.	If the bone is prominent in the damaged area, then you must correct it in this manner: take hold of the bone gently but firmly at its extremity, and command someone to extend it. Place a thicker woolen pad over the flesh where the bone is left, and stretch the extremity of the pad so that it draws the flesh towards the space left by the bone. Then uncover the flesh in the area you wish to cut for the incision not to damage the flesh.
E pausa fust o taula dejos le os decentment, quar quan tu fas aquo no es prohibida la serra que no secce la carn corrumpuda.	Then place a stick or board properly under the bone, for when you do this, it is not forbidden to make the incision without damaging the damaged flesh.
E cove que sia la serradura sobre le loc corrumput petit a petit, quar si es en la concavitat del os corrupcio e no appar en la sua apparicio al sentiment, e forssa a serratura de lu autra veguada.	Then the incision should be made gradually in the damaged area, for if the corruption is within the bone and does not appear in its manifestation through sensation, you must make another cut.
E si le os es corrumput e no-eminent, abantz es la una partida continuada am la autra, e la corrupcio es al mieg loc o en partida de lu, lahoras tu descuebre la carn de totas partz tota; e aprop pausa fust dejos, e aprop serra aquel de la primiera partida la on es la corrupcio entro que sia continuada la serratura del autra partida.	And if the bone is corrupt and non-eminent, one edge is continuous with the other, and the corruption is in the middle or part of it, then you uncover the flesh from all parts; and place fustian over it, and make that from the first edge where the corruption is to be within which the seam of the other part continues.
E sia la serradura segon le loc de la corrupcio un petit, segon que havem dit.	And the seam should be according to the location of the corruption, slightly, as we have said.
E si la corrupcio es en la junctura, inscideys aquela junctura corrumpuda, e serra le os la on es continuat del autra part.	And if the corruption is in the joint, incise that corrupted joint, and set the bone where it continues from the other part.
E si de la corrupcio es en la continuacio de doas juncturas, lahoras no es en lu razio sino engen.	And if the corruption is in the continuity of two joints, then it is not in its proper place but displaced.
E si la corrupcio es en le pecte de la ma o del pe, es mot dificil; empero cove que tu inquieras la corrupcio en qual manieyra appareys a tu, e que abradas aquela, e mondes aquela segon quascuna disposicio la qual es a tu possibla, e am cascum engen sia rectificat a tu, quan no fa a tu contrarietat vena o nervi.	And if the corruption is in the axilla of the arm or the shoulder, it is very difficult; however, you must inquire how the corruption appears to you, and incise and dress that area according to any disposition which is within your capability, and each case should be corrected as you see fit, provided it does not contravene veins or nerves.
E sapias qual es inscididors e las serras a inscidir aquestz osses son motz segon le situament dels osses, e la preparacio de aquels, e la grosseza de aquels, e la subtilitat e la grandeza e la parvitat de aquels, e la duricia e la lor raritat; per que cove que tu prepares a tota specia de operacio estrument convenient ad aquela opperacio.	And consider what are the incisors and the saws to cut these bones are made of according to the position of the bones, and the preparation of those, and their size, and their subtlety and greatness and smallness, and their hardness and their rarity; so that you prepare for every operation an instrument suitable for that operation.
E sapias que aquela operacio significa a tu sobre la specia del strument del qual indigeysses; quan am tu es gran studi e lonc e conoyssensa de las manieyras de aquesta art, e testimoni de manieyras de malautias, quar lahoras ja tu las avias per tu meteys aquo que es convenient a lu dels sturmentz a tota malautia.	And consider that operation means to you regarding the type of instrument you need; when you have great study, length, and knowledge of the ways of this art, and experience with the ways of ailments, so that when you have them, you apply what is convenient for them from the instruments for all ailments.
E yeu so a tu formant en la fi de aquest capitol le nombre dels instrumentz les quals pausaras cum eyssimples am les quals proceziras a la tua prohibicio la qual experimentaras sobre las autras.	And you shall find at the end of this chapter the number of instruments which you will use, some of which you will prepare according to your prohibition, which you will experience with the others.
Forma de serra:	Form of the saw:
Forma de autra serra:	Form of another saw:
Forma de autra serra:	Form of another saw:
Forma de autra serra gran:	Forma of another will be great:
Forma de ray:	Forma of ray:
Sia le cap de aquest ray segon la forma de cap de clau stellat, e les puntz de lu sian segon la forma dels puntz alstefegi.	Let the head of this ray be according to the form of the head of a star key, and its points be according to the form of the prongs of an astelkey.
E no conveneys sino que am aquel sian confricadatz les caps de las juncturas quan so corrumpudas, o es la boca gran ampla.	And do not apply any friction to the heads of the joints only when they are damaged, or when there is a large open wound.
Forma de razori major dels autres:	Forma of great razor:
Forma de razori menor:	Forma of lesser razor:
Forma de razori lat:	Forma of broad razor:
Forma de serra autra decentment fayta: sia fayt arc de lu pus sobira e la acuitat de lu de ferr, e le membre de lu de boys punhal descentment fayt.	Forma of another saw properly made: let it be made with an arc above and the sharpness of its edge of iron, and the handle of its body of well-formed dagger.
Forma de lu:	Forma of it:
Forma de razori en la qual ha concavitat:	Forma of the razor which has a cavity:
Forma de razori autra subtil:	Form of a razor or something subtle:
Forma de autra razori de curvada extremitat:	Form of another razor with a curved extremity:
Forma de rasori petit semblant a tenta:	Form of a razor small like a needle:
Forma de incisori am le qual so inscidit les osses:	Form of an incisor with which one cuts the bones:
Forma de inscisori autra minor:	Form of another incisor smaller:
Forma de un autra inscissori; aquest semblant a ray, e la extremitat de lu es cum serra, e es exhibit en motz locs en la razio dels osses:	Form of another incisor; this resembles a ray, and its extremity is like a sharp point, and it is applied in certain places in the proportion of the bones:
Forma de ray lo qual conveneys a rasio de aquel que es perforat dels osses:	Form like a ray which you apply in proportion to the bone that is being pierced:
E la extremitat de lu es triangulada e de aguda extremitat.	And its extremity is triangular and sharp.
E es fayt de ferr de India , e semblantment cove que totas las causas que havem ditas de rasoris e de inscissoris e de serras.	And it is made of iron from India, and similarly hollow like all the causes we have said regarding razors, incisors, and saws.
De inscizio extremitatz e de la serratura dels osses.	Of the incision extremities and the sawing of bones.
Las extremitatz se poyresso o per causa intrinseca o per causa extrinseca, o cum tu auras medicat aquela corrupcio per curacio de aquelas medicinas e la curacio no comfereys, o vezes la corrupcio anar deves le membre la qual no percuteys denguna causa, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel membre entro aquo la hon acossec la corrupcio, per que le malaute evasesca per aquo de mort o de malicia que es major defeliment del membre.	The extremities may be affected either intrinsically or extrinsically, or as a result of your having treated the corruption with medical remedies and the treatment did not bring relief, or sometimes the corruption may proceed to other parts of the body which you have not yet examined, at which time you should enter that part where the corruption takes hold, in order to expel the disease either through death or malice, which is a greater misfortune for the limb.
E le senhal de aquel al qual accideys, es que·l membre es fayt negre entro que sia cujat que foc la ja comburit, o se poyreys aprop la negror entro que la poyredura aquela ane entro aquel membre que siec lu e que prengua tot le cors; e donc coyta te am inscizio de aquel.	The sign of the one upon whom this happens is that the limb becomes black before it is heated as if it were burning, or you may see the blackness in the area where the reddening has entered that part which infects the whole body; therefore examine that part carefully.
E semblantment si es causa de la corrupcio percussio de alcunas causas venenosas ayssi cum de scorpio mari o de vupera o de rutela e de semblantz.	And similarly, if the cause of the corruption is a blow from some venomous causes such as a scorpion, a viper, or a rueful snake, and its like.
E si la corrupcio o la percussio es en la extremitat del dit, lahoras tu inscideys le dit e no dones spazi a la corrupcio per que ane entro a la ma.	And if the corruption or the blow is in the extremity of the finger, then you should incise the finger and do not give space to the corruption so that it enters your hand.
E semblantment si accedeys a la ma, lahoras tu inscideys aquela de la razit del focil, e no dones spazi a la corrupcio entro que prengua en le focil del bras.	And if you approach the hand, when you incise that of the thigh, do not give space for corruption to enter within where it might take hold in the arm's basin.
E si envezeys aquel, lahoras inscideys le bras entro al coyde en la junctura.	And if you prefer that, when you incise the arm between the codex and the joint.
E si passa otra la corrupcio e la vezes enviro le coyde, lahoras en aquel es la mort del malaute; e aministrar autra causa otra aquo en curacio es quantitat de vertut.	And if corruption passes and spreads around the codex, then in that case it is the death of the patient; and to administer another cause other than this for cure is a measure of virtue.
E semblantment fay del pe quan corrupcio envezeys le dit del pe, lahoras tu inscideys aquel entro ad un dels nozes.	And similarly do for the foot when corruption prefers that of the foot, when you incise that between one of the toes.
E si pren en la pente del pe, lahoras tu inscideys tot le pe.	And if it takes in the sole of the foot, when you incise the whole foot.
Mays si pueja entro al denol, lahoras tu inscideys la camba entro a la junctura del denol.	But if it enters the sole, when you incise the leg between the joint of the sole.
E si la corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denol, lahoras en lu no es engen sino dimissio, e layssar le malaute a la mort.	And if corruption has already permeated the sole, then there is nothing but dismissal, and allow the patient to die.
E la manieyra de inscidir le membre o de serrar lu es que tu strenhas le liament en la partida pus dejos la qual voles inscidir, e strenh autre liament sobre le loc; e extenda le ministre un liament a las partidas dejos, e extenda le ministra autra liament en sus; e tu separa la carn la qual es entre dos liamentz ain spatum lat entro que sia descuberta tota la carn; e aprop sia inscidit o serrat.	And the manner of incising the member or closing it is that you hold the thread in one part and leave which you want to incise, and hold another thread over the place; extend the minister one thread to the parts left and extend the minister another thread on his side; you separate the flesh which is between two threads until all the flesh is uncovered; then it should be incised or closed.
E cove que sia pausat drap de li de totas partidas per so que no toque le loc sa, e que vengua al malaute lesio ajustada e apostema caut.	And ensure that a cloth is placed from all sides over it so that it does not touch the affected area, and that when the wound heals, it comes together properly and forms an appropriate scar.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc quan obras, lahoras tu cauteriza le loc coytadament, o pausa sus lu alcunas polveras restrenhentz le sanc; e aprop retorna a la tua medicacio entro que sia complida.	But if a flux of blood occurs while working, then you cauterize the area frequently, or place some constricting powders on it to control the bleeding; then return to your treatment until it is completed.
E aprop lia le membre plaguat am liament al u convenient, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then bind the injured member with a thread as required, and treat it until it is healed.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc a un home en le sieu pe, aquest meteys accident le qual yeu e a tu recomtat, le qual es quar accidic a lu negror en le sieu pe am adustio que era asemblada a combustio de foc.	And I advise you that if an injury occurs on a man's foot, this accident which you and I have advised against, is one where blackness appears on his foot due to scalding that resembles the combustion of fire.
E aquela corrupcio accidic primierament en le sieu dit entro que tendec tot le pe.	And that corruption accidentally first occurs within the said intestine.
E adonc aquel home preparec per si meteys pus que vic la curacio anar al membre am la vehemencia de lu que atrobec de dolor e de adustrio de lu, e el inscidic aquel pe entro a la junctura, e foc sanat.	And then that man prepares himself to apply the cure as soon as he sees the healing go to the member with the urgency of his pain and the burning sensation he experiences, and places the affected part into the joint, promoting its healing.
Lonc temps accidic a lu aquela meteyssa corrupcio en le dit de la ma indic.	Long ago, that corruption occurred in the hand of the one who applied the remedy.
E adonc venc a mi, e so me perforsat repercutir aquela superfluitat am aquo que pausegui sobre la ma de las medicinas, aprop la mundificacio del cos de lu; e no es repercussa la superfluitat e comensec anar al autra dit entro que comensec en la ma.	And then it comes to me, and I force it to reflect on how to mitigate the excess in what is applied to the hand of the doctor; as the body's purification progresses; but the excess is not reflected and begins to go into another part where it first started in the hand.
E el apelec me a inscidir la ma de lu, e yeu no volgui far aquo sperant sobre la repercussio de aquela superfluitat, e mays que temegui deves la inscizio de la ma de lu mort, quar la vertut del malaute era sobre cazement.	And they call me to place the hand of the patient under it, and I do not want to do this hoping for the reflection of that excess, rather fearing the amputation of the hand of the patient, for the virtue of the gout was powerful.
E pus que el se desperec de mi, es retornat en la sua terra e pervenguec a mi que aquel home preparec e inscidic la sua ma tota, e es sanat.	And after he wakes from me, he returns to his land and informs me that the man prepared and amputated his entire hand, and he was cured.
E no he adhuzida aquesta narracio sino per que sia adjutori sobre aquo que catz de aquesta malautia, e que sia significacio per la qual sia significada e segon la qual sia obrat.	And I have added this narration only to serve as an aid regarding what has been said about this illness, and as a signification so that it may be understood and according to which it may be performed.
De cura sinuum et qualitate clisterizationis cum medicinis.	On the care of colic and the quality of the enema with medicines.
Quan accideys apostema en alcus membres carnozes e·l spazi de l’apostema es prolonguat entro que fa colleccio de sania, e aprop es romput e perforat, e es eyssida de lu la sania, e roman le loc vuoyt quays cum si era vayssel, e la codena que es desobre lu ayssi cum drap subtiliat, e no es pervengut a deriera corrupcio, e no inprimeys en le os o en nervi ni en liament, es apelat sinu, e no es nompnat fistula.	When an apostema occurs in some fleshly members and the space of the apostema is prolonged such that it collects pus, and then it is ruptured and perforated, and the pus is drained from it, and the area remains as if it were a vessel, and the cloth above it is like a thin covering, and no further corruption occurs, and it does not imprint on bone or nerve nor in muscle, it is called colic, and is not named fistula.
Mays empero si le spazi es prolonguat entro que la corrupcio enprema en alcun membre, lahoras es appelada fistula e no zukem.	Otherwise, if the space is prolonged such that the corruption imprint in some member, then it is called a fistula and we stop.
E la cura de lu es que inscidas aquela codena tota ayssi cum es revolvut, e majorment quan es subtiliada e es fayta cum drap, e comfizas que no adhereys al loc per la sua corrupcio.	And the treatment for it is to insert that cloth entirely as if it were rotated, especially when it is thin and made like a cloth, and you must ensure that it does not adhere to the area due to its corruption.
Mays si tu speras que la codena adheresca e que aquela corrupcio no aja conseguit per deriera consecucio, e en la codena ha spassitut de cara, lahoras tu cura aquel am clisteri.	If you hope that the cord will adhere and that that corruption has not succeeded through a secondary consequence, and on the cord has passed toward the front, then you cure that with a cleansing enema.
E es que consideras al sinu, e lahoras si es gran, e·l brac que yeys es de fetent odor, lahoras clisteriza aquel am medicament egipciac le qual es de oli e vi agre e ziniar recebent partidas enguals, e sian ajustadas en un vayssel, e sian coytas sobre le foc entro que’l medicament se fassa rog e pervengua a specitut de mel.	And you consider the sinus, and if it is large, and the cloth that you apply has a foul odor, then give an enema with that medicine which consists of oil and wine mixed with honey in equal parts, and be sure to mix them in a vessel, and let them heat over the fire until the medicine is well heated and reaches a specific temperature.
E aprop tu pren de lu aquo que es necessari e dissolveys lu am aygua e mel; e clisteriza am aquel le sinu, e strenh le orrifici de lu, e layssa la medicina en lu per la quantitat de doas horas.	And then you take what is necessary and dissolve the medicine in water and honey; give this enema to the sinus, strengthen the openings of it, and let the medicine remain in it for about two hours.
E aprop extratz aquela am sprecio; e fay aquo per tantz dias entro que sia mundificat le sinu e sia remauguda la pudor.	And then extract that medicine; do this for several days until the sinus is cleansed and the sore is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es clisterizat am aygua de cendre, quan no es a tu prezent aquest medicament; e es que tu prenguas la cendra de vitz, e met sobre lu aygua; e aprop cola aquela e clisteriza aquel am ela entro que te confizes que·l sinu lahoras es ostat.	And sometimes an enema is given with water from ashes when this medicine is not available; you take the ashes of vitex, put them in water; and then extract that and give the enema until you are sure that the sinus has been cleansed.
E si le malaute no ha tollerancia sobre le medicament egipciac ni l’aygua de la cendre, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aygua e mel e quays sia mesclat ziniar trissat, e clisteriza aquel am vi e mel mesclat, quar de proprietat de mel es que mondifique e lave, e le vi fa adherir le sinu, e majorment quan en le vi ha superfluitat de stipticitat e de siccitat.	And if the patient does not tolerate the Egyptian medicine nor the water of ashes, then prepare that mixture with water and honey mixed with thirty parts of cinnamon, and prepare that mixture with wine and honey mixed, for by the property of honey it modifies and washes, and the wine causes adhesion to the sinew, especially when there is an excess ofstringency and dryness in the wine.
E cum tu fas aquo alcunas veguadas e te comfizes que·l sinu ja es remaugut, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aquo que fa naysser la carn en lu.	And when you have applied it several times and you are sure that the sinew is already softened, then use that mixture to cause flesh to grow in it.
E es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e dissolveys aquel am oli rozat e vi stiptic; o que clisterizas aquel am alcunas medicinas e enguentz autres que hajan las proprietatz les quals ja he yeu scritz en le tractat dels enguents.	And you take of dyafinicon ointment, dissolve that mixture with oil rubbed and stringy wine; or you use that mixture to administer certain medicines and apply other ointments that have the properties which I have already written in the treatise on ointments.
E si le orrifici del sinu es streyt en le qual no es recebuda la canula del clisteri, lahoras tu le amplifique aquel am ferr petit a petit, e pausa en lu calgua envolopada en enguent egipciac o en enguent basilicon entro que sia amplificat.	And if the opening of the sinew is wide enough to receive the catheter of the enema, then you must gradually enlarge it with a small iron instrument, pausing in it while wrapped in Egyptian or basilicon ointment until it is enlarged.
E semblantment si le orrifici es ample, lahoras tu agregua las labias de lu am sutura e layssa de lu quantitat en la qual intre le clisteri ses addicio.	And if the opening is wide, then you should suture the lips of the wound and leave enough space for the enema to be added.
E si le orrifici de lu del qual corr le brac es elevat a las partidas desus, lahoras secca aquel en le pus bas loc que es en lu per que le brac corra entro dejos, quar quan le brac es coartat en la preondeza de sinu la carn esser en lu engendrada.	And if the opening from which the flux flows is elevated above the upper parts, then dry that area below it so that the flux can flow into it; when the flux is constrained in the depth of the sinus, flesh will be generated there.
E si no es a tu possible seccar le sinu entro al enviro del os pus bas segon que voles, lahoras te perforssa que prepares le membre am preparacio per la qual corr de lu le brac leugierament segon que es a tu apparelhat e que no sia en lu retengut alcuna causa del brac.	And if you are not able to dry the sinus thoroughly within the area below the opening as desired, then you should puncture the member with an appropriate preparation so that the flux flows slightly according to your ability and without any obstruction to the flux.
E pren medicinas consolidativas que sian pausadas sobre le sinu convenientz ad aquo que vols exxten aquelas sobre drap de li.	And take consolidative medicines that are applied gently over the sinus in accordance with what you want, extending them on linen cloth.
E le drap sia de tan gran quantitat cum fa la comunicacio de tot le sinu; e aprop inscidey am las forfexs en le dreyt del orrifici del sinu un trauc pus ample un pauc que l’orrifici del sinu; e aprop exten sobre autre drap de li dels enguentz leons segon la quantitat del trauc, e pausa le sobre aquel per posicio longinqua del orrifici del sinu per que sia aleujat le eyssiment del brac de lu e no ostes le drap gran sino aprop alcus dyas una veguada.	And the cloth should be of such quantity as to allow communication with the entire sinus; then cut the scissors along the right side of the sinus opening and make a slight larger incision than the sinus opening; then extend the lion ointment on another piece of linen according to the size of the incision, and place it over the area away from the sinus opening so that it eases the flux of the liquid and does not disturb the cloth for a few days once.
Mays aquel que es sobre le orrifici del sinu, le qual remauguas en tota hora per so que yesca aquo que es ajust en lu del brac.	May he who is over the opening of the sinus, whom you warm at all times so that it does not come out of place in your hand.
E per que sapias si aquo que corr de lu del brac es mot o pauc, o es digest, o es no-digest.	And so that you may know if what flows from the hand is much or little, or is digestible, or is non-digestible.
E am aysso tu considera le loc de aquel sinu, si en lu sent le pacient dolor o no, e si es en lu apostema.	And thus you consider the place of that sinus, if in it the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess.
E cum la tua medicacio es prolonguada en la tal manieyra, e vesas la matiera que es gitada sobre le orrifici del sinu ja adhereys, o se apropria adherencia, lahoras le mayti tu le deslia o le tertz dia, e quan deslias la plagua, lahoras muda le drap per autre e renova le enguent.	And as your treatment is prolonged in this manner, and you see the matter that is discharged over the opening of the sinus has adhered, or there is a growing adherence, then at once remove it or let it dry for one day. When you remove the敷料, then change the cloth to another and renew the ointment.
Mays si del sinu aprop lon spazi yeys virus subtil, lahoras no te desperes de la adherencia de li, quar la sanacio de lu se apropria, quar so alcus homes en les quals tarda generacio de carn en las lors plaguas, e de aquels so en les quals es fayt le contrari de lu.	May it also be that from the sinus there extends a subtle virus, then do not wait for the adherence of this, for the healing of it takes hold, for some people in whose wounds flesh generation is delayed, and in those, the opposite occurs.
E si del sinu aprop motz dias es yssit brac indigest, lahoras sapias que·l sinu no adhereys; e si es tardada la adherencia del sinu e es la causa prolonguada, lahoras tu ajusta en exsiccacio de las medicinas, e si las medicinas so humidas en lor substancia e en la sua vertut, son seccas ayssi cum enguent dyafinicon, quan es en lu ajustada superfluitat de addicio de zegi.	And if from the sinus for nearly days it sits brackish indigestion, then you perceive that the sinus does not adhere; and if adhesion of the sinus is delayed and the cause is prolonged, then you adjust in drying out with medicines, and if the medicines are moist in their substance and in their virtue, they are dried thus like an ointment of dfafinicon when there is excess addition of zegi.
E le mays derier am le qual es curat, es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e sia dissout en oli rozat, e sia sobre lu vojat vi antic engual en la sua substancia, e aprop comfeys aquel am lu, e usa de aquel.	And the best remedy for what is cured, is that you take an ointment of dfafinicon and dissolve it in sweet oil, and apply it well over it, and use only this.
E ja fa semblant en aquela accio, quan no y a brac, enguent dyafinicon, mel quan es coyt entro que sia engrossat, e usa de lu; o que prenguas mirra e aloen e enses, e trissa tot e polveriza sobre le mel quan es sus le foc, e aprop lineys aquo sobre drap e strenh aquel sobre le sinu; e lineys aquel am le mel le qual has cuoyt entro que es engrossat, e polveriza sobre drap e strenh aquel.	And pretend in that action when there is no brackishness, use an ointment of dfafinicon and honey when it is cooked until it thickens, and use it. Or you take myrrh and aloes and cinnamon, mix them all together and powder over the honey which is on the fire, then apply this over cloth and strengthen it over the sinus; and apply that to the honey which you have cooked until it thickens, and powder it over cloth and strengthen it.
E alcunas veguadas so administratz am lu aristologia longua e razitz de lili celesti (e es lili celesti) e farina de errs e centaurea, e usa de aquels simples o ajustatz, trissa aquels e cribela e polveriza sobre le mel le qual he recomtat; e husa de lu.	And sometimes it is administered to him some doses of long winded aristology and reasonings of celestial lilies (and these are celestial lilies) and flour of mercury and centaury, and use those simples or adjusted ones, press them and sift over the honey which I have recommended; and use this.
E si es prolonguat le sinu, e no es sanat per aquesta curacio, lahoras sapias que la corrupcio es en le preon de lu, e ja fa enquisicio en les osses o en les autres membres durs o als liaments; lahoras tu le cura am curacio fistular, ayssi cum desus es dit.	And if the sinew is prolonged and does not heal by this treatment, then you know that the corruption is in the core of it, and already investigate in the bones or in the other hard members or ligaments; then you cure it by fistula treatment, as is said above.
De curacio de panarici et unguis attritae et incisione digiti additi et sectione.	For the cure of tumors, nail attrition, and incision of the digit with additional cutting.
Panarici es apostema le qual nays dejos la ungla del dit pous de la ma o del pe, e fort leu nays en les autres ditz, e cum es prolonguat e la sua curacio es mens prezada, o es apostemat de apostema caut, o es corrumput, e gieta brac entro que corrodeys la razitz de la ungla, e fort leu corromp aquela tota, e fort leu perve la sua corrupcio al os entro que es a lu odor fetent, e es fayta la extremitat del dit lada, e la color de lu es fayta fusca.	Panarici is an apostema which leaves the nail of the finger or toe, and swelling occurs in other fingers, and since it often prolongs its cure, it may become a chronic apostema, or corrupted, and penetrates the bone, emitting a foul odor. The extremity of the digit is then amputated, and the color of the affected area becomes dark.
E donc quan tu auras aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas am ferr tota la superfluitat que es romasa de la ungla e aprop cauteriza la plagla aprop aquo, quar cauteri mot es juvatiu en aysso.	And when you have done that as we said in the division and do not connect your cure, then you must incise all the superfluous matter that is discharged from the joint and place a cautery near it, for a cautery motion is beneficial in this.
Mays si le os es sa e la ungla es sana, e las addicios de la ungla vuoydas ja compremen las carns a las partidas dedintz, e comensan lu punger e ledeysso aquela, lahoras cove que tu pauses ray subtil dejos le angle de la ungla que pungeys la carn, e impelleys aquela sus e inscideys aquela carn am facilitat, e pausa sobre aquo que roman de la carn de las medicinas comburentz corrosivas entro que sia tot remaugut; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	If the bone is sound and the joint is healthy, and the adductors of the joint have drawn the muscles to the inner parts, and they begin to prick and lead that, then you must pause with a subtle ray at the angle of the joint that pricks the muscle, push that up and incise that muscle with ease, and place your hand over what remains of the muscle until it is all destroyed by the burning corrosive medicines; then cure that with ointment until it is healed.
Mays si la corrupcio ja enprem en le os, lahoras cove que tu inscidas le os aquel e le extraguas, car nul temps no es sanat que sia en lu le os corrumput.	If the corruption has already invaded the bone, then you must incise the bone there and extract it, for nothing is healed that remains in the corrupted bone.
E si vezes la corrozio e la corupcio anar en le dit, lahoras tu inscideys aquel en un dels nozes segons que es premesa la sua rememoracio, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you see the corrosion and corruption spreading to that side, then you must incise there in one of the joints according to where its location is remembered, and cure that until it is healed.
Mays si a la ungla endeve percussio o atricio, e endeve en aquela dolor vehement, lahoras cove que tu al comensament fleubotomes le malaute, e aprop secca la ungla am spatum agut am seccio transversa desus en jus, e guarda te que la seccio no pervengua entro a la carn que es dejos la ungla, quar tu faras accidir al malaute dolor vehement, e sira causa a nativitat de la carn ajustada superflua en le loc; e aprop cura aquel loc am aquo que ceda dolor.	If at the joint upon percussion or rubbing, and indeed in that pain it is very violent, then you should at the beginning phlebotomize the malady, and soon dry the joint with an acute spatum by transverse section above in jus, and guard yourself that the section does not penetrate into the flesh which remains outside the joint; for you will cause the malady a very painful pain, and it shall be reason for native excess of adjusted superfluous flesh at that place; and soon cure that place with what relieves pain.
Mays dit ajustat, le qual es nat en las mas de alcus homes, fort leu es carnos tot, e fort leu so en lu osses, o fort leu es en lu ungla.	But by "adjusted," which is native in many people, the flesh is very light, and the bones are very light, or the joint is very light.
E alcus de lu son natz en la razit de la junctura, o es la nativitat de lu en alcus nozes dels ditz.	And some of them are native in the region of the joint, or the native state of the fingers includes certain nodules.
Mays aquel que es nat en alcus nozes del dit no se mau, e aquest que es nat en las juncturas fort leu es maugut.	But that which is native in certain nodules of the fingers is not painful, and this which is native in the joints is very light.
E de aquels que son natz carnoses, la seccio es leugiera, e es que tu inscidas aquel deves la sua razitz am spatum lat.	And for those that are native fleshly, the section is light, and you should incise it with an acute knife.
Mays de aquel que es nat en la razitz de la junctura, la curacio es dificil; e donc guarda te de la abscizio de lu.	More difficult for that which is near the root of the joint; therefore beware of its removal.
Mays en aquel que es nat en dit deves les nozes, cove que tu inscidas al comensament la carn de lu am inscizio redonda entro al os, e aprop serra am una de aquelas serras convenientz ad aquo, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	More difficult in that which is near the knee; ensure that you incise the beginning of the flesh at the joint into a round cut into the bone, and nearby will be one of those convenient slots for this, and cure what is inside until it is healed.
Mays consolidacio la qual accideys als ditz entre lor motas veguadas o per nativitat del home que nays enayssi, o per consolidacio de plagua o per combustio de foc, o per semblantz, adonc cove que secces aquela consolidacio entro que les ditz retorno a la sua forma natural.	More difficult the consolidation which occurs to the fingers between their knuckles due to observed injuries or by nature of the person who has them, or by consolidation from an ulcer or by burning, or by scarring, then ensure that you remove this consolidation until the fingers return to their natural form.
E aprop pausa entre lor draps de li enfuzes en oli rozat per que no sian consolidatz leugierament, e separa entre aquels, o pausa entre aquels una lamina de plom subtil entro que sia consolidat segon que cove.	And place between the bandages of what you have infused with olive oil so that they do not consolidate lightly, and separate between them, or place a thin layer of lead between them until it is consolidated as needed.
E semblantment si accideys consolidacio en alcus ditz am la palma, lahoras tu secca aquela consolidacio segon que es preparada e conveneys a la figura del membre.	And similarly, if consolidation occurs in some fingers at the palm, then dry that consolidation as prepared and conform it to the figure of the limb.
De inscizio de vices, so son varicas.	Of veins, such are varicose veins.
Vices so son varicas, e so venas envolutas grossas plenas de superfluitatz melencolicas las quals veno en motz dels membres del cors, e le major adveniment de lor en las cambas, e majorment en las cambas dels itinerantz e dels laborantz e dels portantz.	Varicose veins are such, and they are large, enveloped veins full of melancholic superfluities that occur in the limbs of the body, with the greatest occurrence in the thighs, especially in those who travel, work, and carry things.
Adonc cove que tu administres purguacio del cors de colera negra alcunas veguadas am expulcio fort, e aprop sangna le pacient de la vena basilica.	Then administer a purge of the body from black bile several times with strong expulsion, and then bleed the patient from the basilic vein.
Mays la curacio de lor am ferr es segon dos manieyras: la una es que sia inscizas e sia atirat aquel sanc negre, e l’autra manieyra es que sia elevada la vena e sia extrayta tota.	More specifically, the treatment for them can be done in two ways: one way is to incise and draw off that black blood, and the other way is to elevate the vein and extract it entirely.
La seccio de lu es segon aquesta manieyra: embroca al comensament la camba am aygua cauda mot entro que le sanc gros sia resolvut, que es feculent de la camba, e aprop strenh la camba del malaute a la partida pus sobirana de la coyssa entro a la partida dejos del denol am una benda, e aprop secca la vena en un loc, o en dos, o en tres am seccio ampla, e aprop eleva le sanc negra am la tieua ma de la partida dejos de la camba entro en sus, e desus en jus, entro que del sanc sia yssida la quantitat que voles e que vezes habastar, e la qual tollera la vertut del malaute.	The procedure is as follows: moisten the beginning of the thigh with hot water until the thick blood has resolved, which is feculent in the thigh, and strengthen the thigh of the patient above the knee between the two sides of the hip with a bandage. Then dry the vein in one, or two, or three places with a wide drying process, and raise the black blood with your hand below the part of the thigh towards the inside, and above towards the groin, until the quantity of blood that you want and is sufficient has been drawn out, which will tolerate the virtue of the black bile.
E aprop lia aquela, e comanda a lu que abstengua de las viandas colera negra engendrantz.	And then lie her down, and command her to abstain from foods generating black bile.
E itera la curacio per fleubotomia quan las venas so umplidas e aquo notz al malaute.	And continue the cure by phlebotomy when the veins are full and this is noted by the patient.
Mays la elevacio de lor es segon aquesta manieyra: tu que razas la camba del malaute, si en lu so motz pels, e aprop met le en banh e embroca la camba de lu am aygua cauda entro que s’enrogesesca e las venas sian exuberadas; o que sia exercitat per exercici fort, si banh no es a tu present, entro que·l membre sia scalfat.	More specifically for elevating the limb in this manner: you raise the knee of the patient, if there are pulsations in the veins, then immerse it in warm water and apply the cloth to the knee with wet heat until it becomes red and the veins are dilated; or if strong exercise is available, if hot water is not present, until the limb is heated.
E aprop secsa la codena en le dreyt de la vena per seccio en le lonc o en le derier de lu deves le denol, o en le pus bas de lu deves lo talo.	And then dry the bandage along the vein by sectioning it or at the end of it you should let it drop, or from the lower part of it you should cut it.
E aprop uobre la codena am uncis e excorja la vena de tota part entro que appara al sentiment, e es deves la appericio de lu que vezes aquela roga declinant a negror.	And then cut the bandage with scissors and strip the vein from all sides until it appears, and you should appreciate the appearance of that rope draining to black.
E donc cum evazeys e de la codena tu vezes aquela blanca quays sia corda.	And then, as you remove the bandage, you see that white which is the rope.
E aprop tu met dejos aquela le ray entro que sia elevada e sia gitada de la codena, e sospen aquela am onci orp leon.	And then you place that ligament raised and bent from the knee, and suspend it on an iron hook or lion's claw.
E aprop secsa autra seccio aprop aquela seccio per tres ditz, e aprop excorja la codena de la partida desus de la vena entro que apparia.	And then dry another section near that section for three digits, and then strip the knee from the part above the vein where it appears.
E aprop eleva aquela e inscideys aquela en deriera seccio deves le talo, e aprop extratz aquela e eleva aquela entro que sia yssida per la seccio segonda, e aprop extratz aquela de la seccio que es sobre aquela.	And then raise that and incise that in the rear section. You should cut the tendon, and then extract that and raise what is inserted through the second section, and then extract that from the section above that.
E fay aquo entro que extraguas aquela de la seccio que es pus sobirana o pus auta de totas las seccios, entro que tota es yssida; e lahoras inscideys aquela.	And do this until you extract that from the section that is further above or higher than all sections, when everything is inserted; then incise that.
E si no obezeys a tu ad extrayre e elevar, lahoras intromet una agulha am fiel fort doble e ligua aquela e extratz la, o intromet dejos lu le ray e revolveys la tua ma a tota part entro qu’en sia getada.	And if you do not obey to extract and raise, then insert a strong steel needle doubled and tie that and extract it. Or insert the ligament and rotate your hand in all directions until it is bent.
E guarda te que no sia inscidida; quar si es trencada, es fayt a tu dificil elevar aquela mot e es vengut sobre le malaute per aquela nocument.	And be careful that it is not incised; for if it is broken, it will be difficult to raise that part and will have come over the wound through that damage.
E cum aquela tota auras fora-gitada, lahoras pausa sobre le loc de la plagua lana submerssa en vi e oli rozat e oli no-rozat, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And when all that is done, then place over the wound wool soaked in wine and oil, whether roasted or unroasted, and care for it until it is healed.
E si la vit es contrayta havent tortuositat a la qual sia envolucio a las partidas, e no es segon rectitut segon que havem dit, lahoras cove que tu fendas sobre aquela a tota partida de tortuositat de lu e als locs de envolucio de lu, e aprop suspen aquela am uncis entro que eleves aquela tota.	And if the vein is contracted having tortuosity in which there is an enclosure at the parts, and it does not follow straightness as we have said, then cut into that completely at all parts of its tortuosity and at the locations of its enclosure, and suspend that with strings while elevating that entirely.
E guarda te deves la tua seccio que no inscidas la vena e que no plagues aquela, quar dificil sira a tu elevar aquela; e serva la tua prudencia en aquela.	And guard yourself in your section so as not to cut the vein and not to damage that, for it will be difficult for you to elevate that; and serve your prudence there.
Forma del inscident am le qual es seccada vit:	Form of the incident where the vein is dried up:
Forma de unci orp:	Form of string orp:
No es a lu accuitat ayssi cum als uncis ni es de aguda extremitat per so que no plague la vena; e es de grossa flexibilitat leon, quar si era subtil, inscidira la vena per la sua subtilitat; habantz es en lu superflua grosseza ayssi cum havem dit.	It is not prepared like other strings nor does it have a sharp end so that it does not damage the vein; and it is of great flexibility. If it were too fine, it would cut the vein due to its fineness; having this in its superfluous thickness as we have said.
De extraccio venae cruris.	From the extraction of the crus vein.
Aquesta vena es engendrada en las cambas en terras caudas ayssi cum al- Ategi en terra de Arabics e en las terras de India caudas e aridas de pauca teneritat e en las quals no nays erba ni aybre.	This vein is generated in the legs in lands with tails, as Al-Ategi describes in the land of Arabs and in the lands of India, with dry and poor soils lacking fertility, in which neither grass nor trees grow.
E fort leu es engendrada en autres locs del cors otra las cambas.	And this vein is generated in other parts of the body except the legs.
E la gestacio de lu es de putrefaccio que ve dejos la codena ayssi cum venen dedintz le cors serpentz e vermps e scarides e verms engendrantz entre la codena e la carn.	And its generation is from putrefaction that leaves the chain as if venom inside the body, serpents, vermin, and worms generating between the chain and the flesh.
E senhal de la suscepcio de l’adveniment de lu es de aquesta vena que accideys en la camba enflammacio vehement; e aprop le loc es vesicat; e aprop comensa la vena yssir del loc de aquela vesicacio quays sembla razit de planta.	And the sign of the susceptibility to the advent of this condition is from this vein: when you touch the leg, there is intense inflammation; then the area becomes swollen; and soon after, the vein protrudes from the location of that swelling as if it were a plant growing.
E adonc cum appar de lu la extremitat, lahoras cove que tu envolvas sobre aquela una pessa de plom del qual sia le pes de una drac. entro a ii drac., e noza aquela e layssa le plom suspendut de la camba.	And then when the extremity appears, cover that area with a piece of lead which weighs as much as one drachm, or two drachms, and press on it, leaving the lead suspended from the leg.
E tantas veguadas cum yeys de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, envolveys aquo em plom e noza aquel.	And as many times as there is a cause from within for the parts outside, wrap this in lead and cover it.
E si mot es prolonguat, lahoras tu inscideys una partida de lu e envolopa le romanent; e no inscidas aquela de razit entro que sia fora yssida, quar si inscideys aquela es contrayta e intra en la carn e fa accidir apostema e poyredura en le loc e ulceracio mala.	And if the wound is prolonged, then you incise a part of it and cover the remainder; and do not incise that which is inside while it is outside, for if you incise it, it will contract and enter the flesh, causing an abscess, inflammation, and a bad ulceration.
Per que cove que sia tractada suaument e sia extrayta petit a petit, entro que sia fora-gitada del derier de lu e no remangua de lu alcuna causa en le cors.	To be treated adequately and extracted little by little, so that it does not return to the buttock, and no cause should be left in the body.
E de aquesta vena es yssit en alcus homes que es en la sua longitut de v palms e de detz e ja es pervengut a mi que yssic un de xx palms.	And from this vein, some men have been stretched to the length of five palms and ten, and I have already been told that one was stretched to twenty palms.
E si es inscidida en la hora de la sua medicacio, lahoras intromet lo ray en le trauc de lu e perfora aquela am lonc trauc am le cors, entro que sia evacuat tot aquo que es en la materia, e administra putrefaccio del loc per alcus dias am medicinas; e aprop cura aquela per la curacio de apostemas.	And if it is incised during the time of its medication, then insert the probe into the wound and perforate that which runs long through the body, so that all that is in the material is evacuated, and administer putrefaction to the area for several days with medicines; and then cure it according to the treatment of abscesses.
E aquesta vena alcunas veguadas ha motz ramps, e majorment quan apar a la junctura del pe o en le pe, e veno a lu motz orrificis, e es yssit de quascu orrifici ram.	And this vein sometimes has protrusions, especially when it appears at the joint of the foot or in the foot, and brings to it numerous openings, and is situated from each opening.
E donc cura aquela ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio e am aquo que es desus dit.	And therefore cure it thus as we have said in the division and what has been said above.
De sectione super vermes generatos sub cute et dicitur aegritudo bovina.	Of the section on worms generated under the skin and called the bovine illness.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en alcuna terra deves nos malautia bovina per so quar motas veguadas endeve als bious e es verm pauc un le qual es nat entre la codena e la carn, e va en tot le cos pujan e devalan, e es mostrat al sentiment deves le sieu anament de membre en membre entro que disromp la codena e yeys fora.	This illness is named in some lands the bovine disease; because motes of worms often appear among cattle and a few such worms are native between the skin and the flesh, and they ascend and descend throughout the body, and are perceived by their own movement from member to member as they tear the skin and come out.
E la generacio de lu es per putrefaccio de alcunas humors ayssi cum accideysso verms e serpentz e lombrics e ascaridas en le ventre.	And the generation of these worms occurs through the putrefaction of certain humors, just as happens with maggots, snakes, worms, and ascarids in the belly.
E es temut per la malicia de lu, quar quan el va en le cors e es elevat al cap, e es pervengut al huel, lahoras fort leu uebre en lu e intra e destruzeys le huel, e aquo endeve motas veguadas.	And it is feared because of its malice, for when it goes in the body and is elevated to the head, and is perceived by smell, then strongly it affects it and enters and destroys the nose, and thereupon many motes appear.
E donc quan tu voles curar aquel e extraire lu, lahoras no se fa si no deves la sieua ambulacio e apparacio de lu al sentiment, e adonc cove que tu strenhas aquo que es sobre lu e aquo que es dejos lu am liament e constriccio fort, e aprop secca sobre lu e extratz aquel.	And when you want to cure it and extract it, then it is not done so that you should only consider its movement and appearance according to the sensation, but then check that you have what is on it and what is left it in ligature and strong constriction, and dry it thoroughly before extracting it.
E si es preondat en la carn e no le atrobes, lahoras tu pausa cauteri am foc sobre le loc entro que mora, e la major causa que es temuda es corrupcio de lu am la qual corrump le loc ayssi cum havem dit.	And if it is found in the flesh and you do not find it, then place a cautery on fire over the area where it resides, and the main fear is corruption of the area, which corrupts the location as we have said.
May si tu vezes aquel esser pervengut al cap prop del huel, lahoras strenh sobre le sobrecil am fort strictura, e aprop secsa sobre lu, e extratz aquel; e cove que·l malaute use de mondificacio del sieu cors am medicinas evacuantz humors putridas malas, e guarda se de viandas generantz putrefaccio.	If you find it to be approaching the head near the ear, then tightly bind over the supraorbital ridge with a strong ligature, and dry it thoroughly before extracting it; and ensure that the illness uses modification of its body through medicines that expel foul humors, and avoid foods causing putrefaction.
De sectione super aegritudinem nafir.	Of the section regarding the disease of the nose.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en nostra terra nafir, e es dolor la qual ve en alcus membres, e aprop es permudada de membre en membre.	This illness is named nafir in our land, and it is a pain that occurs in some members, and often is shifted from one member to another.
E yeu ja e vista aquela segon que yeu te recomtare.	And I have already seen that according to which I will recount.
Yeu fu apelat a una femna malauta ad una vila, e descubric le sieu bras e vi una imflacio petita en la vena funis del bras, e pus que fu romas per una hora, vi aquela imflacio anar ayssi cum va verm pujan ad aquest, mays pus leugierament que esser por, ayssi cum si fos argent viu quan corr de loc en loc.	I have been called to a sick woman at a village, and examined her arm where I found a small swelling in the vein network of the arm. After an hour, I saw that this swelling moved up like a worm rising from one place to another, though less urgently than feared, as if it were live silver moving from spot to spot.
E adonc anet s’en la dolor de aquel loc e fiquet se en le muscle, e aprop aqui stec per una hora.	And then I felt the pain at that place and pressed it into the muscle, and there it stayed for about an hour.
E aprop correc en l’autre cors entro que pervenc al autre bras.	And then I corrected on the other side of the body near where it affected the other arm.
E aprop recomtec a mi que revolvia se per tot le cors sieu segon que yeu vi; e fo trop meravelat de la permutacio de lu e de la velocitat de membre en membre.	And then I was told that she moved around the entire body as I observed; it was too marvelous to see the change in her and the speed with which one member affected another.
E yeu ja havia vist denant aquo en les mieus huels segon aquela manieyra, empero yeu he vistz motz les quals atroban dolor esser permutada de membra a membre.	And I had already seen this before in my own cases according to that manner, but I have also seen many instances where the pain is perceived as being transferred from one limb to another.
Mays no vi aquo am les huels ayssi cum en la femna.	But you do not see this in the heels as in the female.
E yeu no cogiti esser aquo sino que es per aquo quar la femna era de viela, on so de secs cors e de venas descubertas, e en aquesta apparec al sentiment aquela ventositat permutada.	And I do not consider this to be the case, but rather because the female had a lean body with dry organs and veins exposed, and in this appearance there is a sensation of that distension changed.
E es necessari que no apparesca segon aquesta retro-curacio en aquels que son delicioses e am cors humitz de venas ameguadas.	And it is necessary that this backward curvature not appear in those who are plump and have moist organs with enlarged veins.
E cum tu voles la curacio de lu, e le pacient sent aquela dolor, lahoras no es a tu aparent al huel ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras tu strenh sobre aquel e dejos lu leugierament e secse sobre aquel entro que sia yssida aquela ventositat coartada, e cauterize le loc.	And since you want the cure for it, and the patient feels that pain, if it does not appear on the heel as we have said, then strengthen that area and let it lie lightly and dry over it, between which the distended vein should be compressed, and cauterize the place.
Mays si tu no la vezes am los tieus huels, alhoras tu cura aquel am excussio del cors e am aquo que expelleys ventositatz, e carmina aquelas am pillulas fetidas e am pillulas de serapi e semblantz.	But if you do not see it on the heel bones, then cure that by an evacuation of the body and by what expels distension, and stop those with foul-smelling pills and with snake-root pills and their like.
De extraccio de sagetas.	From the extraction of arrows.
Sagetas son diversificadas segon las specias, e segon les locs dels cors en les quals cazo, quar la lor diversitat es que de aquellas so que han grans puntas, e petitas, e concavas, e sordas, so es solidas; e de lor so que han tres angles, e de aquelas a las quals so que han lenguas; e de aquelas a las quals so astelas.	Arrows are diverse according to the species, and according to the locations in the body where they strike, for their diversity is that some have large points, small, concave, and dull, being solid; and others have three angles, and of those to which tongues belong; and of those to which are spines.
E aquela que es segon les membres e las pessas en las quals cazo es segon dos manieyras: quar les membres o so membres principals concaus, ayssi cum le cervel, le cor, e·l fitge, e le pulmo, e les ronhos, e les budels, e la vezica, e a lor semblantz; e donc quan catz en alcu de aquestz membres e aparo a tu senhals de mort, la qual causa yeu recomtare aprop, lahoras cove que tu evites extraccio de aquela sageta en aquels quar la mort siec aquel en le qual en las majors disposicios, e quan a tu no appareysso aquestz mals senhals, e la sageta no es amaguada en la profunditat del membre, lahoras tu extratz aquela e cura la plagua.	And that which is according to the members and feet where they strike is according to two manners: for the members or are principal causes, thus as the brain, the heart, the liver, the lungs, the intestines, the bladder, and their like; and therefore when it strikes any of these members and appears to you signs of death, which cause I will explain in detail, then know that you should avoid extraction of that arrow in those where death results from it, especially in the major dispositions. And when to you do not appear these evil signs and the arrow is not hidden in the depth of the member, then you extract that and cure the wound.
E dels senhals del servel es quan catz en lu sageta, e trespassa le os, e es yssit del cyphac le qual es sobre le cervel, quar accideys per lu soda vehement, e scotomia, e vertige, e rogor en les huels, e imflamacio e rogor de la lengua, e spasme e permixtio de entendament e vomi de colera, e fort leu es abscindida la paraula e es destruida la votz, e es yssit del loc de la plagua humiditat blanca semblant a pols, e yeys de lu semblant ad aquositat de la carn.	And of the signs of the liver are when the arrow strikes it and passes through the bone, and is situated over the cavity which is above the brain, for it happens by the sudden violence, scotoma, vertigo, redness in the pupils, inflammation and redness of the tongue, spasms and confusion of understanding, vomiting of bile, greatly reduced speech and destruction of voice, and are situated over the area of the wound white moisture resembling dust, and from it resembling the humidity of flesh.
E donc si appareyso a tu aquestz senhals, lahoras tu abste de la curacio e de la extraccio de la sageta, si non es fora.	And therefore if you see these signs, then refrain from the cure and extraction of the arrow, unless it is outside.
Mays les senhals de la sageta quan catz en le cor, so que ela es prop de la mamila senestra, e sent am aquela quays sia ficada en causa dura, e no es causa vueda; e fort leu le movement de la sageta es semblant a movement del pols, e corr de la plagua sanc negra, e siec aquel fregiditat de las extremitatz, e suzor freja, e sincopi; e donc sapias que la mort descen ses tot dopte.	And the signs of the arrow when it has pierced the heart are that it is close to the left nipple, and one feels a hard lump there, which is not visible; and the strong movement of the arrow seems like the pulse, and the flow of the black bloody wound drains, and there is coldness in the extremities, pallor, and syncope; and therefore you would know that death descends upon him completely.
E les senhals quan la sageta ha plaglat le pulmo so eyssiment de sanc spumos de la plagua, e les vayssels que so prop del col so apostematz, e es mudada la color del malaute, e expira sperit gran aut, e demanda atraccio de ayre freg.	And the signs when the arrow has pierced the lung are spitting of foamy blood from the wound, and the vessels near the throat are constricted, and the color of the patient changes, and he exhales a great breath or gasps for air.
E si catz la sageta en le velament le qual es en le pietz, e la dolor lahoras es prop de las costas petitas, e es fayt le ale gran am vehement dolor e am sospir, e no so maugutz totz les membres dels muscles.	And if the arrow has pierced the periosteum which is in the foot, and the pain then is near the small bones, and causes a great and violent pain along with heavy breathing, and does not allow all the limbs' muscles to relax.
E si catz la sageta en le stomac, lahoras fort leu yeys de la plagua vianda alcuna indigesta.	And if you cut the arrow in the stomach, then strongly press the wound with some indigestion.
E si catz la sageta en le ventre, e es ficada en lu, yeys alcuna fenda de la plagua, o la tela, o budel le qual es disromput, e no es speransa en la curacio de lu extraccio de la sageta.	And if you cut the arrow in the abdomen, and it is embedded in it, place some opening of the wound, or the tissue, or intestine which is disrupted, and there is no hope for its cure without extracting the arrow.
E si la sageta catz en la vesica, e es yssida defora urina, e procesesca de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, e fort leu es dolor sobre le malaute, lahoras sapias que es mortal.	And if the arrow cuts the bladder, and it pierces through causing urine to leak, and the process from it affects the parts outside, and strong pain occurs in the wound, then know that it is fatal.
Mays les autres membres ayssi cum es la cara, le col, e·l golayro, e las spallas e le adjutori, e les spondils del dos, e la furcula, e la coysa, e la camba e a lor semblantz dels membres, son salvatz segon las majors disposicios quan la sageta no atroba vena ni arteria e no es sageta venenosa.	Moreover, the other limbs such as the face, neck, shoulder, and arm, the ribs, the pelvis, and their counterparts of the limbs, are saved according to the major dispositions when the arrow does not find a vein or artery, and is not a venomous arrow.
E yeu recomtare aquo a tu que he vist del esser de aquestas sagetas, per que signifiques per aquo sobre la curacio tieua.	And I will recount to you what I have seen about the nature of these arrows, so that you may understand this concerning their cure.
La qual causa es, quar en un home cazec sageta en le lacrimal del huel de lu en la razitz del nas, e yeu extrayssi aquela a lu del autra partida, dejos le grays de l’aurelha de lu, e es sanat, e no accidic en le huel de lu nocument.	The cause is that in a man an arrow struck the inner corner of his eye and the edge of his nose, and I extracted it from one side, left his ear gray, and he recovered, and suffered no harm to his eye.
E extrayssi autra sageta a un Juzeu la qual cazec en lu en lo grays del sieu huel, dejos la palpebra pus dejos, e la sageta ja era occultada e no so conseguit de aquela sino una petita extremitat am la qual adhereys al sieu fust, e era gran sageta de las sagetas agudas dels Turcs , am ferr leon en la qual no havia aurelhas.	And I extracted another arrow from Jusef which struck him in the inner corner of his eye, leaving the eyelid but removing it, and the arrow was already hidden and could not be取出箭，只有一个小小的尖端粘在箭杆上，那个箭是一个大号的土耳其急射箭，箭杆上有狮子图案且没有耳环。
E senat es le Juzieu , e no accidic en le sieu huel mal accident.	And Jusef was there, and suffered no harm to his eye despite the mishap.
E extrayssi una autra sageta a un home Crestia la qual era cazuta en le golayro, e era sageta arabica, e es aquela a la qual so aurelhas; e adonc yeu inscidegui sobre aquela entre doas guidegi, e ja era submersa en le golayro de lu; e adonc yeu so subtiliat am aquela, e aprop extraxi aquela, e es sanat le Crestia .	And I extracted another arrow from a Christian man who was struck in the shoulder. It was an Arabic arrow, and that is the one with ear wings; then I incised over it between two muscles, and it was already submerged in his shoulder; then I carefully dissected around it, and soon extracted it, and the Christian recovered.
E extraxi autra sageta a un home la qual era cazuta en le sieu ventre, e cogitegui que moris per aquela; e donc, pus que foro passatz xxx dias e no es mudat sobre lu alcuna causa de las suas disposicios, inscidegui sobre la sageta e engenagui sobre aquela, e es sanat, e no accidic a lu accident mal.	And extracted another arrow from a man which was embedded in his belly, and perceived that he died of that; and therefore, after we passed thirty days and no change occurred due to his disposition, incised upon the arrow and removed it, and he recovered, and was not harmed by this accident.
E vi mays un home en le qual cazec una sageta en le dos de lu, e consolidada es la plagua sobre lu, e pus que foc aprop set ans, yssic la sageta en la razitz de la coyssa.	And there was a man in whom an arrow struck his back, and the wound had healed over. After approximately seven years, incised the arrow at the side of the thigh.
E vi una femna a la qual cazec sageta en le sieu ventre, e la plagua es consolidada dedintz lu, e no es mudada en las suas disposicios en re, e la femna no atrobec nocument en alcunas de las suas opperacios naturals.	And there was a woman to whom an arrow struck her belly, and the wound had healed inside her, and showed no change in her disposition or condition, and the woman did not experience any discomfort during her natural operations.
E vi un autre home al qual cazec sageta en la sua cara e consolidada es la plagua e romas la sageta, no atrobant aqui mota dolor, e motz semblantz ad aquestz.	And there was another man to whom an arrow struck his face, and the wound had healed, but the arrow remained broken. He did not experience any more pain, and appeared similar to this.
E extrayssi la sageta del home dels princeps del rey que era cazuda en le mieg loc del nas sieu e ja havia declinat a la partida dreyta un petit, e occultada era tota la sageta.	And extracted the arrow from the king's principal man, who was struck in the middle of his nose, and it had slightly declined to the right side a little bit. The entire arrow was hidden.
E yeu fu appelat a la curacio de lu aprop le cazement de la sageta entro a tres dias.	And I was called for the treatment of him around the arrow wound within three days.
E adonc yeu atrobegui la plagua de la sageta mot streyta; e adonc yeu inquirigui aquela am tenta subtil, e no sentigui aquela; mays el la sentia puncio dejos la aurelha dreyta, e adonc speregui que aquela punccio era per la extremitat de la sageta.	And then I examined the wound of the arrow closely; and then I inquired if there was anything subtle under it, and he did not feel it; but he felt a prick on his right ear, and then I suspected that this prick was due to the tip of the arrow.
E amplastregui le loc am emplaustre en le qual es vertut atrectiva e digestiva, confizant de mi que·l loc se apostemes per que appares a mi le loc de la sageta, per que secces sobre aquela.	And apply the place to be plastered with an attractive and digestive plaster, believing that by placing it there, I will find the location of the arrow, which will then dry on that area.
E no accidic en le loc accident significant que la sageta hagues conseguit aquel loc; e yeu continuegui am le emplaustre sobre lu per motz dias e no accidic accident; e consolidada es la plagua entretant, e romas le malaute de la extreccio de lu per spazi de motz dias entro que un jorn sentic la sageta dintz le sieu nas e recontec aquo a mi.	And do not miss the significant location where the arrow hit; and continue to apply the plaster over it for several days without missing any spot; and during this time, the wound consolidates, and the arrow is slowly expelled through its own nostril over the course of a few days, and I experienced this.
E adonc yeu pausegui sobre la plagua medicina acuta corrosiva per motz dias entro que foc ubert, e am la tenta yeu assagegui aquel, e atrobegui la extremitat de la sageta subtil, la qual adhereys al fust.	And then place a strong corrosive medicine on the wound for several days until it opens up. Then apply heat to that area, and examine it closely to find the tip of the arrow, which adheres to the shaft.
E aprop yeu ajustegui en la apersio de la plagua per aquela medicina acuta entro que apparec a mi visiblament la extremitat de la sageta, e passec a mi temps am aquo per le spazi de temps entro quatre meses.	And then you adjust in the opening of the wound with that sharp medicine when the extremity of the arrow appears visibly to me, and pass it to my time through the space of time between four months.
E aprop pus que la plagua foc amplificada, e foc a mi possible entrometre las forfexs en lu, e remaure aquela, e no obezic ad eyssiment, lahoras yeu no cessegui subtiliar e ingeniar sobre aquela am manieyras de engen, entro que comensegui un dia sobre aquela am manieyras de engens pendre lu am forceps descentment faytas, segon que vindra la forma de aquelas en la fi del capitol, entro que extraxi aquela; e aprop restauregui aquela plagua.	And then, when the wound is fully opened, and it is possible for me to insert the forceps into it, I enlarge that, without hesitation, until I can grasp it with the forceps in a descending manner, according to the form of those as described at the end of this chapter; after which I extract it; and then restore that wound.
E alcus metges jutgavan que la cartillage del nas no es restaurada, e yeu restauregui aquela e la plagua es consolidada, e sanat es le malaute per sanetat entiera, e no noguec en lu en deguna causa.	And some doctors judged that the cartilage of the nose is not restored, but I restore that and the wound is consolidated, and the patient recovers entirely, with no scar in any cause.
E yeu recomti a tu la qualitat de extraccio de alcunas sagetas per que pauses aquo regla e significacio sobre aquo que no he dit, quar las partidas de aquesta art e las difinicios de aquela no so conprehendudas am narracio ni no comprehen aquelas le libre.	And I recount to you the quality of extracting some arrows, so that you pause and consider this rule and meaning behind what I have not said, for the parts of this art and the definitions of those are not understood in the narrative nor comprehended by those who read freely.
E le artifexs savi compara am pauc sobre mot; e am aquo que es present sobre aquo que es absent; e atroba operacio novela e instrument novel deves le descendement de las causas extranhas del art quan accideysso.	And the wise craftsmen compare a little about motion; and from what is present they infer what is absent; and find new operation and new tool for the descent of foreign causes when they occur.
E donc yeu dic que sagetas no son fora-gitadas dels membres en les quals son ficadas sino segon dos manieyras: o per atraccio del loc en le qual intrec; o per le contrari de la autra partida.	And thus I say that arrows are not excluded from the members in which they are inserted but according to two manners: either by attraction of the place into which they enter; or by the contrary part.
E aquela que es gitada per le loc don es intrada, o es sageta procedent en loc carnos, e es atirada e fora-gitada.	And that which is excluded by the place into which it enters, or the arrow proceeds into a fleshy place and is then thrust in and out.
E si no obezeys a eyssiment de la hora en la qual catz, lahoras cove que tu la laysses per alcus dias entro que poyresca la carn que es al enviro de lu, e sia alleujada l‘atraccio de lu e la sua egressio.	And if it does not obey the sensation of the hour in which it is cut, then you should leave it for a few days until the flesh around it can heal, and reduce the attraction to it and its exit.
E semblantment si es ficada en os e no obezeys a tu a eyssiment, lahoras layssa aquela per alcus dias e itera aquela am atraccio e mocio en quascun dia, e ja es fora-gitada.	And similarly, if it is inserted into bone and does not obey your sensation, then leave that for a few days and repeatedly apply attraction and movement on any given day, and then it will be excluded.
E si no obezeys a tu eyssiment aprop alcus dias, lahoras cove que tu perforas en le circuit de la sageta en aquel os de tota partida am taravel subtil entro que·l loc sia amplificat de la sageta, e aprop extratz aquela.	And if your attempt does not succeed after some days, then you must puncture along the circuit of the arrow in that bone of any part moving subtly where the area is enlarged by the arrow.
E si la sageta es ficada en le os del cap e ja ha procezit en un dels ventres del cervel, e apparo en le malaute alcus de aquels accidentz les quals yeu e ditz, lahoras abste de la extraccio de la sageta e layssa aquela entro que·l sieu esser sia equat aprop alcus dias; quar si la sageta perve al ciphac, lahoras la mort no es a lu prolonguada.	And if the arrow is in the bone of the head and has already affected one of the ventricles of the brain, and appears in the patient from those accidents which you call, then abstain from extracting the arrow and leave it there until its nature is equated for some days; or if the arrow reaches the brain, then death will not be prolonged.
E si la sageta no es ficada sino en le cors del os tant solament e no passa entro al ciphac, e roman le malaute per alcus dias, e no accideys a lu denguna causa de aquels accidentz, lahoras tu engenia en la atraccio de la sageta e en la atraccio de lu.	And if the arrow is not inserted into the head bone but remains in the body for some days and does not suffer any of those accidents, then you proceed with the extraction of the arrow and treat it.
Mays si es mot ficada e no obezeys a tu a extraccio, lahoras tu aministra taravels en le circuit de la sageta ayssi cum havem recomtat, e aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	But if it is firmly fixed and does not yield to your extraction, then you administer travel pains along the circuit of the arrow as we have recommended, and subsequently cure the area until it is healed.
Mays si la sageta ja es amaguada en le loc del cors, e es amaguada del sentiment, lahoras tu inquireys aquela am tenta, e si tu sentas aquela, lahoras atira aquela am alcus sturmentz les quals so convenientz a la atraccio de lu.	But if the arrow is already hidden in the place of the body and hidden from sensation, then you inquire about that area with your hand, and if you feel it, then remove it with some instruments which are suitable for its extraction.
E si no podes sobre lu per la constriccio de la plagua e per la longitut del preon, e aqui no es os ni nervi ni vena, lahoras tu fen sobre la plagua entro que sia amplificada e que sia possible extrayre la sageta.	And if you cannot remove it due to the size of the wound and the depth of the arrow, and there are neither nerves nor veins here, then you cut into the wound when it is enlarged and it is possible to extract the arrow.
E si so a lu aurelhas am las quals sia tenguda, lahoras tu deliura la carn en la qual es ficada de tota partida am tot le engen que poyras far; e ingenia sobre aquo, si no podes sobre la evasio de la carn en la fractura de las aurelhas e en torssio de aquelas entro que obezesca.	And if it is in the ears where it is held, then you incise the flesh in which it is embedded from all sides as much as you can; and use your skill here, if you cannot drain the flesh in the fracture of the ears and in the torsion of those areas where it must yield.
E quan tu administras la extraccio de la sageta en quascun loc on sia, lahoras tu usa am torcio de la tua ma am forceps a totas partidas entro que fassa aquela obezir; e subtilia am deriera subtilitat que la sageta no sia trencada e que sia fayta a tu dificil atraccio de lu e de aquela extraccio.	And when you administer the extraction of the arrow in any place where it is, then you use your hand twisted with forceps from all sides until it yields; and be subtle at the rear subtlety that the arrow not be broken and that it be made easy for its extraction and for that extraction.
E si no podes sobre aquela de la tua hora, lahoras tu layssa per alcus dias entro que se poyrescan las partidas que so en le circuit de lu, e aprop itera aquela quar lahoras es alleujada.	And if you cannot do this at your hour, then you let it be for some days until the parts that are in the circuit of his body recover, and then repeat that which is alleviated.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat flux de sanc, lahoras tu administra aquo que havem dit de curacio en le sieu capitol.	But if there is contrary state of the blood, then you administer what we have said for cure in its chapter.
E guarda la tua vertut de inscizio de vena o de nervi, o de corda, e aministra engen en tota manieyra a tu possibla de la evasio de la sageta; e fay aquo am facilitat e tranquillitat e tarditat e fermetat ayssi cum yeu e a tu recomtat.	And preserve your virtue in the incision of veins or nerves, or cords, and administer engen in every manner for the evacuation of the arrow; and do so with facilitation, tranquility, tardiness, and firmness as you have recommended.
E donc que fassas contrayre la sageta per so que·l malaute sia segon la figura segon la qual foc deves le cazement de la sageta en lu, quar es mays juvatiu.	And therefore make the arrow contract by itself so that the patient is according to the figure according to which you should place the tip of the arrow in him, for this is more advantageous.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible, lahoras tu aministra aquo que es a tu possible per las figuras.	But if this is not possible for you, then administer what is possible according to the figures.
Mays las sagetas que son fora-gitadas per le contrari del autra partida, o que ja de lu procezeys alcuna partida a las partidas de fora, o fa gilbositat la extramitat de la sageta per sentiment de la partida pus desus de la codena propdana e vezes aquela eminent; adonc tu secsa sobre aquela; e sia la seccio segon la quantitat en la qual prenguan las forceps; e aprop atira aquela, quar ela es fayta leugiera a eyssiment.	But the arrows that are counter-directed from the other part, or which you have already treated in the parts of the exterior, or cause swelling at the tip of the arrow due to the pressure from the part above the shoulder; then you extract it over that area; and the extraction should be according to the quantity in which the forceps take hold; then withdraw it, for it is made light by the effort.
Mays si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu tortz lama segon contrarietat entro que la sageta enprema en le os, e amplifique a si meteys, e aprop extratz aquela.	If it is retained in the joint, then twist the limb according to the opposite direction to that in which the arrow presses on the joint, and gradually extend it, and then extract it.
E sino, layssa aquela per alcus dias, e aprop itera aquela entro qu’en yesca.	If not, leave it for a few days, and then repeatedly apply pressure to where it is stuck.
E si le fust de la sageta es en aquela, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am lu.	If the shaft of the arrow is there, then push it into place.
Mays si le fust es cazut e voles aministrar inpulsio, lahoras tu intromet e aquela, si es sorda, sturment concau per so que intre la concavitat de lu en la coa de la sageta e aprop impelleys aquela am lu.	If the shaft is embedded and you wish to administer an impulse, then insert it there. If it is stubborn, create a concavity with your hand so that the concavity of the shaft aligns with the arrow's groove, and then push it in.
Mays si la sageta es concava, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am sturment fort intrant en aquela, quar la sageta es alleujada per aquela.	If the arrow is concave, then push it with strong pressure into place, for the arrow will expand due to this.
E si la sageta es entoxiguada, lahoras cove que tu concaves tota la carn en la qual es le vere, si es a tu possible aquo, e aprop cura aquela am aquo que si conveneys.	If the arrow is poisoned, then ensure that you create a depression in the flesh where it is located, if possible, and then treat it accordingly.
E si la sageta catz en le pietz, o en le ventre, o en la vesica, o en le costat, e es propinqua per so que tu tocas aquela am la tenta, e es a tu possible secsar sobre aquela, lahoras secsa sobre aquela e guarda te de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e extratz aquela, e aprop cos la plagua si indigeys, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the arrow hits the foot, or the stomach, or the bladder, or the side, and is near enough for you to touch it with your hand, and it is possible to extract it there, then extract it, and afterward treat the wound as necessary, and cure that part until it is healed.
Forma de forceps am las quals so atiradas las sagetas:	Form of forceps to which arrows are applied:
Sian las extremitatz de lor cum a bec de ausel que son faytas cum serra quan prendon sobre la sageta per so que no la layssen.	Let the ends of the forceps resemble the beak of an eagle, shaped such that they grasp the arrow firmly without letting go.
E de aquelas son faytas motas specias, grans, paucas e migieras, segon la quantitat de la grandeza de la sageta e de la sieua pauqueza, e de la amplitud de la plagua, e de la constriccio de lu.	And these forceps are made in special sizes, large, few, and medium-sized, according to the size of the arrow and its smallness, and the width of the wound, and its shape.
Forma de impellent concau de aquesta extremitat conquava ayssi cum pena de ausel per so que sia alleujat le intrament de la sageta en lu, e impulcio de aquela sorda:	Form of the concave end of this forceps should resemble the claw of an eagle so that it eases the removal of the arrow from the wound, and impels the arrow:
Forma de impellent de sorda extremitat:	Form of pressing a mute extremity:
ayssi cum ray per so que sia alleujat le intrament de lu en la sageta concava e es impellida am aquel.	Thus, in order that the instrument in the concave groove may be relieved and pressed thereupon.
De fleubotomia de las venas.	Of phlebotomy of the veins.
Las venas de fleubotomia de las quals corr costuma de fleubotomar so xxx, de las quals so en le cap xvi, so es doas venas pulsatils las quals so aprop las aurelhas, dic alhasisain; doas herbas que so en les dos templars apparentz; e doas venas que so en dos lacrimals de dos huels que son appeladas aspicientz; e la vena preparada en le mieg loc del front, e la vena que es en la extremitat del nas; e doas guidegi que so al col; e doas venas que so en la labia desus; e doas venas que so en la labia dejos; e — aquestas so las venas que so appeladas algelic —; e so doas venas que so dejos la lengua.	Of phlebotomy of the veins: The veins for phlebotomy from which it is customary to bleed are xxx, which are in chapter XVI. These are two pulsating veins near the ears, called by Avicenna; two herbs that are on the two temples apparent; and two veins that are under the two eyebrows called ascendent; and a vein in the middle of the forehead, and a vein at the extremity of the nose; two guidegi at the neck; two veins in the upper lip; two veins in the lower lip; — these are the veins called algelic —; and two veins behind the tongue.
Mays las venas que so fleubotomadas en les brasses so v; quar de aquelas es una cephalica, e es deves le latz silvestre; e le poble appela “la vena del cap”, e sorda, e es vena migiera, e es composta de un ram de la basilica, e de autre ram de la cephalica; e nomna aquela le poble “vena de tot le cors”, e basilica es vena la qual es pausada en le latz domestic, e es nomnada “citillar”, e nompnan aquela les vulguars “vena del ventre”; e funis del bras, e es pausada sobre le focil, e es aquela en la qual es fleubotomat, e es aquela que appar sobre le poutz per apparicio manifesta; e salvatella, e es la vena que es entre lo dit auricular e·l pus petit dit, e so en lu dos ramps.	Moreover, the veins that are phlebotomized in the arms are V; of which one is cephalic, and is from the wild basilisk; the people call it "the vein of the head," sorda, and is a median vein, composed of a branch of the basilica and another branch of the cephalic; they call that branch the people "vein of the whole body," while basilica is the vein which is from the domestic basilisk, and is called "citular," and the vulgar call it "vein of the belly"; funis of the arm, and is placed over the axilla, and it is this one on which phlebotomy is performed, and it is this one that appears above the armpit by a clear appearance; salvatella, and it is the vein between the said auricular and the small said, and it is in it two branches.
E en le pe e la camba so tres venas; la una de aquelas es que es dejos la curvatura del denolh del latz silvestre; e la segonda es sophena, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz domestic; e la vena sciatica, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz silvestre; e en la camba son autras venas semblantz ad aquelas.	And in the foot and thigh there are three veins; one of them is that which gives curvature to the curve of the wild deer's horn; and the second is sophena, and its place is given to the thigh of the domestic deer; and the sciatic vein, and its place is given to the thigh of the wild deer; and in the thigh are other veins similar to those.
Le juvament de las venas que so aprop las aurelhas es a cataris antics e emigranea e sahafati e ulceracios del cap malas antiquas.	The veins near the ears are catarrhal, headache, pharyngitis, and old bad ulcers of the head.
E la qualitat de sagnar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: es que sia ras le cap del malaute, e sia freguat le cap del malaute en le occipiti en le loc de amdoas las venas am drap ample am bona fricacio; aprop strenha le malaute le sieu col am una benda entro que apparan las doas e les locs de lor so aprop las aurelhas en dos locs depremegutz del cap; e quereys aquela am le tieu dit, e si tu sentes le pols de aquelas am le dit tieu, aqui senha am tenta.	And the quality of sugging those is as I will recount to you: it should be placed at the back of the patient's head, and the patient's head should be rubbed at the occipital region where both veins are near the ears; then firmly press the patient's neck with a band in which the two veins appear, close to the depressed areas of the head near the ears. And you want that at your right hand, and if you feel the pulse of those at your right hand here, try to sugg them.
Aprop tu pren la lancea cutellar, e es aquela que es inscident, e aprop tu intromet aquel dejos la vena en la codena entro que·l fleubotomi vengua al os.	And you take the scalpel lancet, and it is that which is incised, and then you insert it near the vein between where the bloodletting will reach the mouth.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am la vena e la codena a las partidas desus e inscideys la vena am inscizio inscident.	And then raise your hand to the vein and the cord above, incise the vein with an incident incision.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio la quantitat de dos ditz ajustatz o entorn de aquo; e fay yssir del sanc atant quant voles.	And let the length of the incision be the width of two fingers adjusted or around that; and let the blood flow out as much as you desire.
E aprop strenh am pulvils e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	And then strengthen it with powders and leave that there until it is healed.
E ja e precedit en le comensament del libre la inscizio de aquelas e de lor la cauterizacio.	And already it was mentioned at the beginning of this book regarding the incision and their cautery.
Mays de las doas venas arterias que so als templars le juvament de la fleubotomia es a emigranea antiqua e sode malvada e obtalmia assidua e cors de superfluitatz acutas effusas als huels.	More of the two arteries that supply the temples with the vitality of bloodletting is migranea, an ancient and evil affliction, as well as constant eye strain from a body full of acute and excessive fluids in the veins.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: constrengua le malaute le sieu col mot entro que apparan las doas venas al sentiment per appericio manifesta e sia demonstrat le pols de lor dejos le tieu dit; e lahoras tu senha am tenta.	And the quality of bleeding those is according to what I recount to you: constrict the patient's thigh with your hand between which two arteries become apparent by a clear sensation, and by feeling their pulse with your finger determine the position of their veins; and then you can proceed.
E aprop tu eleva la codena desobre la vena a las partidas desus am le tieu dit indic, e intromet le fleubotomi inscident dejos, e eleva la vena en sus; e inscidey aquela ayssi cum has fayt en las doas venas autras; e fay correr del sanc segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And then you elevate the knee above the vein at the parts above as you have just indicated, and insert the flebothomi incidentially, and elevate the vein in them; and incise that thus as you have done in the two other veins; and let the blood flow according to the quantity of your necessity.
E aprop deslia la coartacio del malaute, e pausa le tieu dit sobre la vena per una hora, e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto e pulvils e strenh aquela desus am fort constriccio, e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	And then release the compression of the thigh, and place your hand on the vein for an hour, and then place the compress and powder over it with a strong constriction, and leave it there until it is healed.
E ja es precedida la rememoracio de lor, e de aquelas la inscizio, e la atraccio en le comensament del libre.	And then the remembering of them is preceded, and of those the incision, and the puncture at the beginning of the thigh.
E donc le juvament de fleubotomia de la vena del front es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a las malautias antiquas de la cara e a emigranea e rogor e ulceracios fetidas.	And the treatment of the femoral venous puncture is similar to the cephalic vein puncture for ancient ailments of the face, such as migraines, swelling, and foul ulcers.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es segon que yeu recomti a tu; so es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col am una benda entro que apparesca la vena; e aprop pren le insturment le qual es nompnat fossori del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the quality of the femoral puncture is as I have recounted to you; it is that the patient strengthens his side with a bandage in which the vein appears; and then take the instrument which is called a fossoir, this is its form:
Pausa la puncta eminent la qual es al cap del fossori sobre aquela vena e percuteys sobre lu am penche o am autre causa en la manieyra de lu, e layssa lo sanc correr segon la quantitat la qual voles; e aprop deslia la perforacio del malaute e strenh aquela entro que sia sanada.	Pause the point eminent at the cap of the fossor over that vein and strike it with your hand either inclined or for another cause in the manner of it, and let the blood flow according to the quantity which you wish; then return the perforation of the malaise and strengthen it within until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es uberta am fleubotomi lat, empero no cove que·l fleubotomi sia de acuta extremitat ayssi cum les autres fleubotomis, abantz sia de lada extremitat, e fleubotoma aquela segon le tranvers, quar le os es propda e fort leu trencaria en lu le fleubotomi quan es subtil.	In some cases, the space is opened with a large incision for venesection, but I do not know if the venesection should be of acute extremity as in other venesections, or before being from the side extremity, and make the venesection according to the transverse, for the bone is nearby and strong; it would break the venesection when it is subtle.
Mays le juvament de las duas venas que so als lacrimals de dos huels per scabia del huels per rogor e sebol en les huels, e a las malautias de la cara.	More the juvenile state of the two veins that are at the lacrimal ducts of the eyes through the groove of the eye by redness and swelling in the eyes, and for facial illnesses.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia es que·l malaute strenha le col sieu am una benda, e aprop fleubotoma aquelas, e tu sias stant sobre le cap de lu.	The quality of the venesection is that the malaise strengthens the cold in its area with a bandage, and then make the venesection there, and you stand over the head of the patient.
E sia fayta la fleubotomia segon le transvers a longitut un pauc am fleubotomi pauc, quar en le loc no es carn; e si le fleubotomi es subtil, fort leu la extremitat de lu es trencada.	And perform the incision for venesection according to the transverse length a little, making a few small incisions, for in that place there is no flesh; and if the incision is fine, strengthen its extremity so that it breaks easily.
E aprop fay correr del sanc atant quant es a tu necessari, e pausa sobre aquelas coto, e strenh aquelas per una nueyt, e aprop deslia aquelas.	And let the blood run until it is necessary, place a bandage over those areas, and strengthen them with a new one.
Mays le fleubotomi de la vena del nas es conferent a febre acuta e a soda vehement, e a las malautias de la cara e emigranea e rogor que accideys en la cara, e majorment quan es antiqua.	More often the incision of the vein in the nose is used for acute fever and intense thirst, and for ailments of the face such as migraines, swelling that occurs in the face, especially when it is chronic.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col e aprop te le sieu nas am la tua ma sinistra, e pren le fleubotomi subtil lonc e fica aquela en le mieg loc del cap del nas segon rectitut, quar la vena no appar al sentiment aqui, e quar le sanc comensa a fluir tantost.	And the quality of the incision for it is that the patient strains his neck and places his nose near your left hand, taking a fine long incision and placing it in the middle location of the nasal tip according to proper direction, for the vein does not appear here, and the blood begins to flow quickly.
Cove que tu ultimes la tua ma am le fleubotomi petit a petit e fassas correr del sanc segon la tua necessitat; e aprop lia aquela per una nuoyt, quar aquela es restaurada leugierament.	Gently close the incision with your finger and let the blood flow according to your need; then cover it with a new bandage, for that is quickly restored.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de las doas guidegui a constriccio de ale e a comensament de lepra e a motas malautias e inpetige e malas ulceracios corrosivas ayssi cum herpotromeno.	May the youth of the femoral incision lead to constriction of veins and the beginning of leprosy and various ill health conditions and bad, corrosive ulcers similarly as with phlebotomy.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que el malaute strenha dejos quascuna en le sieu col am liament; e estia le artifexs sobre le cap del malaute, e le malaute sia sezent sobre una sezela.	And the quality of the femoral incision is that the patient feels each cut in his thigh with a stick; and the attendants are over the head of the patient, and the patient lies on a bench.
E aprop fleubotoma la vena al lonc am fleubotomi ample petit a petit; e aprop extratz de sanc segon temprada quantitat o segon aquo que vezes de necessitat que es ad aquo; e aprop fay semblant del autra vena.	And gradually make the femoral incision along the length with a small and wide incision little by little; and extract blood according to the season's quantity or according to what is necessary as needed; and make a similar incision on the other side.
E aprop deslia le liament e strenh las doas venas am strictura migiera per so que·l malaute no sia prefocat, e laysa entro al mati quar la plagua es sanada.	And then remove the stick and tightly bind the two veins with a midwifery bandage so that the patient does not get overheated, and leave a hole through which the plague can heal.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de las venas algerich, comfereys a petitas apostemas e pustulas de la boca e corrupcio de las gengivas e malas ulceracios e fissuras, e a malas ulceracios que so en le nas e en le circuit de lu.	And the benefit of the femoral incision for the algirich veins, it helps to resolve small abscesses and pustules in the mouth and corruption of the gums, as well as bad ulcers and fissures, and those bad ulcers that are in the nose and around it.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que fases cezer le malaute denant tu, e strenh le col de lu am una benda, e aprop revolveys las labias de lu e reguarda a doas venas de las quals la una es de la dextra de la labia e la segonda de la senestra; e la demonstracio de quascuna es per la negror de quascuna de amdos, e aquo mays es quar en le circuit de aquelas so venas menudas negras; e adonc inscideys cascuna per inscizio inscident.	And the quality of the femoral incision is that you make a cut in front of the patient, strengthen its neck with a bandage, and then revolve the labia and look at two veins, of which one is on the right side of the labium and the other on the left; the demonstration of each is by the blackness of each of both, and this more so in the circuit of those small dark veins; then incise each with an incising incision.
Mays si dubitacio es dejos tu, e no sabes qual es de aquelas, lahoras tu enten a inscisio de la major de aquelas, e de la pus manifesta de aquelas.	And if doubt remains for you, and you do not know which is which among them, then you make the incision of the larger one of them, and of the more obvious.
E fay le semblant de las doas venas que so en las labias desus.	And make the appearance of the two veins that are in the labia above.
Mays costuma corr mays a inscidir las doas venas que so en la labia dejos.	And it is customary to incise both veins that are in the labium.
Mays de doas venas que so dejos la lengua le juvament es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a prefocacios que so en le guolayro, a la malautia de la uvula, e a malautias de la boca.	And of the two veins that are left, the treatment for the tongue is close to the femoral incision for preparatory steps in the groin, for the illness of the uvula, and for illnesses of the mouth.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es que segue le malaute entre las tuas mas denant le solel, e eleva la lengua de lu, e reguarda dejos la lengua, de la un latz de lu vena e del autre latz vena, e la color de quascuna es declinant a negror.	And the quality of flebotomy is to follow the patient's veins in front of their navel, raise the vein of the belly, and regard it, from one side of the vein and the other side of the vein, and the color of each declining to black.
E adonc fleubotoma quascuna; e guarda te que no ultimes la tua ma en fleubotoman aquelas, quar dejos aquelas so arterias.	And then perform flebotomy on each; and note that you should not end your hand in performing flebotomy on these, for they are arteries.
E las tuas venas que so fleubotomadas en le coyde so en las quals corr costuma en totz les homes, e la fleubotomia de lor es fayta segon dos manieyras, o pongen am le fleubotomi mirtilat o olivar a subtilitat declinant; o secsar am fleubotomi cutellar, e apelha si alnessil, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And your veins that are flebotomized in the crease are those in which blood flows customarily in all men, and the flebotomy of them is performed according to two methods, or place a small mirtilo or olive needle subtilly; or use a surgical knife for flebotomy, and call it lnessil, and this is its form.
E aquest alnessil es que conveneys a seccio e de aquels so specias latz e subtils segon la amplitut de las venas e segon la strictura de aquelas.	And this lnessil is to incise and of those specific thin slices according to the width of the veins and according to the structure of those.
Forma de fleubotomi mirti:	Form of flebotomy mirtilo:
sia le latz de lu ayssi cum vezes, e conveneys a obrir las venas concavas plenas procedentz apparentz grossas, e ad aquelas que conteno sanc gros torbat.	Let the wound be thus sized, and you need to open the concave veins full of large apparent vessels, as well as those that contain thick turbid blood.
E aquesta es la forma de fleubotomi olivar:	This is the way to perform an olive bloodletting:
E aquest fleubotomi es de menor latitut e de pus subtil extremitat, e conveneys a fleubotomia de venas subtils que conteno sanc subtil citri.	And this bloodletting is of lesser size and finer extremity, suitable for the bloodletting of fine veins containing thin yellowish blood.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena basilica la qual es una de tres venas: quar extratz le sanc de las malautias que so dejos le guolayro e·l col, e de aquo que siec le pietz e·l ventre.	More appropriate for the bloodletting of the basilic vein, which is one of three veins: from which we extract the bad blood that affects the knee and the groin, as well as what causes pain in the foot and the abdomen.
E conveneys al fleubotomador, quan fleubotomia aquela, que guarde be aquela e sia sobre-temor en aquela, quar dejos lu ha arteria, e si erra e ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi, inscidira aquela arteria e accidira fluxs de sanc, per so que cove que no fleubotomes aquela am fleubotomi pungent, abantz sia sectant cum alnessil.	And you must instruct the bloodletter, when performing this bloodletting, to be well aware of it and show great caution, for if he misses and improperly punctures the bloodletting site, he will injure the artery and cause flows of bad blood. Therefore, it is best to make a small incision before puncturing with a needle, as if cutting with a razor.
E si no appar la basilica per apparicio manifesta, lahoras cove que tu laysses aquela e que tu mudes a la autre, o que cerques alcun ram sieu; o que fleubotomes en loc de lu finis del bras, quar aquela es manifesta; e secsa aquela am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the basilica does not appear through a clear manifestation, then change to the other one, or look for some branch there; or perform a bloodletting at the end of the arm, for that is manifest, and dry out the other with a bloodletting in such a way as we have said.
Mays si tu voles la fleubotomia de lu meteyssa, lahoras cove denant la strictura del bras que toques le loc entro que conogues le loc dels pols, e aprop senha sobre lu am tencha; e aprop lia le bras e secsa la vena am seccio concava am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit; e guarda te que caja la percussio per alcu spazi del loc de la arteria.	And if you wish to perform the bloodletting of the arm, then proceed in front of the constriction of the arm and touch the place where you recognize the location of the pulse, then place your hand over it; then lift the arm and dry the vein with a concave section of the blade in such a way as we have said; and guard that the percussion does not occur over some space of the artery's location.
E quan tu vezes, cum strenhes le liament, imflacio en le loc que has senhat am tencha, lahoras aquela inflacio es inflacio de la arteria, e donc squiva aquela.	And when you observe, as you strengthen the ligament, inflation occurs in the place you marked with your hand; then that inflation is due to the artery, and therefore avoid that area.
E si vezes le sanc fluir en la fleubotomia ayssi cum aurina de enfant, e·l sanc es subtil rog, lahoras sapias que es del sanc de la arteria; e lahoras tu coyta e pausa le tieu dit sobre aquel per lonc spazi; e aprop osta le tieu dit, e si lo sanc es abscindit, quar motas veguadas es abscindit, lahoras tu strenh le bras e layssa aquel.	And if you see the blood flow in the bloodletting as golden from a child, and the blood is thin and rosy, then you know it is the blood of the artery; then lift and pause your hand for a long space over that area; and place your hand close to it, and if the blood is cut, for small motas are cut, then strengthen the arm and leave that.
E guardes le malaute de la moccio de lu, e sia sobre-temor de lu e no maugua aquel per alcus dias entro que sia sanat.	And keep the patient warm, and do not let them catch a chill for several days until they are healed.
Mays si le sanc no es abscindit, e vezes que deves tu no es present medicina ad aquo, lahoras tu inscideys la arteria, si appar a tu; quar la extremitat de lu es contrayta, e es abscindit le sanc; o que prenguas scorsa de fistic, e fen aquela, e pren la una maytat e strenh aquela sobre le loc de la vena am strictura descent am liament e am pulvils entro al autra dia.	If the blood does not stop, and sometimes you must do more than what this medicine suggests, then when you incise the artery, if it appears to you; for the extremity will be constricted, and the blood will stop; or that which you take from a recent fistula, and you do that, and take half of it and strengthen that over the location of the vein with strictura, descent on linen and powder the next day.
E lahoras si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, lahoras cura aquel am aquo del qual es precedit a la rememoracio del loc de las polveras abscindentz flux de sanc.	And if the blood stops, that is good; and if not, then treat that with what preceded in the recall of the location of the powders stopping the flow of blood.
E la abscizio del sanc de lu es dificil en motas disposicios per le loc petit de la plagua e la possibilitat del liament del bras.	And the stopping of the blood in such small areas due to the location and the possibility of the arm's movement is difficult.
Mays de la vena fusca la fleubotomia es juvament que extratz lo sanc de la partida subirana del cap e a la partida dejos del cors; per aquo quar es composta de ram de la basilica e de ram de cephalica, ayssi cum havem dit.	And for the dark vein, phlebotomy is beneficial to extract the blood from the part above the groin up to the part below the body; because this is composed of a branch of the basilica and a branch of the cephalic, as we have said.
E cove al fleubotomant aquela que sia sobre-temor en la fleubotomia de lu, quar dejos aquela es un nervi; e adonc si ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi e atroba le nervi, accidira a lu stupor, e es difficil la sanacio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot, E aquest nervi motas veguadas apar al sentiment; e si es ocultat ad alcus homes e es subtil e no es monstrat, lahoras cove que tu pauses le fleubotomi am le qual tu fleubotomas am seccio de alnessil, e evita le nervi am la tua fortalesa.	And cover the incision after phlebotomy where it is over-tremorous in the phlebotomy of the patient; for that is a nerve; and then if you adjust in the puncture of the phlebotomy and find the nerve, it will happen to you stupor, and it is difficult the healing of him, and not easily he is cured completely. And this nerve manifests sensations at times; and if it is hidden among some men and is subtle and is not shown, then cover the phlebotomy where you make section of alnessil, and avoid the nerve with your strength.
E si la vena es entre dos nervis, lahoras tu fen la vena en la longitut.	And if the vein is between two nerves, then you cut the vein lengthwise.
Le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena cephalica es que atratz le sanc del cap e comfereys a las malautias dels huels.	The purpose of phlebotomy of the cephalic vein is to draw blood from the head and relieve ailments of the eyes.
E cove en aquest propriament, si vols que la fleubotomes pungen am fleubotomi olivar o am fleubotomi mirti; quar es la pus salva de totas las venas, quar no es dejos lu arteria ni nervi.	And cover this properly, if you want to make a phlebotomy at the olive phlebotomy or at the myrtle phlebotomy; for it is taken from all the veins, for neither the artery nor the nerve is left.
Mays empero conveneys a tu deves la fleubotomia que guardes que am le fleubotomi no punguas le cap del lacert tant solament, e cerques le loc pus leugier, e no notz a lu, si no es atrobat am la percussio primieyra que sia sobre aquela am fleubotomia alcunas veguadas.	Moreover, however, you should perform the incision carefully ensuring that you do not puncture the head of the vessel too deeply, and look for the location slightly outward, and do not mark it, unless it is bruised by the first percussive blow which occurs during the incision several times.
Mays empero fort leu es apostemat en alcus homes, quan no es fleubotomat en la primieyra percussio, mays no notz en re aquel apostema.	Moreover, however, an abscess is often found in some people, when it is not punctured in the first percussion, then do not mark it again with a lance.
Mays la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquela e les accidentz de lu so motz, en les quals te cove cogitar en lor rectificacio.	Moreover, the quality of the incision and the accidents related to it are matters that you should carefully consider in their correction.
Le primier de lu es del qual cove que sapias que fleubotomia no es aministrada sino en conservacio de sanetat e per speransa de lu e cautela de aveniment de malautias, e que sia fayta fleubotomia en la una de las venas que so en le coyde, so es: cephalica, fusca e basilica; e que sia fayta fleubotomia al comensament de primaveyra, sobre dejun en primaviera e autunppne, e en invern aprop la comestio, quan apparo significacios de replecio.	The first of these is that you should know that an incision should be made only for the preservation of health and with hope and caution regarding the occurrence of illnesses, and that the incision should be made in one of the veins that are in the thigh: cephalic, femoral, and basilic; and that the incision should be made at the beginning of spring, on an empty stomach in spring and autumn, and in winter shortly after eating, when signs of edema appear.
E sia fayta fleubotomia e le tertz dia o al primier pus que del jorn siran passadas tres horas.	And a femoral incision should be made and the third day or at the first hour of the next day after three hours have passed.
Mays fleubotomia que es aministrada, mays quan provoca convenencia e necessitat ad aquo, o de nuoyt o de dia, en tota hora e en tot temps.	The more frequent the femoral incision is administered, the more it should be done when deemed convenient and necessary, whether at night or during the day, at any hour, and at all times.
E cove que efant no sia fleubotomat entro que aja xiiii ans, e femna que sia prenhs no sia fleubotomada sino del quart mes entro al sete, e les viels no sian fleubotomatz les quals ja han passatz lx ans.	And let a boy not be circumcised until he is four years old, and a girl who is pregnant should not be circumcised but only in the fourth month before giving birth, and women should not be circumcised those which have passed fifty years.
E cum alcu vol esser fleubotomat per qualque manieyra sia, cove que mondifique les sieus budels denant la fleubotomia am clisteri leon, si en aquels ha mota fenda retenguda, per so que las venas no atiro las superfluitatz en la fleubotomia dels budels, que son puridas, e que no noguan als membres principals.	And if anyone wishes to be circumcised in any manner, let them modify their intestines before the circumcision by applying a leon clyster if there is a mota (wart) with a hidden opening, so that the veins do not carry superfluous fluids during the circumcision of the intestines, which are purged, and do not harm the principal members.
E no sian fleubotomatz les pascientz naucea sacertiva e crapula, ni evasent de malautia ni de ebretat entro que aquo sia remaugut aquo de lor, ni malaute de ydropici, e mays que fleubotomia sia temuda aprop colica passio e aprop vomit, e aprop cos de ventre, e aprop multiplicacio de coyt e de trebal e de exercici de dejunis o de vigilias e de tota causa que dissolveys la vertut, o sia corpore28 o animal.	And let no patients who are nauseous, sick from overeating, vomiting due to illness or drunkenness be circumcised until these conditions are remedied for them, nor in cases of dropsy. More often, circumcision should be delayed until colic pain passes, and until vomiting, abdominal discomfort, increased sexual activity, work, and exercise, as well as fasting or staying awake, and all causes that dissolve the virtue, either corporal or animal, have subsided.
E aprop considera en subtiliacio de humos denant aquo si le sanc es gros, am viandas e beures, e am medicinas si aquo es a lu possible ad aquo.	And then consider in subtlety of humors before this if the wound is large, with food and drinks, and with medicines if this is possible for it.
E aprop intre en banh si alcuna causa no prohibeys, o sia excersitat per alcun exercici per so que·l sanc sia subtiliat.	And then enter the bath if any cause does not prohibit it, or exercise by some exercise so that the wound be subtlety treated.
E pausa la fleubotomia de lu en le pietz del dia, so es enviro la hora de tercia, ayssi cum havem dit.	And place the phlebotomy on the feet of the patient, so at about the hour of three, as we have said.
E perforsa te que·l pietz de aquel sia guardat en aquel dia de totz mals accidentz animals, ayssi cum es angustia, ira, temor, e de totz accidentz corporals, ayssi cum es trebal e pena superflua e coyt e semblantz a lor.	And I assure you that the feet of that patient should be guarded on that day from all bad animal accidents, as when there is anxiety, anger, fear, and from all bodily accidents, as when there is work and superfluous pain or copulation and resemblances to them.
E a la sua sezelha fassa esser presentz las causas en le us de la qual corr costuma dels homes am aromaticitat e odorament e am bals e semblantz ad aquels segon la cantitat de possibilitat.	And at her side have present the causes in the use of which custom of men is based on aroma and odor, and with balsams as those according to the quantity and possibility.
E segua le fleubotomador sobre un coyssi que sia pus aut que·l coyssi de aquel que deu esser fleubotomat.	And follow the phlebotomizer over a cushion that is higher than the cushion on which the patient should be phlebotomized.
E aprop extragua le sieu bras, e fregue aquel am la sua ma le fleubotomador doas o tres veguadas; e aprop strenha le liament am correia e involva aquel doas veguadas.	And then extract his arm, rub that area with your hand using the flap knife two or three times; and tightly bind the limb with a bandage and wrap that area twice.
E sia la strictura temprada, quar la strictura quant no es engual, o la strictura es am superfluitat, lahoras prohibeys de fluxs del sanc; o es am mollificacio, e lahoras prohibeys le cors del sanc eyssament.	And if the constriction is tempered, or when the constriction is not equal, or the constriction is due to excess, then prohibit the flow of blood; or it is due to softening, and then prohibit the body's flow of blood accordingly.
E aprop la strictura, cove que aquel que deu esser fleubotomat fregue las suas mas ensemps entre lor entro que las venas sian imfladas, e sian declaradas al sentiment.	And when the constriction is present, have those who are to perform the incision rub their hands together between them as the veins become swollen and clearly apparent to the touch.
E aprop le fleubotomador unte le sieu fleubotomi am un pauc de oli antic propriament; e aprop pausa le sieu di indic de la ma senestra sobre aquela vena, dejos le loc del qual vol la fleubotomia, per que la vena fuja un pauc, e la percussio sia sessada quar de las venas es la qual atrobas ayssi cum corda fugent deves la fleubotomia, e de aquelas es que es plena de ventositat e quan pauses le fleubotomi sobre aquela es contrayta deves le fleubotomi, e es desceubut le fleubotomador; e le fleubotomi no uobre la vena, e si uobre, aquela es streyta.	And the surgeon unites the incision with a little antiseptic oil properly; then places his finger of the left hand on the vein, positioning the area where the incision is to be made so that the vein slightly protrudes and can be clearly felt. The vein should feel like a fleeing cord, indicating fullness and ventosity. When the surgeon pauses the incision over this area, it contracts, revealing the location; if the incision does not open the vein, it should be tightened.
E donc, per aquo cove que·l fleubotomador sia fermat e sia sollicit en totas aquestas causas.	And therefore, in this case, the phlebotomist should be kept engaged and attentive to all these causes.
E aprop depause le fleubotomi, mays si la vena es huberta en una veguada, lahoras bo es; e sino, tu itera aquo autra vaguada dejos aquel loc un pauc, o sobre lu am festinacio, si le loc no es apostemat.	And then remove the phlebotomy device, but if the vein is fully opened in one go, that is good; otherwise, you repeat this process or for a shorter duration next time, or apply more pressure if the area does not show signs of suppuration.
Et si le loc es apostemat, o le malaute se spauresca, lahoras tu le layssa per un dia o per dos, e no strenha le liament, quar fort leu atirara apostema caut, ni no intre en banh.	And if the area is suppured, or the sore opens up, then you let it be for a day or two, and do not pack it tightly, for this would force pus out and it should not be bathed.
E aprop itera la fleubotomia si la ama.	And then repeat the phlebotomy if necessary.
E si la apercio es petita e corr sanc subtilment, e temes que non yesca sanc la cantitat que voles, lahoras tu itera le fleubotomi en aquel trauc segon rectitut e ajusta en la appercio un pauc, e fay aquo am festinacio denant que·l loc sia apostemat, quar le loc es apostemat en motz homes deves pauca apercio.	And if the wound is small and the pus is subtle, and you fear that it might not drain enough, then repeat the phlebotomy in that area according to correctness and adjust slightly based on the appearance. Do so with more pressure before the area suppures, for the area will suppure less when you use a smaller opening.
Mays si vezes aquel ja apostemat, lahoras no iteres sobre lu, quar no escusa a tu alcuna causa; e pausa sobre aquel alcuna partida de la fenda de oli, quar alleuja le cors del sanc.	But if you find that it has already suppurated, then do not touch it, for it serves no useful purpose; instead place something over it from the fissure of oil, which alleviates the body's pain.
E es milhor en aquest loc que oli e que les autres olis.	And it is better in this place than oil and other oils.
E semblantment aministra fenda de oli en tota fleubotomia am la qual fleubotomes las venas deves la prohibicio de cors de sanc, e fan aquo tyriaca alfadoc e sagzenea quan es pausat de la una de aquelas sobre le loc, quar le sanc es subtiliat e es revolvut quan es gros.	And similarly, administer the fissure of oil in all fistulotomy where veins are cut to prevent the flow of blood, and they do this by applying tyriaca alfadoc and sagzenea when placed over the area, for the blood becomes thin and is circulated when it is thick.
E si en le loc de la fleubotomia es engendrat gran apostema, quar motas veguadas accideys, e majorment ad aquel que no es stat sangnat sino aquela veguada, o en la apercio de la vena pauca, e lahoras tu coyta, e pausa sobre le loc sponja infuza en aygua e sal, un pauc scalfada, e strenh aquela per una hora, quar es dissolvut.	And if a large suppurate arises in the area of the fistulotomy, where major accidents occur, especially to those who have not been lanced but only that one time, or during the sign of the small vein, then you should lance and place a sponge infused in water and salt, slightly heated, strongly keeping it there for an hour, for it dissolves.
E cove que fassa aquo aprop le yssiment del sanc de aquela vena am compliment de lu o de autra vena.	And ensure that this is done near the discharge of the blood from that vein, either with the vein or another vein.
E si roman en le loc per alcus dias alcuna negror o viriditat, no notz aquo; e si voles, pausa sobre aquel alcuna causa de aloen e de mirra dissolvut, o alcuna causa de suc de mentastre o de calament o semblant de lu.	And if there is any darkness or greenishness in the area for several days, do not note this; and if you wish, place over it some cause of aloes and myrrh dissolved, or some cause of mustard juice or of its seed or similar to it.
E motas veguadas accideysso apostemas e eminencias deves fleubotomia de la basilica.	And when blue spots occur, you should perform bloodletting at the basilica.
E donc pausa la tua ma sobre aquela, e si lahoras tu atrobas mollicia deves la tua compressio sobre aquela, lahoras aquela eminencia es malvada e mala; e adonc guarda te que pauses sobre aquela alcuna causa de aquo que havem dit, quar fort leu fluira de la arteria sanc.	And place your hand over it. If then you find it soft, apply your compress to that area, as that eminence is bad and harmful; and then be careful to place over it some cause of what we have said, for strong blood will flow from the aorta.
E fay emplaustre am aquo en que es stipticitat, per que le loc sia endurat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And apply a plaster where there is stiffness, to make the area harder, and then treat it with the other treatment until it is healed.
E cove que extraguas del sanc a tot hom segon la quantitat de la sua vertut e segon la color vencent sobrc le sanc segon que appar.	And ensure that you extract from the wound all the pus according to the quantity of its virtue and according to the dominant color over the blood as it appears.
Quar si le sanc es negre, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia rog; e semblantment si tu le vezes gros, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia subtiliat; e semblantment si es agut, entro que sia ostada la acuitat de lu.	For if the blood is black, you let it remain until it becomes clear; similarly, if you see it thick, you let it remain until it becomes thin; similarly, if it is sharp, you wait until its acuity is reduced.
E cove ad aquel que es ple e fort e ha necessitat de extraccio de sanc en una veguada, que sia amplificada la fleubotomia de la vena e le fleubotomi sia lat.	And when it comes to a person who is full and strong and has the need for rapid bloodletting from a vein, enlarge the venesection and let the bleeding be liberal.
E en aquel que es freul, sia fayt le contrari de aquel, e cove que extragua aquel en tropas veguadas, e que le trauc sia streyt.	And when it is a woman, do the opposite, and cause her to bleed in small amounts over several days, and that she bleed steadily.
E le milhor que es administrat en fleubotomia de vena es que sia la seccio transversa, no punctura.	And the best that is administered in venesection is a transverse section, not a puncture.
E aquesta manieyra de fleubotomia es salva de flux de sanc e de inscizio de nervi, e es pus lausabla e pus salva que fleubotomia segon latitut e longitut.	And this method of venesection avoids the flow of blood and the cutting of nerves, and is more commendable and safer than venesection according to length and breadth.
E a la qual es acostumat sobrevenir sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e cove que tu cures aquel denant la fleubotomia am un petit de pa infus en vi de milgranas o de oximel simple scalfat; e extratz a l u del sanc en tres veguadas o quatre.	And when this method is accustomed to cause syncope, do the venesection and ensure that you cure it before the venesection with a drop of wine of milgranas or simple oxymel; and extract from the side of the vein in three or four days.
E si es enfregiditat de compleccio, lahoras prengua denant la fleubotomia pa infus en eyssarop de mirra o en eyssarop de mel aromatizat am specias ayssi cum am pebre, canela, gingiebre e semblantz, o en eyssarop aromatizat e mot odorant.	And if it is a swelling of the complexity, then apply before the venesection a poultice of myrrh extract or an aromatic honey poultice with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and saffron, or an aromatic and fragrant honey poultice.
E si accideys sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e es causa de lu issiment de mot sanc, lahoras cove que prengua en beure aygua de carn e eyssarop mot odorant subtil; e use de aromaticitat am algualea, e sia linit le sieu pietz am aquela.	And if you happen to encounter syncope, perform a femoral puncture, as it is caused by the cessation of motion in the blood. Then let him take in a drink of meat broth and inhale a subtle fragrant vapor; use aromatic substances like laurel, and apply them to his feet with this.
E usa de las autras causas que havem ditas en la divisio en le capitol de sincopi per evacuacio.	And use the other causes that we have said in the division in the chapter on syncope by evacuation.
E qui vol eventar le sieu bras e dissolver le sieu sanc segonda veguada, cove a lu del qual la fleubotomia es per mota evacuacio, e la vertut de lu es freol, que evacue le sanc petit a petit, so es segon la quantitat de la vertut en les dias continuables.	And to cool his arm and dissolve his blood for the second time, apply to him from which the femoral puncture is by major evacuation, and its virtue is cold, which evacuates the blood little by little, according to the quantity of the virtue over consecutive days.
Mays qui vol eventar le sieu bras, e gitar lo sieu sanc segonda vetz, e le sieu cors es fort, lahoras fassa aquo aprop vii horas o ix de la primieyra fleubotomia.	And if one wants to cool his arm and circulate his blood for the second time, and his body is strong, then do this about seven or nine hours after the first femoral puncture.
Mays qui vol atirar le sanc del cors sieu al contrari de la partida a la qual declina, cove que sia eventat en le segon dia o le tertz.	And if one wants to discharge the blood from his body in the direction opposite to which it is flowing, then do this after it has been cooled on the second or third day.
Mays aquel cors en le qual es mot sanc ja scalfat e es acuit e fa accidir febre, cove que sia gitat de lu sanc en una veguada e sia de lu gitada gran cantitat e sia amplificada la apercio entro que accidesca sincopi, pus que tu auras conservadas totas las condicios de fleubotomia; e que pauses la tua ma sobre le pols de lu deves le cors del sanc, per que no endevengua mort en loc de sincopi, quar motas veguadas endeve aquo quan le fleubotomador es ignorant e negligent.	When that body in which there is hot blood already flayed and is acute and causes fever, ensure that the blood is drained from it in one go and a large quantity be let out, and amplify the perception between when the syncope occurs; and since you have preserved all conditions of phlebotomy; and place your hand on the pulse of the patient, to drain the body of the blood, so that it does not end up dead instead of syncope, whereas many times this happens when the phlebotomist is ignorant and negligent.
E no cove quan tu voles desliar le bras e evacua le sanc segonda veguada, cum ja sia claus le orrifici de la vena e sia fayt difficil issiment del sanc, que tu premas subre aquel am vehemencia e encurvat sia extendut leugierament, quar aquo es trop mal.	And do not when you want to release the arm and evacuate the blood a second time, as already the orifices of the vein are closed and it is difficult to expel the blood, that you press upon that area with great force and slightly extend it, for this is too bad.
Habantz le layssa entro que sia fleubotomat segondament; o remau aquo am la acuitat del fleubotomi que es coagulat del sanc en le orrifici de la vena; o pausa sobre aquel de tyriaca alfarach, o de sagzenea, e comprem aquel am compressio leugiera entro que·l sanc sia fora yssit.	And let it remain until the phlebotomy is performed again; or wait for the heat of the phlebotomy to coagulate the blood in the orifices of the vein; or place your hand on the area of tyriaca alfarach, or sagenea, and keep that with a light compression until the blood settles.
E si la vena es apostemada, lahoras layssa aquela e no la toques entro que·l apostema sia sedat.	And if the vein is inflamed, then leave it alone and do not touch it until the inflammation subsides.
E si necessitat te provoca a evacuar le sanc segondament, e no es excusacio, lahoras tu sagna aquel sobre aquel loc o en l’autre bras en autra vena.	And if necessity compels you to evacuate the pus at once, and there is no excuse, then you let that out in the same place or on the other arm into another vein.
E la vena apelada “funis del bras” es fleubotomada en loc de la fusca o de la basilica, quan no so atrobadas o so amaguadas, quar es composta de aquelas.	And the vein called "funis del bras" is incised instead of the funica or basilica when they are not readily visible or are hidden, for it is composed of those.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intrometa la sua ma en aygua cauda entro que·l focil se enrogezesca e que la vena apparia manifestament.	And the quality of incising that vein is that the patient inserts his hand into warm water as the vessel becomes evident and visibly apparent.
E aprop sia strengut sobre aquel am liament am strictura migana; e aprop fleubotoma segon le tranvers petit, no latitudinalment ni segon la longitut.	And then bind it tightly with linen to prevent swelling; and then incise according to the small transverse vein, neither longitudinally nor according to its length.
E sia la apercio ampla e sia la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas aquela sobre la junctura de la ma un petit.	And make the incision wide, and let your incision be where you incise that vein near the wrist of the hand.
E si es prohibit le fluxs del sanc, lahoras tu itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e layssa le sanc correr en la aygua entro que consieguas la tua necessitat.	And if you are to stop the flow of blood, then immerse your hand in the trailing water until you have achieved your necessity and let the blood run into the water.
Mays si tu eras en les dias d’estiu, lahoras tu yest excusat de la iteracio de la ma en l’aygua cauda, e le mes es pausat le cors del sanc en aygua cauda en temps de yvern.	And if you are in the days of summer, then you may be excused from immersing your hand in the trailing water, and instead keep the flow of blood in cold water during winter.
E la fleubotomia de aquesta vena es pus salva que de totas las autras venas, quar dejos lu no ha vena pulsatil, ni nervi.	And the phlebotomy of this vein is safer than that of all other veins, for it has neither a pulsating vein nor nerves.
E la fleubotomia de la savatella de la ma dreyta es conferent a las malautias del fetge.	And the phlebotomy of the basilic vein of the right hand is related to ailments of the liver.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que tu strenguas la ma am liament o am la tua ma, pus que tu l’as mesa en ayga cauda, entro que la vena sia imflada e sia be demostrada al vezement; e aprop fleubotoma aquela transversan; e si inscidas aquela de tot no nozera aquo en re.	And the quality of phlebotomy from this vein is that you press the hand with flax or with your hand, rather than leaving it in trailing water until the vein becomes swollen and clearly visible; then proceed to make the transverse incision; and if you cut through it entirely, no harm will come of this.
E conserve que no ultimes la tua ma am la fleubotomi, quar dejos lu so les nervis dels ditz denudatz de carn.	And make sure that you do not place your hand over the venesection too close to the fingers, for then you would expose the nerves of the fingers without flesh.
E aprop itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e laysse correr le sanc en aquela, quar si tu no iteras aquela en l’aygua cauda, le sanc sira coagulat en lo orrifici de la vena, e es prohibit de flux.	And immediately immerse your hand in the basin of water and let the blood flow into it, for if you do not immerse that part in the basin of water, the blood will coagulate in the orifice of the vein, and this is prohibited from flowing.
E cum es extrayt le sanc segon la quantitat de necessitat, lahoras tu pausa sobre la vena oli e sal, per que no sia consolidada coytadament; e semblantment cove que tu fassas en tot ram streyt.	And when the blood is extracted in the necessary quantity, then pause above the vein with oil and salt, so that it is not consolidated completely; similarly ensure that you do this for the entire length of the vein.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de aquela de la ma senestra, es que es conferent a las malautias de la melsa.	More importantly for the youth of the venesection of that from the left hand, it is that you attend to the illnesses of the mesentery.
E fay semblantment en la fleubotomia de lu ayssi cum has fayt en l’autra.	And perform similarly in the venesection of the leg as you have done in the other.
E le juvament de la vena sephena de la fleubotomia es a las malautias que so en la partida dejos del cos, ayssi cum so malautias de la mayre, e a retencio de mestruas, et a las malautias dels ronhos e ulceracios de coyssas e de cambas antiquas, e a lor semblantz de las malautias.	And the youth of the phlebotomy vein is for illnesses that are in the lower part of the body, such as illnesses of the liver, and retention of menstruation, and for illnesses of hernias and old ulcers of thighs and chests, and their similar to other illnesses.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute entrometa lo sieu pe en aygua cauda e fassa sobre aquel fricacio entro que be apparen las venas; e lia sobre la junctura del pe am correia; e le loc de la vena le talo apparent deves le dit pous, e de aquela so ramificatz en la facia del pe motz ramps.	And the quality of the femoral incision is that the patient's leg enters into cold water and makes friction on that area where the veins become apparent; a bandage is placed over the knee joint; at the location of the vein, he cuts it open, and from there its branches spread across the thigh face.
E donc fleubotoma le pus ample ram o dejos la camba deves le talo deves la agreguacio de lu, quar es milhor e pus sal.	And thus incise the vein more widely or place the bandage to cut the opening, which is better and more secure.
E si fleubotomas aquela en la facia del pe, lahoras tu te guarda dels nervis que so dejos aquela sobre la facia del pe, e pausa la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas per le travers, quays cum si tu la volias inscidir.	And if you perform the femoral incision on the thigh, then you must guard against the nerves that are left on the surface of the thigh, and place your incision over the area where you cut it transversely, as if you wanted to incise it more deeply.
E sia le fleubotomi vosil.	And let the femoral incisions be deep.
Mays si es prohibit le issiment del sanc; lahoras tu itera le pe de lu en l’aygua cauda e layssa correr le sanc en aquela entro que sia evacuat.	But if the bleeding is prohibited; then you wet the leg in cold water and let the blood flow in that area until it is evacuated.
E si le fleubotomador erra en la primieyra veguada, lahoras itera am le fleubotomi en sus un pauc, quar le loc es sal; e no temes de lu malician, mays que te guardes dels nervis ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the femoral incisor makes an error in the first attempt, then repeat the incision a little more, for the location is secure. And do not fear its depth; rather, guard against the nerves as we have said.
E semblantment fay de la sophena del autre pe engualment.	And similarly make a cut on the other foot equally.
E de la vena sciatica, le loc ayssi cum havem dit es deves le talo dejos la cavilha de la partida silvestra.	And for the sciatic vein, the place is as we have said; you should cut the thigh and leave the parting wild valve.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de lu es a dolo de anca quan es per sanc caut.	And the indication for femoral venous incision is pain in the hip when it is due to a severe cut.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intre en banh, e festine e strenha la cueyssa de lu del latz de la ancha entro desus le talo desus quatre ditz an una benda longua subtil, quar no appar sino per aquo.	And the quality of the femoral venous incision is that the patient enters the bath, waxes, and strengthens the thigh with a bandage long and thin, which does not show except through this.
E donc quan appar, lahoras tu fleubotoma aquela segon cascun engen que es a tu possible e segon le tranvers, e es milhor; o inscidas aquela per inscizio o secces aquela per seccio, quar le loc de lu es sal.	And when it appears, then you perform the venous incision according to whatever means are at your disposal and according to the transversal, which is better; or make an incision for extraction or incise it for bloodletting, for the place is clean.
E ela es en motz homes mot ameguada; e si atrobas aquela, e no appar al sentiment de tot, lahoras fleubotoma alcun ram de lu, e es aquel que appar en le dos del pe enves le dit auricular e le anular.	And it is often found to be a large vein; and if you find it but do not appear by touch, then incise some branch of it, and that is the one that appears on the side of the foot between the auricular and annular toes.
E guarda te dels nervis, e fay correr del sanc la quantitat que voles.	And guard the nerves, and let the blood flow in the quantity you want.
E aprop deslia la strictura e pausa sobre le loc de la fleubotomia coto e strenh le loc, quar leugierament es sanat.	And then release the tension and place your hand over the phlebotomy site to strengthen it, so that it heals slightly.
De ventozacio e de las qualitatz de uzar de aquelas.	For ventilation and the qualities of using those.
Ventozas so de corns, o de eram, o de veyre.	Ventilation is either of corns, or of ear, or of eye.
E ventozacio es fayta segon doas manieyras: la una de lor es am scarificacio e extracio de sanc, e l’autra es ventozacio ses scarificacio.	And ventilation is performed in two ways: one way involves incision and extraction of blood, and the other involves ventilation without incision.
E aquesta ventozacio que es ses scarificacio es segon doas manieyras, quar o es am foc o ses foc.	And this ventilation without incision is performed in two ways, either by fire or without fire.
E a las ventozas que so administradas am scarificacio e extraccio de sanc son xiiii locs del cors, dels quals la un en lo qual so pausadas ventozas es alnocrati, e es la deriera partida del cap; e le mieg loc d’el de doas partz del col ensemp; e ventozas del mento dejos la mandibula pus dejos de la boca; e ventozas de doas spatulas; e ventozas de alohoster, e es sobre la fi de la coeta; e ventozas de dos focils, e so de dos brasses; e ventozas de doas cavilhas; e ventozas de doas cuoyssas.	And for the ventilations administered with incision and extraction of blood, there are fourteenth places in the body, of which one where ventilation is paused is alnocrati, and is the last part of the head; and the middle place of the two parts of the neck together; ventilation of the chin leaves the jaw behind and leaves the mouth open; ventilation of the cheeks; ventilation of the collarbones, and it is at the end of the shoulder blade; ventilation of the thigh bones, and they are two braccia long; ventilation of the upper legs; and ventilation of the thighs.
E ventozacio no extratz le sanc sino de las venas menudas sparssas en la carn, e per aquo no catz la vertut per aquelas, ayssi cum es cazement per fleubotomia; ni no cove que ventozacio sia fayta am foc o ses foc en alcuna malautia fayta per replecio entro que le cors tot sia evacuat.	And by venesection, do not extract the blood from the wound but from the small veins scattered in the flesh, and thereby do not lose its virtue as with phlebotomy; nor should you think that venesection should be made by fire or several fires in any illness caused by repletion when the body is completely evacuated.
Mays si necessitat provoca a ventozacio per malautia o per continua, aministrem aquela en tota hora al comensament del mes e en la fi de lu, e en le mieg loc de lu e en qualque temps sia.	But if necessity provokes venesection for an illness or during its continuance, administer it at the beginning of the month and at the end, and in the middle of the month and at any other time.
La qual causa es quar dels homes es en les quals es sanc multiplicat entro que indigeys de extraccio de lu per ventozacio e atroba en le sieu cap graveza e soda; e de aquels es que atroba replecio e rogor en la sua cara e en le sieu cap, e en le sieu col; e de aquels es que atroba pruziment en la sua cara e en le sieu front e tenebrositat e hebetut en les sieus huels; e de aquels que gieta le loc de la sua ventozacio; e de aquels es que le lor ris es multiplicat; e de aquels es que atroba gustament de sanc en la sua boca, o que la lengua es apostemada e escup sanc; e de aquels es que lor dormir es multiplicat, e de aquels que vetz sanc en lo dormir rogor e antics e plaguas e autras causas a lor semblantz.	The cause is that in those men where blood multiplies within without extraction through venesection and finds great weight and hardness; and of those who find repletion and redness on their face and head, and on their neck; and of those who find pain on their face and forehead with darkness and dullness in their eyes; and of those who indicate the place of their venesection; and of those whose laughter is increased; and of those who find taste of blood in their mouth, or whose tongue swells and they spit blood; and of those who sleep more, and of those who see blood during sleep as redness, spots, and other similar causes.
E donc quan vezes en alcuna causa de aquelas, e propriament si es en le tertz o miga del mes, lahoras comandam ventozacio esser fayta pus que so passadas del dia dos o tres horas.	And when often in some cause of those, and properly if it is in the third or fourth day, then command ventilation to be made more than just passed after one or two hours.
E juvament de ventozacio de la nuca es que quan aquela confereys a gravitat en le cap e ad aquo que es efondit als huels; mays cove que aquo sia aprop evacuacio de tot le cors.	And the benefit of ventilation from the neck is that when you apply it to gravity in the head and to what is deep in the veins; more effective is this than just general evacuation of the whole body.
E aquesta ventoza es en le loc de fleubotomia de la cephalica.	And this ventilation is in the place for phlebotomy of the cephalic vein.
E no es legut que use de lu aquel que es de frega complecio, o en le qual es catarr, quar dona ad aquel gran nocument.	And it is not advisable to use for this that which causes inflammation or in which there is a cold, as it gives great harm.
E per aquo no cove que uso de aquela les vielhs, e en les caps dels quals so malautias frejas.	And for this, it is not advisable to use those of the elderly, in whose heads there are gouty ailments.
Mays ad aquel que sobre aquela es continuant sobre lu es fayta oblivio; e per aquo cove que tu comandes al ventozador que depause la sua ma un petit am la ventosa a las partidas dejos, temen de la generacio de oblivio.	More so for those who have continuous inflammation; and for this, you should command the ventizer to place his hand slightly on the ventosa at the affected parts, to prevent the generation of forgetfulness.
Mays ventozacio de alkehel es en loc de fleubotomia de la vena fusca e de la basilica: e per aquo confereys a asma, e a la constriccio de ale e a la scissura del sturment de ale, e a tos, e a replecio.	More frequent ventozatio of alkehel is in the place of fleubotomia of the venas fusca and basilica: and thereby you will contribute to asthma, and to the constriccio of ale and to the scissura of the sturment of ale, and to coughs, and to replecio.
E cove que sia enpellida la ventoza alkehel un petit, quar si es pausada dejos, engendra debilitat en le cors e en le stomac.	And know that if the ventozatio of alkehel is stopped for a little while, it will engender weakness in the body and stomach.
E la ventozacio de alhagdahan confereys a las dolors accident en le cap e a obtalmia, e emigranea, e prefocacio, e a dolors en las razitz de las dentz; e es en loc de fleubotomia de la basiliqua.	And the ventozatio of alhagdahan will contribute to headaches and ophthalmia, migraine, premonition, and tooth pain; it is in the place of fleubotomia of the basilica.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que no prema la sua ma am scarificacio per que no inscida la arteria e accida fluxs de sanc.	And know that you should command the ventillator not to press his hand at the scarification so as not to incise the artery and damage the flow of blood.
E ventozacio dejos le mento comfereys a alcola en la boca, e a corrupcio de la gingiva, e a semblantz a lor de las malautias que so en la boca, e stan en loc de fleubotomia de aliheric que so en las doas labias.	And if the ventozatio is stopped at the mento, it will cause alcohol in the mouth, corruption of the gingiva, and appearances similar to those of illnesses in the mouth, which are in the place of fleubotomia of aliheric that are in the two lips.
Mays la ventozacio que es fayta sobre las doas spatulas confereys a caphatan, le qual es fayt per replecio de caliditat.	More importantly, the application of heat over the two spoons is applied to the caput, which is done by warming up.
E la ventosacio de las doas partidas dedintz dels focils confereys juvament de la fleubotomia de tres venas, so es de la basilica, fusca e cephalica, quar aquela atratz le sanc de totas aquelas venas pus manudas que so en la carn, e aquelas venas menudas de las autras venas pus grossas entro que pervengua la atraccio a las tres venas.	And the windsock application of the two parts inside the flasks contributes to the benefit of the incision of three veins, so called basilica, fusca, and cephalica, for they draw the scum from all those veins that are in the flesh, and those small veins from the larger veins through which the attraction reaches the three veins.
E comanda al ventozador que trop no procezesca en scarificacio, quar le loc es denudat de carn, e dejos lu so nervis e arterias.	And command the heater not to proceed with incision, for the area is stripped of flesh, leaving only nerves and arteries.
E es una ventoza am la qual es ventozat sobre alshosses e confereys a las emorroydas del cul e a las ulceracios pus dejos.	And it is a windsock to which heat is applied and contributes to the hemorrhoids of the anus and the ulcers, and leave them so.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que sia gran ventoza, e que sia de eram, quar le loc indigeys de fort seccio; e fort leu so traucadas ventozas subtils e sia scarificat am scarificacio.	And make sure to command the heater to use a large windsock, made of wool, for the area requires strong drying; and strongly have subtle and light winds applied with incision.
Mays ventozas de las cambas minueysso per minuicio manifesta, quar atiran le sanc de tot le cors, e comfereysso a dolors antiquas dels ronhos e de la mayre, e de la vesica; e provocan las mestruas, e comfereysso a bothor e ademil; e stan en loc de fleubotomia de doas sophenas, e alahorcoben, e de doas cavilhas.	More colds from the legs diminish by manifest diminution, for they carry the scanc from the whole body, and contribute to ancient pains of the hips and of the thigh, and of the bladder; and provoke menstruation, and contribute to bothor and ademil; and are in place of a flebotomy of two sophenas, and alahorcoben, and of two ankles.
Enpero mot debelitan tot le cors e fan accidir sincopi en motz homes.	But they thicken the whole body and cause syncope in many men.
E de las ventozas alahorcoben le juvament es propda al juvament a las ventozas de doas cambas.	And of the colds, alahorcoben affects the youth to the colds of the two hips.
E la qualitat de la posicio de las ventozas es que pauses la ventoza al comensament vueda e sucguas per succio temprada, e no prolongues la posicio de las ventozas, mays pausa aquelas leugierament, e reman aquelas coytadament, e que las humors venguan al loc per adveniment engual.	And the quality of the position of the colds is that you place the cold at the beginning viewable and draw it out by slight suction, and do not prolong the position of the colds, but place them lightly, and retain them constantly, so that the humors come to the area by natural means.
E no cesses iterar aquo e continuar entro que veja le loc ja enrojezir e inflar e que appara la rogor del sanc.	And do not cease to repeat this until you see the area already become red and swell, and the sign of scorch appear.
E lahoras tu scarifiqua e itera la succio pauc a pauc, e aprop considera en la dispozicio dels cors.	And then you incise and gradually increase the suction, while considering the disposition of the bodies.
Quar aquel home que es de tendra carn de rars pors, cove que tu le scarifiques una veguada e no pus, per que le loc no sia ulcerat.	When a person has tender flesh due to cold, incise him only once and not more, lest the place become ulcerated.
E comanda al ventozador que amplifique la scarificacio e pronde un pauc, e atempre la succio am facilitat.	And command the fan to enlarge the incision slightly and apply suction with ease.
E si en le sanc es grossitut, lahoras cove que scarifiques doas veguadas, quar en la primieyra veguada es uberta la via de subtiliacio al sanc e a la aquositat de lu.	And if the wound becomes inflamed, then you should incise twice; in the first incision, open the way for the subtle flow of blood and its humors.
Mays en la segunda a la perscrutacio aquisida de la extraccio del sanc gros.	More in the second incision, for the thorough extraction of the gross blood.
E si le sanc es mot feculent, lahoras sia fayta scarificacio la tersa veguada per que consiegua le derier.	And if the blood is muddied, then the third incision should be made to ensure its complete removal.
E derierament, quan volem extrayre le sanc pauc a pauc o un petit, abasta a nos una scarificacio.	Finally, when we want to extract the blood little by little or only a small amount, suffice us one incision.
E si volem extraccio de mot sanc, scarificam am mota scarificacio; e si nos conoyssem que·l sanc es gros, lahoras cove que scarifiquem per scarificacio preonda.	And if we want an extraction of foul blood, perform a cut with the lancet; and if we know that the blood is thick, then cut with a deeper incision.
E le terme de scarificacio en la qual es la profunditat de la codena tant solament.	And the term of scarification in which is the depth of the incision solely.
E si aquel del qual la codena es grossa, dura, fusca, e les sieus pors so streytz, cove que les locs de las ventosas sian untatz lenitius, apertius resolutius; si es en temps d’estiu, ayssi cum es oli de aloen o oli de violat, o oli de amellas dossas, o oli de cemensa de coja; e si es en temps ivern, lahoras oli narci, o oli de liri, o oli de camamilla, o de sanc, e ad aquels semblantz.	And if the incision is thick, hard, dark, and its pores are straight, then the places for the cups should be rubbed gently, opened, and resolved; if it is in summer, then use olive oil of aloes or olive oil of violet or balsam of copaiba or olive oil of cypress; and if it is in winter, then use narcissus oil, or lavender oil, or chamomile oil, or blood oil, and to those similar.
E si la superfluitat es grossa, freja, lahoras le oli sia amaranti, o oli de balsamita, o oli de aloen, o oli aneti, e a lor semblantz.	And if the excess is thick, apply, then oil of amber, or balsamic oil, or oil of aloes, or olive oil, and to those similar.
Mays si le ventozador es de amples pors de tendra carn, lahoras cove que sia prohibit de oli, e cove que ad aquest les locs de ventozas de lor aprop la ventozacio sian lavatz am ayguaros o am aygua freja de solatrum, o am aygua de coja, o am aygua de bordolaguas, e semblantz ad aquelas.	But if the cupping device has wide pores of tender flesh, then it should be forbidden to use oil, and instead, the areas around the cupping should be washed with warm water or cold water from a solatrum, or water from copaiba, or water from borax, and similar to those.
E aquel del qual le sanc es de mota humiditat, lava las suas ventozas am vi agre, o am aygua de mirt e sumac e semblant ad aquels.	And for those whose fever is due to humid moisture, wash their veins with wine, or with water of myrtle and sumac and similar.
E de aquel del qual las superfluitatz son grossas, lava las suas ventozas am vi antic, o am aygua de sansuc, que es majorana, o de decoccio de anet, o de camamilla, e a lor semblantz.	And for those whose superfluities are large, wash their veins with old wine, or with water of sanicle, which is marigold, or from decoction of dill, or of chamomile, and similar to them.
E cove que la ventozacio sia guardada denant de banh; habantz cove que sia aministrada aprop issiment del banh per una hora o per doas, e cove que dorma aprop la ventozacio.	And ensure that the vein is guarded before bathing; it should be administered approximately after the bath for one or two hours, and it should sleep near the vein.
Quid est quo oportet ut regatur ventosandus aus phlebotomatus ante ventosationem.	What must be done to regulate the patient before phlebotomy and venesection.
Cove que consideras al comensament: lahoras si le ventozador o aquel que·s deu fleubotomar es coleric e ventz sobre lu sanc agut e imflamacio, lahoras cove que prengua causas infrigidantz, ayssi cum milgranas acetosas, e endivia an vi agre e laytuguas, e secanabin, e julep, e a lor semblantz.	Ensure that you consider the beginning: if the patient who needs phlebotomy or venesection is choleric and the fever is acute and inflamed, then ensure that they take causes of cooling, such as sour milken, endive with wine, laxatives, julep, and similar remedies.
E pausa a lor viandas ayssi cum poletz, e carns de auzels serbiges, e viandas conditas am agras, e a lu semblantz.	And feed them thus like pears, pigeon hearts, and seasoned chicken, and foods flavored with garlic, in their likeness.
E de aquel del qual la compleccio es freja, cove que prengua en beure eyssarop almiva, o eyssarop de alsecanabin de semensas, e sumac, e vi mot odorant migier entre viel et noel; e que a lu sia comendat que use de paucitat de beure e de mangar, e pausa las viandas de lu poletz e canabir e pissers e petitz auzels e colombat.	And for those whose complexion is pale, give them to drink essaroop of almond, or essaroop of alecost with seeds, sumac, and vinegar mixed with wine; it should be recommended that they use moderation in drinking and eating, and avoid foods like pears, onions, pease, and small pigeon chicks.
E cove que en lo dia de ventozacio e de fleubotomia le beure sia major que la vianda.	And ensure that the drink is greater than the food on the day of ventilation and phlebotomy.
E cove que sia donat en beure en alcunas horas ad alcus homes tyriaca alpharac, o medicamentz de musc, so es muscada, o alcelita denant la ventozacio o denant fleubotomia o aprop, per so que·ls membres principals sian confortatz e que·l sanc sia subtiliat; e no cove que prenguan aquela scalfatz.	And ensure that some men are given to drink tiryaca alfarac or medicines from musk, such as muscat or acetic acid, before ventilation or phlebotomy or shortly after, so that the principal members be comforted and the wound subtiliate; and do not let them take any scalding drinks.
Mays las ventozas que so ses scarificacio sian ventozas que so pausadas sus le fetge, e sobre la melsa e podagra, e sobre le umbelic, en les locs dels jonolhs, e la pixida del ancha, quar aquestz membres no suffertan scarificacio sobre si.	More specifically, the vents for scarification should be located on the liver, over the melena and podagra, and over the umbilicus, in the areas of the joints, and the side, since these principal members do not suffer from scarification directly.
E no es querit per aquelas sino atraccio de sanc de membre, ayssi cum pausam ventosa sobre mamilha en malautia de flux de sanc del sanc de las nars; e usam de aquela per que sia dissolvuda ventositat freja inviscade del membre, ayssi cum pausam sobre le ventre e l’umbelic; quar aquela rarifique le membre e scalfa lu e ramau la dolor quar resolveys ventositat.	And it is not desired by those only for an attraction of the member's vein, thus as we apply a suction cup on the breast in illness of flux of blood from the blood of the nose; and we use that so that there may be dissolved a friable viscid swelling of the member, thus as we apply over the belly and the umbilicus; for that rarifies the member and heats it and mitigates the pain which resolves the swelling.
E ja es pausada sobre les ronhos quan accideys en lor opilacio o poyra, quar per vertut de atraccio fort leu huobre opilacio e erradica le poyra de son loc.	And it is applied over the hemorrhoids when there is a prolapse or displacement, for by virtue of its strong attraction it reduces the prolapse and eradicates the pain from its place.
E semblantment fa quan es pausada sobre le fetge e la melsa deves ventositat en aquels enclausa.	And it seems to work when applied over the liver and spleen in cases of swelling within them.
E aquestas ventozas so administradas vuedas amb succio tant solament; e alcunas veguadas so administradas am foc.	And these suction cups are applied using suction only sometimes; and at other times, they are applied with fire.
E alcunas veguadas so administradas plenas de aygua tebeza en las malautias de la melsa.	And at other times, they are applied filled with thin water in illnesses of the spleen.
E aquo es per que la ventoza sia umplida e sia pus gran, so es aygua cauda sola o aygua en la qual sian cuytas herbas ad aquo convenientz.	And this is to make the suction cup full and larger, it should be filled with cold water or water in which suitable herbs have been added.
Forma de ventoza aministrada am foc: sia la amplitud del orrifici de dos ditz, segon que nos la havem formada; e la quantitat del preon sia la maytat de un palm; e sia en lo latz de lu, en le loc que es en le circuit, la maytat de lu, le trauc sia petit segon la quantitat que intre en lu una agulha.	Form a suction cup with fire: let the diameter of the opening be two fingers, as we have formed it; and the amount of the preion be half a palm; and place it in the middle of it, in the location that is on the circuit, to the extent of its size, I draw it so small according to the quantity that enters it with a needle.
Sia fayta de eram rog o citri, de grosses marges, leon, enguals e terses per so que no leda le membre deves la sua posicio sobre lu.	Let it be made of elm or citrus, with thick edges, juniper, equal and smooth so that it does not cause the limb to deviate from its position on it.
E sia al mieg de lu vergua transversa de eram o de ferr, on es pausada candela am lo foc.	And let it be at the center of the elm or iron ring, where the candle rests in the fire.
E ja sia aquesta ventoza gran major de aquela la qual havem recomtat; e la pauca mendre de aquela segon las malautias e la etat de aquel que usa de aquela.	And let this suction cup be much larger than the one we have described; and the smaller amount according to the ailments and the condition of the person using it.
E las ventosas dels efantz e extenuatz so autres que las ventozas dels joves e de grosses corssas.	And the suction cups for children and those who are weak should be different from those used for young and healthy people.
E la qualitat de pausar aquesta ventoza am foc sobre le membre es que extenda la meca am foc de lenha decentment denant una pauca candela de cera, e pausa aquela sobre le mieg de la vergua transversa en le mieg loc de la ventoza, per que le foc sia accendut enviro la partida dejos per que no sia comburit le cors del malaute.	And the quality of applying this suction cup with fire to the limb is to extend the wick of the firewood decently in front of a small candle of wax, and place that at the center of the transverse ring in the central location of the suction cup, so that the fire is lit around the part left, to prevent the patient's body from burning.
E aprop sia pausada sobre le membre del malaute, e le dit sia sobre le trauc que havem dit, entro que quan tenem las ventozas e non indigem que osten le dit e que yesca la vapor sobre aquel trauc, lahoras la ventoza sira tantost dissolvuda.	And then place your hand over the patient's thigh, and tell him about what we have said before, within which when we have our hands and do not need them to hold the aforementioned and that the vapor rises above that part, then the hand will soon be dissolved.
E prop igneys la meca segon la sua manieyra, e itera aquela si indigeyssas de aquela.	And then apply the fire according to its manner, and repeat that if you need that.
Mays en ventosa que es aministrada en la malautia de plauressi, am aygua, en la qual no ha vergua transversa ni trauc, e no es aministrada sino que sia umplida de aygua, e es pausada sobre le membre tant solament.	More in the case of the ventosa applied in the disease of pleurisy, then apply water, in which there is no transverse or vein, and it is not applied unless it is filled with water, and is placed over the part only for so long.
E aquesta es la forma de lu: E aquesta ventoza quant plus es gran, tant es milhor, per que puya recebre gran quantitat de aygua.	And this is the form of it: And this ventosa the larger it is, the better, so that it can receive a great quantity of water.
Capitol .xcvii.	Capitol .xcvii.
Sanguissuguas no so administradas en motz membres sino en les membres en les quals non es possible posicio de ventosas, per la parvitat de aquels, ayssi cum le pot e gingiva e semblantz a lor; o en membre denudat de carn, ayssi cum le dit e·l nas e lors semblantz.	Sanguissuguas are not applied to large members but only to those members where the position of the ventosas is impossible due to their small size, such as the lips and similar parts; or to a member devoid of flesh, such as the nose and similar areas.
E la qualitat de usar de aquelas que si has trobadas sanguisugas que so en las ayguas dossas de poyredura mundas.	And the quality of using those that you have found leeches in the clean waters of putrefaction.
E aprop sian layssadas le dia e la nueyt en aygua dossa entro que sian famolentas, e que no romangua alcuna causa en le ventre de aquelas; e aprop sia evacuat le cors en le comensament am fleubotomia e am ventozas; e aprop fregua le membre del malaute entro que s’enrojezesca; e aprop sian pausadas sobre lu.	And soon let them lie in clean water for a day and a night until they become softened, and let no cause of inflammation arise in those; and soon evacuate the body at the beginning with bloodletting and with purges; and soon foment the limb of the patient when it becomes red; and soon place them over it.
E cum son umplidas e caso.	And when they are filled and swollen.
E si es possible succio del loc am ventoza, es mays derier en juvament.	And if possible, draw from the place with purgatives, it is more effective for recovery.
E sino, lahoras lava le loc am vi agre e aprop am mota aygua; e sia freguat e expremut.	And if not, then wash the place with water mixed with wine and subsequently with warm water; and foment it and express it.
E si es prolonguat le cors del sanc aprop le cazement de las sanguissuguas, e es aquo resudan, lahoras tu enfon un drap de li en aygua freja, e pausa aquel de sobre entro que sia abdida la resudacio.	And if the bleeding of the body is prolonged at the place where the leeches are attached, and if they continue to bleed, then you insert a cloth in cold water, and place it there until the bleeding stops.
E si le sanc es multiplicat, lahoras polveriza sobre lu vitriol trissat, o guallas e semblantz a lor de las causas stipticas, entro que·l sanc sia abscidit; o sian pausadas sobre le loc las maytatz de favas excocicadas, e sian layssadas entro que las favas aderescan al loc, e es le sanc abscidit.	And if the bleeding is increased, then powder vitriol trissat or small pieces resembling the causes of haemostasis over it; or place warm bean poultices on the area and let them remain until the beans adhere to the place, and the bleeding has been stopped.
E cove, si es necessaria, iteracio de sanguissuguas, quan es possible mudar aquelas.	And if necessary, iteration of leeches, when possible change those.
E si las sanguissuguas son prohibidas de suspenssio, lahoras sia freguat le loc am sanc recent o fique una agulha en les locs entro que yesca sanc; e aprop sian pausadas, quar aquelas quan sento alcun sanc tantost adarysso.	And if the leeches are prohibited from use, then wash the area with fresh blood or insert a needle into the areas until blood appears; and place them there, waiting for any blood to begin.
E quan voles que cajan, polveriza sobre aquelas un pauc de aloen trissat, o sal, o cendre, e cazo tantost.	And when you want them to draw blood, powder a little aloes trissat, or salt, or ashes over them, and apply it quickly.
Ayssi comensa lo prolec de la tersa partida: de restauracio.	Thus begin the proceedings of the surgical part: of restoration.
Aquest capitol es motas veguadas necessari en la art de medicina; e es restauracio de fractura e de dislocacio accident en les osses.	This chapter is necessary observations on the art of medicine; and it pertains to the restoration of fractures and dislocations in bones.
O, filh, sapiatz que jactan se de aquest capitol les fols metges e les vulguars e aquels que degun temps no reguardero les libres dels Antics ni legiro de aquels una letra.	Oh, son, know that both the false physicians and the vulgar ones, as well as those who for some time have not read the works of the Ancients or not even a letter from their writings, boast about this chapter.
E per aquesta causa es fayt que aquesta manieyra dels scients in terra nostra es privat; e yeu no ho e obliat en aquo degun temps be de tot; e no he adhibit aquo que apres, sino per longitut de lectio dels libres dels Antics e studi sobre le entendement de aquels, entro que extrayssi la sciencia de aquels.	And for this reason, this method of the scientists in our land is kept private; and I have not forgotten it during such a long time; and I have not acquired what follows except through much reading of the works of the Ancients and study over their understanding, from which I extracted the science.
E aprop adirigui a experiment e studi en la longitut de la mieua vida.	And I have directed this experiment and study throughout the length of my life.
E yeu ja he de aquo descrit en aquest capitol tot aquo que conte la mieua sciencia e sobre le qual es passat lo mieu experiment; pus que agui abreujat aquo a vos autres e deliuregui aquo de occupacio de elonguacio; e abreujegui aquo en la fi de abreujacio; et e monstrat aquo en la fi de declaracio; e formegui en aquo motas formas dels sturmentz que so administratz en aquel, cum es fayt per addicio de declaracio, ayssi cum he fayt en dos capitols precedentz.	And I have already described in this chapter all that pertains to my science and about which I have conducted my experiment; and here I summarize this for you others and deliver this from long repetition; and I condense this at the end of the summary; and I demonstrate this at the end of the declaration; and I arrange these in forms of the instruments that are administered there, as is done by declaration, just as I have done in the two preceding chapters.
Capitol primier.	The first chapter.
Summae et collectiones ex esse fracturae ossium, ex eis quarum praemissio necessaria est, antequam incipiamus rememorationem membrorum fraftorum et diversorum si uniuscuiusque.	Sum up and collect the essentials of bone fractures, those for which a preliminary examination is necessary before we begin the recollection of fractured limbs and various injuries of each.
Cove donc que diguam en le prohemi de aquest capitol las summas del sermo; e les capitols al entendament dels quals en le comensament es forsat le artifexs e a stacio sobre la veritat de aquels; so es vos e aquels que so promptz que sapian o aprenguan aquesta art nobla autres de vos.	Therefore, let us begin this chapter with the summary of the discourse; and the chapters for the understanding of which the artisan must be positioned at the beginning on the truth of those; it is you and those who are prompt to know or learn this noble art from others.
E donc dic que quan accideys a alcu fractura o dislocacio o torcio o cazement, lahoras cove que tu te coytes al comensament am fleubotomia o aleyar aquel, o quascu ensemps, si no prohibeys alcuna causa, ayssi cum debelitat de vertut, o es aquel al qual accideys effant, o viel en decrepitat, o es temps de vehement calor, o de vehement freg.	And therefore, say that when accidents occur such as a fracture or dislocation or twist or setting, then you must turn to the beginning and perform a bloodletting or realign that, or both, if no cause prohibits it, such as a lack of virtue, or if it is in decrepitude, or at a time of intense heat or intense cold.
E aprop sia content en vianda sieua de erbas frejas e de carns de auzels e de crabotz; e prohibem carns grossas e umplir si de viandas e de tota vianda que umple las venas de sanc, entro que siras segurat de apostema caut, e si no temes efusio de materia al membre.	And moreover, let the patient eat herbs such as vetches and meats of partridges and crabs; but avoid fatty meats and those filling in general that fill the veins with sang, until you are safe from abscess caut, and if you fear effusion of matter in the limb.
E lahoras retorne le malaute al sieu regiment primier am le qual corr costuma de lu.	And then return the patient to its first proper position according to the custom of the area.
E donc cum le os trencat comensa esser restaurat, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia pascut de viandas nutritivas de nutriment mot e gros e greu en les quals sia viscositat, ayssi cum so viandas faytas de froment cueyt am aygua, e ris, e caps, e pes, e ventres de vacas, e huous, e peys fresc, e vi gros e semblants ad aquels, e am aquest regiment es fayta coagulacio de fractura pus leugierament e miels.	And so when the broken bone begins to be restored, then see that the patient is fed nutritious foods rich in both moisture and density, as those with viscosity, such as foods made from cooked wheat in water, rice, eggs, fish, cow's stomachs, nuts, fresh meat, and coarse substances similar to these, and with this regimen coagulation of the fracture is induced lightly and honey is applied.
E sapias que les osses trinquatz quan so en les homes que so en la primiera vilura e en los decrepitz, no es possible que sian continuatz e sian consolidatz segon lur natura per la exsiccacio dels membres de lor.	And know that broken bones in those who are in the prime of life and in the elderly cannot be continuously set and consolidated according to their nature due to the drying out of their limbs.
E son consolidatz e continuatz segon lor natura tot temps per la exsiccacio de aquels membres, e so continuatz e consolidatz aquels que so de lor en la fi de la lenitat, ayssi cum les osses dels petitz effantz.	And they are continuously set and consolidated according to their nature at all times due to the drying out of those limbs, and those of young animals are continuously set and consolidated when they are in the latter stages of infancy, such as the bones of young creatures.
Mays empero natura ajusta e amnecteys sobre le os trencat de tota partida alcuna causa semblant a glut en le qual es grossitut que adhereys e strenh aquel entro que so ensemps conglutinatz e liatz ensemps, entro que venen la fi de fortitut e de fermesa, ayssi cum foc al comensament, entro que denguna causa no prohibeys aquel de las suas obres.	But nature adjusts and ameliorates over the broken bone from any part, similar to glue in which thickness adheres and strengthens it. Together they conglutinate and harden together, at the end of strength and firmness, such as fire at the beginning, and no cause prevents this from its works.
E per aquesta causa es necessari que pauses las viandas del malaute, viandas en las quals so gravitat e viscozitat e grosseza, ayssi cum havem dit.	And for this reason, it is necessary to place the patient on their side, where there is gravity and viscosity, and bulk, as we have said.
Mota diversitat de fractura segon diversitat del membre.	A variety of fractures according to the diversity of the limb.
E sapias que las specias de fractura son diversas segon la diversitat dels membres, quar fractura del os de la camba es diversa de la fractura del os del cap; e la fractura del os del pietz es divers de la fractura del os del dos; e semblantment totz les autres membres son diverses entre lor.	And know that the species of fracture are diverse according to the diversity of the limbs, for a fracture of the thigh bone is different from a fracture of the skull bone; and a fracture of the foot bone is different from a fracture of the arm; and similarly all other limbs are diverse among themselves.
E yeu venc am rememoracio de tota specia de fractura, expausada en le sieu capitol distincta del autre.	And I will briefly recall all species of fracture, explained in their own chapter distinct from the others.
Mota diversitat de fractura en si meteyssa.	A variety of fractures within itself.
E son diversificadas las specias de fractura del os en lor meteyssas; quar es fayta fractura arcuada otra aquo que accidan en lu stellas; e alcunas veguadas es fayta fractura segon la longitut del os: e so las fracturas de lu satagia e astelhas e addicios procedentz e no-procedentz, ayssi cum es fayt en la pena quan es preparada a escriure, e es fractura am plagua e disrupcio en le cap, e es fractura fissura petita.	And the species of bone fracture are diverse in themselves; for some fractures occur arcuately or where they strike the stars; and sometimes fractures occur according to the length of the bone: such as the fractures of the laminae, stars, and additions both primary and secondary, as when a pen is prepared to write, or fractures by cut and disruption in the head, or small fissure fractures.
E a tota specia es engen o turment propri en restauracio de lu segon que vindra rememoracio de lu distincta en les sieus locs.	And for each case, there is an operation or torture proper in restoration of it according to the separate recall of it in its places.
Mota senhal de fractura del os.	A sign of fracture of the bone.
E per aquo es conoguda fractura del os: es tortuositat de lu, e de aquel eminencia e appericio de lu al sentiment, e so de lu quan compremes aquel am la tua ma.	And for this, the bone fracture is known: there is a deformity of it, and an elevation and prominence visible by touch, and its sensation when you press on it with your hand.
E donc quan no es en le loc tortuositat apparent ni so no es feyt deves le tieu tocament quan toques le os am agitacio e le malaute no atroba gran dolor, lahoras no es aqui fractura.	And therefore, when there is neither apparent deformity nor pain, you should touch the bone with your hand with some movement and if the patient does not find great pain, then it is not a fracture.
Habantz es possible que sia tortuositat o petita fissura, adon no cove que tu mauguas aquel am la tua ma e am compressio de tot; habantz pausa sobre lu de las medicinas de las quals ve rememoracio aprop aquel moment le qual conveneys al loc; e aprop sia streyt per strictura subtil.	It is possible that it is a deformity or small crack. Therefore, touch the area with your hand and apply compression throughout; pause over it using the medicines of which you will recall at that moment, which relate to the location; and then straighten by subtle constriction.
E sapias que·l loc quan es arcuat e no es scindit en dos o otra aquo que no accidan en lu satagie, cum es remauguda tota partida de la sua compar, lahoras cove que comenses de la tua hora a rectificacio de lu habantz que a lu accida apostema caut.	And perceive that the area when curved and does not split into two or another part as nothing happens to it in its integrity, as if all parts of its composition are inflamed, then you should begin your treatment for straightening it, having an abscess form by cautery.
E si a lu accida apostema caut, lahoras layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que cesse le apostema; e aprop engualha aquel segon quascuna manieyra que podes de levitat e de engen.	And if an abscess occurs, leave it alone for some days until the abscess ceases; then equalize it according to any method you can use for elevation and drainage.
E sapias que restauracio de lu e agulacio de lu es pus leugiera que del os en le qual accideysso sathagie.	And know that the restoration and piercing of it are lighter than the surgery where you make such incisions.
E aprop strenh aquel segon que vindra la rememoracio de lu.	And then strengthen it according to the recall of the operation that will come.
Mays si en le os so satagias, lahoras es necessaria extencio de aquest membre trencat de doas partz, si es la ma o le pe; o am la tua ma si le membre es petit; o am doas cordas o am una corda e la ma.	More if in the bone you make such incisions, then it is necessary to extend this broken member into two parts, whether it is the hand or the foot; or use your hand if the member is small; or use two strings or one string and your hand.
E sia la tua posicio am la qual pauses le membre loc engual segon la sua figura natural, mentre que las partidas so extandudas del membre trenquat, lahoras te perforsa que fassas retornar aquelas addicios am engen e segon quascuna manieyra que poyras en lor locs.	And place your hand in such a way that you level the member according to its natural shape, while the parts are extended from the broken member, then force yourself to return those joins with care and according to any method you can in their places.
E guarda te segon la tua forssa que no accida sobre le malaute per la tua operacio delor ni lesio; e perforsa te segon le tieu poder que tu appliques la un os am l’autre son companho segon lors milhors formas.	And guard yourself according to your strength so that it does not occur to the patient due to your operation any pain or injury; and force yourself according to your power to apply one bone to its companion bone according to their best forms.
E cove que en aquela hora aprofitablament tu toques am la tua ma aquel, e si vezes aqui alcuna causa diversa, rectifiqua aquel e enguala aquel per la quantitat de la tua vertut.	And ensure that at that profitable hour you touch it with your hand, and if you see any other cause different, correct it and equalize it by the quantity of your virtue.
E exquiva vehement extenssio e compressio, ayssi cum fan mots fols metges que motas veguadas fan accidir apostema caut per la sua operacio, o fan accidir contraccio en le membre ayssi cum havem vist aquo per la operacio de lor motas veguadas.	And avoid excessive extension and compression, as foolish doctors sometimes cause an abscess through their operations or cause contraction in the limb as we have seen through their operations.
E aprop annecteys, aprop equacio e decent operacio e strictura de aquel membre, e repaus e tranquilitat; amoneste le malaute sobre aquo e fay le squivar que no maugua aquel en la hora de las suas vigilias e del sieu dormir, e ves la sua revolucio e agitacio, e deves la sua egestio, e deves totz les sieus movementz am tota la sua vertut; e aguarda se que la posicio del membre sia posicio am la qual sia asegurada la dolor, la qual causa es quar quan sent en la disposicio de la posicio del membre delor o lesio; lahoras cove que permutes aquel ad autra disposicio de aquela am la qual non senta dolor; e guarda am aquo que la posicio de lu aquela sia dreyta e engual, per so que al membre non accida tortuositat quan es restaurat.	And ensure the connection, maintain equilibrium and a proper operation of that limb, and rest and tranquility; advise the patient about this and make sure they avoid it during their waking hours and while sleeping, observing their revolution and agitation, and control their digestion, all their movements with your full virtue; wait until the position of the limb is in a position where pain is assuredly relieved, which causes is when felt in the disposition of the limb's position or injury; then ensure you change it to another position where they do not feel pain; and observe that the position of the limb is straight and equal, so that when it is restored, no tortuosity occurs.
E la qualitat de la strictura del membre tranquat es aquela que yeu recomti; per que sapias que·ls membres trencatz so diversificatz en lor parvitat e en lor grandeza e en la forma de aquels.	The quality of the fracture of the affected limb is that which I recount; so that you may know that the broken limbs are diversified in their smallness and in their largeness and in the form of those.
E de aquels que son petits ayssi cum le bras e·l dit e·l focil e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras cove que la envolucio sia de drap mol subtil.	And of those that are small, like the arm and the thigh and similar to those, then know that the envelopment should be of soft fine cloth.
Mays aquels que so grosses ayssi cum la cuoyssa o la camba, cove que en aquels sia envolucio lada e dura, quar la liadura lada connecteys le membre gran e strenh aquel de tota part am strictura engual, enayssi que en lu no intre macula.	But of those that are large, like the thigh or the chest, then know that in those an envelopment firm and hard should be used, for the firm binding connects the large and strong limb from all sides at the fracture equally, ensuring that no stain enters.
E aprop comensa, aprop la tua evacuacio de equacio, pausar liament convenient ad aquo, sobre le loc de aquela fractura am tres envolucios o quatre segon que·l membre mereys; e strenh la tua ma un petit am le liament.	And then, after your initial dressing, apply three or four bandages conveniently over the site of the fracture; and strengthen your hand a little with the binding.
E aprop ve am aquel a la partida pus sobirana del loc de la fractura, e strenh mens que no foc la tua strictura am la qual has strengut le loc de la fractura.	And then place it at the uppermost part of the site of the fracture, and strengthen more so that your binding is stronger than the one you applied to the area of the fracture.
E aprop elongua te am envolucio del loc de la fractura un pauc, e mollifiqua la strictura petit a petit, entro que prenguas del loc sa una gran partida.	And then slightly extend the covering of the fracture area, and gradually soften the tension little by little, while you take from that place a large portion.
E aprop pren una autra benda e envolveys aquela autra veguada sobre le loc trenquat am envolucio, e aprop ve am las envolucios a la partida pus dejos de la fractura; e sia la tua operacio en la strictura de la envolucio e en mollificacio de aquela segon que havem dit en la envolucio primieyra desus.	And then take another bandage and wrap the other part around the injured area covered by the wrapping, and gradually bring the wrappings to the portion past the fracture; and let your operation on the tension of the wrapping and in softening that according to what we said in the first wrapping above.
E aprop pausa entre las volucios de stopa leon o drap am le qual sia engualada la tortuositat de la fractura, si en lu es tortuositat; e sino, no pauses en lu alcuna causa.	And then place the stopa cloth or bandage between the wrappings to match the tortuosity of the fracture, if there is any tortuosity; otherwise, do not pause at all.
E aprop pausa sobre lu autra benda, e aprop enguala sobre aquestas envolucios stelhas decentment faytas tantost, si en le loc no es imflacio o apostema caut, e lahoras pausa sobre lu aquo que sede le apostema aquel e que oste la imflacio; e layssa aquela per alcus jorns; e lahoras tu strenh sobre lu las stelhas.	And then place it over the other bandage, and gradually match these wrappings properly made as soon as possible, if there is no swelling or abscess in that area; otherwise, place it over what constitutes the abscess there and what causes the swelling; leave that for a few days; then strengthen the wrappings.
E sian las stelhas de la maytat de canna lada raza, e be formada saviament; o sian de fust de pi; o de ramps de palma ; e sia le ample de quascuna stelha segon aquesta forma e aquesta figura:	And let the wrappings be of linen cloth of good quality, well formed; or of bark of pine; or of palm ribs; and let the width of each wrapping be according to this form and this figure:
Empero cove que la astelha que es pausada sobre aquela fractura sia pus grossa e pus lada un petit que las autras astelhas, e la longitut de la stela segon qu’es legut al membre en magnitut e parvitat; e aprop strenh sobre las astelhas am autra benda segon la tua primieyra strictura; e aprop lia desus am fiel decentment segon que havem dit de strictura, e es que sia la tua strictura segon le loc de la fractura mes, e quant mes es alonguat de la fractura, es mendre la strictura.	However, ensure that the bandage placed over that fracture is much thicker and tighter than the other bandages, and the length of the strip according to what is read about the member in size and smallness; then strengthen on the strips with another bandage according to your first constriction; then place over it decently with a piece of cloth as we said about the constriction, and that be your constriction more where the fracture is, and the more it is stretched from the fracture, the less the constriction.
E cove que les fils sian migiers en grossesa e subtilitat, e sian de li mol; e si les fils so grosses, ayssi cum yeu he vist per la operacio de alcus fols pausantz les lors fils de cordas de li tort, e es error gran, quan catz la strictura fora equalitat.	Ensure that the threads are medium in thickness and fineness, and are of fine material; if the threads are thick, as I have seen in some operations where they used the threads of ropes for binding, it is a great mistake when applying the constriction equally.
E eyssament fils subtils no so convenientz, quar tu no consaguiras per strictura am aquels aquo que voles, e no cove que entre astela e astela haja mens de un dit.	And such thin threads are not convenient, for you will not be able to apply the constriction where you want, and it must be that there is at least one finger's width between each bandage.
E si le malaute es ledit per las extremitatz de las stelas aprop la strictura en les locs sas, lahoras pausa dejos aquelas de stopa leon o lana carmenada entro que aquo no li fassa lesio.	And if the patient is led by the ends of the strips near the constriction in the area, then place there some strips of linen or carded wool between them so that it does not cause injury.
Alcunas veguadas fractura es am plagua, e accideys disrupcio en la codena, e yeu vindre am rememoracio en aquela en le capitol segon singularitat.	Sometimes a fracture is caused by a blow, and there occurs disruption in the chain, and I will recall this in the Capitol according to its singularity.
E sapias que ges tot membre trencat no es streyt am stelhas al primier dia; la qual causa es quar le membre, quan es gran, no cove que pauses sobre lu stelhas sino aprop v dias o vii o mays, segon la tua seguratat de adveniment de apostema caut.	And know that for any member broken, it is not straightened with staples on the first day; for this cause, when the member, if large, cannot be held still by staples, it should be allowed to rest without being moved for about 5 to 7 days or more, according to your safety regarding the onset of an abscess.
E aquesta es la manieyra dels emplaustres am les quals les Antics restauravan, les quals so pausatz sobre fractura e dislocacio e torcio.	And this is the method of plasters that the Ancients used to apply, which are applied over fractures, dislocations, and twists.
Manieyra de emplaustra comu abruejat de restaurament de fractura, convenient a motas compleccios e majorment a las femnas e als efantz, quar es de aquo sobre le qual no ventz calor ni freg: e es que prenguas de polvera de moli, e es la medula de la farina que pen deves le movement de la mola en las paretz del moli.	Method of plastering for the reduction of fractures, suitable for complex cases and especially for women and children, which is applied to that on which no heat or cold is used: and you should take powder of meal, which is the marrow of the flour that hangs from the movement of the mill in its walls.
E comfeys aquel ayssi cum es, sino que cribelles aquel am album de huou, e pausa la comfeccio de lu no-spessa ni subtil; e aprop usa de aquela.	And prepare it thus, but sift it with flour of wheat, and do not make the preparation too thick or too fine; and use this.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre restaurant fractura e dislocacio e torcio: recipe de assafetida, de lapdanum, de acacia, de enula, e migrach, que es razit de milgraner salvage, de totz ana drac. x; de mirra e aloen ana drac. v; alochil ana drac. xx; totz sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian mesclatz am aygua alichil o am album de huou si la compleccio del malaute es scalfada; e aprop usa de aquest emplaustre, quar es de bona composicio e restaura les osses trencatz leugierament, e confereys a motz homes.	Another method of plastering for the restoration of fractures, dislocations, and sprains: take asafetida, lapdanum, acacia, enula, and migrach, which is extracted from wild millet grass, all in drachms 20. Take myrrh and aloes in drachms 5; alcohol in drachms 20. All are to be crushed and sieved, then mixed with alcohol water or with egg white if the patient's skin is sensitive; and use this plaster, which is of good composition, for lightly broken bones, and apply it to strong men.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre le qual comfereys a fractura e torcio: recipe migrach e met de altea blanca ana drac. x; de mirra e de aloen ana drac v; de acacia drac. vi; de bol armenic drac. .xx.	Another method of plaster for fractures and sprains: take migrach and 20 drachms of white mallows; 5 drachms of myrrh; 6 drachms of acacia; 20 drachms of armoric balsam.
Totz sian trissatz en mortier am mota contricio, e sian cribellatz, e sian comfitz am aygua o am album de huou e sia administrat.	All are to be crushed in a mortar with contricio, then sieved, and compounded with water or egg white and administered.
Manieyra de emplaustre a juncturas e osses separatz de lors locs, e seda dolor accident en aquels e a fissuras e fractaduras: sia presa lana sutza e sia submersa en vi agre e oli cuyt e sia pausat sobre le loc.	Method of plastering for joints and bones separated from their places, and for accidental pain in those areas and for fissures and fractures: take virgin wool and immerse it in acidic wine and boiled oil, then place it over the area.
Mays en aquest emplastre no es vertut de restauracio, de apostema caut e expelleys dolors propriament.	More in this plaster there is no virtue of restoration, of abscess cautery and expel pains properly.
Autra manieyra de emplastre que restaura os trancat: pren fuelas de figuier sort e fuelas de papaver salvatge; contereys tot e fay emplastre de lor.	Another way of plaster that restores blocked passages: take leaves of fig tree and leaves of wild poppy; mix them together and make a plaster of them.
Manieyra de emplastre abreujat aministrat deves la restauracio de fractura de os e quan tu voles resolucio del romanent de apostema: recipe razitz de altea, de camamilla e flors de violes, de farina de ers, de totz ana partida i; sian totz trissatz e sian cofitz am vi, si·l membre no es scalfat.	Method of a shortened plaster to administer for the restoration of bone fracture and when you want resolution of abscess: take root of algae, chamomile flowers, violet flowers, flour of rush, all in equal parts; mix them together with wine, if the limb is not inflamed.
Mays si es scalfat, lahoras comfeys aquel am aygua de coliandre humit o am aygua e usa de lu.	More if it is inflamed, then moisten that with water of fennel or with water and use it.
Autra manieyra de emplastra pus fort en resolucio que aquest primier, quan accideys apostema dur deves la restauracio del membre: recipe de razitz de altea e de semensa de li, e de balaustia, e mellilot, majorana, flors de viol, de camamilla, de totz ana partida i engual; totz sian trissatz e sian cofitz am aygua de sauze o am aygua dousa o am vi, tot aquo segon la qualitat del membre e le repaus de la color de lu.	Another stronger method of plaster for resolution than the first, when you encounter an abscess that resists, for restoring the limb: take root of algae, seed of flax, safflower, sweet clover, marjoram, violet flowers, chamomile flowers, all in equal parts and equal; mix them all with water of oak bark or with water mixed [with] vinegar or with wine, according to the quality of the limb and the color of it.
Mays Ypocras no diyssec en le sieu libre que sia pausat sobre le membre trenquat deves la restauracio de lu sino cerot fayt de cera e de oli e no autre causa; e recomtec que sia migier entre grossitut e subtilitat.	May Hippocrates not say in his book that it should be placed over the member soaked with salt the restoration of it but a cauterization made of wax and oil and no other cause; and he recommends that it be mixed between coarseness and subtlety.
Mays a Gualia es vist que sian pausatz sobre le membre trencat deves la restauracio de lu e las causas en las quals es exsiccacio am petit de caliditat so ayssi cum mirra, enses e semblantz a lor de aquelas causas que havem recomtadas.	May Galen, however, be seen as saying that it should be placed over the broken member the restoration of it and the causes in which there is drying of little quality so like myrrh, resin, and similar to those causes that we have recommended.
Manieyra de emplastre que comfereys a lesio e dolor: recipe migat, de cezes, de pels de home inscizes o pena de auzel, e de altea, e sal, partidas enguals; sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian cofitz, e sia fayt emplastre.	Method of plaster that comforts injury and pain: mix equal parts of cypress, of skin from a flayed man or an otter's pelt, and of honey, and salt; crush them, sift them, knead them, and make the plaster.
Mays la quantitat segon la qual cove que romangua la liadura e aprop sia disliada, es que consideres si no es accidit dolor ni pruziment ni le os es trencat no es maugut de son loc, lahoras tu no deslies de motz jorns.	May the quantity with which you should grind the ointment and then dissolve it be such that if no pain has occurred nor swelling, and the bone is not broken, do not disperse it for many days.
E si accideys al loc dolor vehement o prusiment o imflacio, lahoras tu te coyte o deslie aquel en la hora, e osta le emplastre de lu.	And if pain occurs violently or suddenly or inflammation happens in the area, then you should remove it at once and apply a poultice to it.
E pren drap de li e spongia marina leon humida, e submergeys aquela en aygua tebeza, e am aquela lava le loc entro que cesse aquel pruziment e la dolor sia sedada; e aprop layssa repausar le membre per una hora; e aprop pausa sobre lu lana sutza submersa en vi agre e oli o oli rozat, e lia sobre lu per una nuoyt entro que sias segur de apostema caut, e que repause la imflacio del membre, e sia remauguda la dolor de lu.	And take a cloth and a sponge of seawater, soak that in brine, and apply it to the area until the pain subsides; then place the limb at rest for an hour; afterwards, cover it with wool soaked in vinegar or olive oil rubbed on it, and keep it on overnight until you are sure there is no abscess, and let the inflammation of the limb subside, and alleviate the pain.
E aprop itera aquela strictura subtil e emplastre petit e no·l strenhas per la tua constriccio primieyra, e subtilia am aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then apply that fine poultice lightly without straining your original bandage, and keep it subtle until the area is healed.
E si vezes que le apostema e la rogor e la dolor e la imflacio e tots les accidentz ja so remaugutz de tot, e indigeysses de emplastre e de strictura, lahoras tu itera aquel ayssi cum has fayt al comensant engualment.	And if you see that the abscess, the redness, the pain, the inflammation, and all other accidents have been alleviated as much as possible, and no further poultice or bandaging is needed, then continue to apply it in the same way as at the beginning.
E si no accideys al membre alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no deslies aquel sino aprop tres dias o quatre o v o vii; e alcunas veguadas tot aquo es layssat per xx dias segon que a tu appar per la desliadura del membre, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que la fractura adhereys, e se acosta a la coagulacio de la carn sobre aquel.	And if no cause occurs to the member of those we have said, then remove it after approximately three days or four or five or seven; sometimes all this is left for twenty days according to how you see by the sliding of the member, as we have said, until the fracture adheres and becomes attached to the coagulation of the flesh upon it.
E lahoras ajusta en la strictura mays que en la tua strictura primieyra tota, e ayusta en la engrossacio de la vianda del malaute, segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu.	And then adjust the tighter constraint more than in your first constraint, and adjust to the swelling of the food pipe, according to whether the memory of it precedes.
Mays si tu vezes le loc de la fractura ja desiccar e extenuar mays que no cove, lahoras sapias que·l nutriment es prohibit pervenir ad aquel; e donc embroca aquel am aygua tebeza deves tota veguada que delias aquel; e sia aquo en totz tres dias; e alleuja la strictura un petit, e per aquesta operacio corr al membre le nutriment, e es sanat leugierament.	If you see that the place of the fracture is already drying and weakening more than it should, then perceive that nutrition is forbidden to reach there; therefore, moisten that area with water from a sponge all day long that you applied there; do this for three days; loosen the constraint a little, and by this operation supply the member with nutrition, and it will be healed slightly.
Mays aquo que fan les fols restauradors de la fractura del membre autra veguada quan no es restaurat al comensament, segon que cove, e es restaurat segon tortuositat, es error segon la operacio de lor, e temor gran, e si fos dreyturier aquo agrandit les Antics en lors libres e agueran am aquo obrat.	But what the scribes of fractures do another day when the member is not restored to its beginning, according to what it should be, and is restored according to tortuosity, is an error in their operation, and a great fear; if they were right about this enlarging the Ancients in their books and warned about this work.
E yeu no he vist ad alcu de lor aquo far, per que es pus razonable que aquo no fassa.	And I have never seen any of them do so, which makes it even more reasonable that this should not be done.
Capitol segon: De fractura quan accideys en le cap.	Chapter Two: Of Fractures When They Occur in the Head.
Las specias de fracturas son motas, e las figuras de lor son diversas, e las causas son distinctas, quar de fracturas alcuna es fayta per percussio de spaza, e la percussio osta tot le os entro al ciphac, le qual es dejos le os, ayssi cum fay ayssa en le fust, e per aquo aquesta specia es nompnada ascial; o la spaza inscideys alcuna partida del os, e inscideys la carn de lu e no passa la inscizio entro al derier de lu; e aquesta specia de fractura es nompnada levatio absoluta.	The types of fractures are cracks, and their figures are diverse, and the causes are distinct. For some fractures, they are caused by the impact of a blow, where the impact breaks the bone completely through the cartilage, leaving the bone as if cut in wood; thus, this type of fracture is called atransverse. Or the blow affects some part of the bone, cutting the flesh but not passing the incision into the marrow; this type of fracture is called an absolute elevation.
E la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca, e de fractura que es contricio o atricio; e causa de lu es percussio am poyra o cazement sobre peyra, e a lor semblantz.	And the swelling of these two types of fractures can be great or small, and the frictional fracture is caused by impact on stone or pavement, resembling them in appearance.
E aquesta fractura o es penetrant que ja apropinqua al pannicol le qual es dejos le os; o es en la facia del os, e la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca.	And this fracture can be penetrating, coming close to the periosteum which covers the bone; or it is in the face of the bone, and the swelling of these two fractures can be great or small.
E de fractura es que es ameguada en le os, en la subtilitat del cabel petita, e per aquo es nompnada aquesta specia fractura capillar.	And this fracture is made in the bone, in the subtlety of the small hair, and for this it is named this kind of fracture called capillary.
E es fractura que es fayta o per cazement o per percussio de peyra e a lu semblantz, que fa intrar alcuna lamina del os a las partidas dedintz, e es fayta en le loc concavitat ayssi cum accideys als payroles de eram quan accideys a lor percussio e es partida de lor intrada a las partidas dedintz.	And this fracture is caused by compression or percussion of a stone, which causes some lamina of the bone to enter the internal parts, and it occurs in the concave location as happens with iron payroles when they are struck, and the part of their entry into the internal parts.
E majorment es fayt aquo en les cors de osses humitz, ayssi cum so caps de efantz.	And this is mostly caused in the bodies of humid bones, such as those of infants.
E so a totas aquestas specias fracturas satagias, so son pessas ayssi cum stelhas separadas.	And all these kinds of fractures are serious, like separate wounds.
E yeu vindre am reremoracio de tot aquo en son loc.	And I will add a reminder of all this in its place.
E conoyssem totas aquestas specias de fractura per deteccio sobre aquelas e per inquisicio de lor am tentas e ostament de carn corrumpuda que es sobre lor.	And we know all these kinds of fractures through detection by their marks and through inquiry about the broken flesh that is upon them.
E specia capillar es conoguda per aysso que es descubert sobre le os, e es abstergit, e linit sobre lu am tentha, quar la fractura appar negra.	And the capillary fracture is known because it is discovered on the bone, scraped off, and limits around it, for the fracture appears black.
Mays en la curacio de fractura considera al comensament les accidentz del malaute, e lahoras si tu vezes per los accidentz que signifique per significacio manifesta sobre paor, ayssi cum es vomit de colera, e extencio, e perdement de entendament, e abscizio de votz, e sincopi, e febre acuta, e eyssiment dels huels e rogor de aquels, e semblantz a lor dels accidentz en las majors disposicios, ses dopte no es sanat.	In the treatment of fracture consider at the beginning the accidents of the patient, and when you see by the accidents that it signifies manifestly by signification fear, thus as is vomiting of bile, extension, loss of understanding, absence of voice, syncope, acute fever, swelling of the eyes and redness of those, and likenesses to them of the accidents in the greater disposals, then doubt not that it is serious.
E si vezes accidentz no-correntz tu speras salut, lahoras tu comensa la curacio de lu.	And if you see uncommon accidents, you hope for health, and then you begin the treatment of it.
La qual causa es quar si es vengut a tu le plaguat en le comensament cum es plaguat e aquo es en les dias de ivern, lahoras cove que tu studias en le ostament del os denant le dia xiiii segon tota disposicio.	The cause is that if the patient has come to you in the beginning of the injury and is injured, and this occurs during the days of winter, then consider that you study in the bone's membrane the day XIV according to all disposition.
E si es en les dias d’estiu, lahoras cove que te coytes ostar le os denant le vii dia, habantz que aquo que es dejos le os sia corromput del pannicol, e que accidescan les accidentz que havem recomtatz.	And if it is during the days of summer, then consider that you cut the bone on the seventh day, having to know that what remains of the bone is corrupted by the fatty tissue, and that uncommon accidents may occur.
E si la fractura ja es pervenguda al pannicol cubrent le cervel, e es am partidas menudas e atricio, lahoras cove que inscidas la partida conminuta e atrita, segon que yeu recomtare a tu.	And if the fracture has already reached the fatty tissue covering the brain, and is broken into many pieces and is irritated, then consider that you incise the broken part and irritate it, according to what I will recount to you.
E es que tu razas le cap del malaute plaguat, e descuebres sobre le os segon costuma e manieyra a tu possible segon la figura de la plagua, e que sia leugier sobre le malaute.	And you should raise the head of the patient, and uncover the area over the bone according to custom and your method as is possible according to the shape of the wound, and let it be light on the patient.
E si accideys a tu deves la deteccio del os, fluxs de sanc o apostema caut, lahora tu te oppausa a lu am aquo que cove, e es que huemplas le loc de draps infuzes en vi e oli rozat, e fassa repausar la plagua entro que sia sedat le apostema, e sies segur de fluxs del sanc; e aprop comensa en la circuicio del os e en la ablatio de lu.	And if it happens to you to detect the bone, flows of pus or abscess, then you should apply something that fits, and it is that you fill the area with infused cloths in wine and rubbed oil, and let the wound rest until the abscess is relieved; and when you are sure of the flow of pus; then gradually start at the circumference of the bone and around it.
E aquo sia segon una de dos manieyras de operacio.	And this should be done according to one of two methods of operation.
E la una manieyra es que tu inscidas le os am inscisori de streyt tal, e aquesta es la forma de lu: E aprop administra un autre inscissori aquest, un pauc pus lat que aquel; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And one method is that you incise the bone with an incisor straight such, and this is its form: Then administer another incisor slightly to the side of the first; and this is its form:
E aprop administra mays le inscissori pus lat que·l segon.	And then use the incisor slightly more to the side of the second.
E cove que sia deves tu nombre de inscissoris diverses, dels quals alcus so pus latz que alcus autres; e alcus de lor so pus breus que·ls autres e sian en le derier de acuitat de las suas extremitatz, e sian de ferr indi o felod.	And carve out that you are named incisore various, of which some are longer than others; and some of them are shorter than the others and be in the rear part of the sharpness of their extremities, and be of iron or steel.
E usa de lor am facilitat en percussio sobre le inscissori per so que no concutesca le cap e leda aquel.	And use them with ease in percussion on the incisores so that it does not strike the head and lead that.
E si le os es fort, dur, lahoras cove que perfores en le circuit de lu denant que tu administres los inscissoris am les taravels, les quals so nomnatz taravels no-profundantz.	And if the bone is strong and hard, then you should perforate in the circumference of it before you use the incisores with the tremors, which you name shallow perforations.
E no so nomnatz ayssi sino quar aquels no pausan le terme de l’os del test ad aquo que es aprop lu, per so quar al taravel es redonda extremitat o marge sobre aquel que es dejos le cap de lu agut semblant a marge o a cercle petit, le qual prohibeys esser submergit e passar la spissitut del os.	And they are not named so, but rather those that do not reach the end of the bone's depth to what is close to it, so that the tremor has a round extremity or edge over that which leaves the head of the perforation sharp, resembling a small margin or circle, which you prohibit from being submerged and passing the thickness of the bone.
E es convenient que tu prenguas de aquestz taravels gran nombre dels quals quascu convenesca a la spicitut de quascun os, entro que sia a tu present en tottz testz del cervel la extremitat del qual sia aguda, la quantitat en longitut e brevitat sia segon la quantitat de spicitut de aquest test.	And it is convenient that you use a great number of these tremors, each of which suits the thickness of each bone, within which let the extremity of all be sharp, the quantity in length and shortness be according to the quantity of thickness of this bone.
E aquesta es la forma de tres specias de teravels: La qualitat de perforar en le circuit del os trencat es que pauses le teravel sobre le os e revolvas aquel am les tieus ditz entro que sapias que l’os ja es penetrat; e aprop permuda le terevel ad autre loc, e pausa aquo que es entre tot trauc la quantitat de la grosseza del ray o enviro aquo.	This is the form of three species of trephinations: The quality of perforating in the circuit of the broken bone is to place the trephine on the bone and rotate it with your hand in the hole called entro until you know that the bone has already been penetrated; then remove the trephine to another location, and pause where it goes through the entire thickness equaling the size of the ray or around it.
E aprop inscideys am inscissoris aquo que es entre quascun trauc del os, e fay aquel pus subtil que podes sobre aquo en fi de levitat, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que erradiques le os, o am la tua ma, o am alcuna autra causa per alcus sturmentz les quals auras apparelhatz ad aquo, ayssi cum tanalhas e forceps subtils.	And then incise with the scalpel where you go through each part of the bone, and make that fine pus above it on the surface of levity, as we have said, until you remove the bone, or with your hand, or for some other cause by certain instruments which you will apply to it, such as forceps and thin tongs.
E cove que tu guardes am tota cautela que l’inscissori no toque alcuna causa del ciphac.	And make sure that the scalpel does not touch any part of the cavity.
E donc cum auras circuit le os perforan, e sira separat del ciphac si es continuat am lu, e auras aquel extrayt, cove que razas e enguales aquel en la asperitat de lu de aquo que es en le os am autra sturment semblant a inscissori, mays empero cove que sia pus teon e pus subtil que les autres inscissoris.	And therefore, after perforating the bone and separating it from the cavity if it continues with it, you will extract that part. Make sure to rasp and smooth it out on the roughness of the bone using another instrument similar to the scalpel, but ensure it is finer and thinner than other scalpels.
E si roman alcuna partida dels osses petitz e satagias, lahoras pren aquela am facilitat am aquo que es deves tu dels sturmentz; e aprop aquo cura la plagua am lichinis e enguentz les quals havem ditz.	And if there is any small part of the bones fractured and set, then take that easy way with what you should do of the instruments; and next cure the wound with linens and ointments which we have said.
E l’autra manieyra de operacio es leugiera, longinqua de paor, la qual diyssec Gualia e la lauzec per gran lausor; e aquest es le sermo de lu: necessari es a tu en le comensament que comenses descobrir la partida del os del loc en le qual es la fractura pus vehement e pus manifesta, entro que quan auras descubert aquela partida e auras pausat dejos lu la extremitat de aquest inscissori lent e alegre del qual aquesta es la forma:	And the other method of operation is lighter, far from fear, which Gualia described and incised with great skill; this is the way he said: At the beginning, you must necessarily start by uncovering the part of the bone where the fracture is most severe and most evident. When you have uncovered that part and placed your hand on the extremity of this slow and cheerful scalpel, which has this form:
E es que la partida lenticular es leon e no inscideys alcuna causa, e la partida aguda es de lu en dos latz avantz en longitut, ayssi cum vezes; que la partida lenticular sia ajustada al ciphac am la facia de lu inscident aguda en le os.	And it is that the lens-shaped part is bone and you must not incise for any cause, while the acute part divides into two halves lengthwise, as you see; so that the lens-shaped part is placed against the handle of the incising blade, which meets the acute edge on the bone.
E aprop percuteys sobre le inscissori de una partida am un petit malhet entro que inscidas tot le os am facilitat ayssi cum es revolvut, e tu sias segur del pannicol que no accida en lu accident que temas en denguna manieyra, e si le medicant14 era le pus fol de totz les homes e le mays ignorant de lor; certament, e si era dorment.	And then strike on the blade at one small spot where you will incise the entire bone easily as it is turned, and you must be sure of the ligament that it does not accidentally interfere with the accident you fear in any way, and if the doctor was the worst fool of all men and the most ignorant of them; certainly, even if he were asleep.
Lahoras si romania alcuna causa annexa al os del pannicol en alcus locs de os, inscidira aquel de lu am la extremitat del inscissori aquel lenticular, e deliuraria aquel de lu am facilitat, quar es deliurat de lu ses nocument e ses paor.	When some cause affects any part of the bone in certain parts of the body, it will incise that one at the extremity of the incised lenticular one, and release that one with ease, for it is relieved from its damage and fear.
E si fractura del os no penetra entro al pannicol, e aquo que es abscidit o es ostat del os es la facia de lu, e roman en lu asperitat e satagias subtils, lahoras cove que razas aquela asperitat e erradiques aquelas satagias am razoris subtils per les quals tu has preparat le nombre, de diversas quantitatz per que sia a tu possible administrar de aquels en tot loc les pus convenientz de lor e le pus dreyt de aquels segon aquo en que te perduzeys la tua operacio aquel os trencat e la figura de lu.	And if the bone fracture does not penetrate into the muscle, and what is excised or remains of the bone is its surface, and it remains in it roughness and fine sutures, then you must scrape that roughness away and eradicate those fine sutures with sharp instruments prepared by you in various quantities so that you can administer from them the most convenient parts of them and the right part according to where you have directed your operation on that broken bone and its figure.
E cove que administres en la tua razio am la qual razes le os al comensament le pus lat de aquels razoris, e aprop usa aprop lu del pus subtil de lu, e no cesses far aquo segon continuitat entro que pervenguas ad aministrar le pus teon e·l pus subtil de totz aquels.	And you must administer according to your proportion with which you scrape the bone at its beginning using the broader part of those razors, and then use the finer part thereof, and do not cease doing this continuously until you reach administering the thicker and finer part of all.
Mays en quascuna de las autras fracturas petitas capillars e fractura subtil, cove que administres cura segon aquo que perduseys ad rectificacio de lu.	For in any other fine or subtle fractures, you must administer care according to where you have directed for the correction of it.
E es causa que no es ameguada sobre totz les quals han studi en aquela art.	And it is because they are not accustomed to all those who have studied that art.
E stec sobre aquo que nos scriut havem mostrat en grans fracturas.	And place us on what they write, as we have shown in great fractures.
E si le pannicol es retangut quan tu erradiques le os, lahoras cove que prenguas drap de li segon la quantitat de la plagua, e submergeys aquel en oli rozat, e pausa aquel sobre le orrifici de la plagua; e aprop pren autre drap doblat o triplicat e submergeys lu en vi e oli rozat e pausa aquel sobre drap prim e fay aquo al pus leugierament que podes sobre aquel, que no graves le ciphac; e aprop administra sobre aquel liament lat, e no strenhas aquel sino per quantitat que tengua la plagua tant solament.	And if the bandage is cut when you remove the bone, then take cloth according to the size of the wound, and submerge it in olive oil, and place it over the wound opening; then take another piece of cloth folded or tripled, submerge it in wine and olive oil, and place it over the first one, doing this lightly enough that you do not weigh down the dressing; then apply lint over it, and do not press it more than the size of the wound requires.
E layssa aquel am aquesta cura per un dia o per dos entro que sias segur de apostema caut; e aprop deslia aquel e aprop aministra medicinas am las quals es superflua siccitat, ayssi cum razitz de lin e farina de errs, e polvera de enses e de aristologia, e de semblantz ad aquels.	And leave it to this treatment for one day or two until you are sure of the abscess; then remove it and apply medicines that need superfluous dryness, such as linseed and wheat flour, and powder of thyme and of aristolochia, and similar to those.
E es que tu fassas de aquestas medicinas polvera que sia pulverizada sobre la plagua, ayssi cum son secas; e universalment, administra en aquel tota medicina de proprietat de la qual es que abstergesca e no mordique.	And you make these medicines into a powder that is sifted over the wound, such as being dry; generally, apply all medicine of a nature that cleans and does not irritate.
E guarda te segon la tua vertut que la plagua en la tua curacio sia neta; e no sia en lu surdicia de enguent ni autra; ni no layssas agreguar virulencia en lu; quar quan es ajustada sobre le pannicol del cervel, corromp aquel e poyreys aquel, e accideys sobre le malaute aprop aquo malicia maligna.	And guard that in your treatment the wound in your cure be clean; and do not let it have deafness of ointment or another; nor leave to add virulence in it; for when adjusted over the cotton padding of the brain, corrupt that and spoil that, and occur on the patient near this malicious evil.
E accideys en le ciphac del cap, cum de lu es mondificat le os e majorment quan es menspresada la cura de lu, e es negror en la superficia de lu; e donc considera lahoras si accideys al malaute les accidentz que havem ditz, sapias que es parnicios ses tot dopte.	And it happens in the skull of the head, as from it is changed the bone and most especially when the cure of it is neglected, and darkness in the surface of it; and therefore consider when it happens to the patient the accidents that we have said, know that it is perilous for him.
E si no accideys negror sino de la medicina que es pausada desus, e es en vertut de aquela medicina que fassa aquela negror, lahoras cove que tu prenguas de mel una partida e de oli rozat partidas iii, e am aquels linieys un drap, e aprop pausa aquel sobre le ciphac; e aprop cura aquel am las specias de curacio que conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if no darkness accideth but from the medicine that is applied above, and is in virtue of that medicine which maketh that darkness, then take that thou mixest a part of honey with three parts of rubbed oil, and line those with a cloth, and place it over the skull; and cure it with the spices of cure that thou deemest fitting until it be healed.
Capitol .iii.	Third.
De restauracio del nas quan es trincat.	Of restoring the nose when it is broken.
Sapias que no es trencat del nas sino doas partidas ensemps pus sobiranas, o una de aquelas alcunas veguadas, per so quar en lu has dos osses, quar la partida dejos es cartillaginosa, e no es trencada e no accideys a lu sino atricio e tortuositat e sinuitat.	Know that it is not the nose itself that is broken, but two parts together or one of those few fractures, for in the nose there are two bones; the part you have is cartilaginous and not broken, so do not damage it but rub and apply friction.
Mays si es trencada la una de las doas partidas de lu, lahoras cove que tu intrometas le dit petit en le sieu nas, e que engualhas aquela fractura dedintz am le tieu dit indic, e am le dit pous defora, entro que retorne le nas segon la sua figura natural.	But if one of the two parts is broken, you must introduce the little finger into the nostril and equalize the fracture inside according to your previous indication, and outside with your other hand, so that the nose returns to its natural figure.
E sia fayt aquo per tu am facilitat, e guarda te que no caja per aquela tua operacio sobre le malaute delor.	And do this for you with ease, and watch that it does not swell as a result of your operation on the patient in pain.
E si la fractura es en la pus sobirana partida del nas, e le dit no perve ad aquela, lahoras cove que sia equat am la extremitat del ray en le qual sia petita grossitut.	And if the fracture is in the cartilaginous part of the nose, and your finger does not reach it, then you must equalize it at the end of the rib where there is a slight swelling.
E si la fractura es en doas partidas, lahoras tu fay le semblant de aquo.	And if the fracture is in two parts, then you make it appear as such.
E coyta te am restauracio de lu en le primier dia de la fractura, si es possible; e sino, lahoras aprop le vii o·l x deves le repaus del apostema caut.	And by cot tea you have restoration of it on the first day of the fracture, if possible; otherwise, shortly after the seventh or eighth day, you should apply the rest from the apostema caut.
E aprop entromet en la extremitat del nas una meca de drap de li, si la fractura es en una partida, o metz doas calguas, si la fractura es en doas partidas, e sia en la calgua grossitut de tanta quantitat que umpla le trauc del nas.	And then insert into the extremity of the nose a piece of cloth, if the fracture is in one part, or two strips, if the fracture is in two parts, and let it expand so much that it fills the nose.
E diysso alcus dels antics restauradors que las calguas sian enfundudas en boder, e sian permudadas en tot dia, mays no es vist a mi; habantz cove que la meca sia enfunduda en album de huou comfit am polvera de moli; e aprop layssa la qualgua entro que l’os sia fermat e sia endurazida la cartillage.	And this is said by some of the ancient restorers that the strips be wrapped in oil, and be changed throughout the day. But I have not seen it done; instead, use a cover so that the cloth is soaked in honey wax mixed with powder of pounded drugs; and leave the strip until the bone is set and the cartilage is hardened.
E alcunas veguadas sia entromes en le nas, en loc de calgua, pena de auca pus que es envolopada de drap de li leon; e sia que ja te la fractura del nas pus vehement e que le malaute no sia prohibit de inspiracio.	And sometimes insert into the nose instead of a strip, a poultice wrapped in linen cloth; and this is for when the nasal fracture is severe enough that the patient is not prohibited from breathing.
E aquesta causa no es a tu necessaria; e si voles, fay aquo, e si voles, fay calguas.	And this cause is not necessary for you; if you wish, do this, and if you wish, use strips.
E si accideys autra veguada apostema caut, emplastra le nas am cerot o am coto enfus en vi agre e oli rozat, o am diaquilon.	And if another abscess occurs, cauterize it, apply a plaster with honey or a cloth dipped in vinegar and olive oil, or with a diaphoretic.
Mays si no accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que emplaustres aquel defora am farina de sizami e am polvera de enses cofitz am album de huou; e aprop pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e no lies le nas am alcuna causa.	And if no abscess occurs, when you need to plaster it externally, use sesame flour and powdery colocynth with honey; then place your hand on the patient's stopa (a part of the foot), and do not apply any heat to the nose for any reason.
Mays si so trencats les osses del nas am fractura petita o so conminuitz, lahoras cove que scindas sobre aquels, e extraguas aquels am insturmentz que conveno ad aquels; e aprop cos la scissura, e cura aquela am aquo que encarna e consolida, e am emplastres ad aquo convenientz.	And if the bones of the nose are broken or slightly fractured, when you need to split those bones and extract them with instruments suitable for this; then close the incision, treat that area with something that heals and consolidates, and apply plasters as appropriate.
E si accideys plagua dedintz le nas, lahoras cove que cures aquela am calguas e administra canulas de plom entro que sia de tot sanat.	And if a plague occurs inside the nose, when you need to treat that with washes and administer lead canulas until it is completely healed.
Capitol .iiii.	Chapter IV.
De restauracio de la mandibula quan es trincada.	On the restoration of the jaw when broken.
Quan la mandibula dejos es rompuda e la fractura de lu no es am plagua, reguarda lahoras si la fractura es deforas tant solament, e no es trencada en dos e es curvada a las partidas dedintz, lahoras la sua cognicio es leugiera.	When the jaw is broken and the fracture is not displaced, consider whether the fracture is only superficial and not broken into two parts but bent inward, in which case the awareness is slight.
E cove donc, si la fractura es en la part dreyta, que tu intrometas le tieu indic senestre en la boca del malaute; e semblantment si la fractura es an la mandibula senestra, lahoras intromet le dit indic de la ma dreyta; e impelleys am aquel la gilbositat de la fractura dedintz am facilitat a las partidas defora, am la tua autra ma de la partida defora del os; am aquel decentment equa aquelam.	And thus, if the fracture is on the right side, you should introduce the left index finger into the mouth of the patient; similarly, if the fracture is on the left jaw, then introduce the right index finger; and push the gelidity of the fracture inward with ease towards the parts outward, with your other hand from the part outward of the bone; do this properly to that.
E si la fractura de la mandibula ja es separada en doas, lahoras cove que administres extensio de doas partz segon rectitut entro que sia possibla la equacio de lu.	And if the fracture of the jaw is already separated into two parts, then you should administer extension to both parts according to the straight line where possible for their alignment.
E si accideys conmocio de dentz a disrupcio, lahoras strenh aquelas de las quals speras que romandran am fil de aur o de argent o de ceda; e aprop pausa sobre la mandibula trencada cerot, e aprop pausa sobre lu drap duplicat, e pausa sobre le drap gran stelha decentment fayta, o una pessa de sola engual a la longitut de la mandibula; e aprop lia aquela desus segon que a tu es apparelhada la liadura de lu e que conveneys la applicacio, entro que no es destruida.	And if there is a loss of teeth along with disruption, then strengthen those which you hope will break on the edge of gold or silver or cedar; and place your hand over the broken jaw with cautery, place it over the doubled cloth, and place it over the large star-shaped stake decently made, or a piece of wood equal in length to the jaw; and place that above according to how the ligature is applied to it and what you find convenient for its application, provided that it is not destroyed.
E comanda al malaute que use de repaus e tranquilitat, e pausa la vianda de lu sorbicios leons.	And command the patient to rest and be tranquil, and refrain from his usual services for a day.
E si extimas que ja es alterada la figura en alcuna manieyra, lahoras tu te coyta e deslia aquel al tertz dia; e aprop rectifica aquo que ja es alterat de lu e emplaustra aquel am polvera de moli, am album de huou, o am farina de cisami, pus que tu auras ostat le cerot de lu, e pausa sobre le emplastra lana leon.	And if you deem that the figure has already been altered in any way, then let it rest for the seventh day; and then correct what is already altered in it and plaster it with powder of molybdenum, or with ash of oak, or with flour of alum, after which you have applied cerote to it, and place a lion's skin over the plaster.
E adonc cum sta annex e ajustat aquel emplastre sobre lu, e la disposicio del os no es alterada, layssa aquel, que no le deslies entro que sia sanat e strenh la fractura; quar motas veguadas aquesta fractura es streyta en tres sempmanas.	And then, once the plaster is properly applied and the bone's position is not altered, leave it as it is, without removing it until the fracture is healed and strong; for this fracture will be strengthened in three weeks.
E si autra veguada accida apostema caut, lahoras administra aquo que havem dit motas veguadas en la sedacio de lu entro que sia sanat, e sia remaugut aquel apostema.	And if another time an abscess occurs, then administer what we have said previously in the treatment of it until it is healed and drained.
E si la fractura es am plagua, lahoras considera si es pessa del os separada o satagias, lahoras tu te subtilia que ostes aquelas satagias am aquo que conveneys ad aquo en la remocio de aquelas dels sturmentz.	And if the fracture is comminuted, then consider whether it is a severe separation of the bone or a compression fracture. Then you must carefully excise those compressions according to what is appropriate for their removal.
E si le orrifici de la plagua es streyt, lahoras tu le amplifique am le fleubotomi segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And if the wounds are wide, then enlarge them by means of trepanation according to the quantity of your need.
E aprop quan tu auras ostat aquelas satagias, e de aquelas no sira remaugut re, lahoras tu cos le orrifici de la plagua si es ampla; e sino, pausa sobre aquela un dels emplaustres que conveneysso ad aquo e encarnan aquela, entro que sia sanada.	And when you have completed those stages, and from there it will not be necessary to enlarge the wound, then place yourself over the wound if it is large; otherwise, cover it with one of the plasters that are suitable and apply it until it heals.
Capitol .v.	Capitol V.
De restauracio de la furcula quan es trinquada.	For the restoration of the furcula when it is dislocated.
Motas veguadas es trencada la furcula de la partida denant deves le muscle, e aquela fractura es fayta en una de tres manieyras.	When the furcula is fractured, you should break the muscle in front of it, and the fracture can occur in one of three ways.
Quar o es trencada, o seperada, o es seperada en doas partz otra que no accidan satagias; e es leugier a la restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que accideysso en lu satagias, e es dificil a restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que la fractura es am plagua.	When it is fractured, separated, or separated into two parts without going through stages, the restoration is easier; if it happens through stages, the restoration is more difficult; or when the fracture is through a wound.
E la operacio en aquela, quan la fractura es ses plagua, es que tu fassas esser present dos ministres, per so que la un tengua le adjutori e siegua la furcula trencada, e l’autre extenda le col ves aquela partida.	And the operation in this case, when the fracture is through a wound, is that you have two ministers present, so that one holds the assistant and guides the broken furcula, and the other extends the neck towards that part.
E aprop enguala la fractura am les tieus ditz entro que sia fayta la forma de lu segon que cove, e no sia en lu eminencia pauca ni concavitat.	And then equalize the fracture by placing it in the sockets according to its form, and do not place it at a low point or in a depression.
E si indigeysses mes de extencio, lahoras cove que pauses dejos le titillic del malaute spera de drap o de lana, e sia la grandesa de lu segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat; e exten e eleva la furcula e coarta la spera am la tua ma entro que enguales la frectura segon que cove.	And if you need more extension, when you place the patient's limb on a pad or wool, let its length be according to the quantity of your necessity; extend and elevate the fork and hold the pad with your hand so that you equalize the fracture according to its form.
E si no podes atirar la extremitat de la furcula a las partidas defora, per so quar es pervenguda al preon, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e pauses sobre le muscle de lu un coyssi migier en grandeza.	And if you cannot extend the extremity of the fork to the parts outward, because it is obstructed by the knee, then place the patient on their side with their neck and shoulder supported, and place a cushion half the size over the muscle.
E le ministre prema le muscle de lu a las partidas dejos entro que l’os de la furcula sia elevat que es en le preon en sus, e lahoras tu rectifique la fractura e enguala aquela am les tieus ditz.	And the surgeon presses the muscle of the limb inward until the bone of the fork is elevated to the level of the knee, and then you correct the fracture and equalize it in the sockets.
Mays si sentes satagias de la furcula e so maugudas, lahoras cove que fendes sobre aquela e extraguas aquelas satagias am facilitat.	But if you feel gaps in the fork and it is loose, then cut there and remove those gaps easily.
E si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu ingenia inscisio de lu am un dels inscissoris les quals has apparelhatz ad aquo, pus que havias pausat dejos la furcula le sturment que serve le ciphac; e es sturment de fust o de ferr del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if it is retained in the bone, then make an incision on it using one of the bistors you have prepared for this, after placing the furcula (a type of instrument) as the support for the chisel; and this tool is made of wood or iron, of which this is its form:
E es semblant a culier del qual aquesta es la concavitat; e sia la sua latitut segon aquo que has necessitat de lu, segon la grandeza del os o la pauqueza de lu.	And it is similar to a spoon of which this is the cavity; and its width according to what you have needed of it, according to the size of the bone or its smallness.
Mays la longitut de lu sia segon que es a tu possible a la operacio; que haja doas extremitatz ayssi cum vezes, e la una extremitat sia ample e l’autre streyta.	But its length should be according to what is possible in the operation; that it has two extremities thus like you see, and one extremity broad and the other narrow.
E si la disrupcio de la plagua la qual has inscidida quan has extraytas la satagia del os es ampla, e yest segur de apostema caut, lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura.	And if the disruption of the wound which you have incised when you have extracted the splinter from the bone is wide, and you are sure it has an abscess, then you adjust the two lips of the wound with a suture.
E si la disrupcio es pauca, o temes apostema caut, lahoras tu uemple la plagua am draps e pulvils segon la quantitat de la scissura de la plagua.	And if the disruption is small, or you fear an abscess, then you use the wound with bandages and powders according to the amount of the incision in the wound.
E si accideys apostema caut, lahoras infon drap en vi agre e oli rozat e vi, e pausa sobre aquel.	And if a boil occurs, then immerse a cloth in oil, rub it well, apply it, and place it over that area.
Mays la strictura del os quan es ses plagua e ses seccio, es que pauses emplastre fayt de farina de moli am album de huou, e pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e aprop pausa la spera dejos le titillic de lu, si indigeyssas de aquela, e aprop pren humemate, so es torca la qual teno les Sarrazis , que sia mot longua, e sia latitut de lu de un palm o entorn aquel; e aprop pausa pulvils duplicatz sobre la stopa e l’emplastre; e aprop pren una stela de taula subtil de la qual la latitut d’ela sia de tres ditz e en longitut semblantment; e aprop envolopa aquela en drap, e aprop envolopa aquel drap am la stela en lo loc sobre le loc de la fractura; e aprop pausa humemati ayssi cum es revout, e revol aquela sobre le col de lu e dejos le titillic de lu sa e dejos le titillic de lu malaute, e reduzeys aquela sobre tota partida, e quan vezes que la strictura de la fractura am strictura descent, e es aquo que no es occultat sobre tu.	When the bone structure is swollen and stiffened, you should apply a plaster made of flour from ground hazelnut album, place it over the lion's stop (a reference to a specific area), and then place the spatula with its tip on it. If more is needed, take a long piece of Sarrazin cloth, about one palm width or slightly less; then place powder double-folded over the plaster and the area. Next, take a thin table stick whose width is three fingers and similar in length; wrap this stick in a cloth, and then wrap the cloth around the stick at the location of the fracture. Place the humectant thus prepared, rotate it on the neck of the stick, leaving the tip and the bad part exposed, and reduce the plaster over all parts, repeating as often as necessary until the stiffness of the bone structure is well reduced, which should be clearly visible to you.
E tot, que no sia mauguda la stelha desobre le os trencat; e per so cove que tu vejas le malaute quascun dia, que quan le liament es mollificat o vezas la stela ja esser remauguda, lahoras tu rectifica aquo e strenh la liadura.	And always ensure that the stick does not touch the broken bone; thus, you can see the bad part every day. When the lint becomes softened or you see the stick already dry, then correct this and strengthen the ligature.
E aprop pausa le dormir del malaute sobre le col de lu, e pausa dejos le titillic de lu deves le dormir de lu en la nueyt un petit coyssi; per so que am aquel sia elevat le adjutori de lu del latz de aquel, e donc es elevada la la fractura de la furcula a elevacio del muscle; o sia le bras de lu liat al col de aquel.	And then place the patient's head on its pillow, and carefully support the patient's neck so that during sleep at night a small cushion is under it; thus allowing the support of the affected area by the ligament of that region to be elevated, and therefore the fracture of the furcula is raised to an elevation of the muscle; or the arm of the patient is laid on the side of that.
E no deslies le liament si no accideys en le loc prusiment o apostema, entro a xii dias.	And do not loosen the bandage unless there is an accident or abscess in the same place within twelve days.
E aprop renovelha le emplastre si has vista la facia de lu ad aquo, e ajusta en la strictura e restaura aquel e layssa entro que sia restaurat e sia coagulat la fractura de la furcula.	And then renew the plaster if you see the surface of it turn to this, and adjust it to the stricture and restore that, and let the fracture of the furcula be restored and coagulated.
E es strenguda e comfortada segon le mes en xxviii dias, e alcunas veguadas en alcus homes es fayt en mens de temps de aquel.	And it is strengthened and comforted according to the most in twenty-eight days, and in some cases it is done in less time than that.
Capitol .vi.	Capitol. VI.
De restauracio de fractura de la spalla.	On the restoration of the fracture of the shoulder.
Spatula tart es trencada en le loc lat de lu e no so trencatz de lu sino les marges.	The spoon blade is broken in the lateral part of the wound and not from the wound itself but from the margins.
E donc quan es trencat le loc de lu — e es trencat en le mieg loc de lu — e no es conogut sino per tocament, lahoras segon que es la figura de la fractura sforsa te la preparacio de lu e reduzir aquela segon la figura natural en tota manieyra de engen la qual es a tu possible.	And when the place is broken — and it is broken in the middle of the place — and is not known otherwise than by touch, then according to the figure of the fractured bone, prepare that place and reduce it according to the natural figure in every manner in which it is possible for you.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc polvera de moli am album de huou e stopa leon; e aprop pausa pulvil de drap duplicat; e aprop pausa sobre lu stela lada de taula subtil segon la quantitat de la spatula tota o mays un pauc.	And then place on the area powder of ground albino wheat and stopped hyena; and then place powdered duplicated cloth; and then place over the stick on the table a thin slice according to the quantity of the spoon entirely or a little more.
Mays si dejos la stela es concavitat en alcu dels locs de la spatula, lahoras tu enguala aquela concavitat am stopa leon, e aprop pueja la stela segon equalitat.	But if you leave the stick concave in some parts of the spoon, then level that concavity with stopped hyena, and then place the stick according to equality.
E aprop strenh desus am humemati longua ab constriccio decent e am fermesa de la stela entro que no sia remauguda del sieu loc.	And then strengthen above with compress cloth tightly and firmly place the stick so that it is not displaced from its place.
E considera le liament en quascun dia; e totas veguadas que sia mollificat, lia autra veguada e stren le e equa la stela si es remauguda del sieu loc.	And consider the dressing on each day; and all days that it is softened, dress again and strengthen and level the stick if it is displaced from its place.
E jagua le malaute sobre le sieu latz sa.	And apply the patient's knee over its own leg so.
E la spatula es restaurada en xx dias o en .xxv.	And the spatula is restored in 20 days or in 25.
E donc quan es complit aquest nombre, lahoras tu dissolveys le liament, e que tu scias ensegurat quar aquela es dels osses dels quals la cominicio no es temuda ni lor dissolucio.	And when this number is completed, then you dissolve the bond, and you know for sure that it is from which bones their beginning was neither feared nor their dissolution.
E si procezeys del loc del os pessa e pongeys dejos la codena, lahoras tu scindeys sobre lu, e osta le, e fay segon que havem dit en la fractura de la furcula de sadacio de apostema caut si accideys aqui.	And if you proceed from the place of the bone to the joint, then put a ligature there, cut over it, and hold it as we have said in the fracture of the furcula with an apostema caut, if this happens here.
Capitol .vii.	 Chapter VII.
De restauracio de la fractura del pietz.	On the restoration of the fracture of the foot.
Le pietz alcunas veguadas es romput en le mieg loc de lu e aquo tart endeve; mays las extremitatz de lu mot endeve que so ciccadas e comminuidas.	The foot sometimes breaks in the middle of its length, and this takes time to heal; more often, the ends become callused and comminuted.
E dels accidentz de lu quan es trencat le mieg de lu es que declina a las partidas dedintz e accideys a lu gran dolor, e dificultat en lo hale, e tos, e fort leu e vomeys sanc; e es declarada en lu cavitat en le os trencat e no es occulta al sentiment.	And the complications when the foot breaks in its middle are that it inclines towards the inner parts and causes great pain, difficulty in walking, coughing, swelling, and fever. These are evident within the cavity of the broken bone and cannot be hidden from sensation.
E la restauracio de lu es que sia resupinat le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa entre las spallas de lu un coyssi; e aprop prem als muscles de lu, e ajusta las costas de lu am las mas de dos costatz, e subtilia te en la operacio de lu e en la equacio segon tota manieyra que es ad aquo possibla e que conveneys ad aquo, entro que retorne la figura del os segon que cove.	And the restoration is that they are supine on their back, and a cushion is placed between their shoulders; then press on their muscles, adjust their spine against the bones of both sides, and with subtlety in the operation and equilibrium in every manner possible and convenient, until the figure of the bone returns as it should.
E aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e estopa e pausa desobre astela de taula subtil de sauze o de caligi e de a lor semblantz en levitat, pus que tu envolopas aquela en drap; e aprop subtilia te en lian aquela sobre le os trencat que no sia maugut; e vay am liadura segon retonditat al dors alcunas veguadas, e strenh aquel am strictura decent; e aprop considera la liadura en tota hora, e quan es mollificada strenh aquela.	And then place it on the plaster and padding, and place it over the table with a thin layer of wax or pitch similar in weight, so that you wrap it in cloth; then with subtlety place it around the broken bone to ensure it is not too tight; and gradually bind it along the back several times, strengthening it with proper tension; and always consider the binding at all times, and when it becomes softened, strengthen it.
E si necessitat provoca a desliament de aquela deves corrossio o pruziment, o dolor, o apostema que accideysso en le loc, lahoras tu coyta e deslia aquela e erradica le emplastre e rectifique aquo que accideys per aquo am manieyra de curacio de lu; e aprop reduzeys le emplastre, si vezes ad aquo la facia; e ajusta a lu strictura entro que sia sanat.	And if necessity causes a discharge from that, you should incise or probe, or relieve pain, or treat the abscess that occurs in the area. When you incise and remove it, eradicate the plaster and correct what has occurred with the method of curing it; then reduce the plaster, if you notice this; and adjust its tension as it heals.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter VIII.
De restauracio de las costas quan son trincadas.	For the restoration of the ribs when they are fractured.
Sapias que fractura de las costas no catz sino en locs grosses que siegon le dos; e de las extremitatz de lor de la partida denant no accideys ad aquelas contricio sino per aquo quar so cartillaginosas.	Know that a fracture of the ribs occurs only in large areas where they join two together; and from their ends at the front part, such contact does not occur since they are cartilaginous.
E cognicio de lu no es amaguada al sentiment deves la inquisicio de lu am les ditz.	And the perception of it is not hidden to the senses by touching it with your fingers.
E la restauracio sia ayssi que enguales la fractura am les ditz segon la manieyra possibla, entro que sia engulhat segon que cove, e aprop emplastre e strenh le os trencat am stela, si indigeys de aquel.	And the restoration should be done as you equal the fracture with your fingers according to the possible method, ensuring it is properly复原应当尽可能地用手指调整骨折部位，使其对齐，然后根据情况敷上药膏并用夹板固定，如果需要的话。
E si la fractura de las costas es declinant a las partidas dedintz, lahoras accideys al malaute dolor vehement e punctura, ayssi cum punctura que accideys ad aquel que ha pleureci, e per aquo quar le os ponh le velament; e accideys a lu difficultat de hanelit, e tos, e vomit de mot sanc; e aquesta es de dificil curacio.	And if the fracture of the ribs is located at the internal parts, it will cause severe pain and puncture-like sensations in the patient. This is similar to the pain experienced by someone who has pleurisy, and for this reason, the rib is covered with a bandage; and it causes difficulty in breathing, coughing, and vomiting due to blood. This is of difficult cure.
E ja les Antixs so engeniatz en aquela am motz engientz.	And already the Ancients were ingenious in such matters.
E de lor so que diso: cove que pauses viandas del malaute que engendro imflacio e ventositat, per que le ventre sia imflat e sia extendut, e la fractura sia impellida a las partidas defora.	And from them they say: place the patient in a position where foods are induced to cause inflammation and swelling, so that the belly becomes swollen and extended, and the fracture is driven towards the outward parts.
Mays nos avoreyssem aquo per so que no sia causa leugiera a generar apostema caut, si no accideys; e si ja accideys, lahoras ja ajuda ad aquo.	But let us first say that this should not be a light matter to apply a cauterization; if it already occurs, then help is needed for this.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia pausada desus ventoza e aprop que sucque am fortitut; e es semblant a ratiocinacio, mays empero es temut que la ventoza atire las superfluitatz al loc per la debilitat.	And some of them say that it should be positioned above the abdomen and near where it swells with strength; although this seems like a reasonable argument, nevertheless it is feared that the swelling might drive the superfluities to the area due to weakness.
E diyssero alcus de lor: cove que·l loc sia cubert am lana que ja es submersa en oli caut, e sian pausatz pulvils entre las costas entro que sia umplida, que sia la liadura engual quan envolopas aquela segon retonditat; e aprop sia curat le malaute am curacio de pleuresi de vianda e de medicina.	And some of them say: place the area under a cover of wool that has been submerged in cauterizing oil, and sprinkle powders between the ribs until it is full, ensuring the poultice is equal in thickness as you wrap it according to its roundness; then treat the patient with a regimen of dietary cures and medicine.
E si causa vehement constrenh le malaute la qual no sufferta, e le os punh le velament am punctura ledent, temem sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que fendam sobre le loc, descubram de la costa trencada, e aprop pausem desobre aquela instrument que conserve le ciphac, la rememoracio del qual es precedida, e que inscidam le os am facilitat, e extraguam aquel.	And if the severe constriction causes pain in the patient who cannot bear it, and they need to be punctured with a lancet through the veil, then beware of the patient, and immediately cut over the place, uncovering the broken rib, and then place yourself above that instrument which must keep the chip, the memory of which precedes, and by which we shall incise easily and extract it.
E aprop que ajustem las doas labias de la plagua, si es gran, am cozidura, e curem aquela am emplastres entro que sia sanada.	And when we have adjusted the two edges of the wound, if it is large, with suturing, and we treat it with plasters until it is healed.
E si accideys dedintz apostema, lahoras tu coyta e enfon pulvils en oli rozat e pausa sobre le loc, e que sia curat le malaute am aquo que cove a la apostema dedintz.	And if an abscess occurs inside, then incise it and insert powder in oil, place your hand over the area, and treat the patient with what is suitable for the abscess inside.
E sia ressupinat sobre le latz sobre le qual dorm, entro que sia sanat.	And let it be dressed on the cloth on which he sleeps, until it is healed.
Capitol .ix.	Capitulum IX.
De restauracio de fractura del spondil del dos e del col.	On the restoration of fractures of the thoracic and cervical spine.
Alcunas veguadas endeve fractura als osses del col, e tart endeve a lor atricio, e semblantment als spondils del dos.	Sometimes when there are fractures in the bones of the neck, and then apply friction to them, similar to the vertebrae of the back.
E cum aquo accideys ad alcu e voles saber si sara sanat o no, lahoras considera, quar si vezes las sieuas mas ja mollificadas e stupefaytas e mortas e no pot maure aquelas ni extendre ni strenher aquelas e quan constrenges aquelas am les tieus ditz o punges aquelas am agulha e no sent en aquelas dolor, lahoras sapias que no es sanat, e en las mes de disposicios es mortal.	And when this happens to someone and you want to know if they will be healed or not, then consider whether their muscles are already softened, numbed, and dead and cannot grow, extend, or strengthen, and when you stretch them with your hands or prick them with a needle and do not feel any pain in them, then you know that they are not healing, and in such cases the condition is fatal.
E si mau aquelas e sent en aquelas constriccio am les ditz e punctura, lahoras sapias que la nucha de l’os es salva e que le malaute guereys am curacio.	And if you stretch them and feel the pain in the muscles with your hands or prick them, then you know that the bone's marrow is saved and that the illness will heal through cure.
E si ve als spondils del col le semblant ad aquo e voles saber si sira sanat o no, lahoras considera als pes de lu.	And if you feel in the vertebrae of the neck and want to know if they will be healed or not, then consider the feet.
Lahoras si tu vezes que so ja mollificatz, accideys ad aquels aquo que es accidit en las mas, e aprop quan jatz sobre le sieu dos, yeys ventozitat e egestio ses la sua volontat, e alcunas veguadas es resupinat sobre le sieu dos e vol urinar e no pot, lahoras sapias que es mortal, e adonc no trebales en la curacio de lu.	And if you feel that they are already softened, apply what happens in the muscles to them, and when they lie on their back, have freedom of movement and excretion according to their will, and sometimes they are lifted onto their back and want to urinate but cannot, then you know that it is fatal, and then do not attempt to cure them.
Mays si no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, la causa es milhor e pus leugiera.	But if no other cause occurs there, the cause is better and lighter.
E la curacio de lu es que te perforses a la sedacio del apostema caut que pauses sobre le spondil atrissat oli rozat sol, o am mugols de huous asatz; pausa sobre aquela aquel alcunas veguadas le dia entro que sia sedat le apostema caut.	And the cure for this is to puncture for the extraction of the abscess with a cautery that you place over the lower or lateral part of the spine, or on well-heated pieces of wood; place it over that area for several minutes each day until the abscess is extracted.
E lahoras pausa un dels emplastres confortantz e exsitans, e strenh sobre aquel am liament; e comanda al malaute que use de repaus e de tranquillitat e que no dorme sobre la partida am la qual atroba dolor entro que sia sanat.	And then place one of the comforting and soothing plasters, and apply pressure to that area; and command the patient to rest and be tranquil, and not to sleep on the part where he feels pain until he is healed.
E si accideys deves la atricio del os satagias o alcuna causa que ja es seperada de lu, lahoras cove que secces sobre la codena e que ostes aquel os; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua, am sutura si es gran; e aprop cura aquela am alcu encarnatiu dels enguentz, entro que sia sanat.	And if it happens that the fracture of the bone is displaced or any cause that has already separated from it, then you must cauterize the wound and keep the bone in place; and properly adjust the two edges of the wound, sew them if they are large; and apply some flesh-colored ointment to that area until it is healed.
Mays si es trencat le derier del os alhoses, e es la fi de la coeta, lahoras cove que tu entrometas le dit pous de la ma senestra en le cul, e que enguales le os trencat am l’autra ma segon que es possible per equacio segonda; e aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e astelha, si indigeysses de aquels, e aprop strenh aquel.	But if the heel of the bone is broken, and it is the end of the toe, then you must insert your left hand's thumb into the foot, and equalize the broken bone with the other hand as much as possible by second equation; and then apply a plaster and bandage, if needed, and properly keep pressure on that area.
E si sentes satagias trencadas en lu, lahoras tu fen sobre aquela, e osta aquel, e cura la plagua am la curacio que es precedida entro que sia sanada.	And if you feel broken phases in it, then work on that, hold it, and cure the wound with the cure that is to follow once it is healed.
Capitol .x.	Capitol.
De restauracio de la ancha.	For the restoration of health.
Les osses de las anchas tart so trencats, e si trencan, lahoras la fractura de lor no es sino communicio en las extremitatz de aquelas e son inscidas en la longitut e declinan a las partidas dedintz; e accideys al malaute dolor en le loc e punctura, e la camba es stupefacta quan es fractura.	The bones of the feet are broken, and if they break, then the fracture is merely communication at the extremities of those bones and are split in length and decline towards the inner parts; and accidents occur in the patient with pain at the site and puncture, and the leg is stupefied when it fractures.
E la restauracio de lu es que tu extendas la tua ma sobre aquel entro que sia sobre la fractura qual es la figura de lu.	And the restoration of it is that you place your hand over that area while it is over the fracture, which is the shape of the bone.
E si fractura es en la extremitat de lu tant solament, lahoras tu enguala aquela segon que a tu es apparelhat per equacio engual entro que sia asemblat a la sua figura natural.	And if the fracture is only at the extremity of the bone, then you align that part according to how it appears to you by equilibrium, so that it resembles its natural figure.
Mays si la fractura es en le lonc o que ja declina a las partidas dejos, lahoras tu fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu ventre entro que sia preparada a tu la restauracio de aquela fractura.	But if the fracture is in the length or that which already declines towards the inner parts, then you place the patient on their side and prepare for the restoration of that fracture.
E donc quan auras engualada aquela, pausa sobre lu emplastre, e aprop pausa sobre aquel astela de fust o de codena, e strenh per strictura sobre la qual no temas punctacio de fractura ni remocio de la stelha.	And when you have equalized that, place a plaster over it, and then place the wooden or copper rod over it, and tightly bind it without fearing puncture or removal of the rod.
E enguala la concavitat am aquo que uempla aquela entro que aquela prengua la strictura segon equalitat, e comanda al malaute que dorma sobre le sieu dos o desobre le sieu costat sa.	And equalize the cavity so that it fills the space where that will be bound tightly according to equality, and command the patient to lie on their back or on their side.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu cessa de extencio de lu e de la sua restauracio entro que sia sedat le apostema caut, e pausa sobre lu aquo que sede aquel segon que es precedit; e aprop retorna a la restauracio de lu, e strenh aquel ayssi cum cove.	But if an abscess forms, stop the extension of it and its restoration until the abscess is sedated. Place a plaster over it to cool it as described previously; then return to restoring it, and tightly bind it as appropriate.
E si accideysso en le os satagias o son comminuidas, lahoras tu las tratz.	And if this occurs in the bone during fragmentation or comminution, treat it accordingly.
Capitol .xi.	Capitol. xi.
De restauracio de la fractura del adjutori.	Of the restoration of the fracture of the adjutrix.
Adjutori es aquo que es entre le coyde entro al cap de la spalla.	Adjutori is that which is between the condyle between the head of the shoulder.
E si es trencat, lahoras la restauracio de lu es en una de doas manieyras, de las quals es la una que tu prenguas fust pla de migiera groceza segon aquesta forma:	And if it is broken, the restoration of it is in one of two ways, of which one you should use a splint of good wood according to this form:
E sian liatz en doas extremitatz dos liamentz, e aprop sia suspendut del loc elevat.	And place two threads at the ends, and then suspend them from the elevated area.
E segua le malaute sobre una sezela; e aprop gieta fora le sieu bras trencat sobre le fust entro que pervengua al titillic de lu en le mieg loc del qual sia annexa la curvitat del fust.	And place the patient on a cushion; and then put his broken arm on the splint until it reaches the middle point where the curve of the splint is attached.
E aprop suspen sobre aquel alcuna causa greu, o·l minestre extenda aquel a las partidas dejos; e aprop le metge eque la fractura am las sieuas mas ensemps, entro que la fractura retorne segon que cove.	And place it suspended above that with some heavy weight, or the servant extend it to the parts left; and then the doctor apply pressure to the fracture with his hands at all times, until the fracture returns according to its natural course.
E l’autra manieyra es que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sieua cervitz e suspen la ma del col de lu am liament; e aprop comanda a dos ministres que la un de lor tengua aquo que es desobre la fractura am las suas mas; e l’autre tengua le pus dejos de lu; e quascu de lor extenda a la sua partida.	And the other way is that the patient be resuspended on his own neck and hold his head with a thread; and then command two servants that one of them holds what is above the fracture with his hands; and the other holds the rest of him; and each of them extend to their part.
E si voles que la extencio sia pus fort, lahoras tu strenh sobre la fractura am liament e sobre aquela am autre liament, e quascu dels dos ministres extendan a doas suas partidas.	And if you want the extension to be stronger, then place strength on the fracture with one piece of wood and another on another part, and each of the two servants stretch at their respective parts.
E donc si la fractura es propinquada a la extremitat del muscle, lahoras cove que sia pausat la mitat del liament sobre le citillic e l’autre dejos la fractura deves le coyde.	And therefore, if the fracture is near the end of the muscle, then place half of the splint on the muscle and leave the other half on the fracture to secure it.
E semblantment si la fractura es propdana al coyde, lahoras cove que sia pausat le liament sobre aquel loc e sobre aquel coyde.	And similarly, if the fracture is near the joint, then place the splint in that location and on that joint.
Enguala aquela am facilitat e ses trebal, e aprop quant sira engualada segon que cove e es applicada per bona applicacio, lahoras strenh aquela si no accideys apostema caut.	Equalize that with ease and your work, and then strengthen it as much as necessary when it is properly equalized and applied correctly.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras layssa la strictura entro al vii dia, e pausa sobre lu lana sutza enbeguda en vi agre e oli rozat entro que repause le apostema, e lahoras tu stren aquela.	But if an abscess forms, then leave the tension within for five days, and place a piece of clean woolen cloth soaked in vinegar and rubbed with oil over it until the abscess subsides, and then strengthen it.
E la manieyra de strenher aquela es que pauses emplastre sobre la fractura, e aprop pausa envolopament de drap nau sobre le emplastre; e aprop ajuste le bras sobre aquel adjutori, e pause la sua ma uberta sobre le sieu muscle.	And the way to strengthen it is to place a poultice over the fracture, and then wrap a cloth around the poultice; then adjust the arm on this support, and place your hand open over its muscle.
E pausa le drap e strenh sobre le adjutori le bras per so que·l bras sia en loc de stelhas, si no prohibeys de aquo alcuna causa del os trencat.	And place the cloth firmly over the assistant's arm so that the arm is in the place of a splint, without prohibiting anything due to a broken bone.
E lahoras usa de stelhas.	And then use splints.
E es que pauses sobre la fractura aquela stela que sia pus lada e pus fort de las autras stelas; e pausa entre quascuna stela la latitut del dit, e sia la longitut de las stelas segon la trencadura am addicio de tres ditz de tota partida.	And you should place that splint over the fracture which is longer and stronger than the other splints; and place the distance of your thumb between each splint, with the length of the splints according to the breakage plus three thumbs' width.
E aprop strenh sobre las stelas am la strictura la qual he dita al comensament del capitol.	And then firmly place the splints at the fracture which I mentioned at the beginning of this chapter.
E es que la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura sia pus streyt.	And make your bandage over the site of the fracture tighter.
E quant pus es alonguada la fractura sia la strictura menor.	And when the fracture is longer, use a looser bandage.
E donc si vezes le situament de las stelas e la strictura ayssi cum havem dit en la hora en la qual restauras le membre al sieu assituament, lahoras tu fay.	And so, if you adjust the position of the splints and the bandage as we have said in the hour when you restore the limb to its position, then you do this.
E si temes apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la strictura e las stelas entro al dia vii ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you fear an abscess, then leave the stricture and stakes inside for seven days as we have said.
E aprop considera le liament en totas partidas per tres dias per so que no accida en le loc pruziment o imflacio; o es prohibida la vianda pervenir al membre per disposicio de superfluitat de strictura; e donc rectifiqua tot aquo segon que havem dit.	And then consider the ligament in all parts for three days so that no accident happens at the puncture site or inflammation; or if food is prohibited due to the disposition of excessive stricture; and therefore correct all this according to what we have said.
Mays si tu yest sobre confizanssa que no accida alcuna causa de aquo, lahoras no deslias la liguadura sino aprop tres dias o mays.	But if you are confident that no cause will happen from this, then do not loosen the ligature for at least three days or more.
E sia la sua dormicio del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e las sieuas mas sian sobre le stomac.	And let the patient's knees be on their back, and their hands on their stomach.
E pausa sobre le adjutori cocena plena de lana engualment, e considera en tota hora de la nueyt o del dia que no sia deliada ni dissolta la figura del membre trencat, o que sia le liament mollificat, donc rectifica aquo tot am la tua vertut.	And place your hand on the assistant's full woolen cushion, and consider at all times of the night or day that the figure of the broken limb is not distorted, or that the ligament is not softened, therefore correct this with your virtue.
E pausa la vianda del malaute segon le orde le qual havem denant mes, enayssi que la vianda sia subtil en le comensament entro que es comensat strenher; e lahoras cove que egrossas la vianda de lu.	And withhold food from the patient according to the order we have mentioned before, ensuring that the food is subtle at the beginning while it is being gradually strengthened; then increase the amount of food.
Quar de constuma del adjutori e de la camba de lu es que sian strengutz en xl dias; e lahoras cove que sian desliatz e sia administrat banh e sia medicat am enguentz los quals rectifican aquel.	For customarily the legs and their waist are strengthened in forty days; then they should be loosened and a bath should be given, and an ointment applied which rectifies that.
E si la fractura es layha atrita, lahoras tu no deslies de aquela le liament e las stelhas entro a l dias o entro a dos meses.	And if the fracture is not yet healed, then do not loosen the bandage and splints for at least a day or up to two months.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter XII.
De restauracio de fractura del bras.	On the restoration of fractures of the arm.
Bras es compost de dos osses les quals so appelatz dos focils; dels quals la un es petit, e es aquel que siec le dit pous, e l’autre es gran e es aquel le qual es pausat dejos le petit dit, de la partida pus dejus.	The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the ulna and the radius; of which the former is small, and is that which we call the forearm, while the latter is large and is placed beside the smaller one.
E fort leu es trencat le focil major solament, o le petit, e fort leu son trincatz ensemps.	And if the larger bone of the arm is broken alone, or the smaller one, and if both are broken together, they must be set properly.
E quan es trencat le focil petit desus, lahoras la restauracio de lu es leugiera, e la sanacio de lu es pus leugiera.	And when the smaller bone is broken above, then the restoration of it is easier, and its healing is more rapid.
E quan es trencat le focil de lu dejos la fractura de lu es mala, e la sanacio de lu es dificil.	And when the fracture of the leg is broken, I leave the fracture bad, and the healing thereof is difficult.
E pus mala de aquela es quan son trencatz dos osses essemps.	And worse when two long bones are broken.
Donc si l’os le qual es trencat es le focil petit desus, lahoras es convenient al metge, deves la restauracio de lu, que pauze petita extencio am facilitat entro que aquel sia engualhat.	Therefore, if the bone that is broken is the small tibia, then it is convenient for the doctor to restore it, allowing a slight extension between them to facilitate healing.
Mays si le focil gran es aquo que es trincat, lahoras cove que pause extencio pus vehement.	But if the large tibia is broken, then you must allow more significant extension.
E si les dos focils so ensemps trincatz, lahoras cove que tu pauses la extritura mot pus fort.	And if both tibiae are broken together, then you must allow more forceful traction.
E cove que pauses la figura de la ma deves la restauracio de lu e la extencio de lu estenduda sobre un coyssi, e sia le pols de la ma a las partidas desus, pus aut que totz les autres ditz, e le dit auricular sia pus bas dels autres ditz, e le malaute sia cezent sobre una cezela cayrada.	And you must place your hand to restore it and extend the limb over a cushion, with the wrist of the hand above, more than all the others. The auricular finger should be below the other fingers, and the leg should be extended on a tilted bench.
E sia un coyssi denant lu en la altetut o endreyt de lu, per so que·l malaute no encorra trebalh.	And place a cushion in front of it at its height or upright, so that the leg does not undergo further strain.
E aprop le ministre extenda le bras de la partida pus dejos am la sieua ma o am liament, e autre ministre extenda desus semblantment.	And then the minister extends the arm from that side and places it or wraps it with linen, and another minister extends similarly above.
E aprop le metge engualhe le os entro que redugua aquel segon la milhor figura que pot.	And then the doctor realigns the bone within the joint according to the best shape he can.
E si en la factura del os so satagias, lahoras te perforsa raduzir tota pessa en le sieu loc am la tua vertut.	And if there are cracks in the bone, then you must force it to reduce completely into its place with your virtue.
E si appar en lu satagia separada que punh la codena e no es a tu speransa en la restauracio de lu, lahoras tu fen sobre lu e osta aquela segon la manieyra la qual havem dita desus.	And if there appears a separate crack that cannot be closed as you wish in the restoration of it, then you set it aside and treat it according to the manner we have said above.
Mays si la fractura es am plagua, yeu ja he fayt ad aquo capitol singular, e donc pren la curacio de aquel.	But if the fracture is open, I have already treated this separately, and therefore proceed with the treatment of it.
E si accideys apostema caut al comensament de la tua restauracio, lahoras tu lineys un drap am cerot fayt de oli rozat e cera blanca, e sia migier entre specitut e subtilitat, e strenh drap sobre aquel am strictura subtil entro que le apostema sia cedat; e lahoras remau le cerot e pausa emplastre preparat de polvera de moli am clayre de huou, e aprop pausa stelhas; e sia la stela la qual es pauzada sobre aquela fractura pus lada e pus fort.	And if an abscess occurs at the beginning of your restoration, then you line a cloth with wax made from oil rubbed and white wax, making it medium in thickness and fineness, and tightly wrap the cloth around it between layers for the abscess to yield. Then remove the wax and apply a plaster prepared with powder of madder in honey, and place a bandage; let the bandage cover the area on the side and more strongly.
E sapias que·l nombre de las stelas del bras so vi en las majors disposicios, o sia la fractura en un focil o en dos focils ensemps.	And you shall know that the number of ribs in the arm I saw in major dispositions, or rather the fracture in one bone or two bones together.
E aprop pausa la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura pus fort e pus vehement, e quan mays sira la extrictura a las partidas desus de la fractura o a las partidas pus bassas de lu, pausa la strictura un pauc pus molh segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu en le comensament del capitol.	And then place your compression firmly on the location of the fracture more strongly and more vigorously, and the greater the tension at the parts above the fracture or at the lower parts of it, place the compression a little more moist according to how the remembrance of it is recalled at the beginning of the chapter.
E les draps que so envolopatz sobre la fractura sian draps mols humitz, e no sian durs ni aspres, e·l fiel am le qual es strenhut sia de li propriament migier entre subtil e gros, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And the cloths that you wrap around the fracture be moistened with liquid, not hard nor rough, and the fat oil which is strengthened be of the proper mixture between subtle and thick, as we have recommended.
E considera le membre e·l liament aprop alcus dias.	And consider the limb and joint for several days.
E si accideys alcuna causa de la qual rectificacio es necessaria, ayssi cum prusiment le qual accideys al membre, e lahoras cove que tu enbroques le membre am aygua cauda entro que cesse aquel pruziment.	And if any cause arises for which correction is necessary, as previously mentioned what happens to the limb, then immerse the limb in water until that irritation ceases.
E leysses le membre no costreyt entro que repause, e aprop torna la strictura.	And let the limb not be constrained until it rests, and then return the compression.
E si la extrictura ja es mollificada e l’os ja es remaugut e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras rectifiqua tot aquo am la tua vertut.	And if the contraction is already softened and the bone is already mended and resembles those, then correct all this with your virtue.
E considera mays si le nutriment es prohibit pervenir al membre per superfluitat de strictura, quar lahoras cove que mollifiques aquel un petit e laysses aquel per alcus dias entro que corra ad aquel le nutriment, e aprop strenh aquel.	And consider more if the nourishment is prohibited from reaching the member due to excessive contraction, for then you must soften that slightly and leave it for some days until the nourishment flows to that, and then strengthen it.
Mays si al malaute no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no cove que sia desliat entro aprop xx dias o enviro de aquels.	And if to the patient none of the causes we have said occurs, then you must not let it be released or about those within approximately twenty days.
E aprop sia suspenduda la ma del malaute per la sua vertut de movement agitatius, e fay aquel dormir sobre le sieu dos.	And place the patient's hand for its virtue of movement agitation, and make it sleep on its back.
E sapias que aquesta fractura es restaurada en xxx dias o en xxxii dias, o fort leu es restaurada en xxviii dias, e tot aquo es segon la disposicio de las compleccios e las disposicios de la vertut.	And know that this fracture is restored in thirty days or around thirty-two days, or more gently in twenty-eight days, and all this is according to the disposition of the complexities and the arrangements of virtue.
Capitol .xiii.	Capitol.xiii.
De restauracio de fractura de la pinche de la ma e dels ditz.	On the restoration of fractures of the thumb and fingers.
Sapias que a la pinche de la ma e als nuzes dels ditz tart endeve fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio motas veguadas.	Know that at the wrist of the hand and the knuckles of the fingers tendons are located, and do not injure them but rub with visible threads.
E quan accideys a la ma fractura o atrissio, lahoras cove que·l malaute segua cayrat e denant lu lies cezent segon equalitat, e aprop pausa la ma de lu sobre aquela extenduda.	And when fracture or tendons are injured, let the patient remain lying down and before the limb be extended equally, then place your hand over the extended one.
E aprop le ministre extenda les osses trencatz e·l metge engualhe aquels entro que sian congongitz am bona congoncio.	And then the minister extend the broken bones and the doctor adjust those so that they are aligned well.
E lahoras cove que pause emplastre e estopa, si no accideys apostema caut; e aprop pausa stela desus segon la quantitat del loc, e tu ja has envolopada aquela en drap de li.	And then let you apply plaster and cotton, if no abscess forms use a cautery instead; then place a candle above according to the size of the area, and you have already wrapped that in cloth.
Mays si la trincadura es en las partidas dedintz deves le ventre de la palma, e lahoras fay semblant de spera de drap, e comanda al malaute que strenha aquela am la sua palma trincada; aprop sia strenguda am drap lonc.	More so if the rupture is in the inner parts of the palm, then make a semblance of a pocket of cloth, and command the patient to hold that tightly with his ruptured palm; then have him hold it firmly with long cloth.
E sia la stelha de cuer am drap en le qual sia levitat, per so que le cuer sia aplicat a la palma; e strenh aquela segon que cove.	And let the candle be held in cloth in which it is placed lightly, so that the heat is applied to the palm; and hold it tightly as needed.
Mays si la fractura es a las partidas defora, lahoras cove que pauses desus stela e autre estela de la partida dejos en la palma, per so que la ma sia uberta e dreyta; e aprop pausa la strictura, ayssi cum es revolvuda la ma a la rateta entre les ditz am liamentz.	If the fracture is in the outer parts, then you should place another strip above the bone and another strip on the side in your palm, so that your hand is open and straight; then place the splint, as if you are turning your hand at a right angle between your fingers with grains of wheat.
E si accideys fractura a alcu dels nozes dels ditz, lahoras si es le dit pous, sia engualat segon que cove e aprop sia strenhut am la palma e si·t voles, pausa a lu astela petita dreyta per so que sia elevada la fractura e no sia mauguda.	If a fracture occurs in one of the bones of the fingers, then if it is the base of the finger, equalize it according to what you can see and then strengthen it on the palm. If you wish, place a small strip upright so that the fracture is elevated and not displaced.
Mays si la fractura es en les autres ditz, ayssi cum en aquel del mieg loc, o en le indic, o en le auricular, o en le anular, lahoras sia engualhat e liat am le dit sa le qual siec aquel; o sian totz liatz segon continuacio, e es milhor; o pausa sobre aquel stela petita, ayssi cum havem dit en le pous.	If the fracture is in the other fingers, as in the middle finger, or the index, or the ring, or the little finger, then equalize and ligate it on the finger where that bone is; or ligate all of them according to their continuity, which is better; or place a small strip above it, as we said for the base of the finger.
E considera, en la tua restauracio, e aprop aquela, la disposicio de apostema caut e oppose — am la tieua operacio — am aquo que cove quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, segon que es iterada la narracio de lu.	And consider, in your restoration, and especially that, the placement of cautery and opposition — in your operation — according to what you see when a cause from those occurs, as indicated in the narration.
Capitol .xiv.	Chapter XIV.
De restauracio de fractura del os de la coyssa.	For the restoration of fracture of the hip bone.
Le os de la cueyssa motas veguadas es trencat e es declarat al sentiment segon que es convertit a la partida denant e a la pus sobirana.	The hip bone fractured is perceived according to how it is displaced frontward and backward.
E la restauracio de lu se fa enayssi que·l liament es strenhut sobre la fractura e autre liament dejos la fractura, e le malaute sia prostrat sobre le sieu ventre e sobre la cara.	And the restoration is done by reinforcing the ligaments over the fracture and another ligament below the fracture, with the patient lying on their abdomen and face.
E aprop le ministre extenda tot le liament a la sua partida segon la qualitat, quan la fractura es en le mieg loc del os.	And then the surgeon extends the ligament along its proper side according to the quality of the fracture, when it is in the middle part of the bone.
Mays si es propdana a la razitz de la cueyssa, lahoras sia le liament propda al denolh a la partida del pentenilh, per so que la extencio caja en sus, e le autre liament dejos la fractura.	But if it is close to the rim of the hip, then place the ligament along the side of the pelvis, so that the extension reaches there, and another ligament below the fracture.
E semblantment si la trencadura es propdana al denolh, lahoras sia fayt le liament propda al denol, e sia la extencio a las partidas dejos.	And similarly, if the fracture is close to the rim, then place the ligament along the rim, and the extension to the sides below.
E aprop le metge enguale le os am amduas las sieuas mas entro que reduzesca aquel segon la semblansa natural e l’os es conjungit per bona conjunccio; lahoras cove que pauses emplastre e strictura, si no accideys al membre apostema.	And then the doctor aligns the bone by bringing his hands close to where you have reduced it according to its natural form, and the bone is joined by good articulation; then apply a plaster and bandage, so as not to develop an abscess in the limb.
Mays si accideys en lu apostema, lahoras tu layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que l’apostema caut sia cedat, e aprop retorna a la tua curacio.	But if an abscess does occur, then you leave it for a few days until the abscess is ready to be cauterized, and then return to your treatment.
La strictura de lu sia ayssi fayta: cove que envolopes sobre la fractura una benda dura, e dobla aquela dos o tres veguadas, e remaugua de lu superfluitat; e aprop envolopa la camba entro que pervengua al talo e a la razitz de la cueyssa.	The bandaging should be done as follows: first ensure that you wrap a hard bandage around the fracture, fold it two or three times, and secure it from any excess; then wrap the bandage until it reaches the ankle and the back of the thigh.
E intromet lonc fiel entre la cueyssa e la camba prop del denol a las partidas dejos, e venguan las extremitatz del fiel de la partida pus sobirana de las doas partz, e aprop revolveys sobre la camba e la cueyssa aquo que superflueys de la benda.	And insert a long needle between the thigh and the upper part of the leg near the fracture, ensuring that the ends of the needle reach well beyond both parts. Then roll over the bandage and thigh with what remains excess from the wrap.
E aprop pausa sobre la cueyssa en le loc de aquela fractura astelhas, e pausa de aquelas una stela sobre le os de la camba.	And then place something over the thigh at the location of the fracture, and place a stick over the bone of the leg.
E aprop uempli las vacuitatz entre la camba e la cuoyssa am draps mols, per so que sia coagulada la extrictura.	And then fill the space between the waist and the thigh with soft cloth, so that the constriction is constricted.
E aprop comensa am strictura fort del mieg sobre le loc de la fractura am tres envolucios o quatre, e quant mays tu te alonhas am liament del loc de la fractura, la tua strictura sia menor e pus leugiera e pus molha.	And then begin with a strong bandage around the middle of the thigh over the location of the fracture using three or four wraps. The closer you are to the site of the fracture, the tighter, finer, and softer your bandage should be.
E aprop exten a doas extremitatz del fiel a las partidas dejos entro que pervengua a la cavilha del pe, e strenh amdoas las extremitatz de las stelhas del autra part per so que·l liament no sia remaugut del sieu loc.	And then extend the ends of the bandage to the sides where it reaches the foot's arch, and tighten both ends of the strings from the other side so that the bandage does not shift from its place.
E aprop leyssa la strectura sobre aquel, don esta ayssi que no accideys al membre corrosio ni apostema caut ni emflacio e semblantz ad aquels; e si accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, adonc cueta te am desliament de lu, e rectifica aquo que accideys tot aprop, segon que havem dit motas veguadas.	And then place the bandage over it such that it does not cause corrosion, abscess, or inflammation in the limb; and if any of these conditions occur due to some cause, then immediately treat them, and adjust what has occurred as soon as possible, according to what we have said previously.
Mays si en le os es pessa del os la qual pongua, lahoras cove que tu engualhes aquel segon que a tu es possibla; e sino, fen sobre lu e remau aquel, e cura am aquo del qual es precedida la rememoracio entro que sia sanat.	More specifically, if the bone itself is severe and cannot be reduced as much as possible, then fix it in place and treat the area from which memory of the injury was recalled until it heals.
E alcunas veguadas es strenhuda aquesta fractura de la coyssa otra aquo que sian ajustadas a lu stelhas, ayssi cum havem dit en le adjutori e·n le bras.	And sometimes this fracture of the hip is strengthened by another that is adjusted to its sides, as we have said in the assistant and in the arm.
Mays empero en la restauracio de lu en tal manieyra fayta no accideys al malaute claudicacio; e si es restaurada sola, otra aquo que li sia applicada l’autra camba, lahoras es necessari que claudique aquel del qual es tostemps.	But still in the restoration done in such a manner no harm occurs to the patient's ability to walk; and if it is restored alone, or another part is applied to the other side, then it is necessary that the patient limp for some time.
E sapias que la coyssa es strenhuda en xl dias o un pauc mes o un pauc mens, e tot aquo es segon la diversitat de las compleccios e de las autras dispozicios.	And know that the hip is strengthened in about ten days or a few more months, and all this depends on the diversity of the complications and other arrangements.
Capitol .xv.	Capitol.xv.
De restauracio de la fractura de la rodela del denolh.	On the restoration of the fracture of the tibia.
Sapias que fractura de la rodela del denol tart endeve, mays accideys a lu motas veguadas atrissio.	Know that the fracture of the tibia occurs less frequently, but it often results in more severe and prolonged atrophy.
Mays si accideys a lu fractura, lahoras no es sino fissura o trauc en las suas partidas, e aquo es am plagua o ses plagua, e sobre aquo tot es estat am le sentiment.	But if the fracture occurs, then it is merely a crack or a tear in its parts, and this is either one-third or two-thirds, and above all, there is no significant sensation.
E la restauracio de lu es enayssi que sia engualat aquo que es romput de las partidas de lu am les ditz entro que sia agreguat e conjongit segon que es possible per equacio e facilitat e fabricacio.	And the restoration of it is attempted to be equalized what is broken from the parts of it among the fingers so that it may be added and joined according to what is possible by equilibrium, ease, and fabrication.
E aprop pausa emplastre e pausa sobre aquel stela redonda, si indigeysses de aquela; e strenh desus am strictura ad aquo convenient.	And then place the plaster and your hand on that round plaster, if you need it; and strengthen above at the site to what is appropriate.
E aprop considera totas las disposicios las quals havem recomtadas en las autras fracturas, ayssi cum es apostema caut e semblant ad aquels enaissi que se oppause a tot accident am aquo que a lu es convenient entro que sia sanat.	And then consider all the dispositions which we have recommended in other fractures, thus as with an abscess, cauterization, and appearance to those that are applied to every accident according to what is appropriate until it is healed.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter XVI.
De restauracio de la fractura de la camba.	On the restoration of the fracture of the ilium.
Sapias que en la camba so dos osses dels quals la un es gros, e es le nompnat per nom de la camba; e l’autra es subtil, e es nompnat focil.	Know that in the ilium there are two bones, of which one is thick and is named the ilium; and the other is thin and is named the pubis.
E accideys a quascus de las specias de fractura aquo que accideys als dos osses del bras, e per aquo es fayta restauracio de lu ayssi cum restauracio del bras engualment, e la operacio de lu es una.	And accidents of the species of fracture occur in the ilium as they do in the two bones of the arm, and for this reason, its restoration is done equally as the restoration of the arm, and its operation is one.
E si so trincatz dos osses ensemps, la camba es convertida a totas partidas.	And if you need to break two bones at once, the joint becomes dislocated in all directions.
E si es trinquat le os pus subtil, la camba es convertida a las partidas Denant.	And if you need to break the finer bone, the joint becomes dislocated in front.
E si es trincat le os pus gros, atrobas aquel dejos, e es de aquelas causas que no so a tu ameguadas.	And if you need to break the thicker bone, you find that mark, and it is one of those causes that are beyond your control.
E aprop aministra extencio e equacio e liguacio de las astelas segon aquel engualment.	And then administer extension, equalization, and ligature of the tendons accordingly.
Mays empero cove, si la fractura de la camba es laja havent motas satagias, que la extencio sia mendre e pus leugiera, e alleuja am la tua vertut.	However, if the joint fracture has visible spots, let the extension be more gentle and lighter, and bring relief with your virtue.
E en la camba es alcuna causa de operacio sobre le bras, e es quan tu engualas las stelhas e que comples tota la tieua operacio, lahoras tu prendras pessas de fustz de pi le qual es pausat dejos las cauzas las quals so pausades en solies, e so faytas eyssament de brancas de palma; aligeys de aquelas a las quals es petita groceza, e no sia ges de las manudas, e sia la longuesa de aquelas segon la longuesa de la camba, e del denol entro al pus dejos.	And in the joint, if there is any cause for an operation on the arm, and when you equalize the stars and complete your entire surgical operation, then take pieces of pine wood which are placed under the causes that are located in sutures, and make them thus from palm branches; leave those with little roughness, but not like large knots, and let their length be according to the length of the joint, and between them place those with more smoothness.
E aprop envolopa sobre quascuna drap en doas envolucios segon la longitut de lu, e pausa la una sobre la partida de la camba de la una part e l’autra del autra part, e sian del denol entro al pus bas loc del pe.	And then wrap each one in two layers of cloth according to the length of the foot, and place one layer over the part of the leg on one side and the other layer on the other side, and let them be underneath at the base of the foot.
E aprop lias las doas stelhas en tres locs de doas extremitatz e al mieg loc, quar am aquesta strectura la camba es prohibida de clinar a la partida dextra e sinistra, e sta per bona stacio.	And then place the two straps in three locations of both extremities and at the middle location, for in this structure the leg is prohibited from leaning to the right or left side, and it must be well positioned.
E ja es aministrat un brasset de fust segon la longuesa de la camba; e sia pausada en lu la camba per so que conserve aquel de movement.	And then a brace of wood has been applied according to the length of the leg; and place the leg so that it maintains its movement.
E majorment cove que tu fassas aquo en fractura, e quan am aquela es plagua propriament.	And above all, ensure that you do this in a fracture, for when there is such a condition, it is properly called a dislocation.
E aprop considera en quascun jorn la camba e studia am aquel per derier studi, e tu le guardes de apostema e de imflacio o de autres causas semblantz; e cum accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, lahoras opausa te a lu am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	And then consider the leg each day and study it carefully, and guard it from boils and inflammation or other similar causes; and if any of these causes occur, then apply to it what is appropriate until it is healed.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter XVII.
De la fractura del talo e dels osses del pe e dels ditz.	Of the fracture of the talus and the bones of the foot and toes.
Al talo no accideys fractura de tot; mays als osses del pe accideys fractura alcunas veguadas; e als ditz del pe pauc accideys fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio en las mes de disposicio.	Fracture does not occur in the talus at all; more commonly, fractures occur in the bones of the foot; and fractures of the toes of the foot rarely occur, and do not occur to them unless they are rubbed in the proper manner.
E si als osses del pe endeve fractura e vezes aquels osses esser elevatz sobre si entre lor, lahoras le malaute pause le sieu pe sobre la terra preparat ayssi cum anant.	And if fractures occur in the bones of the foot and sometimes those bones need to be elevated above each other, then place the patient's foot on the prepared ground as shown.
E aprop pausa la un pe sobre aquo que es elevat de aquels osses, e aprop calca aquels, e prem, e engualha aquels entro que torno en los locs.	Then place the other foot above those elevated bones, and compress, press, and align those bones back into place.
E aprop pausa emplastre e stopa desus, e pausa dejos le ventre del pe una petita taula a la qual sian dos caps plas.	Then apply plaster and set it over, and place the abdomen of the foot on a small table with two convex ends.
E aprop strenh aquela am le pe am strectura descent, pus que tu has envolopada aquela am draps e am autres causes de las quals indigeys.	Then tightly wrap the foot with the bandage in proper structure, after you have wrapped it with cloths and other materials as needed.
E cum a lu passan tres dias o quatre, lahoras tu deslia le liament, quar tu atrobaras les osses engualatz, o sian trincatz o sian dislocatz, e la operacio en aquels es ayssi co coneysses.	And when three or four days have passed, then you untie the bandage, for you will find the bones equalized, or broken, or dislocated, and the operation in those cases is as you know.
Mays si alcus ditz son trincatz, lahoras restaura aquels, e enguala aquels ayssi cum yeu e recomtat a tu en la restauracio dels ditz de la ma.	And if some are said to be broken, then restore those, and equalize them as I and have shown you in the restoration of the fingers of the hand.
E aprop pausa al dit trincat stela segon la longitut del dit, e sia pus lada de lu un pauc; e aprop dejos le pe aquesta taula la qual e a tu recomtada, e strenh aquela am strictura decent.	And then place the broken finger straight according to its length, and slightly to one side. Then lay the hand on this table which you have adjusted, and tightly bind it with a bandage.
Mays si aquo que es trincat dels osses so dos o tres o mays, lahoras tu pausa sobre quascun dit astela de la sua quantitat envolopada en drap leon, e strenh la taula en le pus bas del pe, e sia stant sobre la un dels caps de la taula foro le ventre del pe per que la tengua am bona retencio.	And if what is broken of the bones are two or three or more, then you place each broken bone straight according to its quantity wrapped in a linen cloth, and support the table under the base of the foot, and standing over one of the ends of the table, pierce the sole of the foot to ensure it has good retention.
E es convenient a tu que no oblides que no consideres totas las causas las quals que e ditas a tu en las autras fracturas dels accidentz que havem dit; e opausa te a tot accident am aquo que cove.	And it is important for you not to forget that you should consider all the causes we have mentioned in other fractures of the accidents we have discussed; and apply this method to any similar case.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter XVIII.
De fractura del conh de la femna e del os del pentenilh e de la vergua del home.	Of the fracture of the thigh bone and the pelvis bone and the scrotum of the man.
Quan le conh de la femna es trincat, lahoras fay aquela ceser en cezela cayrada, e aprop enclina aquela a la partida del dos un petit, e sia tenguda detras.	When the thigh bone is fractured, make that cut in the inclined position, and then incline it slightly towards the upper part of the leg, and let it be held behind.
E aprop la matrona umpla le conh de coto, e sia fayt en le conh de lu ayssi cum spera; e aprop la femna sia concutida, e eleva le dos de lu petit a petit, quar tot aquo es fora-getat entro que sia denant la partida del conh ayssi cum spera e l’os trincat retorna.	And then the midwife fills the thigh with cloth, and it is done in the thigh as desired; and then the woman is supported, and her leg is lifted gradually, for all this must be done before the upper part of the thigh as desired and the fractured bone returns.
E aprop pausa pulvils sobre le dos de lu, e quan vol urinar remaugua le coto am facilitat e aprop urine, e reduzeys e retorna aquel segon la manieyra segon la qual mezist aquel al comensament, e aprop retorne al sieu pulvil primier.	And then place powders on the leg, and when she wants to urinate, wet the cloth to facilitate it; then let her urinate, return it according to the manner in which you mixed it at the beginning, and then return it to its original powder.
E fassa ayssi per vii dias o enviro aquels, quar aquel es restaurat.	And do so for seven days or until those recover, for they are being restored.
E si voles, pren una vezica de ovela e strenh sobre le trauc de lu una canula de canavera; e entromet tota la vesica en le conh de lu, e aprop ensuffla en la canula am vertut entro que la vesica sia imflada dedintz le conh, quar la fractura retorna.	And if you wish, take a bladder of sheep and stretch it over the wound on the patient's back; then insert the entire bladder into the wound, and soon blow through the tube to infuse virtue into the bladder so that it inflates inside the wound, for the fracture returns.
E aprop sia umplida de coto e estia per alcus dias segon que havem recomtat, entro que sia sanat.	And it should be filled with wet cloth and left for some days according to our reckoning, until it is healed.
E quan le os del pentenil de home o de femna es trincat, lahoras aministra en la restauracio e agulacio de lu aquo que havem recomtat en l’os del anca.	And when the bone of the thigh of a man or woman is broken, then administer in the restoration and stitching of it what we have prescribed for the bone of the hip.
E aquo que es dreyt no es occultat en aquestas fracturas proprinquas e que pauc endeveno, majorment ad aquel al qual es alcun studi e us e enten aquest meu libre mot; quar aquela fractura significa a tu en las majors disposicios via dreyturiera en la restauracio e en la strictura de lu, e donc enten be.	And what is right is not hidden in these nearby fractures that occur rarely, but especially to those who have some study and use and understand this my free will; for that fracture means to you through the major just disposals in the restoration and in the structure of it, and therefore understand well.
Mays en la vergua del home quan es trincada, pren guarguamela de auca, e met la vergua en aquela; e aprop pausa sobre lu envolucio de drap, e sia envolopada, e aprop sia layssada per tres dias o enviro aquels, e sia sanada.	In the case of the thigh of a man when it is broken, protect it from pain, and insert the thigh into it; then place your hand over the wrapping of cloth, and let it be wrapped, and let it be left for three days or about that time, and heal it.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XIX.
De restauracio de fractura dels osses quan es am plagua.	For the restoration of bone fractures when they are displaced.
Convenient es ad aquel al qual accideys fractura am plagua, e majorment si le os es gran ayssi cum es le os de la cuoyssa o de l’adjutori, o semblant ad aquel, que tu te cuoytes e fleubotomes aquel tantost si las condicios de fleubotomia a tu o testifican ayssi cum desus havem dit.	It is convenient to treat those upon whom a displaced fracture has occurred, especially if the bone is large, such as the thigh bone or the humerus, or similar. You should set and bleed that area frequently, provided the conditions for bleeding are favorable as we have stated above.
E si la plagua eflueys sanc, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la retencio de lu enayssi que tu polverizes sobre lu zegi trissat, si a tu autra causa no es present.	And if the displacement flows pus, then you should set it to retain the fluid and try to sprinkle safron on it. If another cause is not present.
E aprop comensa restaurar la fractura en aquel meteys dia, e no prolongues aquo, si no accideys apostema.	Then begin to restore the fracture on that day, and do not delay this if an abscess does not occur.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la restauracio de lu entro al ix dia, entro que sia cedat le apostema, e no apropinques a lu en le tertz dia e·l iiii de tot, quar tu faras accidir mals accidentz.	But if an abscess does occur, then you should delay the restoration of it for nine days until the abscess is resolved, and do not approach it on the seventh or tenth day, for then you will cause worse accidents.
Mays si le os trencat es eminent sobre la codena descubert, lahoras cove que te perforses reduzir aquel e engualar aquel am las tuas mas am facilitat e am pauca extencio.	But if the broken bone protrudes over the knee joint, then you must probe to reduce it and equalize it with your hands with as much ease and little extension as possible.
Mays si extencio no es a tu preparada e la equacio de lu am las tieuas mas, lahoras tu reduzeys aquel am las tuas mas am aquest sturment; e es sturment le qual es fayt de ferr, la longitut del qual es de vii ditz o de viii e la latitut del qual es segon la quantitat de la plagua; e per aquo es necessari al metge que prengua de aquels tres o quatre segon la quantitat que indigeys ad aquo en la curacio en tota specia de fractura.	But if the extension is not to your preparedness and cannot be equalized with your hands, then you must reduce it with this instrument; and this instrument is made of iron, its length being seven or eight inches and its width according to the size of the wound; and for this, the doctor must take three or four of them according to the quantity needed in the treatment for any type of fracture.
E sia redon, e sia en lu pauca groceza per so que no sia doblat deves la comprecio sobre aquel en la hora de la operacio.	And it should be round, and of moderate size so that it does not bend during the operation.
E sia de aguda extremitat al qual sia marge en las sieuas extremitatz; e sia le desus de lu a grossetut tendent, e de la maytat de lu entro a las partidas.	And it should have sharp ends, with margins at the edges; and be thick on the outside, but thin within.
E aquesta es la forma de lu:	And this is the form of the instrument:
E es nompnat en grec “labre volentz atelarem”, so es paleta pauca.	And it is named in Greek as "labre volentz atelarem," so it is a small palette.
Per que cove que sia pausada la extremitat de lu acuda elevada sobre la extremitat del os eminent.	In order that the extremity of the patient be elevated above the end of the bone.
E inpelleys aquel en una veguada entro que retorne le os, e sia engualat am alcuna equacio.	And draw it back in one movement so that the bone returns and is aligned with some equation.
E donc esforsa te engualar las extremitatz de la fractura entre lor, e si la extremitat de lu trencada es subtil, e no pren aquela le sturment per bona axcepcio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas la extremitat de aquel os entro que l’insturment haja poder de aquo.	And strive to align the extremities of the fracture with each other. If the broken extremity is fine and does not take the instrument well, then it is customarily that you insert the extremity of that bone where the instrument has the power to do so.
Mays si no podes reduzir le os de tot am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras enscideys aquel am aquo que coveneys a lu dels inscizoris les quals havem ditz; o serra aquel am una de las serras en qualque manieyra sia a tu possible.	But if you cannot reduce the bone completely with what we have recommended, then incise that part as is appropriate for it from among the incisors which we have mentioned; or it may be that part using one of the saws in any manner that is possible for you.
E aprop ratz aquel que roman en le os de asperitat e de scorsas menudas.	And quickly remove that which remains in the bone of roughness and small fragments.
E cum le os es reduzit, e aprop la reduccio le malaute atroba dolor vehement ledent, lahoras sapias que le os no es retornat al sieu loc natural; e adonc fay aquo quar tu confereyses al malaute gran juvament.	And when the bone is reduced, and after the reduction, if the patient finds intense pain in the bone, then you should know that the bone has not returned to its natural place; and then do what you will confer with the patient for great relief.
Cum es complida la tua restauracio la qual fas al os, e lahoras submergeys drap en vi stiptic negre, e propriament si es en estiu, e no pauses sobre la plagua cerot ni autre causa en la qual sia oli, per so que no fassa en lu accidir poyredura e corropcio.	When your restoration of the mouth is completed, and then immerse a cloth in vinegar tied with a black string, and properly in summer, and do not stay over the wound with a wet cloth or any other cause involving oil, so that no accident of burning or corruption occurs.
E aprop aministra stelas en la hora del tieu compliment de la restauracio de l’os, e layssa la plagua descuberta enayssi que inscidas le trauc am forfexs e uses de envolucios segon la quantitat de la plagua.	And then administer steams at the time of the full hour after the restoration of the bone, and leave the wound uncovered to see if it has healed sufficiently, using forceps if necessary and employing bandages according to the size of the wound.
E guarda te am tota cautela que no strenhas la plagua am la fractura, quar motas veguadas an fayt aquo les fols metges, e fero accidir sobre les sieus malautes mort o malautia corrodent o zuthement, so es sania.	And guard yourself with all caution that you do not strain the wound near the fracture, for many times doctors have caused this to happen to their patients, leading to death or a severe and corrosive illness, if it is healthy.
E si la tieua strictura leugiera, molli, diversa de la strictura de las autras fracturas.	And if the swelling is mild and different from the swelling of other fractures.
E si la plagua es gran o es plagua mala, e temes sobre aquel alcus accidentz mals les quals havem recomtatz, e atrobas dolor en le loc, lahoras no cove que pauses sobre aquel astelas, mays fay ad aquel envolucio de draps durs en loc de stelas e strenh lu am aquelas.	And if the wound is large or a bad wound, and you fear certain harmful accidents which we have mentioned, and find pain at that place, then do not stay over it with steams, but apply a cloth wrap instead of steams and strengthen it with those.
E cum aprop un dia o dos vezes ja la plagua comensar, que en lu sia engendrat brac, lahoras tu osta desus le drap le qual havias pausat sobre aquel am vi, e aprop aministra calguas, enguentz am les quals de nostra constuma es que mediquem las plaguas, ayssi cum enguentz tetrafarmacon e semblantz ad aquel.	And when usually one or two days have passed since the wound has started to swell where a blister is formed, then lift up the cloth you had placed over that area, and then apply cold blisters, ointments which according to our custom we use to treat wounds, thus applying tetrafarmakon and resembling it.
E conveneys a tu que deslias le liament e considera la plagua en quascun dia mati e vespre entro que sia consolidada e fermada, e cove que·l membre sia preparat en tal manieyra que la poyredura corra de lu a las partidas dejos am facilitat.	And you should remove the bandage and examine the wound at midday and evening until it is consolidated and closed, and ensure that the part is prepared in such a manner that pus flows from it to the areas left open.
si a la plagua passan motz dias, e no es consolidada ni es abscindit de lu le brac, lahoras sapias que aqui so satagias de las petitas per que cove enquieras la plagua am tenta.	If the wound passes many days and is not consolidated nor has the blister been removed from it, then you should know that here the blisters are situated. You must examine the wound by pricking it.
E de aquelas satagias aquelas que so separadas remau e extratz, aquelas que de lor no so separadas e pongen le membre e fan accidir dolor, perforsa te a inscidir aquelas segon que a tu aquo es possibla.	And of those blisters, those that are separated remain and are extracted, while those that are not separated and cause pain in the limb, forcefully incise them according to what is possible for you.
E si accideys a la plagua zuchem o eluchen, so es stiomenios, o autra specia de corrupcio e de putrefaccio, lahoras cove que pauses a quada un de aquels am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio del qual es precedida narracio en le sieu capitol.	And if the wound turns red or black, it is stiomenios or another form of corruption and putrefaction. Then you must examine each one of those as described in the section that precedes the treatment for which there is a detailed narration in its own chapter.
E de aquo en le qual cove que stia lo mieu sermo e tu fassas present la tua pessa: quan os gros es trincat, emineys sobre le membre ayssi cum le os de la coyssa e del ajutori e semblantz ad aquels dels membres grans, e que no presumas atraccio de lu, ni la extraccio de lu quar motas veguadas accideys per aquo la mort; habantz layssa aquel entro que poyresca, quar fort leu cayra per si aprop xx dias o xxx; e lahoras cura la plagua si a tu es vist, e si no layssa aquela.	And from where the child was lying, you make your presence known: when the head is broken, stand over the member thus like the head of the patient and the helper, seeming like those of large members, and do not presume extraction or introduction of any foreign objects; for if such accidents occur, death will result; have left that which can resolve itself within, for it will fall away on its own in about 20 to 30 days; and then cure the wound if you see fit, otherwise leave it.
Capitol .xx.	Capitol.xx.
De la curacio de nodacio que accideys en le vestigi de alcuna fractura.	For the cure of a birth that occurs in the vicinity of any fracture.
Motas veguadas accideys aquesta nodacio en le vestigi de sanacio de fractura, e majorment que es prop de las juncturas, e es orrasada per lu la figura del membre; e fort leu prohibeys le membre de la sua operacio natural.	Foreign objects may cause this birth in the vicinity of the healing fracture, especially near the joints, and distort the shape of the member; and strongly prohibit the member from its natural operation.
Adonc considera si la nodacio es recent e aministra en aquela medicinas que han stipticat ayssi co es aloen, e enses, e mira, e sercacollo, e acrassia, e semblantz ad aquels; enayssi que prenguas de aquela alcunas o totas, e comfesiys aquelas am vi stiptic, o am album de huou, o am vi agre, e pausa aquela sobre la nodacio en estopa, e constringeys aquelas sobre lu per bona constriccio.	Then consider if the birth is recent and administer those medicines that have astringent properties, such as aloes, incense, myrrh, and balsam; compare them to those substances; try which you take from these some or all, confirm whether they are astringent, or white of egg, or oily; place them on the birth in cotton, and apply pressure with good compression.
E leyssa extrictura que no deslies aquela per motz dias; e aprop deslia aquela e itera autra, entro que sia remauguda la nodacio; o strenh sobre aquela lamina de plom descentment, quar plom ha proprietat de remaure tot aquo que es imflat en les membres.	Leave the compression in place for several days; then remove it and apply another, during which time the swelling should subside; or strengthen the lead sheet downward, as lead has the property of reducing anything that is inflamed in the limbs.
Mays si nodacio ja es en peyra convertida e streyta es e nessessitat provoca a ostar aquela coytadament, e lahoras scindeys aquela per la partida pus sobirana de lu, e inscideys la superfluitat e eminent, o ratz aquela am alcus rezoris entro que sia remauguda; e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But if the knot has already turned into a stone and is hardened, and if necessity demands to cut it out, then split it along its upper part, and incise the superfluous and prominent part, or cut through it with forceps until it subsides; and treat that area until it heals.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI.
De restauracio de fractura quan es restaurada e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul no segon la sieua natura.	For the restoration of fractures, when restored and then immediately let the limb heal according to its natural course.
Quan fractura de os es restaurada, e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul, lahoras aquo no es fayt sino per motas causas: de las quals la una es multitut de solucio del liament e de la liguacio de lu fayta no segon que cove; o per superfluitat de strictura dels liamentz entro que·l nutriment sia prohibit correr al membre; o per multitut de embrocaccio superflua; o per movement superfluent no en la sua hora; o per pauquesa de sanc en le cors del malaute e per debelitat de lu.	When a bone fracture is restored, and then let the thin limb and flesh heal according to their natural course: this is not done except for certain causes. Of which one cause is the excessive dissolution of the ligament and its connection made not according to what is due; or due to excess compression of the ligaments while nutrition is prohibited from flowing to the limb; or due to excessive ointment application; or due to excessive unnecessary movement; or due to insufficient strength in the body of the patient and weakness.
E curacio de aquo es dar a mengar al malaute e far le cor de lu tendre entro que·l sanc sia multiplicat en lu; e aministra banh; e entromet gaug e leticia sobre lu.	And the treatment for this is to give the patient something to eat and make the heart of the patient tender while the disease multiplies within it; apply baths; and insert tubes and joy into it.
E aprop pausa pegua sobre le membre, per so que la pegua atire a lu mot nutriment, o continua embrocacio de lu am aygua tebeza, entro que·l nutriment corr e retorne a la sua figura natural.	And place your hand over the member, so that the hand draws in nutrition, or continue the moistening with white wine, while the nutrition flows and returns to its natural form.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXII.
De curacio dels osses trincatz quan so restauratz tortuozament e prohibeys la operacio de lor de aquo que cove.	For the treatment of broken bones when they are reduced in a tortuous manner and prohibit the operation from being carried out on such cases.
Quan accideys al membre ja restaurat aprop la sanacio de lu de tortuositat e eminencia al os trincat e nodacio, e es per aquo fededa de forma del membre, mays empero le membre no es prohibit de la sieua operacio natural, lahora no cove que tu recipias la paraula de aquel que exsistima aquel membre sia de novel trincat.	When the member, already reduced, is near the completion of its healing from tortuosity and prominence in the broken bone and nodulation, and this is due to the form of the member, yet the member does not prohibit its natural operation, then you should not receive the word of one who thinks that member is newly broken.
Mays ja so statz motz fols metges e restauradors les quals han fayt aquo en nostra tera; e aquesta operacio es mot vituperable perduzent a gran temor le senhal de la qual es mortal.	Yet there are many foolish doctors and reducers who have done this in our land; this operation is greatly reproachable, leading to great fear from the sign of which is fatal.
Mays si claudicacio e nodacio son recentz, lahoras cove que sian enbrocatz am aygua tebeza en la qual so coytas erbas mollificantz, ayssi cum son fuelas de altea e razitz de lu, e mellilot, e semblantz ad aquels; e sia fayt a lu emplastre am emplastre mollificatio ayssi cum dyallaquilon ben fayt; o que sia preza mucillage de razit de altea e sia contucida am gray de gualina o am oli de cirami, e sia emplastrat am aquel; o que sian prezes figuas grassas e sian trissadas am fems de colom, e semblantz ad aquels de las medicinas que son nompnadas amermans consolidacio.	If claudication and nodulation are recent, then soak them in water of mule urine in which are placed soft herbs, such as those of althea, rue, melilot, similar to those; and it should be made a plaster with a mollifying plaster thus well prepared; or that is prepared with mucilage of herb of althea and is compacted with grey of gauze or oil of cinnamon, and is applied with that; or that are prepared with fatty figs and are wrapped in cloths of dove, similar to those of the medicines named almond consolidatio.
E alcunas vetz es dissolvuda am assidua fricacio leugiera que sia am las mas humidas, e sia administrat movement del membre a tota partida en totas horas.	And sometimes it is dissolved by frequent gentle friction applied to the most humid parts, and movement of the limb should be administered continuously at all times.
Mays si tortuositat ja es anada denant e es fayta fort e convertida es en peyra e provocada es necessitat a curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que sia le pus desus cecsat e la continuacio del os sia dissolvut, e sia inscidit aquo que superflueys de nodacio de aquel meteys am le os am inscissoris subtils, e sia aministrada facilitat en aquel am sollicitut e studi.	And if tortuosity has already gone before and is made strong, converted into a stone, and provoked it is necessary for its cure with iron, then it should be that the pus above the cecum and the continuation of the bone be dissolved, and it should be incised what is superfluous of the nodation of that method on the bone with incisors subtils, and should be administered facilitated in that area with solicitude and study.
Capitol .xxiii.	Chapter XXIII.
De sermo en dislocacio.	On the speech about dislocation.
Dislocacio es eyssiment de alcuna de las juncturas del sieu loc, per que es prohibida de movement, e es orrezada la figura del membre, e fa venir sobre le malaute dolors e lesios grans.	Dislocation is the displacement of any joint in a certain location, making movement prohibited and altering the figure of the limb, causing great pain and injuries to the patient.
Donc quan accideys ad alcu dislocacio, lahoras cove tantost perforsar que sia reduzit, e no tarde aquela reduzir, quar si es tardada, le loc es apostemat e fort leu am aquo es fayta dificil la reduccio de dislocaccio.	Therefore, when a dislocation occurs, it is important to act promptly to reduce it. Do not delay the reduction, for if delayed, the area may become gangrenous, making the reduction of the dislocation much more difficult.
E per aysso no cove que sia maugut ni stendut en la hora de la apostemacio, quar motas veguadas fa venir spasme e dolors ledentz.	And for this reason, it should not be cut or stretched during the time of gangrene, as hot applications cause spasms and severe pains.
Mays quan aquo accideys, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la flaubotomia del malaute, e aprop sia layssat entro que repause le apostema; e aprop le membre sia embrocat am aygua cauda e oli, e aprop sia reduzit am facilitat.	More specifically, when this occurs, you should attend to the incision for draining the gangrenous area in the foot, and allow it to rest until the gangrene has subsided; then, the limb should be bathed with warm water and oil, and finally, the dislocation should be reduced with ease.
E tot membre sia curat am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra en son loc.	And every member be treated with water of which the memory will come to its place.
E yeu ja e ordenatz les capitols de dislocacio segon que es precedit en fractura; de la partida del cos pus sobirana entro a la partida pus dejos.	And I have already arranged the chapters on dislocation according to what precedes in fracture; from the part of the body first, then to the part next, and leave it.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter 24.
De curacio de dislocacio de la mandibula dejos.	For the treatment of dislocation of the jaw, proceed.
So dislocadas las doas mandibulas si no tart; e la dislocacio de amdos es fayta segon una de dos manieyras: que o son remaugudas de lurs locs per pauca remocio, e so mollificadas un petit; o so dislocadas per entiera dislocacio e complida, entro que sian mollificadas a la partida de la junctura entro que corro saliva del malaute e que no puesca tenir aquela ni puesca claure la sua boca, e la lengua de lu sia envolopada en sa paraula.	When both jaws are dislocated without fracture; and the dislocation of both is done according to one of two ways: either they are barely moved from their places and slightly mollified; or they are completely dislocated, after which they are mollified at the joint where saliva flows from the patient's mouth, and the patient cannot open nor close their mouth, with their tongue wrapped in a cloth.
Mays quan la dislocacio de lu es pauca, lahoras en las majors disposicios retorna per si an pauca causa.	More often than not, when the dislocation is slight, it returns to its place with little cause in major displacements.
Mays si la dislocacio es entiera e complida, lahoras cove que sia administrada reduccio de lu leugierament, e no sia tardada de tot.	More often than not, when the dislocation is complete and thorough, you should administer a gentle reduction immediately, and not delay it entirely.
E es que·l ministre tengua le cap del malaute, e entrometa lo metge le dit pous de la una sieua ma en la razit de la dislocacio de la mandibula dedintz la boca de lu, si la dislocacio es de la una part; o que entrometa les sieus dos pouzes ensemps, si la dislocacio es de doas partz, e les autres ditz de las mas de lu sian defora am les quals enguale; e comanda al malaute que cesse las suas mandibulas e absolva aquelas anar de quascuna partida; e le metge engualhe la mandibula e enpellisca la mandibula entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And the minister should hold the patient's head, and the doctor insert his thumb from one hand into the gap of the jaw inside the mouth if the dislocation is on one side; or he should insert both thumbs together if the dislocation is on both sides, with the other fingers holding the cheeks; and command the patient to stop moving his jaw and bring those that have wandered back to their places; and the doctor equalize the jaw and push it back into its proper position.
E si dificil es la reducio de lu, e majorment si amdos las mandibulas so essemps dislocadas, lahoras aministra evoporacio am aygua cauda e oli, entro que sia fayta leugiera la reduccio de amdos e no tardes la reduccio de amdos de tot, ayssi quo havem dit.	And if the reduction is difficult, especially if both jaws are completely dislocated, then administer evaporation with hot water and oil, while performing a light reduction of both and do not delay the reduction of both entirely, as we have said before.
E donc cum retornam e so engualadas, e es clausa la boca del malaute e no es mollificada, lahoras pausa sobre aquelas polvils de drap am cerot, e sia fayt de cera e oli rozat; e aprop sia liat am facilitat am liamens mols.	And when returned and equalized, and the mouth of the patient is closed and not relaxed, then place it on powders of linen with cerate, made of wax and rubbed oil; and apply a soft pad to facilitate the bandage.
E sia le dormir del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e·l cap de lu sia stant entre dos aurelhes, per so que no maugue aquel a la partida dreyta ni a la sinistra; e no li fassas per forsa masteguar alcuna causa; habans la sieua vianda sia forbicio leon, entro que quan las dolors sian remaugudas e las mandibulas so nozadas, lahoras maugue aquo que vol.	And let the patient lie on his back, with his head standing between two pillows, so that it does not weaken on either side; and do not force him to vomit for any cause; having his food forbidden until the pains subside and the jaws are relaxed, then weaken what he desires.
E aquo sia aministrat am facilita, e no trebalhe sobre la apercio de la boca deves la comestio e beure e ocitatio, entro que la mandibula sia nozada e sanada.	And let this be given in moderation, and you should not work on the appetite of his mouth by letting him eat and drink or take medicines until his jaw is relaxed and healed.
E si es dificil la reduccio de duas mandibulas quan so dislocadas en alcuna hora e no so convertidas als lors locs, lahoras motas veguadas accideysso febres e soda assidua, e fort leu es alerguat le ventre del malaute, e fort leu e vomeys colera pura.	And if the reduction of two jaws when dislocated at any time and cannot be returned to their proper places causes fever and frequent swelling, and a strong pain in the abdomen of the patient, as well as severe vomiting of pure bile.
E quan tu vezes aquo, lahoras sapias que es perdicio; e motas veguadas mor aquel al qual accideys aquo en x dias.	And when you see this, then know it is dangerous; and frequent swelling may occur to those upon whom this happens in a few days.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter XXV.
De reduccio de la dislocacio de la furcula e de la extremitat del muscle.	Of the reduction of the dislocation of the furcula and the extremity of the muscle.
Furcula no es dislocada del latz dedintz per la sua continuacio am le pietz; e alcunas veguadas es dislocada a la partida defora, e aquo es declarat al sentiment.	The furcula is not dislocated from the stern inside by its continuation to the foot; and sometimes it is dislocated at the outward part, and this is declared by the sensation.
E la restauracio de lu es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos e extenda les sieus brasses.	And the restoration of it is that the patient lies down and extends his arms.
E aprop coarta le loc am la tua palma am fort coartacio, quar ela retornara.	And then compress the area with your palm with strong pressure, for it will return.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre e pulvils e strenh aquela.	And then place your hand over the area, apply the plaster and powders, and strengthen it.
Mays la extremitat de aquel que siec le coyde e·s continuat am aquel, no es dislocada en alcun dia; lahoras cove que sia reduzida e engualhada segon que havem dit e segon que es a tu aparelhat.	More often, the extremity of that which is attached to the thigh is not dislocated in any day; then it must be reduced and realigned as we have said and according to what is at your disposal.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre, e pulvils, e extrictura, e comanda al malaute adherir a trenquilitat e a repaus entro que sia sanat.	And then place your hand over the area, apply the plaster and powders, and instruct the patient to adhere to tranquility and rest until it is healed.
E am aquesta meteyssa curacio es reduzida la extremita del muscle quan es separada del sieu loc.	And in this therapy, the extremity of the muscle is reduced when it is separated from its place.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter XXVI.
De la reduccio de la dislocacio del muscle.	On the reduction of the dislocation of the muscle.
Sapias que·l muscle no es dislocat sino segon tres manieras, de las quals es la una que sia dislocat a la partida del titillic a la partida dejos.	Know that the muscle is not dislocated in any other way than three manners, of which one is when it is dislocated from the tendon to the bone.
E la segonda es que sia dislocat a la partida desus del muscle, e aquo es fayt tart; e no es dislocat a las partidas detras per la spalla; e no es dislocat a las partidas denant per les nervis.	And the second is when it is dislocated from above the muscle, which is called tart; and it is not dislocated at the back parts by the shoulder; and it is not dislocated at the front parts by the nerves.
E majorment es dislocat e defora eyssit a las partidas dejos deves le titillic, e majorment en aquels dels quals las carns son paucas, leugierament es dislocat; mays en aquels en les quals so motas carns, es eyssit fora am dificultat.	And it is mostly dislocated and pushed outward to the back parts of the tendon at the bone, especially in those where there are few muscles, it is slightly dislocated; more so in those where there are many muscles, it is pushed outward with difficulty.
E fort leu accideys ad alcus homes percussio o cazement, e le muscle de lu es apostemat de apostema caut, e es cujat per aquo que ja sia dislocat.	And sometimes due to the force of a blow or impact, a man's muscle becomes infected with an abscess, and is cut because it is already dislocated.
Adonc cove que tu sproes aquo entro que estias sobre-sertetut de lu, e lahoras procesiscas en la curacio de lu.	Then cover what you are especially over them with, and proceed in the cure of them.
E es conoguda la dislocacio de lu quan es a las partidas dejos deves le titillic; per so que distingescas entre le muscle dislocat e·l muscle sa, quar tu atrobas entre aquels diversitat manifesta; e atrobas en le cap del muscle concavitat e dejos le titillic deves le tocament del cap del muscle ayssi quo un huou, e al malaute no pot redusir la sua ma a la sieua aurelha, ni maure aquela per totz movementz.	When the dislocation is in the shoulder area, you must manipulate; so that you can distinguish between the displaced muscle and the normal muscle, for which you find a clear difference; and you find a concavity at the head of the muscle. By manipulating the head of the muscle, it should feel like a hollow, and the patient cannot bring their hand to their ear, nor move it with all movements.
Si es dislocat deves le pietz o ensus, e tu lahoras atrobas manifest tocament, e no es amaguat.	If it is dislocated, manipulate the foot or above it, and then you will find a clear touch, not hidden.
E de aquesta dislocacio es fayta leugiera reduccio quan es fresca e le malaute es enfant.	And for this dislocation, a gentle reduction is made when it is fresh and the patient is unconscious.
E la reduccio de lu es que·l ministre eleva la ma de lu a las partidas desus; e aprop pause les tieus pouses dejos le titillic de lu, e eleva la junctura am fortaleza en sus al sieu loc, e·l ministre eleva la ma de lu, e extenda aquela en sus; e aprop pausa aquela dejos quar ela retorna leugierament.	And the reduction is that the minister raises the patient's hand above the area; then places his fingers on the shoulder, manipulating it with strength at the joint. The minister raises the patient's hand and extends it properly; then presses the shoulder so that it returns gently.
Mays si per aquo que havem dit no retorna, e so del comensament que accidic la dislocacio, motz dias, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia banhat en aygua cauda e sia aministrada enbrocacio que mollifique e liniesca ayssi cum si so coytz razitz de altea, e fenugrec, e melillot en aygua, e sia administrada.	If, however, it does not return through what we have said, and the dislocation occurs from the beginning, for several days, then the patient should be bathed in cold water and a moistening and liniment application given as if with roots of plantain, fenugreek, and melilot in water, and this should be applied.
E aprop le malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu dos e sia pausat dejos le titillic de lu espera de lana que sia engual entre levitat e strictura, e aprop le metge pause le sieu talo sobre la spera, e eleva le cap del muscle am vertut, e atire la ma del malaute per que no sia mauguda a las partidas dejos, e autre ministre tengua le cap del malaute, que no sia maugut a las partidas dejos, quar aquela tantost retorna al sieu loc.	And then the patient should be placed on their back and kept in this position until the wool felt equally between levity and stiffness, and then the doctor places his hand on the surface, elevating the head of the muscle by its virtue, and pulls the patient's hand so that it is not harmed at the joints, while another minister holds the head of the patient to prevent it from being twisted.
E si voles, reduzeys aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu fassas esser prezent un home le qual sia pus lonc que·l malaute, e estia de la part de aquel latz, e entrometa le sieu muscle dejos le titillic del malaute e eleve le titillic de lu a las partidas desus entro que·l malaute sia suspendut en ayre, e autre ministre tire la ma del malaute de las partidas dejos del sieu ventre.	And if you wish, return the other according to this manner: and it is that you have a person who is longer than the patient, standing on the side of the affected limb, and insert his muscle under the titillation of the patient's foot, elevating the titillation above the joints upwards while the patient's limb hangs in the air, and another minister pulls the patient's hand from the joints down its abdomen.
Mays si le malaute es leugier, lahoras cove que am lu que autre causa sia suspenduda, per so que grave aquel, quar la dislocacio retorna tantost.	But if the patient is light, then consider that another cause may be suspended, for fear that grave illness returns quickly.
E es reduzit eysament segon autra manieyra: e es que sia ficat en terra un fust lonc le cap del qual sia redon de figura, ayssi cum pilo de mortier, que no sia gros ni subtil, e aprop sia pausat dejos le malaute; pus que so pausatz sobre·l cap del fust draps leons, e·l malaute sia stant segon la longitut del fust, e aprop sia extenduda la ma de lu a las partidas dejos del autra part; e sia extendut le cos de lu del autre part am fortaleza, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And it is reduced slowly in another manner: and it is that the patient be placed on the ground with a long rod whose head is round in shape, like the brim of a mortar, neither thick nor thin, and then place the patient; then cover its head with lion skin, and let the patient lie according to the length of the rod. And extend your hand to the opposite parts of the body; and stretch the body from the other side with strength, for the joint returns to its place quickly.
E si es dificil reduccio de lu per totas las causas que havem ditas, lahoras usa de aquesta cura: e es que tu prenguas un fust la quantitat del qual sia en le lonc de dos brasses, e latitut de aquel sia de quatre ditz, e la grossetut de lu sia aleujat en le preon del tittilic segon aquesta forma:	And if the reduction is difficult due to all the causes we have mentioned, then use this cure: and you should take a rod whose length is about two braccia, its width is four digits, and its thickness is enlarged at the tip according to this form.
E aprop sobre le cap redon sian liatz drap leons per so que·l fust no ledesca le malaute.	And place lion skin over the round head to prevent the rod from injuring the patient.
E aprop sia pausat dejos le titillic del malaute, e sia extenduda la ma o le bras sobre·l fust entro a las partidas dejos, e sia liat le fust sobre le adjutori e le bras e la extremitat de la ma.	And then place the patient's head, and extend your hand or arm along the side of the body, and tie the limb to the support and the arm and the extremity of the hand.
Aprop sia pausat le bras sobre un scalo de scala segon la latitut, e la ma sia extenduda a las partidas dejos, e l’autre cos sia suspendut de l’autre part, quar la junctura intra tantost.	And then place the arm on a step of the ladder according to its width, and the hand extended along the sides, and the other side be suspended from the other part, that the joint may soon heal.
E cum le intrament de lu es complit segon quascuna maniera que es a tu possibla, e lahoras cove que tu pauses dejos le titillic spera de lana de engual quantitat; e aprop pauza emplastre perparat de polvera de moli am enses e album de huou sobre tot le muscle, ayssi quo es revolvut desus, e aprop strenh dejos le titillic am strictura decent; e le liament sia revolvut sobre le emplastre, e la ma de lu sia annectida al col de lu, e sia leyssat, e no sia mauguda la ma de lu per vii dias.	And when the instrument for him is completed in any way that is possible, then place under the head a pillow of wool of equal quantity; and then apply an ointment prepared from powder of milled pepper and honey over all the muscle, so that it is well mixed on top, and tightly bind the head with a bandage; the headband should be rotated over the ointment, and the hand should be attached to the neck, and let it be, and do not move the hand for seven days.
E cove que sia pausada la vianda del malaute pauca, entro que·l membre sia confortat, quar es pus leugier a la sanacio de lu.	And ensure that the diet of the patient is light, until the limb is comfortable, for it is more favorable to its recovery.
E aprop la vianda sia donada major aprop vii o v e sia exercitat un movement; e donc si es fermat e no es mollificat, lahoras ja es sanat.	And soon after, more food should be given about seven or five times and exercise should be performed; and thus if it is closed and not softened, then it is healed.
Mays si la junctura es dislocada motas veguadas per humiditat que accideys a lu o per autra causa, lahoras cove que en aquela sia administrat cauteri am tres traucs, segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri.	And if the joint is dislocated due to several days of humidity that affected it or for another cause, then it is necessary to apply a cautery three times, as previously said in the chapter on cautery.
E si tot aysso es fayt e aprop vii dias es desliat le liament e la junctura no es fermada, e le emplastre e la strictura son reduzitz sobre lu alcunas veguadas, e no es fermada e catz e no pot elevar aquel bras a las partidas desus, lahoras sapias que·ls nervis de lu, les quals so al cap del muscle, ja so inscizes o extendutz o mollificatz, e sapia que la junctura nul temps no sira ficada en loc sieu.	And if all this is done and after seven days the ligament and joint are not closed, and the plaster and stricture are reduced over it for several days, and still are not closed and catgut is not placed and the arm cannot be raised above the parts above, then you should know that the nerves of the muscle, which are at the head of the muscle, are either cut or extended or softened, and you should know that the joint will never be fixed in its proper place.
De la dislocacio de aquela qu’es fayta deves le pietz e la mamilha o las partidas detras, la reduccio es fayta am impulcio e extencio am las mas, entro que retorne.	For the dislocation of that which is caused, you should manipulate the foot and calf or the parts behind, reducing it with impulse and extension while it returns.
E sia administrada en aquela l’autra strictura, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And let it be administered in the other stricture, and care that within which it is healed.
E si accideys aprop la sanacio gravitat en le membre e tarditat en le movement de lu, lahoras le malaute uze de banh motas veguadas entro que aquela gravitat sia alleujada e que retorne a la natura de lu primiera.	And if there happens an immediate gravity in the member and tardiness in the movement of it, then the patient uses warm baths until that gravity is alleviated and returns to its natural state.
Capitol .xxvii.	Capitol.xxvii.
De curacio de dislocacio del coyde.	On the treatment of dislocation of the shoulder.
Sapias que la junctura del coyde es dislocada am difficultat e semblantment retorna am difficultat; e aquela es dislocada a totas partidas, e majorment a la partida denant a la partida detras, e la dislocacio de lu no es amaguada a tu quar es cazent dejos le vezement o dejos le tocament segon qualque figura sia dislocat, e quan ajustes le coyde disloguat am le sa, aquo es a tu declarat manifestament, quar la junctura es concavada e no pot doblar le bras, ni tocar am aquel le sieu muscle.	Know that the joint of the shoulder is dislocated with difficulty and seems to return with difficulty; it can be dislocated in all directions, but most commonly in front and behind. The dislocation is not hidden to you—whether by quickly observing or touching according to whatever form it is dislocated. When you set the dislocated shoulder into place, this will be manifestly clear to you, for the joint is concave and cannot bend the arm or touch its own muscle.
E cove que·t coytes, e reduzescas la dislocacio tantost denant que vengua a lu apostema caut, quar si ve a lu apostema caut, dificil es la reduccio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot; e majorment quan es a las partidas detras, quar pus mala es de totas las autras specias de dislocacio, e de major dolor, e motas veguadas deyssen am aquela la mort.	And seek the sockets, and reduce the dislocation as soon as possible before it comes to an abscess. For if it reaches an abscess, reduction becomes difficult, and even with strong means, it is not fully cured; especially when it is in the rear parts, for it is more harmful than all other types of dislocation, causing greater pain, and warm baths often bring about death.
E la restauracio de lu, quan es aquela que es possibla reduzir, es que la ma de lu sia extenduda am doas mas, e le bras de lu sia expandut, e las mas del metge sian sobre le coyde e dejos lu, e el empellisca la junctura am les pouzes de las suas mas ensemps, o am la razit de la sua palma entro que torne en son loc.	And the restoration of it, when that is possible to reduce, is that his hand be extended with two others, and his arm be spread out, and the hands of the doctor be on his thigh and let him, and he press the joint with the heels of his hands or between the palm of his hand as it returns to its place.
Mays si la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras retorna ayssi que dobla la ma am la sua ma, entro que percuta le coyde am la razit de la sua palma.	If the dislocation is in the front parts, then return it thus by bending his hand towards his own hand, between striking the thigh with the palm of his hand.
E si la dislocacio no obezeys a la reduccio, lahoras aministra vehement extencio e mot fort.	And if the dislocation does not yield to reduction, then administer strong extension and vigorous movement.
E es que dos ministres extendan le bras, e tenguan aquel eyssament dos ministres per so que no sia remaugut deves la extencio.	And have two ministers extend the arm, and hold that position with two ministers so that it is not removed from the extension.
E aprop sia revolvut le bras deves tota part, pus que es envolopat drap doblat lonc sobre la ma de lu, o liament.	And then rotate the arm completely around, as it is wrapped with a long folded cloth around the patient's hand, or bandage.
E quant le metge toca la junctura am la sua ma, unte aquela am alcun oli per so que aquo sia aquelas causas las quals ajudan en lubricitat de la junctura am facilitat; e aprop empellesca la junctura am empulcio vehement entro que retorne.	And when the doctor touches the joint with his hand, anoint that area with some oil so that it helps in the lubrication of the joint and facilitates its return; then press the joint vigorously as it returns.
E aprop la reduccio de lu cove que sia pausat sobre aquela empastre en le qual sia stipticitat e excequacio am album de huou, e sia extrenhut am strictura descent, e·l bras sia suspendut del col, e sia layssat per alcus dias.	And after the reduction of the cavity, it should be placed on that cushion where there is a padding and drainage with white linen, and extended in a hanging position, and the arm should be suspended from the neck, and left for some days.
E aprop sia desliat; e donc si la junctura es formada en le sieu loc, lahoras tu deslia le liament de lu e layssa aquela.	And after it should be released; and therefore if the joint is formed in that location, then you release the ligament of the foot and leave it.
E si vezas la junctura no be strenher, lahoras tu itera le emplastre e·l liament, e layssa aquela per alcus dias entro que sia extrenhuda; e aprop deslia aquela.	And if you see the joint not well strengthened, then you repeat the application of the plaster and the ligament, and leave it for some days until it is extended; and then release it.
Mays si accideys a lu gravitat aprop la reduccio de la junctura, e la disposicio de lu es en movement, lahoras aministra humectacio en banh e fricacio subtil, e comprecio, entro que sia aleujat; o pausa sobre la junctura aleliati, so es coyssa de moto grassa; e aprop sia liada, e layssa aquela sobre le os le dia e la nueyt.	But if it happens to him that there is gravity near the reduction of the joint, and its position is in motion, then administer moistening in bath and subtle friction and compression, until it is healed; or pause over the joint for a while, especially if it is a matter of excess fat; and then bind it, and leave it on the bone day and night.
E aprop osta aquela, e met aquel en banh; e quan suza, lahoras tu fregua la junctura am fricacio temprada, e aprop itera sobre aquela aleliati, so es ronhonal de moto, una veguada, e la segonda, e la .iii.a.,	And apply that to it, and put it in the bath; when soaked, then friction the joint with tempered friction, and repeat over it for a while, especially if it is due to excess movement, once, and the second, and the third time.
am intrament de banh, entro que sia linit.	am intrament de banh, entro que sia linit.
E si voles, pausa sobre aquela fenda de vaca humida e scalfada am boder e stren sobre aquel; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas, quar aquela es humida e reduzeys a la sua disposicio.	And if you wish, place your hand over that moist and weathered crack and press strongly against it; do this several times, for that is moist and return it to its position.
Capitol .xxviii.	Capitol. xxviii.
De curacio de dislocacio de malassen, so es de la junctura que es entre·l bras e la ma.	For the treatment of dislocation of the shoulder, it is the joint where the arm meets the shoulder.
Malassen de la ma alcunas vetz es deslocada, e la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es leugiera, e·l contrari es de las autras juncturas, mays empero cove que sia velocitat en la reduccio de lu en la hora en la qual es deslocada, denant que le loc sia apostemat o que accida en lu apostema caut.	Shoulder of the arm is sometimes dislocated, and the reduction of such a dislocation is light. Conversely, for other joints, it is more important that there be speed in the reduction when it occurs, before the area becomes swollen or appestematized.
E la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es que tu pauses la junctura de la ma del malaute sobre una taula e le ministre extenda la ma de aquel, e le metge pause la sua ma o o la sua palma sobre la iminencia de la junctura, e empellisca aquela entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And the reduction of the shoulder dislocation is that you place the patient's arm joint on a table and have them extend their arm. The surgeon then places their hand or palm over the vicinity of the joint and gently push it back into its proper place.
Mays empero cove que sia considerat si la palma ja es ostada al ventre de la ma, lahoras le malaute pause le dos de la sua ma sobre una taula deves la extencio e la reduccio; e si la dislocacio es precedent deves le dos de la ma, lahoras sia la posicio de la ma de aquel intrinicequement sobre la taula, per so que la ma del metge caja sobre aquela iminencia de la junctura.	But first it should be noted if the palm is already pressed against the patient's abdomen, then the patient places both hands on a table to extend and reduce; and if the dislocation is previous, place both hands, while the position of the hand is intricately on the table, so that the doctor's hand falls over that potential of the joint.
E donc si retorna tantost, bon es; e sino, lahoras strenh aquela am empastre cedant le apostema e layssa aquel; e no iteres aquo, quar sino, no soferta ni no podes sobre la reduccio de lu pus que passan a lu dias.	And so if it returns quickly, that is good; but if not, then strengthen the area by packing it, allowing the abscess to come to a head and leave it; and do not repeat this, for if you do, you will neither be able nor suffer for the reduction of it more than what passes in a day.
Mays empero la junctura roman segon la sua tortuositat; e no notz al malaute alcuna causa, sino que la ma es mollificada e no pot strenher alcuna causa; lahoras sapias que les nervis son trincatz o trissatz, e lahoras no es engen en lu sino que sia strenhuda am cauteri prop le cazament de lu e fort leu aquo confereys alcuna causa.	But according to the joint's tortuosity, strengthen it; and do not note any cause to the patient, but rather have your hand mollified and unable to strengthen any cause; then you know that the nerves are cut or torn, and there is no engendering in it except that you strengthen it with a cautery near its site and fortify it with this conferring some cause.
Donc cum malassem es retornada, lahoras pausa sobre lu empastre le qual havem recomtat, e sia layssat e strenhut per v dias; e aprop sia desliat e sia layssat e la ma de lu sia excercitada.	And since the gout has returned, place it over the packing which we have recommended, and let it be left and strengthened for five days; then release it, leave it, and exercise the hand.
Mays si le movement de lu es ostat e accideys en lu alcuna gravitat, lahoras leniys aquela am aygua cauda e am fricacio alcunas veguadas, entro que sia alleujat.	And if the movement in it has been obstructed and occurs with some gravity, then apply that which is cauterized water and some friction several times, until it is alleviated.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter XXIX.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels ditz.	On the cure of dislocation of fingers.
Alcunas veguadas so dislocatz les ditz a tota partida.	In some cases, dislocate the fingers entirely.
E quan es dislocat alcun dit de aquels al dos de la palma o al ventre de lu, lahoras sten le dit e impelleys la dislocacio de lu am les tieus pouses, entro que retorne.	And when one finger is dislocated on the side of the palm or in its center, then hold the finger and push the dislocation back with your fingers, until it returns to place.
E aprop sostenta le cap del dit, e suspen aquel deves la part a la qual es dislocat, e layssa aquel per dos dias.	Then hold the head of the finger, and suspend that part which is dislocated, and leave it for two days.
E aprop suspen aquel e exten aquel entro que dreyt sia engualhat en aquel sieu dia.	Then suspend that part and extend it until it is straightened in that day.
E quan sira noyt, lia aquel segon aquela narracio, e no cesses desliar aquel en le dia e exercitar am movement, e lia aquel en la noyt; e fay aquo per alcus dias entro que sia streyt.	And when it is night, manipulate it according to that instruction, and do not cease to loosen it during the day and exercise with movement, and manipulate it at night; do this for several days until it is straight.
E fay semblant am aquo, si es dislocat al ventre de la ma, e lia aquel ad aquela partida e fay am aquo la tieua primiera operacio, entro que sia sanat.	And make it seem as if you are doing this, if it is dislocated in the hand, and hold that part to another part, and do with this your first operation, until it is healed.
E semblantment fay am aquo quan es dislocat a las autres partidas.	And make it seem as if you are doing this when it is dislocated in other parts.
Capitol .xxx.	Capitol.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels spondils del dos.	For the cure of dislocation of the spine in the second degree.
Quan accideys ad alcun dels spondils del dos o del col dislocacio complida, e so remaugutz motz spondils de lors locs, lahoras en aquela no es curacio, quar la mort se coyta al malaute.	When you encounter dislocation of any of the vertebrae in the lower back or neck, and numerous vertebrae are affected in that location, there is no cure for it, as death may ensue.
E senhal de aquo es que la egestio del malaute es fora-eyssida ses voluntat, e no pot retenir aquela; e motas veguadas so mollificatz alcus membres de lu o doas cambas de lu o dos brasses de lu, o un de aquels; o es remaugut un spondil de son loc, quar motas veguadas es remaugut e motas veguadas es fayta la remocio de aquels a quatre partidas.	The sign of this is that the patient's excretion forces itself out against their will and they cannot retain it; several times, parts of the body, or one or both sides, or one of these areas, become soft. Or a vertebra is dislocated from its place, as several times a vertebra is displaced and multiple operations are performed to remove those in four directions.
Donc aquela ja es remauguda a las partidas detras e es nompnada gelbozitat.	Then that is reddened at the rear parts and is named jaundice.
Mays la curacio de lu es que lahoras consideras si la gelbozitat accidey de puerissia, quar lahoras en aquela no es curacio ni de aquela no es sanacio de tot.	May the cure of it be that when you consider whether jaundice is caused by urines, then in that case there is neither cure nor does one fully recover.
Mays en aquela que ve per cazement o per percussio o per semblant ad aquels, ja diyssero les Antics las manieras de curacio am sermo prolixs, del qual lo mays retorna am profieyt; mays yeu ja e abreujat de aquel del qual lo pauc escusa del trop de lu, per la mieua propinquitat a la entencio mieua exposicio, am la qual he aquo expausat et format ex instrument divers de aquel am le qual mostrero aquo e espausero aquel.	May it be that in those caused by stone or by percussion or by appearance similar to those, the Ancients spoke at length about the methods of cure, regarding which the most returns are prophetic; but I will now abbreviate what is of little use due to its excess, for the nearness of my own understanding and exposition to which I have expounded and formed from various instruments, with which I shall show and expand upon that.
E dic que en gelbosita que accideys de la partida denant en le pietz, no es engen ni sanacio de aquela; e semblantment en aquela que es fayta a dos latz.	And I say that in jaundice caused by the front part of the foot, neither is there any onset nor recovery from it; similarly in that which occurs between two toes.
E de aquelas no es curada sino aquela que accideys en le dos propriament am aquo que yeu recomti.	And of those, only the jaundice that occurs in the two specific areas as I have described is cured.
E es que·l malaute sia extendut sobre la sua cara sobre pug engual prop de paret, e sia extendut dejos lu esturment molh per so que no sia lidit le pietz de lu.	And the patient should be extended on his back as close to the wall as possible, and let him lie on something moistened so that his feet are not exposed.
E aprop un fust dreyt sia pausat, ficat en la terra en la extremitat del pug entorn le cap de lu, e autra fust en aviro les pes de lu en l’autra extremitat del pueg.	And place a straight stick, planted in the ground at the end of the arm near its head, and another stick vertically under his feet at the other end of the stick.
E·l ministre tengua le fust, e no sia fermat en fossa; e autre ministre tengua l’autre segon aquela forma.	The minister should hold the stick, and it should not be fixed in the ground; another minister should hold the other end according to that form.
E aprop envolopa sobre le cap del malaute e dejos les titillic liamen leon ferm; e exten la extremitat del liamel al fust le qual es deves le cap de lu, e lia aquel en lu; e aprop strenh l’autre liament sobre las ancas de lu les denols de lu, e deves las cambas de lu; e aprop ajusta totz les liamentz e lia aquels en l’autre fust le qual es deves les pes de lu.	And wrap around the head of the patient and ensure that the ligaments are tightly bound. Extend the end of the ligament to the stick which is fixed at the head of the patient, and tie it there; and tightly bind the other ligaments over the hips of the patient with his kneels, and position his legs. And adjust all the ligaments and tie them to the other stick which is fixed at the feet of the patient.
E aprop le ministre cascu extenda le liament a la partida del fust, e no sian remaugutz les dos fustz e les liamentz dels sieus locs en les quals son ficatz, mays empero no so fermatz ayssi cum havem dit.	And the minister should extend the ligament to the part of the stick, and do not remove both sticks and the ligaments in which they are inserted, but rather keep them as we have said.
E le metge pause las suas palmas sobre le spondil am fortaleza entro que retorne, o que pause sobre aquela una taula, e aprop que ajuste sobre la taula les sieus pes entro que retorne.	And the doctor places his palms on the spine with force between which he returns, or places one hand on a table, and adjusts his feet on the table as he returns.
Mays si no retorna per aquesta forma, lahoras pren una taula de la qual la latitut o la longitut sia en aviro de tres brassas, e cava en la paret de la qual havem dit que es prop le malaute un loc en le qual intre la extremitat de la taula.	And if it does not return in this manner, then take a table whose breadth or length is about three braccia, and dig into the wall where we have said that it is near the patient a place at the end of the table.
E aprop pausa la maytat de la taula sobre le spondilh, e·l metge pause les sieus pes sobre l’autre extremitat, e estrenha be entro que le spondil sia coartat e que retorne al sieu loc.	And place the majority of the table over the spine, and the doctor places his feet on the other end, and presses well between which the spine is compressed and returns to its place.
E si tu voles, obre am torn le qual es revolvut am la ma; e es que tu fiques en terra deves le cap del malaute en le derier del pug dos fustz, la longitut dels quals sia d’un bras, e deves le cap de lu en le derier del pug eyssament dos fustz; e sia la longitut que es entre quascun fust un palm, e ja es fayt en quascun fust trauc en le qual corr torn, e quascun sia mot fermat en terra per so que no sia maugut.	And if you wish, open the wound which is rotated in your hand; and when you stand on the ground, place the patient's head at the heel of two sticks, whose length is one braccio, and place his head at the heel of similarly two sticks; and let the distance between each stick be a palm, and already make a hole in each stick through which torn can flow, and let each be firmly fixed on the ground so that they do not move.
E sia mes un fust redon en le qual es le torn, e sia revolvut en les dos traucs dels dos fustz.	And let there be a round stick for the rod, and let it be turned in the two holes of the two sticks.
E en la extremitat de lu es un trauc en le qual es format le fust, la longueza del qual es un palm am aquo que es revolvut; e en les dos autres fustz es semblant de aquel.	And at the end of it is a hole through which the stick passes, the length of which is one palm's breadth as it is turned; and in the other two sticks, it is similar to that.
E aprop strenh les liamentz que has streyt en le pietz del malaute en le trau le qual es deves le cap de lu, e les liamentz que has streyts en las coyssas de lu en le torn le qual es deves les pes de lu.	And then strengthen the ligaments you have stretched in the foot of the patient in the hole through which you place its head, and the ligaments you have stretched in the thighs of the patient in the rod through which you place its feet.
E aprop deves quascun torn e stia un ministre que torssa le torn am la sua ma, e le metge engualhe le spondil segon que havem dit.	And then place each rod and have a minister hold the rod with his hand, and the doctor straighten the spine according to what we have said.
E aquesta es la forma del torn:	And this is the form of the rod:
E aprop pus que le spondil es retornat, e le loc es engualhat, lahoras cove que pauses empastre exciccatiu am album de huou, e aprop estopa; e aprop pause sobre le empastre astela de taula de la qual la latitut sia de tres ditz o enviro aquels, e la longitut de lu sia quantitat que prengua le loc de la gelbositat, e sobre la partida del spondil sa.	And when the spine is returned and the area is straightened, then cover it with an ointment made of goose fat, and a bit of wool; place a strip of cloth from a table, whose width should be about three fingers or slightly more, and whose length should fit the area of jaundice, over the part of the spine.
E aprop sia liat am liament le qual havem dit, e uze le malaute de nutriment subtil entro que sia sanat.	And then apply the honey which we have said, and use the patient's subtle nourishment under it until it heals.
E si roman alcuna iminencia en le loc en la fi de la sanacio, lahoras cove que sian aministradas medicinas que moilifico e liniscan am aministracio de la taula per lonc temps, la qual havem recomtada; e ja es aministrada en aquel loc lamina de plom.	And if there is any danger at the site near the end of healing, then it is necessary to administer medicines that mollify and soothe for a long time, which we have recommended; and already a lead sheet has been administered in that location.
E alcunas veguadas accideys imminencia en le derier dels spondils del dos, e es cujat per aquela dislocacio; e es aquel os le qual ja imineys per que no cove que sia fayta prosompcio a lu am aquesta medicina, quar fort leu fara a tu accidir mort.	And sometimes dangers occur near the end of the vertebrae in the back, and are caused by that dislocation; and it is that bone for which you already foresee that no suspicion should arise about it with this medicine, because it will make it very strong to your detriment.
Capitol .xxxi.	Capitol xxxi.
De curacio de anca dislocada.	On the treatment of dislocated hip.
Sapias que la junctura del ancha e la junctura del muscle no endeve sino dislocacio tant solament, e no accideys ad aquelas aquo que accideys a las autras juncturas de petita remocio e concavitat.	Know that the hip joint and the joint of the muscle should dislocate only in such a manner, and not occur with those things that happen to other joints with slight movement and depression.
E la junctura de la ancha es dislocada segon quatre manieyras, quar es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, o a las partidas defora, o a las partidas denant, o a las partidas detras.	And the joint of the ankle is dislocated according to four manners; it is dislocated to the internal parts, or to the external parts, or to the anterior parts, or to the posterior parts.
E majorment es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, e pauc a las partidas denant o a las partidas detras.	And primarily it is dislocated to the internal parts, and little to the anterior or posterior parts.
E senhal de la dislocacio de lu a las partidas de dintz es quar, quan tu ajustas la camba del malaute sana am la malaute, es pus longua e·l denolh es pus heminent que de la sana, e·l malaute no pot doblar le sieu pe deves le lenguonar, e es le loc que siec le lengonar apostemat de apostema caut, per so que·l cap de la coyssa ja es pervengut aqui.	And the sign of dislocation to the internal parts is that when you adjust the foot of the healthy side against the injured side, it becomes longer and the sole is more prominent than on the healthy side. The injured foot cannot bend its toe; this is the place where you should cauterize the apostema, so that the head of the swelling is already reached here.
E·l senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio es a las partidas defora, es que les accidentz de lu so contraris ad aquest accident.	And the sign of one that is affected by dislocation to the external parts is that the symptoms of it are contrary to this accident.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas denant es quar expan la camba sieua segon compliment, mays empero no dobla aquela ses dolor que es en le denol, e si se perforsa ad anar e no pot sobre aquo a las partidas denant; e la urina de lu es retenguda e l’engonar de lu es apostemat, e deves la ambulacio de lu sobre le talo.	And the sign of one that is affected by dislocation to the anterior parts is that the foot swells according to the complement, but it cannot bend the toe that is in pain. If forced to go forward and cannot do so toward the anterior parts; his urine is retained and his swelling is an apostema, and you should treat his mobility on the sole.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas detras es que no expande le denol, ni no puesca doblar aquel denant que doble le engonar, e la camba de lu es pus breva que l’autra, e l’engonar es mollificat, e·l cap de la coyssa es deves aquel loc.	And the sign of those who suffer dislocation in the rear parts is that they cannot expand the belly, nor can they bend what should bend, and the leg is shorter than the other, and the knee is softened, and the head of the thigh is displaced at that location.
Mays reduccio de las specias de aquesta dislocacio es que tu consideras, lahoras, si la dislocacio es vetusta et antiqua, que ja es anticada am le havent aquela aprop tu aministras reduccio de lu e roman segon la sua disposicio, lahoras no es en aquela curacio de tot; e adonc no cove que en aquela sia fayta prosompcio.	The main reduction of the species of this dislocation is that you consider, at that time, if the dislocation is old, whether it has already hardened. If so, you should then reduce it gently according to its position, but not in all aspects; then one should not attempt to make any assumptions about it.
Mays en aquel del qual la dislocacio es recent, e es una de las quatre specias de dislocacio, lahoras te coyta ad aquo que volvas la junctura e extendas aquela a las partidas dedintz e a las partidas defora, e mau aquela a la dextra e sinistra, quar fort leu retorna e no indigeys de autra cura.	For the one where the dislocation is recent, and it is one of the four species of dislocation, you should reduce the joint by turning it back and extending it to the internal and external parts, and manipulate it to the right and left, as it will naturally return to its place without needing further treatment.
Mays, si no retorna en aquesta manieyra, lahoras cove que tu prepares ministre fort e extendas la camba de lu de la partida pus dejos, o am las suas mas, o am liament lo qual es liat sobre la camba desus le denol; e autre ministre extenda la ma de aquel desus enayssi que meta las suas mas dejos les titillics de lu; e aprop strenha am liament leon sobre la razit de la coyssa, e tengua autre ministre ters le extremitat del liament.	Moreover, if it does not return in this manner, you should prepare a strong counterpoise and extend the leg on that side, or place your hand under its thighs, or apply liniment which is rubbed over the leg below the belly; another should extend his hand from above so that it touches the patient's thighs with its fingers; then firmly apply liniment lion over the back of the thigh, and have another person hold the end of the liniment.
E sia extencio de lu o de la partida dedintz a l’angonar a la partida de la furcula, o de la partida detras a la partida del dos.	And it is an extension of his back or from the angle to the fork part, or from behind to the side part of the spine.
E sia la extencio de totz aquels en una veguada entro que·l malaute sia elevat am le sieu cos de terra e que romangua pendent.	And it is the extension of all these in one go, raising the patient's body from the ground and allowing them to hang pendulously.
E aquesta specia de extencio es specia cominal a totas quatre.	And this type of extension is special for all four.
E donc si la dislocacio retorna am aquo que havem dit, sira bo; e sino, lahoras es necessari a tota specia aquo que dire de la propria curacio.	And so, if the dislocation returns as we have said, it will be good; otherwise, for every type, what I say about its own treatment is necessary.
En la reduccio de lu propria, quan es dislocada, e la dislocacio es a las partidas dedintz, cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu latz sa; e aprop pausa les liamentz sobre la razit de la coyssa en aquel loc le qual entre le cap de la coyssa e·l loc que es dejos le langonar; e aprop exten le liament en sus de la part del angonar a la pus auta partida de la furcula.	In the reduction of its own, when dislocated, and the dislocation is in the internal parts, ensure that the patient is laid on their side; then place the pillows on the side of the thigh in that location where between the head of the thigh and the angle area of the spine; then extend the pillow above the part of the angle to the other side of the fork.
E aprop autre ministre fort prengua les brasses de lu, e amerme le loc gros de la coyssa malaute e extenda a las partidas deforo per extencio vehement, quar aquela retorna en le sieu loc.	And then another minister firmly holds the legs of the patient, and compresses the thick part of the affected thigh, extending it outward by strong extension, so that it returns to its proper place.
E aquesta specia es de pus leugiera curacio am la qual aquest membre es reduzit que las autres specias.	And this species is of such slight cure for which this member is reduced compared to other species.
Mays si es excusat sobre tu e no obezeys al entrament am aquesta specia de curacio de tot, lahoras cove que sian liatz les dos pes del malaute ensemps am liament fort, leugier, sobre amdos les talos e amdos les denols.	And if you excuse me and do not follow the training for this species of cure, then make sure that both feet of the patient are tied together firmly, lightly over both the ankles and both the insteps.
E sia la longitut de quascun de son par la quantitat de quatre ditz, e sia la camba malaute extenduda mays que l’autre per quantitat de dos ditz.	And let the length of each be equal to the quantity of four fingers, and let the patient's leg be extended more than the other by a quantity of two fingers.
E aprop le malaute sia suspendut sobre le cap del fust, e que sia en la mayso; e sia la longitut de lu de la terra la quantitat de dos brasses.	And place the patient's leg above the stake's head, and let it be in the hand. Let the length of the rope be equal to the quantity of two braces.
E aprop comanda a un jove fort que minuesca le cap de la coyssa, e sia suspendut am le malaute autre jove, e l’autre jove minuent la coysa am fortaleza empellesca, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And command a strong young man to hold down the patient's thigh, and another strong young man to suspend the leg. The other man should hold down the thigh with strength, so that the joint returns to its place quickly.
Mays en la reducio propria, quan es dislocacio a la partida defora, cove que·l malaute jaga sobre pug segon que havem recomtat en le havent gelbozitat; e sia strenhut le liament sobre la camba malauta propriament e sobre le pietz de lu.	And in the proper reduction, when dislocation is at the outer part, make sure the patient's leg lies on a pillow according to what we have advised regarding the position; and strengthen the rope around the patient's leg and over its ankle.
E aprop dos fustz sian pausatz, la un als pes de lu, e l’autre al cap; e aprop sian pausatz fustz ajustatz al mieg del pueg ficat sobre·l qual draps humitz sian envolopatz, per so que·l malaute no sia dampnajat per que·l fust sia entre las coyssas de lu, per que deves la extencio a las partidas dejos no sia atirat.	And then place two stakes, one on the patient's foot, and the other on the head; and place stakes adjusted in the middle of the stake placed over which wet cloths be wrapped, so that the patient is not harmed because the stake is between the patient's thighs, for you must allow the extension from the parts left undone to be avoided.
E aprop quascun ministre extenda a la sua part, e·l metge am la sua ma enguala la reduccio segon l’art.	And each minister extend to his part, and the doctor with his hand equalize the reduction according to the art.
Donc, si obezeys a revercio, sira bo grandament; e sino, pausa sobre aquela diligentment e ayssi quo havem dit en gelbozitat per aquela engualment.	Then, if you obey reverse, it will be very good; and otherwise, place your hand diligently over it, as we said in the equalization for it.
Mays cove que·l malaute jagua sobre les sieus latz sa quetament.	Make sure that the patient lies quietly on his side.
E quan la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras cove que la camba sia extenduda leugierament, e es segon aquesta meteyssa narracio sobre pueg; e le metge pause la palma de la sua ma dreyta sobre·l langonar malaute, e aprop coarte aquel am l’autra ma, e am aquela coartacio pausa aquel extendut a las partidas dejos a la partida del denol.	And when the dislocation is in the front parts, then make sure that the leg is extended slightly, and this according to this narrative method about the thigh; and the doctor places the palm of his right hand on the injured thigh, and nearby draws it with the other hand, and at that draw place that extension to the rear parts towards the front part.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas detras, lahoras no cove que·l malaute sia extendut a las partidas dejos, e es elevat sobre la terra; habantz cove que sia pausat sobre causa dura, ayssi cum cove le eyssament si l’ancha de lu es dislocada a las partidas defora, segon aquo que havem dit del jasement de lu sobre dos anchas; e es sobre la sua cara e les liamentz sian extendutz, segon que havem dit, no ha guayre.	If the dislocation is at the back parts, then do not let the patient be stretched out on the back, but elevate them above the ground; you should place them on a hard surface, as if the width of their body is dislocated to the front, according to what we have said about its position on two widths; and they should lie on their side with their limbs extended, as we have said, not otherwise.
E cove que sia aministrada compressio am taula sobre le loc al qual yeys la junctura.	A compress should be applied on the area where the joint is dislocated.
Donc cum la reducio es complida segon que cove — e·l senhal de la reduccio de lu no es amaguat a tu, e es que tu extendas del malaute doas cambas, e quan tu vezes aquelas enguals e le malaute extrenh la sieua camba e expandeys aquela ses excusacio, lahoras sapias que·l membre segon que cove es retornat — e lahoras tu ajusta doas coyssas e pausa empastre e extrenh am benda ayssi que la ancha no sia mauguda en alcuna de las partidas; e adheresca le malaute a repaus per tres dias o per quatre.	So, when the reduction is completed as it should be — and you notice the sign of the reduction, which is that you can extend both sides of the patient's limbs, and when you test them equally and the joint extends its usual space, then you know that the limb has returned to its proper place — then you place cushions and apply bandages so that the width is not disturbed in any part; and you keep the joint at rest for three or four days.
E aprop deslia le liament e l’empastre, e compara la una camba am l’autra.	Then compare one limb with the other and remove the bandage and dressing.
Lahoras, si vezas aquelas enguals en vustament, lahoras sapias que la dislocacio ja es fermada, e adonc layssa le malaute anar.	When you see equal signs in the wound, then know that the dislocation is already closed, and then let the patient go.
E si vezas alcuna causa de mollificacio, lahoras tu retorna e emplastra aquel, e extrenh aquel segon la tua primiera strectura, e layssa aquel en tres dias.	And if you see any cause of swelling, then return and apply a plaster there, and bind it according to your first structure, and leave it for three days.
E aprop deslia aquel, e fay aquel tardar en ambulacio sobre quascu per alcus dias, entro que sia confortat.	Then loosen it, and allow it to rest in mobility for each part for some days until it is comfortable.
Capitol .xxxii.	Capitol.xxxii.
De curacio de dislocacio del denolh.	On the treatment of dislocation of the shoulder.
Le denolh es dislocat segon tres manieyras, quar es dislocat a las partidas defora, e a las partidas dedintz, e a las partidas dejos mays a las partidas detras; e a las partidas denant no es dislocat.	The shoulder is dislocated in three ways: it can be dislocated to the outer parts, to the inner parts, and to the back parts more than to the front parts; it is not dislocated to the front parts.
E le senhal de dislocacio de lu es que comandes al malaute que aplique la sua camba am la coyssa; lahoras sapias que·l denol es dislocat.	And the sign of shoulder dislocation is that you command the patient to apply their hand to their hip; then you know that the shoulder is dislocated.
E la restauracio de totas las manieyras de lu es que fassas cezer le malaute dreyt, enayssi que ja extenda la sieua camba, si pot sobre aquo; adherir le tieu dos a la cara de lu, e pausa le pe de lu entre les tieus pes; e aprop fay adherir le denol de lu am las tuas palmas, e rete aquelas entre les tieus ditz sobre le denolh de lu am fortaleza, e autre ministre extenda le sieu pe entro que·l denol retorne a son loc.	And the restoration of all manners of it is that you make sure the patient lies straight, try to extend its leg as much as possible; attach your knees to its face, and place your foot between its feet; then make sure the sole of your hand adheres to its sole, keep those between your fingers on its sole with strength, and another attendant stretches his foot so that the sole returns to its place.
E senhal de reddicio de lu es que la sua camba adharesca am la coyssa am levitat no-laboroza.	And the sign of its submission is that its leg adheres to the thigh with ease, without effort.
E aprop emplastra aquel e fay adhirir la camba am la coyssa, e aprop lia aquelas emsemps am una benda per tres dias o per quatre, e aprop deslia aquelas.	And then apply this and make the leg adhere to the thigh, and keep these in place with a bandage for three or four days, and later remove them.
E no uze le malaute de ambulacio per alcus dias, entro que sia sanat e cofortat.	And do not use the patient's leg for walking for some days until it is healed and strengthened.
Mays si la reduccio de lu a tu es excusada, lahoras aministra fort extencio am liamentz dels quals en la curacio de la hancha precedit narracio.	But if the reduction of it is excused to you, then administer strong extension to the limbs of which in the cure of the hip the preceding narration was given.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter XXXIII.
De la curacio de la dislocacio del talo.	Of the treatment of dislocation of the ankle.
Le talo alcunas veguadas es remaugut per petita remocio, e alcunas veguadas es dislocat segon compliment, e la dislocacio de lu es fayta o a las partidas dedintz o a las partidas deforo.	The ankle is sometimes reduced by slight movement, and sometimes dislocated according to the injury, and the dislocation of the ankle is caused either internally or externally.
E le senhal de la dislocacio de lu es que vezes le talo imflat procedent a la partida a la qual es dislocat.	And the sign of the dislocation of the ankle is that you see the ankle swollen from the part where it is dislocated.
Mays la curacio de la remocio de lu es de leugiera reddicio, e es que sia extendut am facilitat am las mas e sia engualhat entro que retorne.	More so, the treatment of reducing the ankle is by gentle manipulation, and it should be stretched with ease and returned to its normal position.
Mays en la curacio de lu quan es dislocat segon compliment, cove que fasses cezer le malaute dreyt, e tengua aquel un ministre fort e valent de la partida detras del dos de aquel en le mieg loc de lu.	More so, in the treatment of the ankle when it is dislocated according to injury, ensure that you straighten the limb properly, and have a strong and brave assistant behind the injured part at the midpoint.
E aprop te tu am la tieua ma dreyta le pe de la pus sobirana part, e am la tua ma sinistra de la part pus dejos del pe en le loc de la cavilha.	And then, with your right hand hold the foot of the injured part above, and with your left hand hold the part below the foot at the location of the ankle.
E aprop atira le pe a tu am la tua ma dreyta, e aprop am la sinistra per dos veguadas, e aprop exten am la sinistra; e empelleys le pietz del pe am la dreyta deves la camba ses trebalh.	And then draw the foot to your right hand, and towards the left by two stretches, and extend the left; and push the foot's sole to the right, let the leg bend as it works.
E fay aquo doas veguadas segon que havem comtat.	And do this twice according to how we have counted.
E aprop empelleys le pietz del pe a la camba la tersa veguada, e tu es a la cavilha.	And then push the foot's sole to the bend on the third stretch, and you are at the knee.
Donc si retorna en una veguada o en dos segon aquesta manieyra, e si vezes le pe engualhat, es bo; e sino, lahoras sobre lu itera la operacio, quar aquel retorna.	So if it returns in one or two stretches according to this manner, and if you close the foot well, that is good; otherwise, then iterate the operation, for if it does not return.
Mays si a tu es prohibida la reduccio de lu am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu dos sobre terra, e estrenh un paysel mot en terra fermat, e que caja entre las coyssas de lu, e tu ja has envolopat sobre lu drap per so que no ledesca le malaute.	But if in you the reduction of it as we have recommended is forbidden, then make a poultice on the sole of the foot, and place a hard piece of wood on firm ground, and let it press between the patient's thighs, and you have wrapped it with a cloth so that the poultice does not fall off.
E aprop le ministre de lu tengua las suas coyssas, e aprop autre ministre extenda le pe am las suas mas o am liament que lie sobre le col del pe; e aprop extenda aquel quascun ministre contre extencio del sieu par, e le payssel sia extant entre las coyssas del malaute retinent aquel, per so que·l cos de lu no sia atirat a las partidas dejos deves la sua extencio.	And then the minister hold their thighs, and another minister extend the foot with their hands or with wood they place on the heel of the foot; and then each minister extends themselves against the extension of their part, and the piece presses between the patient's thighs, holding that there, so that the body of the patient is not drawn to the sides you let them maintain their extension.
E aprop le metge enguala la dislocacio am las sieuas mas, e autre ministre tengua la coyssa sana a las partidas dejos, quar la dislocacio retorna am la facilitat.	And then the doctor equalizes the dislocation with his hands, while another assists by holding the healthy thigh at the parts left open, so that the dislocation returns with ease.
E donc cum retorna la dislocacio e es declarada a tu la sanetat de la reduccio de lu, lahoras pausa emplastre e extrenh aquela am liamentz fortment, e ligua le pe am liament a la camba.	And then, as the dislocation returns and its reduction is declared to be healthy, then apply a strong paste externally to it, and bind the foot with lint to the leg.
E cove que temes o te guardes dels nervis les quals so detras sobre le talo, per que le liament sobre aquel no sia vehement e leda aquel fortment.	And be careful not to place lint over the nerves behind the ankle, as it might be too strong and severely irritate them.
E aprop layssa aquel per dos dias o per tres; e si le liament es mollificat, extrenh aquel.	And leave it there for two or three days; and if the lint is moistened, remove it.
E aprop deslia aquel en le ters dia o en le quart, e prohibeys le malaute de anament per xl dias.	And remove it on the third day or the fourth, and prohibit the patient from walking for ten days.
Mays si es forsat de anar denant aquel spazi, no es fayta segurtat que la dislocacio no sia sobre lu dissolvuda e corrumpuda, e aprop aquo que no recipia curacio.	More so, if it is necessary to walk before that time, there is no guarantee that the dislocation has not become dissolved and corrupted, and what does not receive treatment.
E si accideys a lu apostema caut, lahoras cove que tu aministre en la cedacio de lu aquo en lo qual precedic la nostra narracio, en autre loc de curacio e de embrocacio, entro que sia remauguda.	And if an abscess occurs in the leg, then when you administer treatment at the site of the lesion as we described earlier in our narrative, do so in another location for treatment and fomentation before it becomes suppurated.
Capitol .xxxiiii.	Chapter XXXIV.
De curacio de dislocacio dels ditz dels pes.	For the treatment of dislocation of the toes in the feet.
Cove que aquel qu’es dislocat sia engualhat am pauca extencio ses trebal; e aquo que no es dificil, abantz es leugier.	Make sure that which is dislocated is gently reduced to a small extent; and what is not difficult, it is easier to do so beforehand.
Mays si la dislocacio es en alcus nozes del dos del pe, lahoras cove que fassas cezer le malaute le sieu pe sobre loc engual de la terra o sobre taula, e sia estant ayssi cum si anava.	But if the dislocation is in one of the big toes of the foot, then make sure you place the patient's foot on a level part of the ground or on a table, and keep it thus as if they were walking.
E aprop tu sta de pes, e pausa le tieu pe sobre aquo que imineys de las juncturas, e aprop calca aquel am le tieu pe am vertut entro que retorne, e que vejas aquel ja engualhat e no aparesca en le loc eminencia.	Then stand on the patient's foot, and place your own foot over the area near the joints. Gently press that part with your foot using its natural strength until it returns to its proper position, and observe that it is reduced without appearing as a prominence in that location.
E aprop pausa dejos le ventre del pe de lu una taula que prengua tot le pe, a la qual sian dos caps, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent e ferma per tres dias; e aprop deslia aquel e fay aquel repausar de ambulacio per motz dias, entro que sia estrenhut e de reddicio sia assegurat.	And then place under the abdomen of him a table that can hold his foot, which has two ends, and strengthen it with structure decent and firm for three days; then remove it and make another repose of ambulation for several days, until it is strengthened and its recovery is assured.
Capitol .xxxv.	Capitol.xxxv.
De las specias de dislocacio que sian faytas am plagua o am fractura o am quascuna ensemps.	Of the species of dislocation that are caused by strain or fracture or any other means.
Quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, e tu te perforssas en la curacio de aquela e en la restauracio de lu, motas veguadas succezeys la mort.	When any of these causes occur, and you are involved in the treatment and restoration of it, you must guard against the occurrence of death.
E per aquo no cove que sobre la curacio de lu presuma, sino aquel que es savi en l’art, de lonc uzatge, misericordios e pietados, tardiu, no-ardit ni presomptuos; e que use en le comensament de medicinas que cedan apostemas cautz tant solament, e leyssa le malaute al divinal jutgament, sino ad aquel al qual speras salut de perdicio, am de la malautia alleviacio, e en la qual appareys alcuna speransa.	And for this reason, you must not presume in the treatment of it, but only someone who is wise in the art, long experienced, merciful and pious; who waits, not impatient, nor rash, nor presumptuous; and uses at the beginning of medicines that allow cautery to take effect only, and leave the outcome to divine judgment, rather than relying on any one method for complete recovery, but to whom you show some hope in the alleviation of illness, and in which you appear to have some hope.
E adonc esforsa te tantost far de lu la reduccio en le comensament de la causa, denant que endevengua apostema caut.	And then strive to perform the reduction at the beginning of the cause, before it becomes an abscess.
E adonc si le membre retorna segon que volem, lahoras aministra regiment le qual ceda apostema caut e cura la plagua am aquo que conveneys a lu dels enguentz desiccatius.	And then, if the limb returns as we want, administer a regimen that prevents the formation of an abscess and heals the wound in a way suitable for it using drying ointments.
E si dislocacio es am fractura e accideys en le os satagias separadas, lahoras tu perforsa le stement de lor, e fay en aquo so que havem dit en las malautias simplas de aquo que es precedit en les locz de aquels.	And if dislocation is with fracture and accidents in the bones separated, then you reduce their joints, and do so as we have said in simple ailments previously discussed in those locations.
E guarda e esquiva segon la tua vertut aquel del intrament en las vias de temor segon que a tu es precedida la mia predicacio; quar aquo es milhor a tu deves le tieu Creator, e mays permanent a la tua gloria, e mays saludos al tieu cos verays aquels en le tieu temps.	And use and avoid according to your virtue that part of the instrument along the ways of fear as my preaching precedes you; for this is better for you to be held by your Creator, and more permanent to your glory, and more greetings to your true essence those in your time.
Ayssi fineysso las paraulas de Albucasim perfieytament de las quals Dieus ne sia benezeyt.	Thus you finish the words of Albucasim perfectly of which may God be blessed.
Amen.	Amen.
