قال واضع هذا الكتاب لمّا أكملت لكم يا بنىّ هذا الكتاب الذى هو جزء العلم فى الطبّ بكماله وبلغت الغاية فيه من وضوحه وبيانه رأيت أن أكمله لكم بهذه المقالة التى هى جزء العمل باليد.	I have completed this book for you, my sons, this book which is a part of the science of medicine, with its benefits and advantages. I have reached the goal in it from its clarity and simplicity. I saw that I should complete it for you with this chapter, which is a part of the work with the hand.
لأنّ العمل باليد محسنه فى بلدنا وفى زماننا معدوم البتّة حتّى كاد أن يدرس علمه وينقطع أثره.	Because the work with the hand is honorable in our country and in our time, it is rare to find someone who teaches its skill and whose influence does not cease.
وإنّما بقى منه رسوم يسيرة فى كتب الأوائل قد صحّفته الأيدى وواقعه الخطاء والتشويش حتّى استغلقت معانيه وبعدت فائدته.	And there remained of it (the skill) only a few vague references in the books of the ancients, which were corrected by the experts and removed from the defects and the confusions, until I clarified its meanings and increased its benefits.
فرأيت أن أحييه وأؤلّف فيه هذه المقالة على طريق الشرح والبيان والاختصار وأن آتى بصور حدائد الكّى وسائر آلات العمل إذ هو من زيادة البيان ومن وكيد ما يحتاج اليه.	I saw that I should revive it and compile this chapter in the way of clarification, explanation, and brevity, and that I should bring illustrations of the surgical instruments and other tools of work, since it is an addition to the explanation and a fulfillment of what is needed.
والسبب الذى لا يوجد صانع محسن بيده فى زماننا هذا لأنّ صناعة الطبّ طويلة وينبغى لصاحبها أن يرتاض قبل ذلك فى علم التشريح الذى وصفه جالينوس.	And the reason why there is no skilled craftsman with a good hand in our time, is that the profession of medicine is long and it is necessary for its owner to be well-versed beforehand in the science of anatomy, which Galenous described.
حتّى يقف على منافع الأعضاء وهيآتها ومزاجاتها واتّصالها وانفصالها ومعرفة العظام والأعصاب والعضلات وعددها ومخارجها والعروق النوابض والسواكن ومواضع مخارجها.	Until he understands the functions of the organs, their positions, connections, and separations, and knows the bones, nerves, muscles, their numbers, and their exits, as well as the veins, arteries, and their branches.
ولذلك قال ابقرات إنّ الأطبّاء بالاسم كثير وبالفعل قليل ولا سيّما فى صناعة اليد، وقد ذكرنا نحن من ذلك طرفا فى المدخل من هذا الكتاب.	Therefore, Hippocrates said that many physicians are known by their name, but few by their actions, and it is not so in the craft of the hand. We have mentioned this aspect in the introduction to this book.
لأنّه من لم يكن عالما بما ذكرنا من التشريح لم يخل أن يقع فى خطاء يقتل الناس به كما قد شاهدت كثيرا ممّن تصوّر فى هذا العلم وادّعاه بغير علم ولا دراية.	For one who is not knowledgeable in what we mentioned of anatomy, it is not unlikely that he will fall into mistakes that kill people, as I have seen many who pretend to be experts in this science without knowledge or experience.
وذلك أنّى رأيت طبيبا جاهلا قد شقّ على ورم خنزيرىّ فى عنق امرأة، فأبرى بعض شريانات العنق فنزف دم المرأة حتّى سقطت ميتة بين يديه.	And that is why I saw a foolish physician who made an incision in the varicose veins of a woman's neck, so he cut some of the neck's sinews and the woman's blood gushed out until she died between his hands.
ورأيت طبيبا آخر قد تقدّم فى اخراج حصاة لرجل قد طعن فى السّن وكانت الحصاة كبيرة فتهوّر فأخرجها بقطعة من جرم المثانة.	A skilled physician had previously succeeded in extracting a large bone fragment from a man who was stabbed in the thigh, and it was making him restless, so he extracted it with a piece of cloth from the mattress.
فمات الرجل الى نحو ثلاثة أيّام، وكنت قد دعيت الى اخراجها فرأيت من عظم الحصاة وحال العليل ما قدّرت عليه ذلك.	The man died after about three days, and I had been called in to extract it, so I saw the bone fragment and the state of the patient, which made me realize that.
ورأيت طبيبا آخر كان يرتزق عند بعض قوّاد بلدنا على الطبّ.	I saw another physician who was skilled at some of our country's surgical practices.
فحدث لصبّى اسود كان عنده كسر فى ساقه بقرب العقب مع جرح فأسرع الطبيب بجهله فشدّ الكسر على الجرح بالرفائد والجبائر شدّا وثيقا ولم يترك للجرح تنفّسا.	A black attendant had a fracture in his leg near the ankle with a wound, so the physician hastened to set the fracture on the wound with bandages and splints, tightening them strongly and not leaving any space for the wound to gape.
ثم اطلقه على شهواته ثمّ تركه أيّاما وأمره أن لا يحلّ الرباط حتّى تورّم ساقه وقدمه وأشرف على الهلاك.	Then he wrapped it with a compress, and left him for some days, and ordered him not to move the dressing until the swelling of his leg and foot subsided, and he looked out for any sign of gangrene.
فدعيت اليه فأسرعت حل الرباط فنال الراحة واستقلّ من اوجاعه إلّا أنّ الفساد قد كان استحكم فى العضو ولم أستطع ارداعه.	He called me to him, so I hastened to undo the dressing and found no relief, and his pains had increased, for the putrefaction had taken hold of the limb and I could not stop it.
فلم يزل الفساد يسعى فى العضو حتّى هلك.	The putrefaction did not cease to spread in the limb until he died.
ورأيت طبيبا آخر بّط ورما سرطانيّا فتقرّح بعد أيّام حتّى عظمت بلية صاحبه وذلك أنّ السرطان اذا كان محضا من خلط سوداوىّ فإنّه لا ينبغى أن يعرض له بالحديد البتّة.	I saw another physician who had a cancerous tumor on his lip, and it ulcerated after a few days until the patient's pain became severe, for if the cancer was derived from a black bile, it was not suitable to treat it with iron instruments.
إلّا أن يكون فى عضو يحتمل أن يستأصل جميعه.	Unless it is in a member that can be entirely amputated.
ولهذا يا بنّى ينبغى لكم أن تعلموا أنّ العمل باليد ينقسم قسمين عمل تصحبه السلامة وعمل يكون معه العطب فى اكثر الحالات.	Therefore, my sons, it is fitting for you to learn that manual work is divided into two categories: a type of work that ensures safety and a type that involves risk in most cases.
وقد نبّهت فى كلّ مكان يأتى من هذا الكتاب العمل الذى فيه الغرر والخوف فينبغى لكم أن تحذروه وترفضوه.	And I have pointed out in every place that comes from this book the work that involves danger and fear, so it is fitting for you to beware of it and avoid it.
لئلّا يجد الجاهل السبيل الى القول والطعن فخذوا لأنفسكم بالحزم والحياطة ولمرضاكم بالرفق والتثبّت.	The ignorant person does not find the way to the patient and the wound, so take care of yourselves with bandaging and cauterization, and do not neglect yourselves with wrapping and stitching.
واستعملوا الطريق الافضل المؤدى الى السلامة والعاقبة المحمودة وتنكّبوا الامراض الخطرة العسيرة البرؤ.	And use the best method leading to health and the praised recovery, and avoid the serious and severe chronic diseases.
ونزّهوا انفسكم عمّا تخافون أن يدخل عليكم الشبهة فى دينكم ودنياكم فهو ابقى لجاهكم وارفع فى الدنيا والآخرة لأقداركم.	And beware of what you fear that doubt may enter into your religion and your worldly life, for it is a defect in your piety and a decrease in this world and the hereafter for your rewards.
فقد قال جالينوس فى بعض وصاياه لا تداووا مرض سوء فتسمّوا أطبّاء سوء.	For Galen said in some of his wills: "Do not treat a bad disease, so you are called bad doctors.
وقد قسمت هذه المقالة على ثلثة ابواب.	And I have divided this chapter into three sections.
الباب الاوّل.	The First Section.
فى الكّى بالنار والكّى بالدواء الحادّ مبّوب مرتّب من القرن الى القدم وصور الآلات وحدائد الكّى وكلّ ما يحتاج اليه فى العمل باليد.	On the incision with the razor and the incision with the sharp medicine, a well-arranged and well-established method from the head to the foot, and pictures of the instruments and what is needed for them in the work by hand.
والباب الثانى.	The Second Section.
فى الشقّ والبطّ والفصد والحجامة والجراحات وإخراج السهام ونحو ذلك كلّه مبوّب مرتّب وصور الآلات.	On incision, venesection, cupping, and surgical operations, and extracting the arrows and similar things, all well-arranged and with pictures of the instruments.
والباب الثالث.	The Third Section.
فى الجبر والخلع وعلاج الوثى ونحو ذلك مبوّب مرتّب من القرن الى القدم وصور الآلات.	On fracture, luxation, and treatment of wounds, and similar things, well-arranged and established from the head to the foot, and pictures of the instruments.
الباب الاوّل.	The First Section.
فى الكّى.	On Incision.
وقبل أن نذكر العمل به ينبغى أن نذكر كيفيّة منافعه ومضارّه وفى اىّ مزاج يستعمل.	And before we mention the operation, it is necessary to mention its benefits and drawbacks, and in which condition it is used.
فأقول إنّ الكلام فى كيفيّة منفعة الكّى ومضارّه كلام طويل وعلم دقيق وسرّ خفىّ وقد تكلّم فيه جماعة من الحكماء.	I say that the discussion of the benefits and drawbacks of incision is a long topic, requiring precise knowledge and subtle secrets, and many wise men have spoken about it.
واختلفوا فيه وقد اختصرت من كلامهم اليسير مخافة التطويل.	And they disagreed on it, but I have summarized the minimum of their words, fearing excessive length.
فأقول إنّ الكّى ينفع بالجملة لكلّ سوء مزاج يكون مع مادّة وبغير مادّة حاشى مزاجين وهما المزاج الحارّ من غير مادّة والمزاج اليابس من غير مادّة.	I say that the scalpel benefits from being held for every bad mixture, whether it is with a material or without a material, except for two mixtures: the hot mixture which is without a material and the dry mixture which is without a material.
فأمّا المزاج اليابس مع مادّة فقد اختلفوا فيه فقال بعضهم إنّ الكّى نافع فيه وقال آخرون بضدّ ذلك إنّ الكّى لا يصلح فى مرض يكون من الحرارة واليبوسة لأنّ طبع النار الحرارة واليبوسة.	As for the dry mixture with a material, they have differed over it; some of them said that the scalpel is beneficial in it, while others disagreed with that, saying that the scalpel does not rectify in a disease resulting from heat and dryness, because the nature of fire is heat and dryness.
ومن المحال أن يستشفى من مرض حارّ يابس بدواء حارّ يابس، وقال الذى يقول بضدّ ذلك إنّ الكّى بالنار قد ينفع من مرض حارّ يابس يحدث فى ابدان الناس.	And it is unlikely that a hot, dry disease can be treated with a hot, dry medicine, and he who disagrees with that says that the scalpel, by fire, can benefit from a hot, dry disease that occurs in people's bodies.
لأنّك متى اضفت بدن الانسان ورطوبته الى مزاج النار اصبت بدن الانسان باردا.	Because when you have inserted the human body and its moistness into the fire mixture, the human body becomes cold.
وأنا اقول بقوله لأنّ التجربة قد كشفت لى ذلك مرّات الّا أنّه لا ينبغى أن يتصوّر على ذلك الأمر الّا من قد ارتاض ودرب فى باب الكّى دربة بالغة.	And I say to him, because experience has repeatedly shown me that, although it is not fitting to imagine it, unless one has been cautioned and trained in the art of surgery with a foreign language.
ووقف على اختلاف مزاجات الناس وحال الامراض فى انفسها واسبابها واعراضها ومدّة زمانها.	And I have stopped at the difference in people's mixtures, and the condition of their diseases within themselves, and their causes, symptoms, and duration of time.
وأمّا سائر الامزجة فلا خوف عليك منها ولا سيّما الامراض الباردة الرطبة فقد اتّفق جميع الاطبّاء عليها ولم يختلفوا فى النفع بالكّى فيها.	As for the other mixtures, there is no fear of them, nor of the cold, moist diseases; for all physicians have agreed on their treatment with the scalpel and did not differ in its benefit.
واعلموا يا بنّى أنّ من سرّ التعالج الكّى بالنار وفضله على الكّى بالدواء المحرق لأنّ النار جوهر مفرد لا يتعدّى فعله العضو الذى كوى ولا يضرّ بعضو آخر متّصل به إلّا ضررا يسيرا.	And know, my son, that the secret of the treatment with the scalpel by fire and its superiority over the scalpel with cauterizing medicine is because fire is a pure, unmixed substance that does not exceed its effect on the member that is being treated, and it does not harm another connected member except for a slight harm.
والكّى بالدواء المحرق قد يتعدّى فعله الى ما بعد من الاعضاء وربّما احدث فى العضو مرضا تعسر مداواته وربّما قتل، والنار لشرفها وكرم جوهرها لا تفعل ذلك الّا أن افرطت.	And the scalpel with cauterizing medicine may exceed its effect to what is beyond the members, and perhaps it causes a disease in the member that makes its treatment difficult, and perhaps it kills; but fire, with its nobility and generosity of substance, does not do that except when it is misguided.
وقد اتّضح لنا ذلك بالتجربة لطول الخدمة والعناية بالصناعة والوقوف على حقائق الأمر.	We have tested it for us through experience over the length of service and attention to industry and stopping at the facts of the matter.
ولهذا استغنيت عن طول الكلام، ولو لا أنّه لا يليق بكتابى هذا لأوردت عليكم فى النار سرّا غامضا وكيفيّة فعلها فى الاجسام ونفيها للامراض بكلام فلسفىّ برهانّى يدقّ عن افهامكم.	For this reason, I have refrained from lengthy speech, and if it were not that it does not befit a book like this, I would have presented to you in the fire of a burning desire and how it works on the bodies and drives out the illnesses with philosophical words, convincing you by its evidence.
واعلموا يا بنّى أنّهم قد اختلفوا فى الزمان الذى يصلح فيه الكّى وجعلوا افضل الزمان زمان الربيع.	And know, my sons, that they have differed in the timing which is suitable for it and made the best time the spring season.
وأنا اقول إنّ الكّى قد يصلح فى كل زمان من اجل أنّ الضرر الواقع من قبل الزمان يستغرق فى المنفعة التى تستجلب بالكّى.	And I say that it is suitable at every time, because the harm that occurs before the timing becomes hidden in the benefit that is sought through it.
ولا سيّما إن كان الكّى من اوجاع ضروريّة قويّة محفدة لا تحتمل التأخير لما يخاف منها أن يعقب ببلية هى اعظم من يسير الضرر الداخل من قبل الزمان.	And it is not fitting that the disease should be from among the powerful, overwhelming, and unendurable injuries, which do not tolerate delay, for what is feared from it is greater than the internal harm that occurs before the timing.
ولا يقع ببالكم يا بنّى ما يتوهّموه العامّة وجهّال الاطبّاء أنّ الكّى الذى يبرئ من مرض مّا لا يكون لذلك عودة ابدا وتجعلوه لذاما.	And it does not occur to your minds, my sons, what the common people and the ignorant doctors think, that the disease which is cured from a certain illness will never have a relapse, and they make it a principle.
وليس الامركما ظنّوا من اجل أنّ الكّى انّما هو بمنزلة الدواء الذى يحيل المزاج ويجفّف الرطوبات التى هى سبب حدوث الاوجاع.	And the ignorant people do not think that the disease is actually in a state of being opposite to the medicine that changes the temperament and removes the bad humors, which are the cause of the occurrence of the injuries.
إلّا أنّ الكّى يفضل على الدواء بسرعة نجحه وقوة فعله وشدّة سلطانه.	Rather, the disease is stronger than the medicine in terms of its rapidness, effectiveness, and intensity of its dominance.
وقد يمكن أن يعود المرض وقتا مّا من الزمان على حسب مزاج العليل وتمكّن مرضه وقوّته وما يتهيّأ فى جسمه من اجتماع الفضول فيه واهمال نفسه فى اكتسابها من الاغذية ونحو ذلك من الاسباب.	And it is possible that the illness may return at a time, depending on the temperament of the patient and the establishment of his disease, and its strength, and what is accumulated in his body from the gathering of residues and neglecting himself in acquiring them from the nourishment and similar things from the causes.
اللّهمّ الّا أن يكون المرض الذى يستعمل فيه الكّى مرضا لطيفا وفى عضو قليل الفضول والرطوبات.	The disease for which the disease is treated with gentle medicine, and in an organ with little residue and bad humors.
مثل كّى الضرس عن الوجع ونحوه فقد يمكن أن لا يعود فيه ذلك الوجع وذلك يكون فى الاقلّ.	As the wound is near the joint and its vicinity, it may be difficult to restore that joint, and this will be in the lesser.
وأمّا قول العامّة ايضا أنّ الكّى آخر الطّب فهو قول صواب لا الى مايذهبون هم لأنّهم يعتقدون أن لا علاج ينفع بدواء ولا بغيره بعد وقوع الكّى والامر بخلاف ذلك.	And the common people also say that the wound is the last of the physician's duties, which is a correct saying, not because they think that there is no treatment that can benefit by medicine or otherwise after the occurrence of the wound and the severity of the pain, but to the contrary.
وإنّما معنى إنّ الكّى آخر الطّب إنّما هو أنّنا متى استعملنا ضروب العلاج فى مرض من الامراض ولم تنجع تلك الادوية ثمّ استعملنا آخر شىء الكّى فينجع فمن هاهنا وقع إنّ الكّى آخر الطّب.	But the meaning of 'the wound is the last of the physician's duties' is that when we have tried various treatments for a disease and they did not benefit, then we resort to the last thing, which is the wound, and thus it happens that the wound is the last of the physician's duties.
لا على المعنى الذى ذهب اليه العامّة وكثير من جهّال الاطبّاء.	Not according to the meaning that the common people have gone to, and many of the ignorant physicians.
وقد ذكرت الاوائل أنّ الكّى بالذهب افضل من الكّى بالحديد وانّما قالوا ذلك لاعتدال الذهب وشرف جوهره وقالوا إنّه لا يتقيّح موضع الكّى وليس ذلك على الاطلاق.	And I have mentioned that the ancients said that a wound with gold is better than a wound with iron, and they said that because of the mildness of gold and the nobility of its essence, and they said it does not irritate the site of the wound, but that is not on the basis of experience.
لأنّنى قد جرّبت ذلك فوجدته انّما يفعل ذلك فى بعض الابدان دون بعض والكّى به احسن وافضل من الحديد كما قالوا الّا أنّك اذا احميت المكواة فى النار من الذهب لم يتبيّن لك متى تحمى على القدر الذى تريد لحمرة الذهب.	Because I have tried it and found that it does not do that in some cases, but rather the wound is better and more suitable with gold than with iron, as they said, except that if you cauterize a vessel of gold in the fire, it will not be apparent to you when it reaches the degree you want for burning the gold.
ولأنّه يسرع اليه البرد وإن زدت عليه فى الحمى ذاب فى النار وانسبك فيقع الصانع من ذلك فى شغل فلذلك صار الكى بالحديد عندنا اسرع واقرب من الصواب للعمل إن شاء الله.	And because it is hastened to cool down and if you add to it in the cauterization, it will burn in the fire and its creator will be punished for that, so for this reason the wound with iron became faster and closer to being correct for the operation, God willing.
وقد رتّبت هذاالباب فىالكّى على فصول نظّمتها من الرأس الى القدم ليسهل على الطالب ما يريد منه إن شاء الله.	And I have organized this chapter on wounds in sections, which I have arranged from head to toe, so that it will be easy for the student to find what he wants from it, God willing.
الفصل الاوّل.	The First Chapter.
فىكىّ الرأس كيّة واحدة.	A fracture of the skull is one thing.
تنفع هذه الكيّة من غلبة الرطوبة والبرودة على الدماغ اللتين هما سبب للصداع وكثرة النزلات من الرأس الى ناحية العينين والاذنين وكثرة النوم ووجع الاسنان واوجاع الحلق.	This fracture is due to the severity of the moistness and cold on the brain, which are a cause of headache, frequent yawning from the head to the area of the eyes and ears, and frequent drowsiness, and pain in the teeth and ache in the throat.
وبالجملة لكلّ مرض يعرض من البرودة كالفالج والصرع والسكات ونحوها من الامراض.	And with each compilation for every disease that appears from cold, such as palsy, and paralysis, and tetanus, and similar ones of the diseases.
صورة هذه الكيّة أن تأمر العليل اوّلا بالاستفراغ بالدواء المسهل المنقى للرأس ثلاث ليال او اربع على حسب ما توجب قوّة العليل وسنّه وعادته.	The treatment of this fracture is to anoint the affected area with a medicine that is pure and refined for the head, three or four times, according to the strength of the affection and its severity.
ثمّ تأمره أن يحلق رأسه بالموسى ثمّ تقعده بين يديك متربعا قد وضع يديه على صدره.	Then treat him by making him sniff a remedy, then make him sit between your hands, placing his hands on his chest.
ثمّ تضع اصل كفّك على اصل انفه بين عينيه فحيث انتهى اصبعك الوسطى فعلّم ذلك الموضع بالمداد.	Then place the base of your palm on the base of his nose between his eyes, so that your middle finger is extended to that spot with the medication.
ثمّ احم المكواة الزيتونيّة التى هذه صورتها.	Then apply the Zoitory ointment, which is its form.
انكشف من العظم قدر رأس الخلال او قدر حبّة الكرسنّة فارفع يدك والّا فأعد يدك بالحديدة نفسها او بغيرها إن بردت.	Uncover as much of the bone as the size of a dirham or a carat, then remove your hand and return it to its former position, or to another one if you have removed it.
حتّى ترى من العظم ما ذكرت لك ثمّ خذ شيئا من ملح فحلّه فى الماء وشرّب فيه قطنة وضعها على الموضع واتركه ثلاث ايّام.	Until you see the bone as I mentioned to you, then take some salt, dissolve it in water, and soak a compress in it, place it on the spot, and leave it for three days.
ثمّ احمل عليه قطنة مشرّبة فى السمن واتركها عليه حتّى تذهب الخشكريشة من النار ثمّ عالجه بالمرهم الرباعىّ الى أن يبرأ إن شاء الله.	Then apply to it a compress soaked in rose oil, and leave it on until the inflammation subsides from the wound, then treat it with the four-part remedy until he recovers, God willing.
وقد قالوا ان الجرح كلّما بقى مفتوحا يمدّ القيح فهو افضل وانفع.	And they said that if the wound remains open, it is better to let the pus flow out, and it is more beneficial.
وذكر بعضهم بأن يكوى الجلد الى العظم وتمسك المكواة حتّى يحترق بعض ثخن العظم ثمّ يجرّد بعد ذلك ما احترق من العظم ثمّ يعالج.	And some of them mentioned that the wound should be cauterized to the bone, and the ointment should be held on until some of the bone's thickness is scorched, then what was scorched from the bone would slough off afterwards, and then it would be treated.
وقال آخرون ينبغى أن يبالغ بالكّى حتّى يؤثر فى العظم تأثيرا قويّا حتّى يسقط من العظم كهيئة القيراط اوالفلكة الصغيرة وزعموا انّه ينفّس من ذلك الموضع ابخرة الرأس ويترك الجرح مفتوحا زمانا طويلا.	The extreme bruise should be treated with a strong influence on the bone until it affects the bone strongly, so that it drops off from the bone either as a splinter or a small flake, and they assume that it is separated from that position, leaving the head of the wound open for a long time.
ثمّ يعالج حتّى يندمل، ولست أرى هذين النوعين من الكّى البتّة الّا فى بعض الناس وعلى طريق الغرر وتركه عندى افضل ومع السلامة اذا كانت فإنّ الرأس يعضف متى تفرّق اتصاله الطبيعىّ كما قد شاهدناه فى سائر الاعضاء.	Then it is treated until it becomes inflamed, and I have not seen this type of bruise on the bone except in some people, and it is better to leave it to its natural course with safety, if it is so, for the head will unite naturally when its natural connection is restored, as we have seen in other limbs.
ولا سيّما متى كان رأس العليل ضعيفا بالطبع والنوع الاوّل من الكّى اسلم وافضل عندى واياه استعمل فاعمل به تسلم إن شاء الله.	And it is not suitable when the head of the wound is weak by nature, and the first type of bruise on the bone is better suited for it, and it is more effective to use it, God willing.
الفصل الثانى.	The Second Chapter.
فىكىّ الرأس أيضا.	Also Treating the Head Wound.
اذا حدث فى جملة الرأس وجع مزمن وطال ذلك بالعليل واستعمل الإيارجات والقوقايات والسعوطات والأدهان والضمادات ولا سيّما إن كان قد كوى الكيّة الواحدة التى وصفنا فلم ينفعه شىء من ذلك فانظر.	If a wound occurred on the head and became chronic and lingered with the dressing, and the medications and bandages were used, but it did not benefit from any of that, so look.
فإن كان رأس العليل قوّى البنية بالطبع ولم يكن ضعيفا وكان يجد بردا شديدا فاكوه كيّة أخرى فوق تلك قليلا.	For if the head of the wound was strong by nature and not weak, and it found severe cold, then cauterize another spot above that one slightly.
ثمّ اكوه على كلّ قرن من رأسه كيّة حتّى يذهب ثخن الجلد وينكشف من العظم القدر الذى وصفنا.	Then cauterize on every prominence of the bone a spot until the thickness of the skin is burned and the bone is exposed to the extent that we described.
واكوه كيّة فى مؤّخّر رأسه فى الموضع الذى يعرف بالفأس وخفّف يدك فى هذه ولا تكشف العظم فإنّ العليل يجد لها ألما شديدا خلاف ألم سائر كيّات الرأس كلّها وسأذكر هذه الكيّة فى موضعها.	And cauterize a spot at the back of the head in the place that is recognized by the crown, and reduce your hand in this, and do not expose the bone, for the wound finds it very painful, unlike the pain of other wounds on the head, all of them, and I will mention this cauterization in its position.
وينبغى أن تكون المكواة التى يكوى بها قرنا الرأس ومؤخّره ألطف من المكواة التى يكوى بها وسط الرأس وهذه صورتها.	And it is necessary that the cauterization be the one that cauterizes the prominence of the head and its back, and this is gentler than the cauterization that cauterizes the middle of the head, and this is its form.
الفصل الثالث.	The Third Chapter.
فىكىّ الشقيقة غير المزمنة.	About the non-suppurating wound.
اذا حدث فى شقّ الرأس وجع مع صداع وامتدّ الوجع الى العين فاستفرغ العليل بالادوية المنقية للرأس واستعمل سائر العلاج الذى ذكرت فى تقاسيم الامراض فإن لم ينجع ذلك فالكىّ فيها على وجهين.	If a wound occurs on the head and is accompanied by a fever and the pain extends to the eye, then use the medicinal treatment for the head that has been mentioned in the chapter on fever, and employ other treatments that have been mentioned in the chapter on wounds; if that does not help, then open the wound in two directions.
إمّا الكىّ بالدواء الحادّ المحرق وإمّا بالحديد.	Either open the wound with a sharp lancet or with an iron instrument.
فأمّا الكىّ بالدواء المحرق فهو أن تأخذ سنّا واحدا من الثوم فتقشره وتقطع اطرافه من الجهتين ثمّ شقّ موضع الوجع من الصدغ بمبضع عريض حتّى يصير فيه موضعا تحت الجلد يسع فيه السنّ.	Then opening the wound with a sharp lancet is done by taking one tooth of a razor, sharpening it and cutting its edges from both sides, then making an incision at the site of the pain in the scalp with a narrow scalpel until it forms a space under the skin where the tooth can enter.
فيدخل فيه تحت الجلد حتّى يغيب ثمّ شدّ عليه برفائد شدّا محكما وتتركه قدر خمس عشرة ساعة ثمّ حلّه وأخرج الثوم واترك الجرح يومين او ثلثة ثمّ احمل.	Then insert it under the skin until it meets the resistance, then tighten it with a strong bandage and leave it for fifteen hours, then remove it and take out the razor, and leave the wound for two or three days, then treat it.
عليه قطنة مغموسة فى السمن حتّى يقيح الموضع ثمّ تعالجه بالمرهم الى أن يبرأ إن شاء اللّه، وإن شئت فعلت ذلك ببعض الادوية المحرقة التى آتيتها فى المقالة الثامنة عشر فى الادوية المحرقة.	Apply a compress soaked in oil until the site heals, then treat it with ointment until it recovers, God willing; if not, then do that with some of the sharp medicines I mentioned in chapter eighteen on sharp medicines.
وأمّا كيّها بالحديد فعلى هذه الصفة: تحمى المكواة التى هذه صورتها:.	And as for opening it with an iron instrument, it is done in this way: the shape of the instrument is like this:.
وتسمّى المكواة المسماريّة لأنّ رأسها كهيئة المسمار فيها بعض التقبيب وفى وسطها نتوّ صغير.	And it is called the crescent-shaped instrument because its head is curved like a crescent moon, with some notches on it, and in its middle there is a small tube.
ثمّ تضعها على موضع الوجع وتمسك يدك وانت تدير الحديدة قليلا قليلا، ويكون القدر الذى تحرق من ثخن الجلد مثل نصفه.	Then place it on the site of the pain, and hold your hand firmly, and gently move the instrument back and forth, and the amount that is scraped from the thickness of the skin will be like half of it.
وترفع يدك لكيلا تحرق الشريان الذى من اسفل فيحدث النزف، ثمّ تشرّب قطنة فى ماء الملح وتضعها على الموضع وتتركه ثلثة ايّام.	And lift your hand so as not to scrape the artery that is below, lest it causes bleeding; then sprinkle a compress with rose water and salt, and apply it to the site, and leave it for three days.
ثمّ تحمل القطنة بالسمن ثمّ تعالجه بالمرهم الى أن يبرأ إن شاء الله.	Then apply the cotton with rose-water and bind it with the bandage until he recovers, God willing.
وإن شئت كويت هذه الشقيقة بالطرف السكّينىّ الناتى من المكواة وتحفظ من قطع الشريان فى هذه الشقيقة غير المزمنة خاصّة.	And if you wish to unite this fractured bone with the straight splint, which is taken from the wooden splint, and take care not to cut the artery in this fracture, especially the one that is not yet formed.
الفصل الرابع.	Chapter Four.
فىكّى الشقيقة المزمنة.	Treating the Fractured Bone.
اذا عالجت الشقيقة بما ذكرنا من العلاج المتقدّم وما ذكرنا فى تقاسيم الامراض فلم ينجع العلاج ورأيت من العلّة ما لا يقوم بها ما ذكرنا من الكّى الاوّل بالدواء او الكىّ بالنار.	If you treated the fracture with the treatment we mentioned and what we mentioned in the sections on diseases, and the treatment did not succeed, and you saw from the ailment what does not respond to the first remedy, either the doctor or the nurse.
فينبغى أن تحمى المكواة السكّينيّة حتّى تبيضّ بعد أن تعلّم على موضع الوجع بخطّ طوله نصف اصبع او نحوه وتترك يدك مرّة واحدة وانت تشدّها حتّى تقطع الشريان وتبلغ نحو العظم.	You should apply the straight splint until it becomes white after you have taught on the site of the ache, with a line along its length, half a finger or nearly, and leave your hand one time and hold it firmly until you feel the artery and reach near the bone.
الّا أنّه ينبغى لك أن تتحفّظ من اتّصال الفكّ الذى يتحرّك عند المضغ فتحرق العضل او العصب المحرّك له فيحدث التشنّج.	It is necessary for you to beware of the connection of the joint that moves when chewing, lest you injure the moving muscle or nerve, causing stiffness.
وكن على حذر ورقبة من نزف دم الشريان الذى قطعت فإنّ فى قطعه الغرر.	And be on guard and beware of the flow of blood from the artery that you cut, for in its cutting there is danger.
ولا سيّما لمن جهل ما يصنع ولم يكن دربا مجرّبا وترك العمل اولى.	And it is not suitable for one who does not know what he is doing and has not been trained in the profession, and leaves the primary work.
وسيأتى ذكر تدبير النزف العارض من الشريان على وجهه فى موضعه من الكتاب إن شاء اللّه، فإن رأيت من العلّة ما لا تقوم به هذه الكيّة.	And we will mention the management of the bleeding artery on its surface, in its place in the book, God willing, for I saw from the ailment what does not respond to this remedy.
ورأيت جسم العليل محتملا فاكوه كيّة فى وسط الرأس كما وصفنا وعالج الجرح حتّى يبرأ إن شاء الله.	And I saw the body of the patient bent over, his head bowed in the middle of the head, as we described, and treated the wound until he recovered, God willing.
وإن شئت استعملت الكىّ الذى ذكرنا فى باب سلّ الشريان بالمكواة ذات السكّينين فإنّه كىّ افضل من هذا وأنجع.	And if you wish to use the doctor who we mentioned in the chapter on bandaging the artery with the straight splints, for it is a better treatment than this and more effective.
الفصل الخامس.	The Fifth Chapter.
فىكىّ اوجاع الأذنين.	Concerning the fractures of the forearm bones.
اذا حدث فى الأذن وجع عن برد وعولج بالمسهلات وسائر العلاج الذى ذكرنا فى التقسيم ولم يذهب الوجع فاحم المكواة التى تسمّى النقطة التى هذه صورتها.	If a fracture occurs in the forearm and it is dislocated from its place, and we treated it with bandages and other treatments that we mentioned in the previous section, but the pain did not subside, then we should cauterize the affected area at the point where the injury occurred.
ثم تنقط بها بعد إحمائها حول الأذن كلّها كما تدور او حولهما جميعا إن كان الوجع فيهما.	Then we should apply it afterwards, after wrapping it around the entire forearm, just as it is bent or twisted, if the pain is in both of them.
وتبعد بالكىّ من أصل الأذن قليلا بعد أن تعلّم الموضع بالمداد ويكون الكىّ قدر عشر نقط فى كلّ أذن او نحوها ثمّ تعالج المواضع حتّى يبرأ إن شاء الله.	And afterwards, the forearm is cauterized slightly above the wrist, after marking the spot with ink, and it should be about ten points on each forearm or thereabouts, then the spots are treated until recovery, God willing.
الفصل السادس.	The Sixth Chapter.
فىكىّ اللقوة.	Concerning the ankle.
اللقوة التى تعالج بالكّى انّما تكون من النوع الذى يحدث من البلغم على ما ذكرت فى تقاسيم الامراض.	The ankle that is treated with cauterization, which is of the type that occurs due to phlegmatic humor, as I mentioned in the previous section on diseases.
ويجتنب كىّ النوع الذى يحدث من جفوف وتشنّج العصب.	And we avoid cauterizing the type that occurs due to gout and nerve irritation.
متى عالجت هذا النوع من اللقوة بالايارجات والسعوطات والغراغر فلم ينجع علاجك فينبغى أن يكوى العليل بثلاث كيّات.	When I treated this type of ankle with purging and blood-letting, and other treatments, but it did not respond to treatment, it is likely that the patient will be cured by being cauterized in three places.
واحدة عند أصل الأذن والثانية أسفل قليلا من صدغه والثالثة عند مجتمع الشفتين.	One at the base of the forearm, the second a little below the anklebone, and the third at the junction of the lips.
واجعل كيّك من ضدّ الجهة المريضة لأنّ الاسترخاء انّما يحدث فى الجهة التى تظهر صحيحة.	And I make the cauterization points on the opposite side of the affected area, because relaxation only occurs in the side that appears healthy.
وصورة الكىّ أن تكويه كيّة بإزاء طرف الأذن الأعلى تحت قرن الرأس قليلا وأخرى فى الصدغ ويكون طولها على قدر طول الابهام.	And the pattern of cauterization is to make a point on the upper side of the forearm, below the crown of the head, slightly, and another at the anklebone, and their length should be equivalent to the length of the fingers.
تنزل بالكّى يدك حتّى تحرق قدر نصف ثخن الجلد، وهذه صورة المكواة وهى نوع من السكّينيّة التى تقدّمت صورتها الّا أنّها ألطف منها قليلا كما ترى.	You should bring the cauterizing iron down until it reaches a depth of about half the thickness of the skin, and this is the pattern of the branding, which is a type of scarring that has a similar shape, but is slightly more gentle, as you can see.
وينبغى أن يكون السكّين فيه فضل غلظ قليلا، ثمّ تعالج الموضع بما تقدّم ذكره حتّى يبرأ إن شاء الله.	It is desirable that the scalpel be slightly bent, then it should be applied to the site with what has been mentioned previously until healing occurs, if God wills.
الفصل السابع.	Chapter Seven.
فىكىّ السكتة المزمنة.	Treating Chronic Ulcers.
اذا أزمنت السكتة وعالجتها بما ذكرنا ولم ينجع علاجك ولم يكن بالعليل حمّى فاكوه أربع كيّات.	If you have treated the ulcer as we mentioned and the treatment has not been successful, and it has not been affected by the medicine, then cauterize it with four points.
على كل قرن من رأسه كيّة وكيّة فى وسط الرأس كما ذكرنا وكّيّة فى موخّر الرأس على ما تقدّم.	On each horn of his head, a point and a point in the middle of the head as we mentioned, and a point on the back of the head, according to what has been presented.
وصفة المكاوى على ما تقدم، وقد يكوى ايضا كيّة على فم المعدة فيكون ابلغ، ثمّ تعالج بما تقدّم.	The prescription for empyema is as previously mentioned; it may also be cauterized with a point on the orifice of the bowel, so that it becomes more effective, then treat it with what has been presented.
الفصل الثامن.	Chapter Eight.
فىكىّ النسيان.	Treating Fistulas.
الذى يكون من البلغم ينبغى أن يسقى العليل اوّلا من الايارجات الكبار والحبوب المنقية للدماغ.	What is from phlegm, it is desirable that the patient be given a laxative first, then the large and small purging medications for the brain.
ثمّ يحلق رأسه كلّه وتحمل على مؤخّره ضماد الخردل المكتوب فى مقالة الاضمدة تحمله مرات فإنّه ضرب من الكىّ.	Then he should be cupped on his whole head and a poultice of toasted rhubarb should be applied to the back of his neck, which is bound many times, so that it will be a strong remedy.
وافعل ذلك على الرتبة بعينها التى ذكرتها هنالك فإن برىء بذلك والّا فاكوه ثلاث كيّات فى مؤخّر رأسه تكون مصطفّة من اعلى الرأس الى اسفل العنق.	And do that on the same rank as mentioned, if he is not cured by it, then cauterize him with three points on the back of his head, extending from the top of the head to the bottom of the neck.
واجعل بين كلّ كيّة وكيّة غلظ اصبع ثمّ يعالج الكىّ بما تقدّم، فإن اردت الزيادة وكان العليل محتملا لذلك فاكوه الكيّة الوسطى.	And let there be a space of a finger's width between each point and another, then treat the points as previously mentioned; if you want to increase it and the patient is inclined towards that, then cauterize the middle point.
فإن اردت الزيادة فاكوه على القرنين ثمّ تعالجه حتّى يبرأ، وتكون المكواة زيتونيّة على الصورة التى تقدّمت.	If you want to increase it, cauterize on the horns, then treat him until he recovers, and the cauterization will be in a z-shaped form as previously mentioned.
الفصل التاسع.	The Ninth Section.
فىكىّ الفالج واسترخاء جميع البدن.	Make an incision and relax all the muscles.
ينبغى أن تتقدّم فى تنقية الرأس بالايارجات وما ذكرنا ثمّ احلق رأس العليل ثمّ اكوه كيّة فى وسط الرأس وكيّة على كلّ قرن من الرأس وكيّة على مؤخّره.	It is necessary to start with cleansing the head by using a syringe and what we have mentioned, then shave the patient's head, then make an incision in the middle of the head and an incision on each horn of the head and an incision at its back.
وثلاثا على فقارات العنق، فإن احتجت فى علّة استرخاء البدن الى أكثر من ذلك وكان المريض محتملا لذلك والمرض قويّا مستحكما فاكوه أربع كيّات على فقارات ظهره.	And three on the nape of the neck, if you were unable to relax the muscles more than that and the patient was inclined to it, and the disease was strong, manifestly, so make four incisions on the vertebrae of the back.
وأبلغ بالكىّ حتى تحرق من الجلد أكثره وترفع يدك ثمّ تعالجه على ما تقدّم ذكره حتّى يبرأ إن شاء الله، وتكون المكواة زيتونيّة.	And inform the patient until the incision heals from the skin, and elevate your hand, then apply it to what you have mentioned beforehand, until he recovers, if God wills, and make the bandage zinc-based.
الفصل العاشر.	The Tenth Section.
فىكىّ الصرع.	Make an incision on the abscess.
انّما يكوى المصروع الذى يكون صرعه من قبل البلغم، فينبغى أن ينقى دماغه اوّلا باليارجات الكبار وبسائر العلاج الذى ذكرنا فى التقسيم اذا كان العليل كبيرا وكان محتملا لأخذ الادوية.	It is necessary to evacuate the pus that is in the abscess, which has been formed by the phlegm, and it is necessary to cleanse his brain first with the large syringes and other treatments that we have mentioned in the section, if the abscess was large and the patient was inclined to take the medications.
فأمّا إن كان صبيّا لا يحتمل الادوية فليستعمل الغراغر والمملضغ المنقية للدماغ قبل ذلك بأيّام كثيرة مع تحسين اغذيته.	But if it was a young patient who could not withstand the medications, then use the irrigations and gentle cleansers for the brain before that, over many days, along with improving his nutrition.
ثمّ يحلق رأسه ثمّ اكوه الكيّة الواحدة فى وسط الرأس على ما تقدّم فى الصفة وكيّة أخرى فى مؤخّره.	Then shave his head, then make a single incision in the middle of the head as mentioned before in the section, and another incision at its back.
وعلى كلّ قرن من رأسه كيّة، فإن كان المريض قويّا وكان محتملا فاكوه الكيّات التى ذكرت فى صاحب الفالج واسترخاء البدن على فقارات العنق وفقارات الظهر، وتكون المكواة زيتونيّة على الصفة التى تقدّمت.	And on each horn of his head an incision, if the patient was strong and inclined, then make the incisions that were mentioned in the case of the surgical patient and relaxation of the muscles on the nape of the neck and the vertebrae of the back, and make the zinc-based bandage according to the section that was mentioned beforehand.
فإن كان العليل صبيّا فاجعل المكواة لطيفة على هذه الصورة.	If the patient is a young boy, make the bandage light on this pattern.
الفصل الحادى عشر.	The Twelfth Operation.
فى كىّ المالنخوليا.	On the dissection of the axilla.
اذا كان سبب المالنخوليا رطوبات فاسدة وبلغم غليظ فاكوه الكيّات التى ذكرنا فى صاحب الفالج.	If the cause of the axillary swelling is a thick and stubborn abscess, then open the abscesses that we mentioned in the case of the patient with elephantiasis.
إن كان سبب المالنخوليا فضل مائل الى السوداء وكان جسم العليل مرطوبا فاسقه ما ينقى دماغه على ما تقدّم فى التقسيم.	If the cause of the axillary swelling is a malignant ulcer that has turned black and the patient's body is corrupt, then evacuate what is stagnant in his blood according to what we have mentioned in the section on evacuation.
ثمّ احلق رأس العليل ثمّ اصنع كعكة محكمة من كتان كالدائرة ثمّ أنزلها فى وسط رأسه والعليل قاعد متربّعا يمسك من كلّ جهة ثمّ خذ رطلا واحدا من سمن الغنم العتيق.	Then, shave the patient's head, then make a tight circular dressing of two layers, and place it in the middle of his head. The patient should sit bent forward, holding each side, and take one pill from the aged hippocras.
ثمّ سخّنه على النار سخونة معتدلة قدر ما يحتمل الاصبع اذا أدخل فيه ثمّ تفرغه وسط رأسه فى الدائرة وتتركه حتّى يبرد، تفعل ذلك بالعليل كلّ أسبوع مرّة مع سائر تدبيره الجيّد حتّى يبرأ إن شاء اللّه.	Then, apply a moderate heat to the lantern, as much as the finger can bear if inserted, then place it in the middle of his head within the circle and leave it until it cools. Do that with the patient every week, along with other good treatments, until he recovers, God willing.
وإن شئت كويته تنقّطا صغارا كثيرة من غير أن تمسك يدك بالمكواة بل يكون تشميما فإنّ هذا النوع من الكّى يرطب الدماغ باعتدال.	And if you see that the swelling has many small abscesses, do not touch it with your hand in the bandage, but let it be a poultice, for this type of abscess ripens the blood with moderation.
ثمّ تحمل عليه قطنة مشرّبة فى السمن او فى شحم الدجاج.	Then, apply to it a compress soaked in aged hippocras or in chicken fat.
الفصل الثانى عشر.	The Twelfth Chapter.
فى كىّ الماء النازل فى العين.	On the dissection of the descending watery humor in the eye.
اذا تبيّن لك ابتداء الماء النازل فى العين بالعلامات التى ذكرت فى التقسيم فبادر فاسق العليل ما ينقى رأسه واحمه من جميع الرطوبات وعرّقه فى الحمّام على الريق أيّاما.	If you find that the descending watery humor in the eye is apparent to you through the signs that I mentioned in the section, then hasten to evacuate the patient's head and cleanse him from all impurities and wash him in the bath with warm water every day.
ثم مره بحلق رأسه واكوه كيّة فى وسط الرأس ثمّ اكوه كيّتين على الصدغين إن كان ابتداء نزول الماء فى العينين جميعا او من الجانب الواحد إن كان فى العين الواحدة.	Then, shave his head and make a dressing in the middle of the head, then make two dressings on the temples if the descending watery humor is apparent in both eyes or one dressing on one temple if it is in one eye.
ثمّ اقطع بالمكواة جميع الاوردة والشريانات التى تحت الجلد ولتكن الكيّات فيها طول فى عرض الصدغين وتحفّظ من نزف الدم.	Cut with the scalpel all the vessels and nerves that are under the scalp, and leave the arteries in it throughout its length in the dissected area, and beware of bleeding.
فإن رأيت شيئا منه فاقطعه على المقام بأىّ علاج أمكنك وسنأتى بالحكمة فى سلّ الشريانات وقطعها والتحفّظ من النزف.	If you see any of it, cut it off at the base with a suitable treatment that is possible for you, and be careful in dissecting the nerves and cutting them, and beware of bleeding.
وقد يكوى فى القفا تحت العظمين كيّتين بليغتين.	And two ligaments are found at the back of the vertebrae, which are very thick.
الفصل الثالث عشر.	The 13th Section.
فى كىّ الدموع المزمنة.	On the chronic blood vessels.
اذا كانت دموع العين مزمنة دائمة وكانت من قبل الأوردة والشريانات التى فى ظاهر الرأس من خارج الرأس وتيقّنت أنّ ذلك من فضول باردة غليظة بلغمانيّة فاكوه الكىّ الذى وصفت بعينه فى ابتداء الماء النازل.	If the blood vessels of the eye are chronically diseased and were previously from the vessels and nerves that are on the surface of the head from outside the head, and you think that it is because of a cold, humid, and melancholic temperament, then treat the vessels that I described specifically at the beginning of the descending materia.
كيّة فى وسط الرأس وكيّتين على الصدغين وكيّتين فى القفا تحت العظمين وإن احتجت الى زيادة فاكوه كيّة فى كلّ جانب من ذنب العين على طرف الحاجب بمكواة صغيرة.	There is a vessel in the middle of the head, and two on the dissected area, and two at the back of the vertebrae, and if you need to add more, then treat the vessel on each side of the eye's corner towards the edge of the eyebrow with a small scalpel.
الفصل الرابع عشر.	The 14th Section.
فى كىّ نتن الأنف.	On the vessels of the nose.
اذا عالجته بما ذكرنا فى التقسيم ولم ينجع العلاج فبادر فاسق العليل القوقايا ثلاث ليال ثمّ احلق رأسه وأكوه الكيّة الوسطى بالمكواة الزيتونيّة.	If you treated it with what we mentioned in the section and the treatment did not succeed, then hurry and make an incision on the three ligaments for three days, then shave his head and cut the middle vessel with the zeitone scalpel.
ثمّ اكوه بالمكواة المسماريّة كيّتين فوق الحاجبين تحت الشعر قليلا وتحفّظ من الشريان لا تقطعه، وهذه صورة المسماريّة.	Then cut with the masmariyah scalpel, two above the eyebrows, under the hair slightly, and beware of the nerve so you don't cut it, and this is the picture of the masmariyah.
الفصل الخامس عشر.	The 15th Section.
فى كىّ استرخاء جفن العين.	On the vessels of the relaxation of the eye's eyelid.
اذا استرخى جفن العين عن مرض او رطوبة فاكو الجفن كيّة واحدة بهذه المكواة الهلاليّة.	If the eyelid of the eye relaxes due to a disease or weakness, then cut the eyelid's vessel with this helalyah scalpel.
وإن شئت فاكوه فوق الحاجبين قليلا كيّتين فى كلّ جهة وتباعد من الصدغين ويكون طول كلّ كيّة على طول الحاجب.	If you dislike it, elevate it slightly above the eyebrows, two fingers' breadth in each direction, and separate it from the temples, so that the length of each section is along the length of the eyebrow.
ولا تبالغ يدك بالكىّ بل على قدر ما يحترق ثلث الجلد، وتكون صورة المكواة على هذه الصفة.	Do not overextend your hand with the section, but to the extent that it is sufficient to remove a third of the skin, and the shape of the excision will be on this condition.
الفصل السادس عشر.	The Sixteenth Chapter.
فى كىّ جفن العين.	On the section of the eyelid.
اذا انقلبت اشفارها الى داخل فنخست العين فالكىّ فيها على نوعين.	If you turned its edges towards the inside of the eye, the section in it will be of two types.
إمّا الكىّ بالنار وإمّا الكىّ بالدواء المحرق، فأمّا كيّها بالنار فتأمر العليل قبل ذلك أن يترك اشفاره إن كان ممّن ينتفها حتّى تطول وتستوى.	Either the section with the fire or the section with the sharp medicine, and of these, the section with the fire, so it is ordered to leave its edges before that, if it was something that needed to be opened until it becomes flat and even.
فإن نخسته عند نباتها فتشدّ عينيه بعصابة لئلّا تتحرّك حتّى تنبت فإذا نبتت واستوت فضع رأس العليل فى حجرك ثمّ تعلّم على جفن العين بالمداد علامة على شكل ورقة آس.	If you left it when it was planted, it will congeal with a dressing for a while until it sprouts; and if it has sprouted and become fixed, then put the head of the instrument on your finger, then teach on the eyelid with the material, making a mark in the shape of a piece of paper.
ويكون ابتداء العلامة بالقرب من الاشفار ثمّ تضع تحت الجفن قطنة مشرّبة فى بياض البيض او فى لعاب البزرقطونا ثمّ تحمّى مكواة هذه صورتها.	And the beginning of the mark will be near the edges, then you put under the eyelid a small, curved needle in the white of the egg or in the humor of the bzarqtuna, then you make an incision in this shape.
ثمّ تكوى على الشكل الذى علّمت قليلا قليلا فى مرّات كثيرة حتّى يحترق سطح الجلد الذى هو كشكل ورقة الآس كلّه ظاهره خاصّة وعلامة صحّة عملك أن ترى جفن العين قد تشمّر والشعر قد ارتفع عن لحمة العين.	Then you cauterize on the shape that you marked, little by little, in many repeated ways, until it reaches the surface of the skin, which is like a piece of paper, all of it is visible and has a correct mark, and your operation is successful when you see that the eyelid has been raised and the hair has risen from its adhesion to the eye.
فارفع يدك حينئذ واتركه ثلاثة أيّام، ثمّ احمل عليه قطنة بالسمن حتّى تنقلع الخشكريشة ثمّ عالجه بالمرهم حتّى يبرأ إن شاء اللّه، فإن عاد شىء من الشعر بعد وقت واسترخى الجفن.	Then leave your hand at that time and let it be for three days, then apply a dressing with grease until the crusts fall off, then treat it with the merhem until it heals, if God wills. If some of the hair returns after a while and the eyelid relaxes.
فأعد الكىّ على ذلك الموضع كما فعلت اوّلا، فإن كان الشعر فى الجفن الأسفل فاكوه حتّى يرجع الى موضعه الطبيعّى ولا ينخس الشعر العين، وأمّا الكىّ بالدواء المحرق فهو أن تأمر العليل أن يترك الاشفار حتّى تطول وتستوى.	Place the scalpel on that spot as you did previously, for if the hair is in the lower jaw, it will be reversed to its natural position and not interfere with the eyelashes. As for the scalpel's path with the curved sides, it is necessary to order the assistant to hold back the edges until they settle down.
ثمّ تصنع من الكاغد صورة ورقة آس ثمّ خذ من الصابون المعهود ومن الجير غير المطفأ من كلّ واحد وزن درهم او نحوه فتسحقهما جميعا سحقا جيّدا وتفعل ذلك بالعجلة لئلا يجفّ.	Then make a picture from the Kaghd, and take from the Sabun al-Ma`hud, and from the Jarir that is not rusty, each weighing a dirham or a little more, and mix them all together into a smooth paste, and do that with speed so it does not congeal.
ثم تبسط منه على الكاغد الذى صنعت كهيئة ورقة الآس وتضعه على جفن العين الواحدة او الاثنتين وتضع تحت العين قطنة مشرّبة فى بياض البيض ورأس العليل فى حجرك.	Then spread it on the Kaghd you made, which is a picture of the bone, and apply it to one eyelid or both, and place under the eye a cotton pad soaked in albumen of an egg, and hold it with your finger.
وتضع اصبعك السبّابة فوق الدواء وتزمّه قليلا وأنت تحركه كلّما حسّ العليل بلذع الدواء لأنّه يجد له لذعا كالنار فما دام يجد اللذع فاترك الدواء وحرّكه باصبعك فإذا سكن اللذع فانزع الدواء واغسل العين بالماء.	And place your index finger on the medicine and press it slightly, and you move it whenever you feel the patient feeling the sweetness of the medicine, because he finds it sweet like a narcissus; as long as he feels the sweetness, leave the medicine and move it with your finger, and if the sweetness subsides, remove the medicine and wash the eye with water.
وانظر فإن رأيت الجفن قد ارتفع كما يرتفع عند التشمير بالنار او بالقطع وإلّا فأعد عليه من الدواء على الموضع الذى لم يؤثّر فيه الدواء ولم يسودّ حتّى تستوفى عملك وتتشمّر العين ثمّ تضع عليه القطن بالسمن حتّى تنقلع جلبة الحرق.	And look, if you see the eyelid has risen as it rises when anointed with narcissus or with a collirium, and otherwise, return to it with the medicine on the spot where the medicine did not affect it, until you complete your task and anoint the eye, then apply the cotton with grease until the inflammation subsides.
ثمّ تعالجه بالمرهم النخلىّ او غيره حتّى يبرأ، وينبغى لك عند العمل أن تتحفّظ غاية التحفّظ أن لا يسقط فى العين من الدواء شىء فإن استرخى الجفن بعد ايّام ونخش من الشعر شىء فى العين.	Then treat it with the Nakhli or other collyrium until it heals, and it is necessary for you when working to be extremely cautious that nothing of the medicine falls into the eye, for if the eyelid relaxes after a few days and something of the hair falls into the eye.
فأعد الدواء على ذلك الموضع الذى استرخى من الجفن خاصّة كما فعلت اوّلا ثمّ عالجه حتّى يبرأ، وهذه صورة ورقة الآس.	Apply the medication to that spot where the skin has relaxed from the special bandage, just as you did at first, and then cover it until it heals, and this is a picture of a wrapping bandage.
واعلم أنّ أعين الناس قد تختلف فى الصغر والكبر فعلى حسب ذلك فليكن تشميرك، وليس بخفىّ طريق الصواب على من كانت له دربة بهذه الصناعة.	And know that the eyes of people may differ in smallness and largeness, so according to that, let your gaze be, and do not take a rough route to what was suitable for him in this craft.
الفصل السابع عشر.	Chapter Seventeen.
فى كىّ الناصور الذى يعرض فى مأق العين.	On the fracture of the nasal bone that appears in the corner of the eye.
اذا عالجت الناصور بما ذكرنا فى تقاسيم الأمراض فلم ينجع علاجك فينبغى أن يكوى على هذه الصفة.	If you treated the fracture with what we mentioned in the treatment of illnesses, and your treatment did not succeed, it is likely that it will relapse into this condition.
تأمر العليل أن يضع رأسه فى حجرك ويمسك رأسه خادم بين يديك إمساكا لايتحرّك ولا يضظرب برأسه.	Order the patient to put his head on your stone and hold his head firmly between your hands, holding it in a way that he does not move or jerk his head.
ثمّ تضع قطنة مبلولة فى بياض البيض او فى لعاب البرزقطونا على عينيه ثمّ تحمى المكواة التى هذه صورتها.	Then you put a cotton pad soaked in the white of an egg or in the pulp of a colyndian stone on his eyes, then you apply the dressing that is shown in this picture.
تكون مجوّفة كهيئة انبوبة ريش النسر من الطرف الواحد الذى يكون به الكىّ وإن شئت أن تكون منفوذة الطرف الآخر وإن شئت كانت مصمتة كالمرود الّا أنّ هذه المجوّفة أفضل لعملك إن شاء الله.	It is better to make a tube like the pipe of a reed from the single extremity that has the fracture, and if you cannot, it should be from the other extremity, even if it was constricted like the marrow, but this tube is better for your work, God willing.
ثمّ تعصر الناصور إن كان مفتوحا وتخرج منه المدّة وتنشفه او كان غير مفتوح فتفتحه وتستخرج قيحه ثمّ تضع حينئذ عليه المكواة وهى حامية جدّا فتمسك بها يدك حتّى تصل الى العظم.	Then you strip the nasal bone if it was broken open and remove the pus from it, or if it was not broken open, you open it and extract its contents, then you apply the dressing and it is very beneficial, so hold it with your hand until you reach the bone.
وأبعد يدك قليلا عند الكىّ من العين الى ناحية الانف لئلّا تخطئ يدك او يقلق العليل فتقع المكواة فى شحمة العين فتفسدها، فإن وصلت فى أوّل كيّة الى العظم وإلّا فأعد المكواة مرّة ثانية إن احتجت الى ذلك.	And withdraw your hand a little from the fracture near the eye towards the direction of the nose, lest your hand trembles or the patient moves, and the dressing falls on the corner of the eye, causing it harm. If you reach the bone in the first attempt, well and good; otherwise, reapply the dressing again if you need to.
واتركه ثلاثة ايّام ثمّ احمل عليه قطنة بالسمن وعالجه بالمرهم المجفّف حتّى يبرأ، فإن مضى له أربعون يوما ولم يبرأ فاحمل عليه الدواء الحادّ الأكّال حتى ينكشف العظم واجرده على ما سيأتى ذكره فى بابه إن شاء الله.	Here is the translation of the excerpt:
ووجه آخر من كىّ الناصور ذكره بعض الاوائل، تعمد الى موضع الناصور تشقّه ثم تضع فى نفس الشقّ قمعا رقيقا هذه صورته.	Another method of dissecting the jugular vein, where some surgeons direct their attention to the location of the jugular vein and make an incision there, then placing a thin cannula in the same incision, this is its shape.
وتصبّ فيه قدر وزن درهم رصاصا مذابا وتمسك يدك بالقمع إمساكا جيّدا مزموما ولا يتحرك العليل البتّة لئلّا يسيل الرصاص المذاب الى عينه وينبغى أن تضع على عين العليل قطنة مبلولة فى بياض البيض او فى الماء.	And pour into it a weight of a dirham of melted lead, and hold your hand with the cannula firmly grasping, not allowing the fluid to move around, until the melted lead settles onto the eye of the cannula, and it is desirable to place on the eye of the cannula a small cotton pad soaked in egg white or water.
فإنّ الرصاص يحرق موضع الناصور ويبرئه برءا عجيبا، فإن برئ الناصور بما ذكرنا من الكىّ والعلاج وإلّا فلا بدّ من استعمال ثقب الأنف وردّ الناصور الى مجرى الأنف على ما سيأتى فى موضعه الأخصّ به.	For the melted lead will show the location of the jugular vein and reveal it with a wondrous revelation, for revealing the jugular vein is by what we mentioned from the incision and treatment, and if not, then there is no alternative but to make an opening in the nostril and redirect the jugular vein to the nostril passage, as will be clear in its specific location.
الفصل الثامن عشر.	The Eighteenth Chapter.
فى كىّ شقاق الشفة.	On incising the temporal artery.
كثيرا ما يحدث شقاق فى الشفة يسمّى الشعرة ولا سيّما فى شفاه الصبيان فإنّه كثيرا ما يحدث، اذا عالجت هذا الشقاق بما ذكرنا فى التقسيم فلم ينجع العلاج فأحم مكواة صغيرة سكّينيّة على هذه الصورة.	Many times an incision is made in the temporal artery, which is called the "Shu'ra", and it often occurs in the temples of children; if you treated this incision with what we mentioned in the section, but the treatment did not benefit, then apply a small, blunt, and slightly curved cautery iron of this shape.
يكون جوفها على رقّة السكّين ثمّ تضعها حامية بالعجلة فى نفس الشقاق حتّى يصل الكىّ الى عمق الشقاق ثمّ تعالجه بالقيروطى حتّى يبرأ إن شاء الله.	It should be placed on the flat surface of the cautery iron, then apply it gently with the needle in the same incision until the cautery reaches the depth of the incision, and treat it with the roller until it heals, God willing.
الفصل التاسع عشر.	The Nineteenth Chapter.
فى كىّ الناصور الحادث فى الفم.	On incising the jugular vein in the mouth.
اذا عرض فى اصل اللثاث او فى الحنك او فى اصول الاضراس ورم ثمّ قاح وانفجر وصار من جرى القيح ناصور ثمّ عالجته فلم ينجع فيه العلاج فينبغى أن تحمى مكواة على قدر ما يسع فى الناصور.	If the swelling appears in the root of the teeth or in the gum or in the roots of the canines and became inflamed and ulcerated, and the jugular vein was injured, then you treated it but the treatment did not benefit, it is desirable to apply a cautery iron according to what is suitable for the jugular vein.
ثمّ تدخلها حامية فى ثقب الناصور وتمسك يدك حتّى تصل الحديدة محمية الى غوره وآخره وتفعل ذلك مرّة او مرّين ثّم تعالجه بعد ذلك بما ذكرنا من العلاج الى أن يبرأ إن شاء اللّه.	Then insert it into the nostril and hold your hand until you reach the nasal bone and its end, and do that one or two times. Then treat it afterwards with what we mentioned of treatment until he recovers, God willing.
فإن انقطعت المادّة وبرئ وإلّا فلا بدّ من الكشف على المكان وينزع العظم الفاسد على حسب ما سيأتى فى بابه إن شاء اللّه.	If the matter is cut off and he recovers, but if not, then it is necessary to expose the place and remove the rotten bone according to what will be mentioned in its chapter, God willing.
الفصل العشرون.	The 20th Chapter
فىكىّ الاضراس واللثاث المسترخية.	On the treatment of hemorrhoids and prolapsed anus.
اذا استرخت اللثاث من قبل الرطوبة وتحركّت الاضراس وعالجتها بالادوية ولم تنجع فضع رأس العليل فى حجرك ثمّ أحم المكواة التى تأتى صورتها بعد هذا بعد أن تضع الانبوبة على الضرس.	If the anus has prolapsed due to humidity and the hemorrhoids have moved and been treated with medications but did not respond, then put the head of the scalpel in your hand, then hold the poultice that comes into shape after this, after you place the tube on the vein.
وتدخل فيها المكواة حامية بالعجلة وتمسك يدك قليلا حتّى يحسّ العليل بحرارة النار قد وصلت الى أصل الضرس ثّم ترفع يدك ثمّ تعيد المكواة مرّات على حسب ما تريد ثمّ يملأ العليل فمه من ماء الملح.	And insert the poultice gently with the scalpel and hold your hand slightly until you feel the heat of the fire has reached the root of the vein, then lift your hand, then repeat the poultice several times according to what you want, then the vein will be filled with saltwater.
ويمسكه ساعة ويقذف به فإنّ الضرس المتحرّكة تثبت واللثة المسترخية تشتدّ وتجفّ الرطوبة الفاسدة.	And let it stay for an hour, and then pour it out, for the moving vein will stop, and the prolapsed anus will contract, and the rotten humidity will be absorbed.
الفصل الحادى والعشرون.	The 11th and 20th Chapters
فى كىّ وجع الضرس.	On the treatment of ulcerated veins.
اذا كان وجع الضرس من قبل البرد او كان فيها دود ولم ينجع فيه العلاج بالأدوية فالكىّ فيها على وجهين إمّا الكىّ بالسمن وإمّا الكىّ بالنار.	If the ulcerated vein is due to cold or has worms and did not respond to treatment with medications, then treat it in two ways: either treating with icing or treating with fire.
أمّا الكىّ بالسمن فهو أن تأخذ السمن البقرىّ فتغليه فى مغرفة حديد او فى صدفة ثمّ تأخذ قطنة فتلفّها على طرف المرود ثمّ تغمسها فى السمن المغلى وتضعها على السنّ الوجعة بالعجلة وتمسكها حتّى تبرد.	As for treating with icing, it is that you take icy snow and grind it in an iron mortar or a stone one, then take a cloth and wrap it around the end of the affected vein, and dip it in the ground snow and apply it to the painful area with the scalpel, and hold it until it cools down.
ثمّ تعيدها مرّات حتّى تصل قوّة النار الى أصل الضرس، وإن شئت أن تغمس صوفة او قطنة فى السمن البارد وتضعها على السنّ الوجعة وتجعل فوقها الحديدة المحميّة حتّى تصل النار الى قعر السنّ.	Then, you should bandage it repeatedly until the force of the cautery reaches the bottom of the wound, and if you wish to put a dressing or a tampon in the cold salve and place it on the painful spot, making an elevated compress above it until the cautery reaches the bottom of the painful spot.
وأمّا كيّها بالنار فهو أن تعمد الى أنبوبة نحاس او أنبوبة حديد ويكون فى جرمها بعض الغلظ لئلّا يصل حرّ النار الى فم العليل، ثمّ احم المكواة التى تأتى صورتها وتضعها على نفس السنّ وتمسك يدك حتّى تبرد المكواة تفعل ذلك مرّات.	And if you cauterize it with fire, it is necessary to hold the tube of copper or iron at a distance, so that some of its heat reaches the mouth of the wound, then remove the cautery and place it on the same spot, holding your hand until the cautery cools down, doing that repeatedly.
فإنّ الوجع يذهب إمّا ذلك النهار بعينه وإمّا يوما آخر، وينبغى فى إثر ذلك الكىّ أن يملأ العليل فمه بالسمن الطيّب ويمسكه ساعة ثمّ يقذف به، وهذه صورة المكواة.	For the pain will go away that very day or another day, and it is necessary afterwards to fill the mouth of the wound with good butter and massage it for an hour, then inject it, and this is the picture of the cautery.
تكوى بأىّ طرف شئت وعلى الحسب الذى يمكن، وهذه صورة الأنبوبة.	Cauterize on whichever side you wish, according to what is possible, and this is the picture of the tube.
الفصل الثانى والعشرون.	Chapter Twenty-Two.
فى كىّ الخنازير.	On Cauterization of the Nose.
اذا كانت الخنازير عن البلغم والرطوبات الباردة ولم تكن تنقاد للنضج بالأدوية وأردت نضجا سريعا فأحم المكواة المجوفة التى هذه صورتها منفوذة الطرفين.	If the nose is affected by phlegm and cold, humid matters and it did not respond to medication and you wanted to cauterize it quickly, hold the cautery tube, whose picture is shown, with its two ends.
ليخرج الدخان عند الكىّ من الطرف الآخر وضعها محمية على نفس الورم مرّة وثانية إن احتجت الى ذلك حتّى تصل الى عمق الورم فإن كان الورم صغيرا فاجعل المكواة على قدر الورم.	Let the smoke exit during cauterization from the other end, and place it obliquely on the same tumor, once or twice, until you reach the depth of the tumor; if the tumor is small, then hold the cautery according to the size of the tumor.
ثمّ اتركه ثلثة ايّام واحمل عليه قطنة مغموسة فى السمن حتّى يذهب ما احترق بالنار ثمّ عالجه بالمرهم والفتائل حتّى يبرأ إن شاء الله.	Then, leave it for three days and apply a dressing soaked in cold salve until what was burned by the fire disappears, then treat it with ointments and bandages until it heals, God willing.
الفصل الثالث والعشرون.	The Thirty-Third Section.
فى الكىّ من بحوحة الصوت وضيق النفس.	On the treatment of those who have a wound in the larynx and are short of breath.
اذا غلبت الرطوبات على قصبة الرئة ولا سيّما اذا كان ذلك مع برودة المزاج فينبغى أن يستفرغ العليل أوّلا بالأدوية المسهلة، ثمّ تكويه كيّة فى نقرة النحر عند أصل الحلقوم فى الموضع المنخفض.	If the humors have overcome the trachea and it is not possible to cough, especially if it happens with a cold temperament, it is necessary to evacuate the mucus first with gentle medicines, then to cough it out in the cavity of the chest at the base of the larynx in the lower position.
فاحذر أن تصل بالكىّ الى الحلقوم ولا تحرق من الجلد إلّا نصفة، ثمّ اكوه كيّة أخرى عند مفصل العنق فى آخر خرزة منه بليغة وتكون المكواة مسماريّة على الصفة التى تقدّمت.	Be careful not to reach with the instrument to the larynx, and do not scrape the skin unless it is half a finger's length; then make another incision at the joint of the neck at the end of the trachea, making the incision serrated on the shape that you have predetermined.
ثمّ عالجه بما تقدّم ذكره حتّى يبرأ إن شاء الله.	Then treat it with what has been mentioned previously until he recovers, God willing.
الفصل الرابع والعشرون.	The Forty-Second Section.
فى كىّ مرض الرئة والسعال.	On the treatment of lung disease and coughing.
اذا كان السعال ومرض الرئة عن رطوبات باردة ولم يكن بالعليل حمّى ولا سلّ وكان المرض مزمنا فاكوه كيّتين فوق الترقوتين فى المواضع المنخفضة الليّنة الفارغة وكيّة أخرى فى وسط الصدر بين الثديين.	If the cough and lung disease are due to cold humors and it is not a humid or salty condition, and the disease is chronic, then make two incisions above the ribs in the lower empty places, and another incision in the middle of the chest between the breasts.
وتكون المكواة مسماريّة على الصورة التى تقدّمت، وإن شئت فليكن كيّك تنقيطا بالمكواة التى تسمّى النقطة وقد تقدّمت صورتها فى تنقيط وجع الأذنين وتكون النقط من ثلاثين نقطة الى نحوها.	And make the incision serrated on the shape that you have predetermined, and if you wish, let it be a series of punctures with the instrument, which is called "nquat", and its shape has been mentioned in the section on punctures and cutting of the veins, and the punctures are from thirty points or more.
ثمّ تعالجه بما تقدّم ذكره حتّى يبرأ، وقد تصنع مكواة ذات ثلاث شعب على هذه الصورة ويستعجل بها الكىّ لأنّك تكوى بها فى مرّة واحدة ثلاث كيّات، وهذه صورة المكواة.	Then treat it with what has been mentioned previously until he recovers, and a instrument with three branches can be made according to this shape, which is more convenient because you make three incisions at once with it, and this is the shape of the instrument.
الفصل الخامس والعشرون.	The Forty-Fifth Section.
فى كىّ الابط.	On the treatment of hernia.
اذا انخلع رأس العضد بسبب رطوبات مزلّقة او لم يثبت فى حين ردّه عن تخلّعه حتّى يصير له ذلك عادة تردّ ثمّ ينخلع عند أدنى حركة تعرض كما شاهدناه فينبغى أن يردّ الفكّ اوّلا.	If the head of the joint is dislocated due to a fall or does not settle into place when it returns to its position until it becomes accustomed to that, then it will dislocate again with minimal movement, as we have observed in the case of those who dislocate their jaw or elbow.
ثمّ يستلقى العليل على ظهره او على الجانب الصحيح ثمّ ترفع الجلد الذى فى داخل الابط الى فوق بأصابع من يدك اليسرى إن كان المفصل انخلع الى داخل.	Then the physician will place his hand on his back or on the healthy side, and then lift the skin that is inside the joint upwards with the fingers of his left hand, if the dislocation is towards the inside.
ثمّ تحمى المكواة ذات السفّودين التى هذه صورتها.	Then he wraps the bandage that has two tails in this shape.
ثمّ تكوى بها الجلد حتّى تنفذها الى الجانب الآخر ويأتى شكل الكىّ أربع كيّات، وقد يكوى بمكواة ذات ثلاث سفافيد فيكون شكل الكىّ حينئذ ستّ كيّات وتكون السفافيد على رقّة المورد.	Then he fastens it to the skin until it reaches the other side, and it takes the shape of four knots. Alternatively, one can fasten it with a bandage that has three tails, in which case the shape will be six knots, and the tails will be on the surface of the wound.
وهذه صورة المكواة ذات الثلاث سفافيد.	And this is the picture of the bandage with three tails.
وقد يزاد على هذا العدد واحدة فتكون الكيّات ثمانيا، ثمّ تحمل على الكّى الكرّات المدقوق مع الملح ثمّ تلزم العليل الدعة ولا يحرّك العضو زمانا حتّى يقوى، وإن كان الخلع الى فوق وقلّما يكون ذلك.	And one can add to this number, making the knots eight. Then, he applies to the knots the compresses with salt and bandages the limb firmly, without moving the limb for a while until it heals. And if the dislocation is upwards, that will be even better.
فاكوه فوق المنكب كيّة واحدة مسماريّة جيّدة او كيّات كثيرة تنقيطا فإنّ المفصل يشتدّ وتذهب الرطوبة ويبرأ العليل.	He places above the shoulder a single, well-tightened knot or several knots that are close together, so that the joint is strengthened and the swelling goes away, and the limb is healed.
الفصل السادس والعشرون.	Chapter Twenty-Six.
فى كىّ المعدة.	On the treatment of dislocation.
اذا حدث فى المعدة برد ورطوبات كثيرة حتّى أخرجها عن مزاجها وكثرت النزلات اليها وعولجت بصنوف العلاج فلم ينجع فينبغى أن يستلقى العليل على ظهره ويمدّ ساقيه ويديه ثمّ تكويه ثلاث كيّات.	If a dislocation occurs in the shoulder due to many falls and severe injuries that disrupt its alignment, and many abscesses form on it, and it is treated with various remedies but does not improve, it is necessary that the physician places his hand on his back and stretches out his arm and hand, then fastens it with three knots.
كيّة تحت ملعقة الصدر بقدر أصبع بمكواة مسماريّة وكيّتين أسفل عن جنبتى الكيّة الواحدة حتّى يأتى شكل الكيّات مثلّثا وأبعد بينهما لئلّا تجتمع اذا تقيّحت ويكون عمق الكّى قدر ثلثى ثخن الجلد ويكون شكل الكيّات.	Here is the translation:
على هذه الصورة وعلى هذا القدر بلا مزيد.	In this figure and to this extent, without further ado.
وإن شئت كويته كيّة واحدة كبيرة فى وسط المعدة على هذه الصورة.	And if you find a single large swelling in the middle of the abdomen, like this figure.
وتكون المكواة التى تكوى بها هذه الكيّة الواحدة على شكل دائرة على هذه الصورة.	The incision to be made for this single swelling is circular in shape, as in this figure.
وقد تكوى المعدة تنقيطا لمن جزع من هذا الكىّ وهو أن تعلّم على المعدة نقطا على القدر الذى تريد بالمداد ثمّ تكويه بمكواة نقطيّة ثمّ تعالجه بالعلاج الذى تقدّم حتّى يبرأ،.	You should make a small incision in the abdomen, just enough to insert your finger to feel the extent of the swelling, then make an exploratory incision and examine it with the treatment that I have described, until he recovers.
الفصل السابع والعشرون.	Chapter 27.
فى كىّ الكبد الباردة.	On a swelling of the cold liver.
اذا عرض من الكبد وجع عن برودة ورطوبة او عن ريح غليلة حتّى خرجت من مزاجها الطبيعى خروجا مفرطا وعولج العليل بما ذكرنا فى التقسيم فلم ينجع ذلك.	If there is a swelling of the liver due to coldness and moisture, or due to a bitter or salty humor, until it departs from its natural temperament, causing excessive secretion and ulceration, and it does not respond to treatment as we have mentioned in the previous section.
فينبغى أن يستلقى العليل على قفاه وتعلّم بالمداد ثلاث كيّات على هذا الشكل وهذا المقدار بعينه على الكبد أسفل من الشراسيف حيث ينتهى مرفق الإنسان.	It is necessary to lay the patient on his back, and make three incisions with the scalpel in this shape and size, specifically on the liver below the ribs, where the arm pit of the person ends.
ويكون بعد كلّ كيّة وكيّة على غلظ الأصبع ويكون الكىّ على طول البدن مستقيما ولا تزمّ يدك بالمكواة نعمّا.	And after each incision, there should be a thickness of a finger, and the incision should be along the length of the body, straight, and do not hesitate with the scalpel, indeed.
وليكن قدر ما تحرق من ثخن الجلد قدر نصفه لا مزيد، ويكون العليل قائما على قدميه فإن لم يكن قائما فيكون مضطجعا قد مدّ ساقيه ورفع ذراعيه، وهذه صورة المكواة.	And take care not to cut more than half the thickness of the skin, and the patient should be sitting on his heels, if he is not sitting, then he should be reclining, having stretched out his legs and raised his arms, and this is a picture of the incision.
وقد يمكنك أن تكوى هذه الكيّات بالمكواة السكّينيّة اذا كان معك رفق وحذق بالصناعة وتحفّظ لئلّا تمعن فى الكىّ فتحرق الجلد كلّه فتحرق البطن وتصل الى الأمعاء فإنّ الجلد هناك رقيق فاعلمه.	And you may make these incisions with the Sikkini scalpel, if you have a skilled and precise hand in the craft, and pay attention to the subtlety of the incision, so that you do not cut through the entire skin, or the abdomen, and reach the intestines, for the skin there is thin, so be careful.
الفصل الثامن والعشرون.	The Eighteenth Chapter.
فى بطّ ورم الكبد بالكىّ.	On incising and draining the abscess of the liver with a tube.
اذا عرض فى الكبد خراج وأردت أن تعلم إن كان ذلك الورم فى لحم الكبد او فى صفاقه فإنّه إن كان فى لحم الكبد فإنّه يجد العليل ثقلا ووجعا بغير حدّة.	If an abscess appears in the liver and you want to know if it is in the flesh of the liver or in its membranes, then if it is in the flesh of the liver, it will be found to have a thick pus and a severe pain without limit.
وإن كان فى صفاق الكبد كان مع الوجع حدّة شديدة ورأيت أنّه قد أعيا الأطبّاء علاجه فينبغى أن يستلقى العليل على قفاه ثمّ تعلّم على الموضع الوارم بالمداد.	And if it is in the membranes of the liver, it will be accompanied by severe pain and you will find that the physicians have abandoned its treatment, so it is necessary to drain the pus on the affected area and then treat the abscess with a poultice.
ثمّ تحمى المكواة فى النار وهى المكواة التى تشبه الميل وهذه صورتها.	Then heat the cautery in the fire, and it is the cautery that resembles a probe, and this is its shape.
وتكويه بها كيّة واحدة حتّى تحرق الجلد كلّه وتنتهى بالكىّ الى الصفاق حتّى تخرج المدّة كلّها ثمّ تعالجه بعلاج الخراجات حتّى يبرأ.	And cauterize with it in a single session until the entire flesh is burned, and then pierce to the membranes until all the pus comes out, and then treat it with abscess treatments until it heals.
وهذا النوع من الكىّ لا ينبغى أن يستعمله إلّا من طالت دربته فى صناعة الطبّ وجرت على يديه هذه الامراض بالتجربة مرارا فحينئذ يقدم على مثل هذا العمل وتركه عندى أفضل.	And this type of cautery should not be used except by one who has long experience in the manufacture of medical instruments and has treated these diseases through repeated experiments, so then he can perform such a task and leave it to the best.
الفصل التاسع والعشرون.	The Nineteenth Chapter.
فى كىّ الشوصة.	On incising of the tumor.
ذكرت الاوائل الكىّ بأصول الزراوند للشوصة الباردة على هذه الصفة وهوأن تأخذ من أصول الزراوند اليابس الطويل أصلا واحدا أطول ما تجد منه ويكون كغلظ الأصبع ثمّ تغمسه فى الزيت وتقده فى النار.	I mentioned that the ancient surgeons used to incise tumors with the roots of the agrimony plant for cold abscesss in this manner: it is that you take a long, straight root of the agrimony plant, as thick as a finger, and then dip it in oil and heat it in the fire.
ثمّ تكويه كيّة واحدة فيما بين اتّصال الترقوة بالعنق وكيّتين صغيرتين دون الاوداج قليلا مائلة الى الناحية التى تحت اللحية وكيّتين عظيمتين فوق الثديين فيما بين الضلع الثالث والرابع.	Then cauterize with it in a single session, between the connection of the trachea and the neck, and two small cauteries below the larynx, slightly inclined towards the side beneath the lip, and two large cauteries above the breasts, between the third and fourth ribs.
وكيّتين ايضا فيما بين الضلع الخامس والسادس مائلة الى خلف قليلا وكيّة أخرى وسط الصدر وأخرى فوق المعدة وثلاث كيّات من خلف واحدة فيما بين الكتفين واثنتين عن جنبى الصلب أسفل من الكىّ الذى يكون فيما بين الكفين.	There are also five veins in the area between the fifth and sixth ribs, leaning slightly backwards. Another vein is in the middle of the chest, and another above the diaphragm, and three veins from behind which come together between the two shoulder blades, and two below the solid vein which lies between the shoulders.
ولا ينبغى أن تعمق يدك بالكىّ بل يكون فى ظاهر الجلد تشميما، وقد ذكر بعض الاوائل أنّ من الناس من كان يستعمل مكواة من حديد شبه الميل فيحميها ويدخلها فيما بين الاضلاع حتّى ينتهى بها الى نفس الورم.	It is not proper to insert your hand into the vein, but it should be on the surface of the skin, making a slight incision. Some of the ancients mentioned that some people used to employ a small iron instrument resembling a filiform probe, and would insert it between the ribs until it reached the tumor itself.
ويخرج المدّة كما ذكرنا فى ورم الكبد، وفى هذا البطّ بالكىّ من الغرر إمّا أن يموت العليل من ساعته وإمّا أن يعرض فى الموضع ناصورٌ لا برء له.	And the abscess is evacuated, as we mentioned in the case of a liver tumor, and in this type of abscess in the chest, either the patient dies from its severity or it becomes a chronic condition that cannot be cured.
الفصل الثلاثون.	Chapter Thirty.
فىكىّ الطحال.	The Vein of the Spleen.
اذا عالجت مرض الطحال بما ذكرنا من العلاج فى التقسيم فلم ينجع علاجك فالكىّ فيه على ثلاثة أوجه كلّها صواب أحدها أن تكويها ثلاث كيّات اوأربع مصطفّة على طول الطحال.	If you treated the spleen disease with what we mentioned earlier from the treatment in the section, and your treatment did not benefit, then there are three ways to open the vein, all of which are correct: one is to evacuate three or four veins arranged along the length of the spleen.
على شكل كيّات الكبد التى تقدّم شكلها ويكون بين كلّ كيّة وكيّة قدر غلظ الأصبع او أكثر قليلا وتكون صفة المكواة الصفة التى ذكرنا فى كىّ الكبد سواء ولا تعمق يدك بالكىّ وصورة العليل ملقى على ظهره.	Like the veins of the liver, which we previously described in terms of their shape and arrangement, with each vein being about as thick as a finger or slightly thicker, and the instrument's edge is like the one we mentioned for the liver vein, without inserting your hand into the vein, and the patient's body should be laid on his back.
والوجه الآخر فى المرفق وترفع الجلدة التى قبالة الطحال حيث تنتهى مرفق العليل المرفق وترفع الجلدة التى قبالة الطحال حيث تنتهى مرفق العليل اليسرى ويكون رفعك الجلد على عرض البدن لتقع الكيّات على طول البدن.	And the other way is in the armpit, and the skin that is opposite the spleen is elevated, where the patient's arm is raised, and the skin that is opposite the spleen is elevated, where the patient's left arm is raised, and your elevation of the skin should be on the width of the body so that the veins are along the length of the body.
ثمّ تدخل السفّودين محميّة جدّا حتّى تنفذ بهما الجلد من الناحية الأخرى ثمّ تخرج المكواة فتكون الكيّات أربعا، وإن شئت أن تكوى بالمكواة الأخرى ذات الثلاثة سفافيد.	Then the surgeon inserts the scalpel deeply until it reaches the bone from the other side, then he extracts the instrument and finds that there are four ligatures, and if he wishes to extract with the other instrument having three hooks.
ثمّ تعالج موضع الكىّ بعد أن تتركه يمدّ القيح أيّاما كثيرة فهو أنجع من سائر ما تقدّم من العلاج.	Then he treats the site of the ligature after he releases it, extending the pus, sometimes excessively, for it is easier than what has been previously mentioned in the treatment.
الفصل الحادى والثلاثون.	The 31st chapter.
فى كىّ الاستسقاء.	On the ligature of obstruction.
الكىّ إنّما ينفع فى الاستسقاء الزقّىّ خاصّة، اذا عالجت المستسقى بضروب العلاج الذى ذكرنا فى التقسيم فلم ينجع علاجك فينبغى أن تكويه أربع كيّات حول السرّة وكيّة واحدة على المعدة.	The ligature, indeed, is beneficial in obstructive suffocation, if you treat the suffocated person with the various treatments that we mentioned in the section, but if your treatment does not benefit him, it is necessary to extract four ligatures around the neck and one on the stomach.
وكيّة أخرى على الكبد وكيّة على الطحال وكيّتين وراء ظهره بين الخرزات واحدة قبالة صدره وأخرى قبالة معدته، ويكون قدر عمق الكىّ قريبا من ثخن الجلد، ثمّ تترك الكىّ مفتوحا يمدّ القيح زمانا طويلا.	And another on the liver, and one on the spleen, and two behind his back between the ribs, one in front of his chest and another in front of his stomach, and the ligature is close to the thickness of the bone, then you leave the ligature open, extending the pus for a long time.
ولا تخل العليل من العلاج بعد الكىّ بما ينبغى لتجمع له المعنيين فيسرع اليه البرء، وصورة المكواة التى يكوى بها الظهر تكون مسماريّة على ما تقدّمت صورتها والتى يكوى بها الظهر تكون زيتونيّة.	And do not neglect the patient from treatment after the ligature, with what is necessary to gather his strength quickly, and the shape of the instrument that extracts the back becomes symmetrical on what has been previously mentioned in its shape, and what extracts the back becomes zitone.
الفصل الثانى والثلاثون.	The 32nd chapter.
فى كىّ القدمين والساقين.	On the ligature of the legs and thighs.
اذا تورمتا فى المستسقى وامتلأتا ماء أصفر فينبغى أن يكوى على ظهر القدم فى النقرة التى بين الخنصر والبنصر.	If you find a swelling in the suffocated person and a yellowish discharge, it is necessary to extract on the back of the foot at the node between the ankle and the toe.
وأقم يدك بالمكواة ولا تعوّجها ثمّ ارفع يدك ولا تعيدها البتّة فإنّه يرشح الماء الأصفر وتكون المكواة على هذه الصورة.	And place your hand on the instrument, and do not shake it, then lift your hand without hesitation, for it will drain the yellowish discharge, and the instrument will be in this shape.
ثمّ تكوى على الساقين كيّتين كيّتين فى كلّ ساق ويكون الكىّ بالطرف السكّينّى من المكواة ويكون الكىّ على طول الساق واحدة تحت الركبة وأخرى أسفل منها نحو وسط الساق وعلى كلّ فخذ كيّتين كيّتين.	The suture should be applied to the legs, two sutures on each leg, one at the end of the tibia and another below it, near the middle of the leg, and on each thigh, two sutures, two sutures.
واترك الكىّ مفتوحا بغير علاج زمانا طويلا يرشح منه الماء ثمّ تعالجه بسائر ما ذكرنا.	Leave the suture loose, without tightening it for a while, until the swelling subsides, then tighten it gradually as we have mentioned.
الفصل الثالث والثلاثون.	Chapter Thirty-Three.
فى كىّ الإسهال.	On Suturing of Hernias.
اذا كان الاسهال من برد ورطوبات حتّى اضعف القوى الماسكة والهاضمة التى فى المعدة والمعاء وعولج ذلك بضروب العلاج ولم يبرأ ورأيت العليل محتملا للكىّ وافر القوّة فاكوه كيّة كبيرة على معدته.	If the hernia is caused by a weakness of the constricting powers and the adhering parts in the stomach and intestines, and it was treated with various treatments but did not heal, and you saw that the patient was still suffering greatly, then make a large suture on his stomach.
على ما تقدّم فى كىّ المعدة بمكواة الدائرة وأربع كيّات حول السرّة لطاف بالمكواة المسماريّة اللطيفة وكيّة على القطن فوق العصعص كبيرة او كيّتين.	As previously mentioned, on the stomach suture with a circular suture and four sutures around the navel, gentle with the curved suture, and one or two sutures on the belly above the pubic bone.
فإن رأيت الرطوبات وافرة والعليل محتملا لذلك فاكوه كيّة على العانة وكيّة على كل خاصرة وربّما زدت كيّتين صغيرتين على المعدة بقرب الكبيرة فإنّه علاج منجح لا يخطأ نفعه إن شاء اللّه.	If you see the weakness and suffering is considerable, then make a suture on the groin and one on each flank, and maybe add two small sutures on the stomach near the large one; it is a successful treatment that will not harm, God willing.
الفصل الرابع والثلاثون.	Chapter Thirty-Four.
فى كىّ بواسير المقعدة.	On Suturing of Ulcers on the Back.
اذا كان فى المقعدة بواسير مزمنة كثيرة او واحدة وكانت من أخلاط غليظة باردة او رطوبات فاسدة وعولجت بما ذكرنا فى التقسيم فلم ينجع العلاج فاكو العليل ثلاث كيّات على أسفل خرز الظهر تحت المائدة قليلا مثلّثة.	If there are chronic ulcers on the back, many or one, and they are due to cold, thick, and dry humors, or to weakness, and you have treated them with what we mentioned in the previous section, but the treatment did not benefit, then make three sutures on the lower part of the back, under the shoulder blade, slightly triangular.
وكيّة تحت السرّة بمثل أصبعين وإن قدّرت أنّ معدته قد بردت وطعامه لا ينهضم ورايت وجهه متورّما فاكوه على المعدة كيّة كبيرة على ما تقدّم وكيّة على كبده.	And a suture under the navel, like two fingers, and if you think that his stomach has become weak and his constitution does not consolidate, and you see his face pale, then make a large suture on his stomach as previously mentioned, and one on his chest.
وأخرى على طحاله بمكواة مسماريّة واترك الكىّ مفتوحا زمانا ثمّ عالجه حتّى يبرأ إن شاء الله.	And another on his temple with a curved scalpel, and the surgeon passes through it at the right time, then he moves away until it is healed, God willing.
الفصل الخامس والثلاثون.	Chapter Thirty-Five.
فى كىّ الثآليل.	On the surgical incisions.
بعد قطعها اذا قطعت الثؤلول فاحم المكواة التى تشبه الميل ثمّ أدخلها حامية فى نفس الثؤلول المقطوع وامعن يدك حتّى تصل المكواة الى فم العرق الذى تسيل منه الدماء تفعل ذلك مرّة او مرّتين.	After cutting it, if you have cut the artery, take a scalpel that resembles a filaria, then insert its edge into the same artery that has been cut, and move your hand until the scalpel reaches the mouth of the vein from which the blood flows, do that once or twice.
فإن كانت الثآليل كثيرة فاكو كلّ واحد كيّة على ما وصفنا ثمّ عالجها بما يوافقها من المراهم حتّى تبرأ، وإن كويته كيّة ايضا كبيرة على القطن كان أبلغ فى النفع.	If the incisions are many, treat each one individually as we have described, then apply what suits it from the medications until it heals. And if the wound is also large on the cloth, it was more effective in the benefit.
الفصل السادس والثلاثون.	Chapter Thirty-Six.
فى كىّ الناصور الذى يكون فى المقعدة ونواحيها.	On the surgical treatment of hemorrhoids that are in the anus and its surrounding areas.
اذا لم يجب العليل الى الشقّ والعمل الذى وصفنا فى موضعه وجبن عن ذلك فربّما برئ بالكىّ فإذا حدث بأحد ناصور وأزمن جرى القيح منه والرطوبات الفاسدة فأوّل ما ينبغى لك أن تقيسه بمسبار رقيق.	If the patient did not respond to the treatment and the operation that we described in its place, and the swelling persisted, perhaps it would be cured by surgery. If one of the hemorrhoids happened and the putrid matter flowed from it, first what is necessary for you is to stop the flow with a thin reed.
ثمّ اعرف قدر غوره بالمسبار ثمّ احم المكواة التى تشبه الميل ثم أدخلها حامية فى نفس الناصور على استقامة غور الناصور والقدر الذى دخل فيه المسبار وأعد عليه الكىّ حتّى تحترق تلك الأجسام الفاسدة كلّها مّرة او مرّتين او ثلاثا على قدر حاجتك.	Then recognize the size of its cavity with the reed, then take a scalpel that resembles a filaria, and insert its edge into the same hemorrhoid on the straightness of its cavity and the size that the reed entered, and move your hand until you remove all those putrid bodies once or twice or thrice according to your need.
وتحفّظ من حرق عصب إن كان هناك او عرق عظيم وإن كان الناصور يفضى الى جرم المثانة او الى جرم المعاء.	And beware of damaging a nerve if there is one, or a large vein, and if the hemorrhoid extends to the anus or to the rectum.
فتحفّظ من هذه المواضع كلّها، وإنّما تفعل ذلك اذا كان الناصور فى موضع لحمّى وقدّرت أنّه غير منفوذ، ثمّ عالج الموضع حتّى يبرأ، فإن انختم الموضع وانقطع عنه الموادّ وبقى كذلك زمانا فاعلم أنّه قد برئ على الكمال.	Be cautious of these places all, and do not do that unless the hemorrhoid is in a place where it is possible to reach it and you are certain that it is not inaccessible, then treat the area until it heals. If you have treated the area and the humors have stopped and it has remained so for a period of time, then know that it has healed completely.
وإن لم ينقطع عنه الموادّ فاعلم أنّه منفوذ او فى غوره عظم فاسد او نحو ذلك ممّا يأتى ذكره فى موضعه.	If the material does not separate from him, know that it is either a nerve or a vessel in the bone, or something similar that causes harm to his condition.
الفصل السابع والثلاثون.	Chapter 37.
فى كىّ الكلى.	On the Wounds of the Abdomen.
اذا حدث فى الكلى وجع عن برد او ريح غليظة ونقص لذلك جماع العليل فينبغى أن تكويه على المتنين على نفس الكلى كيّة على كلّ كلية بالمكواة المسماريّة التى تقدّم ذكرها وربّما كويناه ثالثة فى نفس المائدة فتأتى ثلاث كيّات مصطفّة فيكون أبلغ فى النفع.	If a wound occurs in the abdomen and it opens into the peritoneum or the omentum, and for that reason the gathering of the abdominal contents is hindered, it is necessary to gather them on the mattenin, on the same abdomen, with the surgical instrument mentioned earlier, and perhaps a third gathering will be needed in the same region, so three gathered abdomens will result, which will be more effective in the treatment.
الفصل الثامن والثلاثون.	Chapter 38.
فى كىّ المثانة.	On the Wounds of the Nose.
اذا حدث فى المثانة ضعف واسترخاء عن برد ورطوبات حتّى لا يمسك العليل البول فاكوه كيّة فى أسفل السرّة على المثانة حيث يبتدئ شعر العانة وكيّة عن يمين السرّة وأخرى عن شماله.	If a wound occurs in the nose, with weakness and relaxation of the nasal cartilage so that the urine cannot be retained, then it is necessary to gather the edges of the wound at the base of the septum, on the nose, where the hair of the nostrils begins, and to gather one edge from the right side of the septum and another from its left side.
ويكون بعد الكىّ من كلّ جانب على قدر عقد الإبهام وتكويه كيّة فى أسفل الظهر او كيّتين إن احتجت الى ذلك وتكون المكواة مسماريّة على ما تقدّم.	And it will be, after the gathering, from each side, according to the size of the thumb, and it will be gathered at the base of the spine or two gatherings if there is a need for that, and the surgical instrument will be the same one mentioned earlier.
الفصل التاسع والثلاثون.	Chapter 39.
فى كىّ الرحم.	On the Wounds of the Uterus.
اذا حدث فى الرحم مادّة من برد ورطوبات فامتنعت بذلك عن الحبل وفسد طثمها وتعذّر دروره او حدث لها عند مجيئه وجع فينبغى أن تكوى ثلاث كيّات حول السرّة كما ذكرنا فى كىّ المثانة.	If a wound occurs in the uterus, with material from the peritoneum and omentum, it will be necessary to treat it by gathering around the cervix, as we mentioned in the wounds of the nose.
وكيّة على القطن أسفل الظهر او كيّتين وتكون المكواة مسماريّة.	And gather at the perineum below the spine or two gatherings, and the surgical instrument will be the same one mentioned earlier.
الفصل الأربعون.	Chapter 40.
فىكىّ تخلّع الورك.	On the Excision of the Varix.
قد تنصّب رطوبات مخاطئة الى حقّ الورك فتكون سببا لخروجه عن موضعه وعلامته أن تطول الساق على الأخرى اذا قست بعضها الى بعض وتجد موضع الخلع فيه فراغ فينبغى أن تكوى العليل على حقّ الورك نفسه كيّة شبه الدائرة.	You should apply oblique sutures to the sides of the wound, so that they do not obstruct its contraction and do not leave a mark in its place. If you unite some of them with others, you will find an empty space where the knee joint lies, and it is suitable to form the sutures in a semicircular shape on the sides of the wound itself.
بعد أن تعلّم بالمداد حول الحقّ كما يدور ليقع نفس الحقّ فى وسط الدائرة وتكون المكواة التى تقدّم صورتها فى كىّ المعدة فإن لم تحضرك هذه المكواة فاكوه ثلاث كيّات بالمكواة الزيتونيّة الكبيرة.	After you have applied the dressing around the wound, as it turns out to be in the middle of the circle, and the bandage that you will present its shape in a circular form, if you do not prepare this bandage, you will need three bands with the large zitone bandage.
وصيّر للكىّ عمقا على قدر ثخن الجلد كلّه ثمّ عالجه حتّى يبرأ إن شاء الله.	You should tighten the band for a period of time according to the thickness of the skin, then loosen it until it heals, God willing.
الفصل الحادى والأربعون.	The 14th and 40th chapters.
فى كىّ عرق النسا.	On the artery of the nose.
اذا حدث وجع فى حقّ الورك وكان سبب ذلك برد ورطوبات وعالجت العليل بما ذكرنا فى التقسيم ولم ينجع العلاج وأزمن ذلك فينبغى أن يسهل العليل من الأخلاط الغليظة بحبّ المنتن او حبّ الصبّارى ونحوه.	If a wound occurs on the thigh and it is due to cold and oblique sutures, and you treated it with what we mentioned in the chapter, but the treatment did not work, and it became worse, it is suitable to remove the dressing from the thick, sticky discharge or the thin, watery discharge, and so on.
ثمّ اكوه ووجه الكىّ فيه على ضربين إمّا كىّ بالأدوية المحرقة وإمّا كىّ بالنار والكىّ بالنار يكون على وجوه كثيرة أحدها أن تكوى على حقّ الورك نفسه ثلاث كيّات مثلّثة على هذه الصورة.	Then, there are three bands on the thigh, either with adhesive medicine or with fire, and the band with fire is in several ways, one of which is to apply it on the thigh itself in three triangular shapes like this.
وتصير لها عمقا صالحا ويكون بعد ما بين كلّ كيّة وكيّة على قدر غلظ الأصبع وتكون المكواة زيتونيّة وقد يكوى كيّة فى الوسط على رأس الورك نفسه فتكون اربع كيّات وإن شئت فاكوه بالدائرة التى تقدّم ذكرها فى كىّ تخلّع الورك كيّة واحدة.	And you make a suitable band for it, and it will be after what is between each band and band, according to the thickness of the finger, and the zitone bandage will be applied. And there may be a band in the middle on the top of the thigh itself, so that there are four bands. If you wish, you can apply it with the circular shape we mentioned earlier, as one band for treating the thigh.
لتكون الدائرة تحيط بجميع الورك وتحرق ثخن الجلد كلّه، هذه صفة الكىّ فى عرق النسا اذا كان الوجع لازما للورك نفسه ولم يكن يمتدّ الى الفخذ والساق.	So that the circle surrounds all of the thigh and tightens according to the thickness of the skin, this is the description of the band on the artery of the nose if the wound is limited to the thigh itself and does not extend to the hip and leg.
فإن امتدّ الى الفخذ والساق فاكوه كيّتين على الفخذ على الموضع الذى يشير عليك العليل بالوجع فيه وكيّة فوق العرقوب بأربع أصابع الى الجهة الوحشيّة قليلا وتكون المكواة سكّينيّة ويكون عمق الكيّة على قدر ثخن الجلد فقط.	If it reaches the thigh and leg, it forms two heads on the thigh at the site that points to the patient's pain in it, and a head above the ankle joint with four fingers towards the lateral side slightly, and the incision is oblique, and the depth of the incision is equal to the thickness of the skin only.
وإن أشار الى أن الوجع يمتدّ الى نحو اصابع الرجل فاكوه حيث أشار عليك بمكواة النقطة ثلاثا او اربعا او أكثر إن احتاج الى ذلك، وإن أشار بالوجع تحت الركبة نحو الساق فاكوه هناك كيّة واحدة سكّينيّة.	And if it points to the pain extending towards the toes of the leg, it forms a head where it points with an incision of three or four or more stitches as needed, and if it points to the pain beneath the knee towards the leg, it forms one oblique incision there.
وتحفّظ فى جميع كيّك من أن تبلغ بالكىّ الى أن تحرق عصبا او شريانا عظيما فتحدث بذلك على العليل آفة رديئة او زمانة.	And be cautious in all your incisions not to reach with the knife to sever a nerve or a large artery, lest you cause a severe injury to the patient or a fatal consequence.
وقد شاهدت واحدا وثانيا ممّن كوى فوق العرقوب وبولغ فى الكىّ فتزكّم الساق حتّى بلغ الزكام القدم وتثقّب كلّه وفسد جميع الرجل ثمّ حدث الاسهال والموت بعد ذلك، فإن كان الوجع فى الجهتين جميعا كويتهما على هذه الصفة بعينها.	I have seen one or two individuals who cut above the ankle joint and severed the vein in the leg, which caused the foot to become gangrenous and eventually led to the amputation of the entire leg, and then resulted in paralysis and death afterwards; thus, if the pain is on both sides, it should be treated in this manner with bilateral symmetry.
وقد ذكر بعض العلماء من الحكماء فى كىّ الورك كيّا هذه صفته يصنع شبه القدح من حديد ويكون قطره نصف شبر ويكون عند فمه على غلظ نواة التمر او اقلّ قليلا وفى داخل ذلك القدح قدح آخر وقدح ثالث.	Some wise men among the authorities have mentioned that for the incision of the varicose vein, a instrument similar to a curved hook made of iron is crafted, its width being half a finger, and it should be at its mouth about the thickness of a date stone or slightly less, and inside that hook there are another and a third hook.
ويكون بعد ما بين كلّ قدحين بقدر عقد الإبهام ويكون الأقداح مفتوحة من الجهتين ويكون ارتفاعها نحو عقد او عقدين وتتّخذ لها مقبضا من حديد قد أحكم فى الأقداح وهذه صورته.	And it should be after that, between each of the two hooks, a width of about a finger's joint, and the hooks are open on both sides, and their height is about a finger or fingers, and an iron ring is taken for them, which is fixed in the hooks, and this is its form.
ثمّ تحمى فى النار حتّى تحمرّ وترمى الشرر ثمّ توضع على حقّ الورك والعليل متّكئ على الجانب الصحيح فتكويه ثلاث كيّات مستديرة فى مرّة واحدة ثمّ تتركه ثلاثة أيّام وتضمّده بالسمن وتترك الجرح مفتوحا أيّاما.	Then it is heated in the fire until it becomes red hot, and then it is quenched in cold water, and then it is placed on the varicose vein, and the patient is lying on their sound side, so that three rounded incisions are made at one time, and then it is left for three days, and it is treated with rose oil, and the wound is left open.
كثيرة ثمّ تعالجه بالمرهم حتّى يبرأ، قال واضع هذا الكتاب هذا النوع من الكىّ قلّما استعملناه لشناعته وهول منظره ولقلّة من نجد ممّن يصبر عليه الّا أنّه من جيّد الكىّ لمن صبر عليه وأصيب به موضعه.	Then the wound should be treated with the suitable remedies until it heals, for I have written this book on this type of surgery which we rarely use due to its rarity and few people can endure it, except that it is excellent for those who can endure it and are affected by their condition.
وأمّا الكىّ بالأدوية المحرقة فهو أن تصنع قدحين شبه الحلق التى ينزل فيها رتاجالباب مننحاس او من حديد.	And the surgical instrument with the curved jaws is that which is made to resemble a ring, descending into it are the sharp teeth from the file or from iron.
يكون فى حاشيتهما ارتفاع قدر عقدين او نحوهما ويكون بعد ما بينهما قدر غلظ الأصبع وتكون مفتوحة الأسفل مفتوحة الأعلى ويكون قد مسكت بعضها ببعض على هذه الصورة.	It should be in its two edges a height of about one finger or similar, and it should be after what is between them a thickness of a finger's width, and it should be open at the bottom and open at the top, and some of it should be bent towards each other in this shape.
ثمّ تنزلها على حقّ الورك والعليل مضطجع على جنبه الصحيح وتزمّ يدك نعما ثمّ تصبّ بين الدائرتين من الماء الحادّ وهو مدفأ بالنارقليلا وتمسكه قدر ساعة رمليّة ويصبر العليل على لذعه وحرقته فإنّه يجد لذعا كالنار.	Then you should place it on the patient's thigh, and the healthy side should be resting on its edge, and you should hold your hand firmly, then you should pour between the two rings of the sharp water, which is lukewarm, and you should keep it for about an hour, and the patient should endure the pain and burning, for he will find the pain like a nail.
حتّى يهدأ اللذع ثمّ ترفع يدك بالآلة وتمسح الماء الحادّ عن الورك كلّه بالماء العذب ثمّ تتركه ثلاثة أيّام وتحمل عليه السمن حتّى يذهب سواد الحرق وتتركه أيّاما يجرى منه القيح فإنّه أبلغ فى النفع.	Until the pain subsides, then you should lift your hand with the instrument and pour out the lukewarm water from the thigh completely with fresh water, then you should leave it for three days and apply oil until the burning sensation disappears, and you should leave it for a few days until the pus is discharged, for it is more effective in healing.
ثمّ تعالجه بالمراهم حتّى يبرأ، فإن امتدّ الوجع الى الفخذ او الساق صنعت له قالبا فيما يمسك الماء على حسب ما صنعت بالورك سواء، وهذه صفة الماء الحادّ وقد أثبتّه فى مقالة إصلاح الأدوية.	Then you should treat it with the suitable remedies until it heals, for if the pain extends to the thigh or leg, make a poultice for it as you held the water according to what you did on the thigh, and this is the description of the lukewarm water, which I have established in the chapter on surgical instruments' repair.
تأخذ من ملح القلى ومن الجير غير مطفأ من كلّ واحد جزءا فتسحقهما وتضعهما فى قدر جديدة قد ثقبت أسفلها ثقبة واحدة صغيرة على قدر ما يدخلها المرود وتضع تحت قاع القدر قدرا أخرى مزجّجة.	You take from the salty clay and from the unglazed pottery, each one piece, and you crush them together and put them in a new vessel that has been perforated at its bottom with a small hole corresponding to what the medicine enters, and you place underneath the vessel another perforated one.
وتلقى على القلى والجير من الماء العذب ما يغمرهما بأصبع بعد أن تزمّهما بيدك زمّا جيّدا وتترك القدر حتّى ينزل الماء الحادّ فى أسفل القدر المزحّجة ثمّ تجمع ذلك الماء كلّه ثمّ تلقيه على جير آخر وقلى آخر مجدّدين ايضا.	Here is the translation of the excerpt:
فإنّه يكون حينئذ قوىّ الحدّة جدّا يتصرّف فى كثير من أعمال الطبّ وفى كىّ سائر الأعضاء لأنّه يفعل فعل النار بعينها، ومن الأدوية ما يكوى بها الورك أيضا مثل الثافسيا وعسل البلاذر والجير مع الصابون ممروخين.	It is then a strong stimulant, as it stimulates many of the body's functions and some of its other members, because it acts on them like fire, and among the medicines that are used to treat it are also Thapsia, honey of dates, and Geren with Sabun Marmarin.
وزعم جالينوس حكاية عن رجل من القدماء علاجا لوجع الورك وعرق النسا وعظّم أمره جدّا وزعم أنّه لا يحتاج الى غيره من العلاج وأنّه يبرئ من مرّة واحدة.	Galenos reported about a man from the ancients who was treated for a wound on his hip and an abscess on his nose, and he improved greatly and thought that he did not need any other treatment and that he was cured in one time.
حتّى أنّه ربّما أدخل الحمّام محمولا وخرج منه قد برئ وهو أن يوخذ من الشيطرج الأخضر فإن لم يوجد الأخضر فيؤخذ اليابس الحديث فينعم دقّه مع شىء من شحم ويوضع على الورك حيث الوجع او فى الساق او فى الفخذ.	It is said that perhaps he entered the bath with a poultice and came out of it cured, and that he would take from the green vitriol; if the green was not found, he would take the recent yabes, and mix it with some fat and apply it to the hip where the wound was, or on the thigh or in the knee.
وتشدّ وتترك قدر ثلاث ساعات او بقدر ما يحسّ العليل بسكون الحرقة ثمّ أدخله الحمّام فإذا ندى بدنه فأدخله الحوض فإنّ الوجع يذهب ويبرأ بإذن الله، فإن لم يبرأ فأعد عليه الضماد بعد عشرة أيّام مرّة أخرى.	And he would apply it and leave it for three hours or as long as the patient felt the heat of the poultice, then he would enter the bath; if his body was cleansed, he would enter the basin, and the wound would disappear and be cured, God willing; if it did not cure, he would repeat the application after ten days, another time.
فإنّه يبرأ إن شاء الله، واعلم أنّه لا ينبغى أن يستعمل أحد الكى بهذه الأدوية الّا بعد استفراغ البدن، وقد ذكر دياسقوريدس أنّ بعر الماعز اذا كوى به عرق النسا نفع منه.	He would be cured, God willing, and I knew that it was not proper to use one of these medicines unless after purging the body, and Dioscorides mentioned that if a poultice of millet was applied to an abscess on the nose, it would benefit from it.
ويكون الكىّ على هذه الصفة، يؤخذ صوف فيشرب فى الزيت العتيق ويوضع على المكان العميق الذى فيما بين الإبهام من اليد وبين الزند وهو الى الزند أقرب ثمّ خذ بعرة ماعز جافّة.	And the poultice would be on this condition, taking a handful of supefied material and soaking it in old oil, then applying it to the painful spot between the thumb and the index finger, which is closer to the index finger, then taking a poultice of coarse millet.
فألهبها بالنار حتّى تصير جمرة ثمّ ضعها على الصوف واتركها حتّى تطفأ ثمّ خذ غيرها فلا تزال تفعل ذلك الى أن يصل الحسّ بتوسّط العضد الى الورك ويسكن الوجع بإذن اللّه وهذا الضرب من الكىّ يسمّى الكىّ البعرى.	And heat it with fire until it becomes a small ball, then put it on the supefied material and leave it until it dissolves, then take another one; do not stop doing that until the sensation reaches the middle of the joint to the hip, and the wound is cured, God willing. And this type of poultice is called the Poultice of the Hip Joint.
الفصل الثانى والأربعون.	The 42nd Section.
فى كىّ وجع الظهر.	On the wound of the back.
قد يعرض الوجع فى الظهر من أسباب كثيرة إمّا عن سقطة او ضربة او استفراغ مفرط ونحو ذلك ويكون من انصباب مادّة باردة رطبة والكىّ إنّما يقع فى هذا الصنف وحده.	The wound on the back may occur due to various reasons, whether from a fall or a blow or an excessive evacuation, and so forth, and it happens when a cold moist substance pours down, and the wound only occurs in this category alone.
الذى يكون من انصباب مادّة باردة فينبغى بعد استفراغ العليل بحبّ المنتن ونحوه أن يكوى على ظهره حيث الوجع ثلاثة صفوف على عرض المائدة نفسها بعد أن تعلّم الموضع بالمداد فى كلّ صفّ خمس كيّات او أكثر على قدر ما ترى من احتمال العليل وقوّته.	That which occurs from the pouring down of a cold moist substance, afterwards evacuating the liquid with a gentle pressure and so forth, it coagulates on his back where the wound is in three rows across the width of the bed itself, after the location is marked with a application of five or more wounds according to the degree of the evacuation's likelihood and strength.
ويكون الكىّ بمكواة النقطة وإن شئت كويته ثلاث كيّات او أربعا بمكواة مسماريّة متوسّطة على هذه الصورة.	And the wound is at the confluence of the points, and if you wish, it may be three or four wounds at a moderate distance, arranged in this pattern.
الفصل الثالث والأبعون.	The 53rd Section.
فى كىّ ابتداء الحدبة.	On the wound at the beginning of the curvature.
كثيرا ما تعرض هذه العلّة للأطفال الصغار وعلامة ابتدائها فى الطفل أن يحدث عليه ضيق النفس عند القيام والحركة وتجد فى آخِر فقارات ظهره خرزة قد برزت تنتو على سائر الخرزات.	Many times this ailment affects young children, and a sign of its beginning in the child is that he experiences shortness of breath upon standing and movement, and you find on the upper vertebrae of his back a bump that has emerged distinct from the other bumps.
فإذا رأيت ذلك وأردت توقيفها فاكوه بمكواة تكون دائرة على هذه الصورة.	If you see that and want to treat it, then apply cups in a circular pattern according to this method.
لتأخذ الكيّة على كلّ جهة من الفقارة باستواء وإن شئت كويته حول الفقارة بمكواة النقطة صفّين او ثلاثة ولتكن النقط قريبة بعضها من بعض ثمّ تعالج الموضع حتّى يبرأ بما ذكرنا.	Take the cup on each side of the vertebrae, including its width, and if you wish, apply it around the vertebrae with a circular pattern of points, two or three rows, and make the points close to each other, then treat the location until it heals as we mentioned.
وتحفّظ أن تستعمل الكىّ فى الحدبة التى تكون من تشنّج العصب،.	And beware that you do not use cups on a curvature caused by nerve spasm.
الفصل الرابع والأربعون.	The 44th Section.
فى كىّ النقرس وأوجاع المفاصل.	On the wound of gout and joint pains.
اذا كانت أوجاع المفاصل عن رطوبات باردة تنصبّ الى أىّ عضو كان من الجسم فإذا حدثت الأوجاع فى الرجلين فمن عادة الأطبّاء أن يسمّوا ذلك نقرسا خاصّة.	If the pains of the joints are due to cold humors that affect a member of the body, then if the pains occur in the legs, it is customary for the physicians to call that sciatica specifically.
فإذا عولج النقرس البارد السبب بضروب العلاج الذى ذكرنا فى التقسيم ولم تذهب الأوجاع فإنّ الكىّ يذهب بها وهو أن تكويه بعد الاستفراغ حول مفصل الرجلين كيّات كثيرة وتكون المكواة زيتونيّة متوسّطة على هذه الصورة.	If we treated the cold sciatica with the treatment method that we mentioned in the section and the pains did not go away, then the doctor goes to it, which is to bandage after applying a poultice around the joints of the legs, numerous times, and the bandage is medicated with a moderate degree on this pattern.
وإن احتجت أن تنقّط على وجه الرجل فافعل بمكواة النقطة، فإن صعدت الأوجاع الى الركبتين او الى سائر المفاصل وكثيرا ما يعرض ذلك فاكوه على كلّ ركبة ثلاث كيّات او اربعا من كلّ جهة بهذه المكواة الزيتونيّة بعينها.	And if it is necessary to apply a poultice on the face of the leg, then do so with a small bandage, and if the pains ascend to the knees or to other joints, which often happens, then apply three or four bandages on each side with this medicated bandage, opposite each other.
فإن احوجت الى أكثر من هذا الكىّ فاكوه ولا تعمق يدك بالكىّ بل يكون نحو ثخن الجلد فقط، فإن صعدت الأوجاع الى الوركين او الى الظهر فاستعمل ما ذكرنا من الكىّ فى بابه.	If you need to apply more than this number of bandages, then do so, but do not overdo it with the bandages, rather it should be about the thickness of a finger only; if the pains ascend to the hips or to the back, then use what we mentioned of the bandages in their place.
فإن كانت الأوجاع فى اليدين فقط فنقّط حول الزندين كما تدور صفّين، فإن بقيت الأوجاع فى الأصابع فنقّطها على كلّ عقدة نقطة وعلى مشط اليد، فإن صعدت الأوجاع بعد أيّام الى المرفقين او الى المنكبين.	If the pains are in the hands only, then apply a poultice around the wrists as you would bandage a splint, and if the pains remain in the fingers, then apply it to each joint and on the palmar surface of the hand; if the pains ascend after some days to the elbows or to the shoulders.
فاكوهما من كلّ جهة ولا يخلُ العليل من التدبير الجيّد وأخذ الأدوية فإنّه إن أحسن الغذاء واستفرغ البلغم فإنّه يبرأ مع هذا الكىّ إن شاء الله.	Then apply them (the bandages) from each side, and do not neglect the excellent regimen and taking of medication, for it is the best nutrition and evacuating phlegm; then he will recover with this treatment, God willing.
الفصل الخامس والأربعون.	Chapter 45.
فى كىّ الفتوق.	On the bandage of gout.
اذا عرض فتق فى الأربيّة وانحدر بعض المعاء والثرب الى الخصية وكان ذلك مبتدئا قريبا فينبغى أن تأمر العليل بترك الأكل يومه وأن يستعمل من المليّنات ما يحدر به البراز عن جوفه.	If gout appears in the hips and some of the affected joints and veins descend to the thigh, and that has recently started, it is advisable to order the patient to avoid eating on that day and to use emollients that would help to evacuate the matter from his joint.
ثمّ يضطجع بين يديك على ظهره وتأمره أن يمسك نفسه حتّى يبرز الثرب او المعاء ثم تردّه بأصبعك ثمّ تعلّم بالمداد تحت الفتق على عظم العانة علامة تشبه نصف الدائرة أطرافها الى أعلى البدن.	Place your hands on his chest and instruct him to hold himself still until the numbness or swelling subsides, then touch it with your fingers, and feel with the pulse at the bottom of the wrist on the bone of the forearm, a mark resembling half a circle, its edges extending upwards towards the elbow.
ثمّ تحمى مكواة هذه صورتها.	Then make an incision according to this shape.
حتّى تأتى بيضاء ترمى الشرر ثمّ تردّ المعاء او الثرب الى جوفه ثمّ يضع خادم يده على الموضع لئلّا يبرز المعاء وقد فرجت بين ساقى العليل ووضعت تحته وسادة وخادم آخر يعقد على ساقيه.	Until the white appearance appears, then touch the swelling or numbness to its edge, then a servant puts his hand on the spot to prevent the swelling from appearing, and you have made an opening between the thighs of the patient and placed a compress underneath, and another servant ties his legs.
وآخر على صدره يمسك يديه ثمّ تنزل المكواة على العلامة نفسها ويدك بالمكواة واقفة مستقيمة وتمسكها حتّى تبلغ بها العظم او تعيدها مرّة أخرى إن لم تبلغ بالأولى الى العظم.	And another on his chest, holding your hands, then lower the incision to the mark itself and hold the incision straight and steady until you reach the bone with it or make a second attempt if you did not reach the bone at first.
وتحفّظ جهدك من بروز المعاء فى حين كيّك لئلّا تحرقه فيحدث بذلك على العليل إمّا الموت وإمّا بليّة عظيمة، واعلم أنّك متى لم تبلغ بالكىّ العظم لم ينجح عملك، وينبغى أن تكون مكواة الصبيان لطيفة على أقدارهم وللكبار على أقدارهم.	And be cautious of your effort lest the swelling appears while you are operating, for that may cause death or great harm to the patient. And know that if you do not reach the bone with the incision, your operation will not succeed. And it is necessary for the incisions on young people to be gentle on their joints and on old people to be gentle on their joints.
ثمّ تعالج موضع الكىّ بعد ثلاثة أيّام بالسمن حتّى تذهب خشكريشة النار ثمّ تعالجه بسائر المراهم حتّى يبرأ وليكن العليل مضطجعا على ظهره اربعين يوما حتّى ينختم الجرح.	Then treat the site of the incision after three days with rose oil until the redness subsides, then treat it with other beneficial remedies until he recovers. And let the patient lie on his chest for forty days until the wound heals.
وينبغى أن تجعل غذاءه مدّة علاجه ما يليّن بطنه لئلّا يبرز المعاء عند التزحّر والتبرّز ثمّ اذا أراد القيام بعد الأربعين يوما فتستعمل رباطا محكما وتمسكه أربعين يوما أخر ويقلّ من التعب والامتلاء من الطعام والشراب والصياح الشديد.	And it is necessary to make his diet moderate during the period of treatment, so that he does not suffer from bloating, lest the swelling appear during the movement and exertion. Then, if he wants to stand up after forty days, use a sturdy bandage and apply it for forty more days, and reduce fatigue and indigestion from food, drink, and severe exhaustion.
فإنّه اذا استعمل هذا التدبير هكذا برئ برؤا تامّا إن شاء الله، وسأذكر علاج الفتوق بالشقّ فى بابه إن شاء الله، وأمّا الفتق الذى يحدث فى سائر البطن وكان مبتدئا فإن أردت أن لا يزيد فاكو الفتق منه كيّة مستديرة على قدره.	If we employ this method thus, with the blessing of God, and I shall mention the treatment of the fracture by resetting in its place, if God wills, and concerning the fracture that occurs in other parts of the abdomen and was initially displaced, I wanted to ensure that it does not increase because of the rounded prominence on its extent.
وليكن ما تحرق من الجلد مثل ثلثيه ثمّ عالجه بما ذكرنا فإنّه لا يزيد إن شاء الله، وقد ذكر بعض الأوائل أن يكوى الفتق بمكواة مثلّثة على هذه الصورة.	And let the ulceration not be excessive, like a third of it, then treat it with what we have mentioned, so that it does not increase, if God wills. Some of the predecessors have mentioned that the fracture should be coaxed with a tripartite bandage on this pattern.
بعد أن تعلّم على الفتق بالمداد وتصير الخطّ الذى بالعرض فى الجانب الأعلى من الفتق والخطّ الآخر الى اسفل وتنزل يدك فى الوسط بكيّة واحدة مسماريّة والكىّ الأوّل اسهل وأفضل إن شاء اللّه.	After you have applied the pad to the fracture and made a straight line along the width in the upper part of the fracture, and another line downwards, and you place your hand in the middle with one smooth motion, the first being easier and better, if God wills.
الفصل السادس والأربعون.	Chapter 46.
فى كىّ الوثى.	On the stitches of the Sutures.
اذا حدث فى بعض الأعضاء عن سقطة او ضربة وجع ودام ذلك الوجع زمانا طويلا ولم ينجع فيه العلاج بالأدوية فينبغى أن يكوى بمكواة النقطة ويكون كىّ كلّ عضو على حسب كبره وصغره وضعفه وقوّته.	If a member is affected by a fall or a blow, and pain and distress occur, taking a long time to heal, and the treatment with medicines does not help, it may be necessary to treat it with a puncture bandage, and each member should be treated according to its size, smallness, and weakness.
وتمكّن الوجع والوثى منه فإن برئ من الكىّ الأوّل وإلّا فتعيد عليه الكىّ لأنّ من عادة هذه الأوجاع أن تنتقل من العضو الى ما قرب منه فينبغى أن تتبعها بالكّى حتّى يبرأ العليل.	And if the pain and stitches are removed from it, then it is freed from the first bandage; otherwise, you should reapply the bandage to it, because it is customary for these pains to transfer from one member to its neighboring ones, so it is necessary to follow them with the bandage until the patient recovers.
الفصل السابع والأربعون.	Chapter 47.
فى كىّ الجذام.	On the Stitches of Abscesses.
أمّا المجذومون فقد ينتفعون بالكّى نفعا عظيما ولا سيّما صنف الجذام الذى يكون من قبل تعفّن البلغم والسوداء.	As for abscesses, they benefit greatly from the bandages, and it is not limited to one type of abscess, which occurs due to the collection of phlegm and melancholy.
فإذا أردت كيّه نظرت فإن كان الجذام مبتدئا وعالجته بما ذكرنا فى التقسيم ولم ينحّط ولم يتوقّف وخفت على العليل أن يستولى الفساد على جميع مزاجه فاكوه على الرأس خمس كيّات.	If you intended to make an incision, look carefully so that the amputation was at the joint and it was treated with what we mentioned in the section on suturing, and did not become inflamed and did not suppurate, and the patient's condition improved; for if the corruption spread to all the surrounding tissues, it would be difficult to control, and five treatments would be required for the head.
الواحدة فى وسط الرأس المعهودة والثانية أسفل منها نحو الجبهة عند نهاية الشعر واثنتين على القرنين وواحدة من خلف على نقرة القفا وأمعن يدك بالكىّ قليلا حتى يؤثّر فى العظم تأثيرا يسيرا.	One is in the middle of the aching head, and the second is below it towards the forehead at the end of the hair, and two are on the temples, and one from behind on the nape of the neck; and direct your hand with the scalpel slightly until it has a slight effect on the bone.
وتنقلع منه قشور ليسهل تنفّس البخارات الغليظة منها وتكويه كيّة أيضا على نفس الطحال على ما تقدّم، وأمّا إن كان الجذام قد استمرّ على العليل وظهر ظهورا بيّنا فينبغى أن تكويه هذه الكيّات التى ذكرنا فى الرأس.	And you remove the crust that has formed, so that the thick humors are drained from it, and you cauterize another incision on the same vein as mentioned before; and if the amputation had persisted on the patient and clear signs appeared, it would be necessary to cauterize these incisions we mentioned in the head.
وكيّة على طرف الأنف وكيّتين على الوجنتين وكيّتين على فقارات العنق وستّا على فقارات الظهر وواحدة كبيرة على العصعص عند عجز الذنب وأخرى فوقها فى نفس المائدة واثنتين على الأوراك على كلّ ورك واحدة.	And an incision on the tip of the nose, and two on the cheekbones, and two on the veins of the neck, and six on the veins of the back, and one large one on the vertebrae at the bend of the tailbone, and another above it in the same row, and two on the hips, one on each hip.
واثنتين على الركبتين واحدة على كلّ ركبة واثنتين على المنكبين واثنتين على المرفقين واثنتين على ترائب الصدر وتكويه على كلّ مفصل من مفاصل أصابع يديه ورجليه كيّة وعلى كلّ كعب من رجليه وزندى يديه.	And two on the kneecaps, one on each kneecap, and two on the shoulders, and two on the elbows, and two on the ribs of the chest, and cauterize on every joint of his fingers and toes, an incision on each ankle and wrist.
وتحفّظ من العصب الذى على مؤخّر الكعبين لئلّا تحرقهما، وقد يكوى كيّة على عظم العانة وأخرى على فم المعدة وأخرى على الكبد، واعلم أنّك كلّما زدت كيّا كان أنفع وأنجع.	And beware of the nerve that is on the back of the ankles, lest you harm them; and he may cauterize an incision on the bone of the hip, and another on the mouth of the stomach, and another on the liver; and know that every time you make an incision, it has a benefit and a relief.
واعلم أنّ العليل لا يجد للكىّ وجعا كما يجده الصحيح من أجل أنّ بدنه قد خدر، وينبغى أن تكون المكاوى من الكبر والصغر على حسب الأعضاء والمفاصل على ما تقدّم من صفات الحدائد.	The patient does not find the pain of the injury as the healthy person finds it, because his body has become accustomed to it, and it is necessary that the pains should be from the large and small according to the members and joints in relation to what is mentioned of the signs of the injuries.
ثمّ عالج الكىّ بدقيق الكرسنّة مع العسل وسائر العلاج حتّى يبرأ إن شاء اللّه تعالى.	Then we treat the injury with a gentle touch, with honey and other treatments until he recovers, if God wills it.
الفصل الثامن والأربعون.	Chapter 38.
فى كىّ الخدر متى خدر عضو من الأعضاء وعولج بالأدوية والأدهان والضمادات فلم يبرأ فاكو نفس العضو المنخدر بكيّات على حسب ما يستحقّ عظم العضو او صغره وليكن كيّك واغلا فى ثخن الجلد قليلا.	When a member becomes numb, and its treatment with medications and bandages fails to cure it, then the same member becomes numb again, and its treatment should be according to whether the bone of the member is large or small, and let the treatment be gentle in piercing the skin slightly.
ثمّ تعالجه بالمرهم حتّى يبرأ، وقد يكوى لبعض الخدر الذى يعرض لليد والرجل فى فقارات الظهر عند مخرج العصب الذى يحرّك ذلك العضو فيذهب الخدر.	Then we treat it with the poultice until he recovers, and sometimes numbness occurs in the hand or leg at the points of the back where the nerve emerges that moves that member, and the numbness disappears.
ولا يقدم على ذلك إلّا من كان بصيرا بتشريح الأعضاء ومخارج الأعصاب المحرّكة للبدن،.	And no one can present that except one who is skilled in the anatomy of the members and the emergence of the nerves that move the body.
الفصل التاسع والأربعون.	Chapter 49.
فى كىّ البرص.	On Ulcers.
اذا تقادم البرص ولم ينجع فيه حيلة من حيل الطبّ فأكو عليه كيّا فيه عمق قليلا على قدر ثخن الجلد حتّى يذهب البياض ويتغيّر لونه.	If an ulcer is chronic and no remedy from the remedies of medicine has been effective for it, then we make on it a gentle operation, slightly piercing the skin, until the whiteness disappears and its color changes.
ثمّ تعالجه بدقيق العدس مع دهن الوردوورق لسان الحمل ودم الحمام او دم الخطاطيف من كلّ واحد جزء ويخلط الجميع ويطلى على خرقة ويلزم الموضع حتّى يبرأ.	Then we treat it with a gentle touch, along with the application of rose water and lavender oil, or the blood of the affected part, or the blood of the hot baths, each one part, and mix them all together and apply it to the ulcer, and bind the place until he recovers.
الفصل الخمسون.	Chapter 50.
فىكىّ السرطان.	On Cancer.
اذا كان السرطان مبتدئا وأردت توقيفه فاكوه بمكواة الدائرة حواليه كما تدور، وقد ذكر بعض الحكماء أن يكوى كيّة بليغة فى وسطه ولست أرى أنا ذلك لأنّى أتوقّع أن يتقرّح وقد شاهدت ذلك مرّات.	If the cancer is beginning and you want to stop it, then we cauterize around it with a circular motion, as it is described. Some wise men have mentioned that a severe burn should be made in its center, but I do not see that, because I believe that it will become worse, and I have seen that many times.
فالصواب أن يكوى حواليه بدائرة كما قلنا او بكيّات كثيرة.	The bandage should be applied around it in a circular fashion, as we have mentioned, or with multiple layers.
الفصل الحادى والخمسون.	The sixty-first and fifty-eighth chapters.
فى كىّ الدبيلة.	On the treatment of the pestilence.
اذا حدث بأحد دبيلة وقد أبطأت فى النضج إمّا من قبل الفضل الفاعل لها وإمّا من قبل سنّ العليل اذا كان شيخا قليل الدم وإمّا من قبل الزمان وأردت أن تسرع فى نضج الدبيلة فاكو حواليها بكيّات صغار كثيرة تنقيطا.	If pestilence occurs to someone and it has been delayed in its treatment, either because of the patient's lack of faith or because of the doctor's ignorance of its proper treatment, or because of the patient's advanced age and the doctor wants to hasten the treatment of the pestilence, then let him apply bandages around it in many small layers that are not constricting.
ثمّ اتركها فإنّها تسرع بالنضج فإن أردت بطّها بالكىّ فاحم المكواة التى هذه صورتها.	Then leave it, for it will hasten the treatment. If you want to apply a dressing to it with a bandage, then apply this type of dressing that is its shape.
وأنزلها فى وسط الدبيلة حتّى تنفذ الجلد ولتكن الكيّة ممّا يلى الأسفل ليسهل جرى القيح ثم تعالجها بما ينبغى حتّى تبرأ.	And insert it into the middle of the pestilence until the suppuration is finished and the dressing is in its place, so that the pus may flow out easily, then treat it with what is suitable until it heals.
الفصل الثانى والخمسون.	The fifty-second chapter.
فى كىّ الآكلة.	On the treatment of ulcers.
الآكلة إنّما هى فساد يسعى فى العضو فيأكله كما تأكل النار الحطب اليابس فإن رأيت الآكلة فى موضع يحتمل الكىّ بالنار فاحم مكاوى مسماريّة كثيرة صغارا وكبارا على حسب ما يصلح لذلك الموضع الذى فيه الآكلة.	Ulcers are a type of corruption that spreads in the member, eating away the flesh like fire eats away the dry wood. If you see an ulcer in a place that can be treated with fire, then apply many small and large cauteries according to what is suitable for that location where the ulcer is.
ثمّ اكوها من كلّ جهة حتّى يستأصل الفساد كلّه ولا يبقى منه شىء البتّة، ثمّ تتركه ثلاثة أيّام وتحمل على المواضع المكويّة الكبريت المسحوق مع الزيت حتّى تنقلع الخشكريشة كلّها وجميع الفساد.	Then cauterize it from every direction until the corruption is completely destroyed and nothing of it remains, then leave it for three days and apply to the cauterized places a mixture of borax, rose water, and oil until all the roughness and entire corruption are removed.
ثمّ تعالجه بالمراهم المنبتة للحم فإن رأيت بعد ثلاثة أيّام أنّ اللحم ينبت نباتا صحيحا لا فساد فيه وإلّا فأعد الكىّ على ما بقى من المواضع الفاسدة، وقد تعالج الآكلة بالدواء الحادّ.	Then treat it with perfumed ointments suitable for the flesh, and if you see after three days that the flesh has grown healthy growth without corruption in it, otherwise, return to treating the remaining corrupted areas. The ulcer is treated with a strong medicine.
فإنّه يقوم مقام بالنار اسرع نفعا وقد ذكرت علاجها بالدواء الحادّ فى التقسيم فتأخذه من هناك متى احتجت اليه.	It stands in place of the nerve, and I have mentioned its treatment with sharp medications in the incision, so take it from there whenever you need it.
الفصل الثالث والخمسون.	Chapter Three and Fifty.
فى كىّ المسامير المعكوسة وغير المعكوسة.	On the curved and non-curved sutures.
كثيرا ما تحدث فى اسافل القدمين هذه العلّة وهى شىء خشن يوّلم الرجل، والكىّ فيها على وجهين إمّا الكىّ بالنار وإمّا الكىّ بالماء الحادّ.	It often happens in the soles of these feet, which is a rough thing that harms the man, and the sutures are either those with the nerve or those with sharp water.
فأمّا الكىّ بالنار فهو أن تحمى المكواة المجوّفة الشبيهة بريش النسر تصنع من حديد على قدر ما يحيط بالمسمار من كلّ جهة وتكون رقيقة الحاشية ثمّ تنزلها حامية على المسمار ثمّ تدير يدك بالمكواة حول المسمار حتّى تصل المكواة الى عمق المسمار.	As for the suture with the nerve, it is that you take a curved, thin-bladed instrument made of iron, proportionate to the circumference of the suture from every side, and its edge is sharp; then you lower it gently onto the suture, and you turn your hand with the instrument around the suture until the instrument reaches the depth of the suture.
وتتركه ثلاثة أيّام يهمّ بالقيح ثمّ تضمدها بالخبازى البرّيّة المدقوقة بالملح وتترك الضماد عليها ليلة فإنّها تنقلع من أصولها ثمّ تعالج موضع الجرح بالمرهم المنبت للحم حتّى يبرأ، فإن كانت المسامير غير معكوسة.	And leave it for three days, bandaging with the rough, coarse, powdered gypsum, and leaving the dressing on for a night; then it will detach from its roots. Then treat the place of the wound with the soft, absorbent plaster until it heals, if the sutures are not curved.
وكثيرا ما تحدث فى سطح البدن ولا سيّما فى الأيدى والأرجل فينبغى أن تأخذ انبوبة من نحاس او من حديد او من ريش النسر وتنزلها على المسمار او الثؤلول ثمّ تلقى فى الأنبوبة من الماء الحادّ قدرا يسيرا.	And it often happens on the surface of the body, not just on the hands and feet, that you should take a tube made of copper or iron or from the edge of the razor, and lower it onto the suture or the abscess, then pour into the tube some sharp water in small amounts.
وتمسك يدك وأنت تديرها مع غمز يدك قليلا لكى تؤثّر حاشية الأنبوبة فى أصل المسمار ويجد الماء الحادّ السبيل الى الغوص الى أصل المسمار ويصبر العليل قليلا على لذع الماء الحادّ ساعة.	And hold your hand, and turn it with a slight grip of your hand so that the edge of the tube affects the base of the suture, and the sharp water flows through to the base of the suture, and the pain subsides slightly from the touch of the sharp water for an hour.
ثمّ تتركه فإنّ المسمار ينقلع بأصوله، هكذا تفعل بها واحدة واحدة حتّى تأتى على جميع ما منها فى الجسم ثمّ تعالج مواضعها بعد أن تنقلع بما ينبت اللحم من المراهم.	Then leave it, for the suture will detach from its roots. Thus you do with one, one by one, until you reach all of them in the body, then treat their places after they have detached, and the flesh grows from the wounds.
الفصل الرابع والخمسون.	The 54th Chapter.
فى كىّ النافض.	On the Treatment of Hemorrhoids.
اذا حدث بأحد نافض من برد فى العصب او من حمّى ربع او غير ذلك فينبغى أن تكويه أربع كيّات او خمسا على خرز الظهر بين كلّ خرزة كيّة وفى صدره كيّة.	If a hemorrhoid occurs in one of the nerves, or from coldness, or from a blow, or something else, it is advisable to cauterize four or five places on the back of the spine, with a cautery mark between each spot, and one on his buttock.
وعلى معدته كيّة بالمكواة الزيتونيّة فإنّ النافض يسكن ويسرع بنضج المرض البارد.	And if he is cauterized on his abdomen with the Zionite iron, then the hemorrhoid becomes quiet and is relieved from the cold disease.
الفصل الخامس والخمسون.	The 55th Chapter.
فى كىّ البثر الحادث فى البدن.	On the Treatment of Wounds Occurring in the Body.
قد تندفع فى البدن بثور قبيحة تكون عن موادّ باردة غليظة فاسدة فينبغى أوّل ظهورها أن تكوى على رأس كلّ بثرة كيّة لطيفة بعود آس قد أوقد طرفه بالنار او بأصل الزراوند الطويل او بمكواة عدسيّة.	Wounds may occur in the body due to cold, thick, and dirty materials, so it is advisable when they first appear to cauterize on top of each wound a small mark with an iron instrument, or with the tip of a long scalpel, or with a sharp cautery.
وقد تكوى الدماميل فى اوّل اندفاعها على هذه الصفة فلا يزيد ويتبدّد الفضل الفاعل لها ويبرأ منها العليل إلّا أنّه ينبغى أن يكون ذلك بعد استفراغ العليل بالفصد.	And it may be that the ulcers are cauterized at first onset in this manner, so they do not increase and the effective benefit for them is achieved, and the patient is cured of them, but it is advisable to do that after evacuating the patient's bowels with a purgative.
الفصل السادس والخمسون.	The 56th Chapter.
فى كىّ النزف الحادث عند قطع الشريان.	On the Treatment of Bleeding Occurring upon Severance of an Artery.
كثيرا ما يحدث نزف الدم من شريان قد انقطع عند جرح يعرض من خارج او عند شقّ ورم او كىّ عضو ونحو ذلك فيعسر قطعه.	It often happens that bleeding of blood occurs from an artery that has been severed upon a wound, whether it be an external one or a fracture or a dislocation, and so on, which makes its ligation difficult.
فإذا حدث لأحد ذلك فاسرع بيدك الى فم الشريان فضع عليه اصبعك السبّابة وشدّه نعما حتّى يحصر الدم تحت اصبعك ولا يخرج منه شىء ثمّ تضع فى النار مكاوى زيتونيّة صغارا وكبارا عدّة وتنفح عليها حتّى تصير حامية جدّا.	If that happens to someone, then hasten to the mouth of the artery and place your middle finger on it and constrict it strongly until the blood is constricted under your finger and does not exit from it, then apply to the cautery Zionite irons, small and large, several times, until a strong adhesion occurs.
ثمّ تأخذ منها واحدة إمّا صغيرة وإمّا كبيرة على حسب الجرح والموضع الذى انفتق فيه الشريان وتنزل المكواة على نفس العرق بعد أن تنزع اصبعك بالعجلة وتمسك المكواة حتّى ينقطع الدم.	You take one of them, either small or large, according to the wound and the place where the artery has opened, and you apply the cautery to the same vein after having removed your finger from the scalpel, and you hold the cautery until the bleeding stops.
فإن اندفع عند رفعك الأصبع من فم الشريان وطفأ المكواة فخذ مكواة أخرى بالعجلة من المكاوى التى فى النار المعدّة ولا تزال تفعل ذلك بواحدة بعد أخرى حتّى ينقطع الدم.	If the bleeding does not stop when you lift your finger from the mouth of the artery and apply the cautery, take another cautery with the scalpel from the prepared cauteraries in the fire, and do not cease doing that one after another until the bleeding stops.
وتحفّظ لا تحرق عصبا يكون هناك فتحدث على العليل بليّة أخرى، واعلم أنّ الشريان اذا نزف منه الدم فإنّه لا يستطاع قطعه ولا سيّما اذا كان الشريان عظيما إلّا بأحد أربعة أوجه إمّا بالكىّ كما قلنا وإمّا ببتره اذا لم يكن قد انبتر.	And be cautious not to burn the surrounding tissue, for it will lead to a worse condition; and know that if blood flows from an artery, it cannot be stopped at all, unless it is one of four types: either by compression, as we have mentioned, or by ligature, if it has not been ligated before.
فإنّه اذا بتر تقلّصت طرفاه وانقطع الدم وإمّا أن يربط بالخيوط ربطا وثيقا وإمّا أن توضع عليه الأدوية التى من شأنها قطع الدم والشدّ بالرفائد شدّا محكما.	For if it is ligated, its sides will be constricted and the bleeding will stop; or it may be bound with strong and tight bandages; or medicines that stop blood and strengthen the weakened area may be applied to it.
وأمّا من يحاول قطعه برباط او بشدّ بالخرق او وضع الأشياء المحرقة ونحو ذلك فإنّه لاينقطع بذلك البتّة إلّا فى الندرة فإن عرض لأحد ذلك ولم يحضره طبيب ولا دواء فليبادر بوضع الأصبع السبّابة على فم الجرح نفسه كما وصفنا.	And whoever tries to stop it with a ligature or by tightening the bandage or applying hot instruments and suchlike, it will not be stopped thereby, except in rare cases; if one of them is presented and no doctor or medicine is present, then let him hasten to apply the finger on the mouth of the wound itself, as we have described.
ويشدّه جدّا حتّى ينحصر الدم وينطل من فوق الجرح وعلى الشريان والأصبع لا تزول من عليه بالماء البارد الشديد البرد دائما ختّى يجمد الدم ويغلظ وينقطع وفى خلال ذلك تنظر فيما يحتاج اليه من كىّ او دواء.	And press it firmly until the bleeding is constricted and stops, and from above the wound and on the artery, do not cease to apply cold water, extremely cold, constantly, so that the blood is congealed and thickened, and stops, and during that, you observe what is needed of compression or medicine.
الباب الثانى.	The Second Chapter.
فى الشقّ والبطّ والفصد والجراحات ونحوها.	On incisions, cupping, phlebotomy, and surgical operations, and the like.
قال خلف قد ذكرنا فىالباب الأوّلكلّ مرض يصلح فيه الكىّ بالنار والدواء المحرق وعلله وأسبابه وآلاته وصور المكاوى وجعلت ذلك فصولا من القرن الى القدم.	Here is the translation of the excerpt:
وأنا أسلك فى هذاالباب ذلكالمسلك بعينه ليسهل على الطالب مطلوبه..	We have placed in this chapter a specific type of suture which is not easy for the seeker to find what he needs.
قبل أن أبدأ بذلك فينبغى أن تعلموا يا بنىّ أنّ هذاالباب فيهمن الغرر فوق مافىالباب الاوّلفى الكىّ.	Before I start with that, it is necessary for you to learn, my sons, that this chapter contains some of what was omitted from the previous chapter.
ومن أجل ذلك ينبغى أن يكون التحذير فيه أشدّ لأنّ العمل فى هذاالباب كثيراما يقع فيه الاستفراغ من الدم الذى به تقوم الحيوة عند فتح عرق او شق على ورم او بطّ خراج او علاج جراحة او إخراج سهم او شقّ على حصاة ونحو ذلك ممّا يصحب كلّها الغرر والخوف ويقع فى أكثرها الموت.	And for that reason, it is necessary for the warning in this chapter to be more severe, because the work in this chapter is plentiful and frequently involves excessive bleeding from the blood vessels when an artery is opened or a vein is cut, or a tumor is removed, or a surgical incision is made, or a limb is amputated, and so on, all of which involve great danger and fear, and many of them lead to death.
وأنا أوصيكم عن الوقوع فيما فيه الشبهة عليكم فإنّه قد يقع إليكم فى هذه الصناعة صنوف من الناس بضروب من الأسقام فمنهم من قد ضجر بمرضه وهان عليه الموت.	And I advise you about the occurrence of similarity in it, for it may happen to you in this craft that various types of people will experience different kinds of calamities, among whom are those who have been worn out by their illness and death has befallen them.
لشدّة ما يجد من سقمه وطول بليّته وبالمرض من التقرّر ما يدلّ على الموت، ومنهم من يبذل لكم ماله ويغنيكم به رجاء الصحّة ومرضه قتّال فلا ينبغى لكم أن تتساعدوا من اتاكم ممّن هذه صفته البتّة.	It is severe what one finds of calamities and the length of his suffering, and from the disease that indicates death; and among them are those who spend their wealth and weary you with the hope of health and the promise of cure, so it is not fitting for you to rely on your own opinion in this type of case.
وليكن حذركم أشدّ من رغبتكم وحرصكم ولا تقدموا على شىء من ذلك الّا بعد علم يقين يصحّ عندكم بما يصير اليه العاقبة المحمودة، واستعملوا فى جميع علاج مرضاكم تقدمة المعرفة والإنذار بما تؤول اليه السلامة.	And I warn you more severely than your desire and eagerness, and do not proceed with anything of that unless after certain knowledge is established in you, so that what leads to the desired outcome is verified, and use in all treatment of your disease the presentation of knowledge and warning, so that it leads to safety.
فإنّ لكم فى ذلك عونا على اكتساب الثناء والمجد والذكر والحمد، ألهمكم اللّه يا بنّى رشده ولا حرّمكم الصواب والتوفيق إنّ ذلك بيده لا إله الّا هو.	For you will have in that a means of acquiring praise, glory, remembrance, and gratitude. May God guide you, my sons, to righteousness and grant you success, for He is the only deity worthy of worship.
وقد رتّبت هذاالباب فصولاعلى ما تقدّم فى باب الكىّ من القرن الى القدم ليخفّ عليكم مطلب ما تريدون منه إن شاء الله.	And I have arranged this chapter in sections, building upon what was presented in the previous chapter from the head to the foot, so that it may be easy for you to find what you want from it, God willing.
الفصل الأوّل.	The First Chapter.
فىعلاج الماء الذى يجتمع فى رؤوس الصبيان.	On the treatment of the water that gathers in the heads of babies.
إنّ هذا السقم كثيرا ما يعرض للصبيان عند الولادة اذا ضغطت القابلة رأس الصبّى بغير رفق وقد يعرض أيضا من علّة خفيّة لا تعرف.	This illness often affects babies at birth if the womb presses on the baby's head without gentleness, and it may also occur due to a hidden cause that is not recognized.
ولم أر هذه العلّة فى غير الصبيان وجميع من رأيت منهم أسرع اليه الموت فلذلك رأيت ترك العمل به ولقد رأيت منهم صبيّا قد امتلأ رأسه ماء والرأس يعظم فى كلّ يوم.	I have not seen this illness in anyone other than babies, and all those whom I saw were hastening towards death; therefore, I saw the abandonment of work with them. And I have seen a baby whose head was filled with water, and the head would swell every day.
حتّى لم يطق الصبىّ يقعد على نفسه لعظم رأسه والرطوبة تتزايد حتّى هلك.	Until the baby could not sit up by himself due to the swelling of his head and the corruption increasing until he died.
وهذا الرطوبة إمّا أن تجتمع بين الجلد والعظم وإمّا أن تجتمع تحت العظم على الصفاق، والعمل فى ذلك إن كانت الرطوبة فيما بين الجلد والعظم وكان الورم صغيرا فينبغى أن تشقّ فى وسط الرأس شقّا واحدا بالعرض ويكون طول الشقّ نحو عقدين حتّى تسيل الرطوبة وهذه صورة المبضع.	And this corruption either gathers between the skin and the bone, or it gathers beneath the bone on the scalp. The work in that is if the corruption was between the skin and the bone, and the tumor was small, it would be necessary to make a single incision in the middle of the head, about a finger's width, and the length of the incision would be around four fingers until the corruption drains, and this is the picture of the operation.
فإن كانت الرطوبة أزيد والورم أعظم فاجعلها شقّين متقاطعين على هذه الصورة:.	If the corruption was more and the tumor was larger, I would make two intersecting incisions in this shape:.
وإن كانت الرطوبة تحت العظم وعلامته أن ترى خياطات الرأس مفتوحة من كلّ جهة والماء ينخفض اذا عصرته بيدك الى داخل وليس بخفىّ ذلك عليك فينبغى أن تشقّ فى وسط الرأس ثلاثة شقوق على هذه الصورة.	And if the corruption was beneath the bone, and its sign was that the sutures of the head were open from every side, and the water would flow down when you pressed on it with your hand, and it did not hide that from you; then it would be necessary to make three incisions in the middle of the head, like this shape.
وبعد الشقّ تخرج الرطوبة كلّها ثمّ تشدّ الشقوق بالخرق والرفائد ثمّ تنطله من فوق بالشراب والزيت الى اليوم الخامس ثمّ تحلّ الرباط وتعالج الجرح بالفتل والمراهم ولا تترك شدّ الرأس باعتدال وتغذّى العليل بكلّ غذاء جافّ قليل الرطوبة.	And after the incision, all the corruption would come out; then you would close the incisions with sutures and bandages, and then apply a compress above with rose oil and wax until the fifth day; then you would remove the dressing and treat the wound with ointments and medicines, and not leave the head constricted, and feed the baby light and gentle food to reduce the corruption.
الى أن يقوى العضو ويبرأ، وصفة أخرى من الشقّ أن تنظر حيث يظهر عظم الورم واجتماع الماء لأنّه قد يكون فى مؤخّر الرأس أكثر او فى مقدّمه او فى اليمين او فى الشمال.	Before the member is strong and another aspect of the fracture is observed, where the bone of the tumor appears and the gathering of the water, because it may be in the back of the head more or in its front or on the right or on the left.
فتقصد بالشقّ حيث ظهر لك الورم وامتلاء الماء فتشقّه على ما يمكنك وتحفّظ أن تقطع شريانا فتحدث نزفا فيموت العليل من ذلك النزف مع استفراغ الرطوبة.	You intend to split the fracture where the tumor appears and the gathering of the water, so you split it according to what is possible for you and be cautious not to cut a vein, lest you cause a hemorrhage that kills the patient, along with the pouring out of the flux.
الفصل الثانى.	The Second Chapter.
قطع الشريانين اللذين خلف الاذنين المعروفين بالحسيسين.	Cutting the two arteries that are behind the two known ears of the neck, called the jugulars.
متى عرض لأحد نزلات حادّة الى العينين او الى الصدر وأزمن ذلك ولم ينجع فى ذلك علاج الأدوية فأبلغ العلاج فى ذلك قطع هذين الشريانين.	When a severe hemorrhage occurs in the eyes or in the breast, and that is not cured by medicine treatment, then inform the treatment of cutting these two arteries.
فينبغى اذا أردت قطعهما أن تحلق رأس العليل بالموسى ثمّ تحكّ الموضع بخرقة خشنة ليظهر الشريان ثمّ تشدّ رقبة العليل بفضل ثوبه ثمّ تنظر حيث ينبض العرق وموضعاهما الموضعان المتخفّضان اللذان خلف الأذنين وقلّ ما تخفى إلّا فى بعض الناس.	Then, if you want to cut them, you should shave the patient's head with a razor, then scrub the place with a rough cloth so that the artery appears, and then constrict the patient's neck with a bandage, and look where the pulse is, and its two hidden positions behind the ears, and diminish what is hidden except in some people.
ثمّ تعلّم عليهما بالمداد ثمّ تقطعهما بالمبضع النشل قطعا الى العظم ويكون ذلك بعرض الرأس وإن شئت أدخلت المبضع من تحت الشريان وتنتره الى فوق بالقطع ويكون طول القطع نحو أصبعين مضمومتين.	Then, you mark them with a marker, and then cut them with a scalpel, cutting to the bone, and that is done across the head; if you wish, insert the scalpel from underneath the artery and turn it upwards while cutting, and the length of the cut is about two fingers.
فإنّ العرق اذا انقطع خرج الدم خروجا نبضيّا يثب الى قدّام وثوبا متواترا، فإن لم يظهر الشريان للحسّ فينبغى أن تقدر من الأذن بعد قدر ثلاث أصابع ثمّ تعلّم بالمداد وتشقّ الى العظم، والذى ينبغى أن.	For if the artery is cut, the blood gushes out in a pulsating flow that rises upwards and falls back repeatedly; if the artery does not appear to the sense of touch, it should be estimated from the ear at a distance of three fingers, then marked with a marker, and cut to the bone, which is what is intended.
ترسل من الدم سّت أواق على التوّسط وربّما أرسلت منه أكثر او أقل كلّ ذلك على قدر ما يظهر لك من قوّة العليل وامتلاء شرياناته، ثمّ تنظر الى الجرح فإن بقى على العظم من الصفاق شىء فاقطعه.	You let out seven or eight ounces of blood, or perhaps more or less, all according to what appears to you of the patient's strength and the gathering of his arteries; then, look at the wound, if there remains on the bone from the periosteum something, cut it off.
لئلّا يعرض ورم حارّ ثمّ تشدّ الجرح بفتيلة من خرق كتان ثمّ عالجه بالمراهم حتّى يبرأ،.	The wound is exposed and cleansed with a piece of cloth, then the sutures are applied to bring together the edges of the wound, until it is fully closed.
الفصل الثالث.	Chapter Three
فىسلّ الشريانين اللذين فى الأصداغ.	The two vessels in the temples.
اذا حدث بإنسان شقيقة مزمنة او نزلات حادّة من قبل رطوبات حرّيفة وحرارة فى عضلات الاصداغ او صداع مزمن شديد ونحو ذلك وعولج بضروب علاج الطّب فلم ينجع ذلك فقد جرّبنا فى هذه الأمراض سلّ الشريانات من الأصداغ او كيّها كما وصفنا.	If a person suffers from chronic or acute severe headaches due to rheumatic or hot and cold sensations in the temple muscles, or severe chronic temple pain, and was treated with various medical treatments but did not respond, we have tried in these cases to ligate the vessels in the temples as we have described.
ووجه العمل فى سلّها أن يحلق العليل الشعر الذى فى الأصداغ وتقصد الشريان الظاهر فى الصدغ فإنّه يتبيّن لك من نبضه وقلّ ما يخفى الّا فى الفرد من الناس.	The purpose of the operation is to ligate the superficial vessel that is in the temples, and the intention is to ligate the visible vessels in the temple, so that it becomes clear to you from its pulsation and the decrease in what is hidden, except in some people.
او عند شدة البرد فإن خفى عليك فليشدّ العليل رقبته بفضل ثوبه ثمّ تحكّ أنت الموضع بخرقة او تكمّد الموضع بماء حارّ حتّى يظهر الشريان ظهورا بيّنا واضحا.	When the skin is tightened, it becomes clear to you, so you should tighten the superficial vessel with a fine ligature, then touch the area with a hot spatula or compress the area with hot water until the vessels become clearly visible and distinct.
ثمّ تأخذ المبضع الذى هذه صورته.	Then take the instrument that is depicted in this picture.
ثم تسلخ به الجلد برفق حتّى تصل الى الشريان ثمّ تلقى فيه صنّارة وتجذبه الى فوق حتّى تخرجه من الجلد وتخلّصه من الصفاقات التى تحته من كلّ جهة فإن كان الشريان رقيقا فتلويه بطرف الصنّارة.	Then insert it into the skin with a gentle touch until you reach the vessel, then apply a ligature to it and pull it upwards until you extract it from the skin and free it from the attachments that are underneath from every direction; if the vessel is thin, then wrap it with the tip of the ligature.
ثمّ تقطع منه جزءا على قدر ما يتباعد طرفاه وتنقبض ولا تحدث نزفا فإنّه إن لم يبتر ولم ينقطع لم يرق الدم اصلا ثمّ استفرغ من الدم من ستّ أواق الى ثلاث.	Then cut a part of it, according to the measure of its separation from both ends and contraction, without causing bleeding; for if it does not bleed and is not severed, the blood will not flow at all. Then, purify the blood from six or seven orifices.
فإن كان الشريان عظيما فينبغى أن تربطه فى مكانين بخيط مثنّى قوىّ وليكن الخيط إمّا من ابريسم وإما من أوتار العود لئلّا يسرع اليه العفن قبل التحام الجرح فيحدث النزف.	If the vessel is large, it is necessary to ligate it in two places with a strong thread, whether from silk or from the tendons of the bow, so that the suppuration does not hasten to it before the wound heals, causing bleeding.
ثمّ تقطع فضل ما بين الرباطين تفعل ذلك فى تلك الساعة او بعد وقت آخر، وإن شئت أن تكويه كيّا الى العظم بمكواة سكّينيّة حتّى ينبتر أطرافه فيقوم مقام هذا العمل بعينه او أفضل كما قلنا.	Then, cut the excess between the sutures at that hour or after another time, and if you wish to straighten it onto the bone with a straightening instrument until its edges settle in their place, performing this task by itself or better, as we have said.
الّا إن كان العليل به حمّى او محرور المزاج لأنّ الكىّ ممّا يعين على إفناء الرطوبات فيكون أوكد فى المنفعة، وينبغى بعد سلّ الشريانين أن يحشى الموضع بالقتن البالى وتوضع عليه الرفائد المحكمة وبعد الحلّ يعالج بالادوية اليابسة التى تنبت اللحم وبالفتل حتّى يبرأ إن شاء اللّه.	But if the patient has a fever or an inflamed temperament, because the evacuation of the abscesses is necessary to relieve the area, and after ligating the arteries it is necessary to clean the site with cotton rose water and apply the dressing that holds in place, and after the resolution is treated with softening remedies that grow flesh, and with a gentle touch until he recovers, if God wills.
فإن حدث فى خلال عملك نزف من الشريان فبادر الى قطعه إمّا بالكىّ وإمّا أن تملأ الموضع بالزاج وتشدّ يدك حتّى ينقطع الدم فإن لم يحضرك من ذلك شىء فضع أصبعك حتّى يجمد الدم.	If a hemorrhage occurs during your operation, hasten to ligate it either with the instrument or by compressing the site with a bandage and tighten your hand until the bleeding stops; and if you are not prepared for that, put your finger on it until the bleeding is stanched.
وانطل الموضع بالماء الشديد البرد حتّى تسكن الحدّة وتشدّه على ما ينبغى، وممّا هو أخفّ وأسهل من سلّ الشريان أن تكوى العرق بهذه المكواة ذات السكّينين بعد أن تعلّم الموضعين بالمداد.	And compress the site with cold water until the bleeding is stopped and constricted to what is necessary, and it is easier and simpler than ligating the arteries to straighten the vein with this straightening instrument after having cleaned the sites with a pledget.
وتنزلها حامية جدّا حتّى تبلغ الى العظم وينقطع العرق فى موضعين لكى يتباعد ما بين طرفيه فإنّه لا يلتحم بهذا الكىّ البتّة، وهذه صورة المكواة.	And descend gradually, very gently, until you reach the bone and the vein is cut off at two sites, so that it does not adhere to this instrument, and this is the form of the straightening instrument.
تكون حادّة السكّينين تشبه المقدّتين الصغيرتين إلّا أنّها تكون أقلّ حدّة من السكّين كثيرا لأنّه إن كانتا حادّتين كالسكّين أسرع اليهما البرد ولم ينقطع اللحم بسرعة، فإذا كان فيهما بعض الغلظ امتسك فيهما حرّ النار.	The edges of the straightening instrument are similar to small scissors, except that they are less sharp than the scissors by a lot, because if they were as sharp as the scissors, they would have hastened the cooling and the flesh would not have been cut quickly; therefore, if there is some roughness in them, it holds back the heat of the fire.
وقطعت اللحم بسرعة، وهذا العمل أفضل من كلّ عمل وأخف وأسهل، وليكن بعد ما بين السكّينين قدر غلظ الأصبع.	And cut the flesh quickly, and this task is better than every task, easier and simpler; and let it be, after what is between the scissors, as much as the thickness of a finger.
الفصل الرابع.	The Fourth Chapter.
فىعلاج سيلان الدموع الحارّة الدائمة الى العينين.	On the treatment of chronic conjunctival ulcers that affect the eyes.
اذا كانت الدموع دائمة وكان سيلانها من العروق التى على قحف الرأس من خارج ولم يكن ينتفع فيها بشىء من علاج الطّب بالأدوية ورأيت وجه العليل قد احمّر.	If the ulcers are chronic and their origin is from the veins on the surface of the head from outside, and it has not been benefited by any treatment with medications and you have seen the face of the patient become darker.
ويحسّ فى جبينه دبيبا كدبيب النمل وعيناه مهزولتان رطبتان قد تأكّلت اشفارهما وتشبّطت اجفانهما من حدّة الدموع فاضطرّت الاوائل فى علاجها الى هذا العمل ويسمّونه العلاج بالسيف، وهو أن تأمر العليل بحلق الشعر الذى فى جبهته.	And he feels a numbness in his forehead like the numbness of a limb, and his eyes are sunken, having lost their luster, and their lids are constricted from the severity of the ulcers. The physicians have despaired of treating them up to this point, and they call it the treatment by cauterization, which is to burn the patient's hair roots on his forehead.
ثمّ تشقّ فى الجبهة ثلاثة شقوق متوازية على طول الجبهة ويكون طول الشقّ نحو أصبعين الشقّ الواحد موازيا لطول الأنف فى وسط الجبهة والثانى على البعد قليلا من حركة العضل الذى فى الصدغ والثالث من الجهة الأخرى.	Then, make three parallel incisions on the forehead, each incision being about a finger's length, one of them parallel to the nose in the middle of the forehead, the second one slightly away from the movement of the muscle on the temple, and the third one on the other side.
وتحفّظ من قطع الشريانين اللذين فى الجانبين وأبعد يدك من اتّصال الفكّين ويكون بعد كلّ شقّ قدر ثلاث اصابع مضمومة وليكن معك قطع إسفنج معدّة او خرق ناشفة كثيرة بما تنشف الدم.	And be cautious not to cut the two arteries that are in both sides, and keep your hand away from the connection of the jawbones. After each incision, make three folds of the skin, and have with you a cutting instrument or a scalpel that cuts many times to stop the bleeding.
ثمّ تدخل المبضع الحادّ الطرفين الذى هذه صورته.	Then, insert the sharp pointed cautery iron that has this shape.
من الشقّ الذى يلى الصدغ الى الشقّ الأوسط وتسلخ به جميع الجلد الذى فيما بين الشقّين مع الصفاق الذى على العظم ثمّ تفعل ذلك ايضا من الشقّ الأوسط الى الشقّ الثالث ثمّ تخرج هذا المبضع.	From the incision that is near the temple to the middle incision, and scrape with it all the flesh that is between the two incisions, along with the periosteum that is on the bone. Then, do that again from the middle incision to the third incision, then withdraw this cautery iron.
وتدخل فى الشقّ الأوّل ايضا آلة أخرى تسمّى سكّينيّة حادّة من الجهة الواحدة وملساء غير حادّة من الجهة الأخرى وهذه صورتها:.	And insert into the first incision another instrument, a sharp scalpel from one side and a blunt scraper from the other side, and this is its shape.
وتصير جانبها الحادّ الى فوق نحو اللحم الملصق بالجلد وجانبها الأملس نحو العظم وتدفعها حتّى تنتهى الى الشقّ الأوسط وتقطع بها جميع الأوعية التى تنزل من الرأس الى العينين من غير أن يصل القطع الى ظاهر الجلد.	The edge of the incision should be directed upwards towards the fatty tissue near the scalp, and the other edge should be directed towards the bone, and it should be pushed until it reaches the middle of the separation, cutting all the vessels that descend from the head to the eyes without touching the outer surface of the scalp.
ثمّ تفعل ذلك فى الشقّ الأوسط الى الشقّ الآخر، وبعد أن يسيل من الدم القدر المعتدل تعصر المواضع من قطع الدم الجامد ثمّ تصير فى كلّ شقّ فتيلة من قطن بال وتضع عليها رفادة قد بلت بشراب وزيت او خلّ وزيت.	Then do the same in the middle separation to the other separation, and after the blood flow stops, you should compress the bleeding vessels by cutting off the blood supply from the veins, then you should make a dressing on each separation with a pad of cotton or linen, applying pressure with a bandage or a tight wrapper.
لئلّا يحدث ورم حارّ وفى اليوم الثالث تحلّ الرباط وتستعمل التنطيل الكثير بالماء الفاتر ثمّ تعالجه بمرهم الباسليقون بدهن الورد وسائر ما تعالج به الجراحات الى أن يبرأ إن شاء الله.	A fever may occur, and on the third day, you should relax the bandage and use plenty of cold water, then you should treat it with a gentle poultice, using rose-water and other treatments until he recovers, God willing.
الفصل الخامس.	Chapter Five.
فىعلاج الدموع والنزلات الى العينين من باطن الرأس.	Treatment of hemorrhage and fluxes from the eyes to the interior of the head.
متى حدث لأحد نزلات كثيرة حادّة حرّيفة دائمة وترى العينين منه مهزولتين صغيرتين وقد ضعف نظرهما والأجفان متقرحة وتساقط الأشفار منهما.	When many severe, piercing, and persistent fluxes occur to someone, and he feels that his eyes are weak and small, and his vision is impaired, and the eyelids are heavy and drooping.
ويكون فى عمق الرأس وجع حادّ مؤلم وعطاس متتابع فاعلم من هذه الأعراض أنّ تلك الموادّ والنزلات إنّما تجىء من عروق كثيرة عميقة وأفضل العلاج فيها هذا العلاج، وهو أن تأمر العليل بحلق جبهته ثمّ تشقّ شقّا واحدا فى وسط الجبهة.	And it is in the depth of the head, with a sharp, painful, and consecutive ache, and you should know from these symptoms that those materials and fluxes are coming from many deep-seated blood vessels, and the best treatment for them is this treatment, which is to order the patient to be placed on his back, then make a single incision in the middle of the forehead.
او أرفع قليلا بالعرض وتبتدئ بالشقّ من الصدغ الأيسر الى الصدغ الأيمن ويكون الشقّ الى العظم وأبعد يدك عن عضل الصدغين المتحرّكين عند المضغ حتّى اذا انكشف العظم ونشفت جميع الدم بالإسفنج.	Or raise the patient a little on his side and make an incision from the left temple to the right temple, and let the incision be down to the bone, and keep your hand away from the moving muscles of the temples when biting, until you expose the bone and remove all the blood with a sponge.
ففرّق بين شفتى الشقّ بالقطن البالى او بفتل من الكتان ثمّ تشدّ من فوق بالرفائد وتشرّب الرفائد بالشراب والزيت لئلّا يحدث ورم حارّ ومتى حللتها ورأيت أنّ الورم الحارّ قد نقض فينبغى أن تحكّ العظم حتّى يبدأ فيه نبات اللحم.	Separate the edges of the wound with the blunt scissors or the handle of the scalpel, then grasp from above with the forceps and scrape the forceps with the rasp and the file, for if you do it, a painful swelling will occur, and when you touch it, you will feel that the painful swelling has subsided; therefore, it is necessary to consolidate the bone until new flesh begins to grow.
ثمّ تعالجه بالتدبير المجفّف الذى ينبت اللحم مثل أن يؤخذ من دقيق الحنطة جزآن ومن القلفونيا اربعة اجزاء ويهيّأ منهما مرهم ويستعمل فى نبات اللحم فى مثل هذه الجراحات.	Then treat it with the dressing that promotes the growth of flesh, such as taking from the fine powder of rose-water and four parts of colophon, and mixing them together to create a paste, which is used in promoting the growth of flesh in these types of wounds.
الفصل السادس.	The Sixth Chapter
فىعلاج ما يسقط فى الأذن.	On treating what falls into the ear canal.
جميع ما يسقط فى الأذن أحد أربعة أنواع إمّا حجر معدنّى او شبه الحجر كالحديد والزجاج وإمّا حّب نباتىّ كالحمّص والنواة ونحو ذلك وإمّا شىء سيّال مثل الماء والخلّ ونحوه.	All that falls into the ear canal is of four types: either a mineral stone, like iron and glass, or plant material, like beetles and grains, and so on; or something fluid, like water and vinegar, and their like.
وإمّا حيوان، فمتى سقط فى الأذن حصاة او جنس الحصاة ممّا لا يربو فى الأذن فاستقبل بالأذن الشمس فإن رأيت الحصاة فقطّر فيها شيئا من دهن بنفسج او السيرج ثمّ حاول إخراجها بحركة الرأس او التعطيس بالكندس.	And if it is an animal, and it falls into the ear canal, such as a lizard or a type of lizard that does not belong in the ear, then treat the ear with sunlight, and if you see the lizard, try to remove it by moving the head or by inserting a small instrument.
وسدّ المنخرين عند مجئ العطاس بعد أن تضع حول الأذن طوقا من خرق او صوف وتمدّ الأذن الى فوق فكثيرا ما تخرج بهذا العلاج فإن لم تخرج وإلّا فحاول إخراجها بالجفت اللطيف الذى هذه صورته.	And stop the nostrils when the lizard emerges, after you have placed a ring around the ear with a strip of cloth or a lock of wool, and extend the ear upwards, for often it comes out with this treatment; if it does not come out, then try to remove it with a gentle hook, whose shape is like this.
فإن خرجت بالجفت والّا فحاول إخراجها بصنّارة عمياء لطيفة قليلة الانثناء فإن لم تخرج بذلك والّا فاصنع أنبوبة من نحاس وأدخل طرف الأنبوبة فى ثقب الأذن نعمّا.	If it did not come out with the hook, then try to remove it with a thin, curved, and gentle forceps; if it does not come out with that, then make a tube from a copper wire and insert one end of the tube into the ear canal, yes.
وسدّ ما حوالى الأنبوبة بالقير المليّن بالدهن لئلّا يكون للريح طريق غير الأنبوبة ثمّ اجذبها بريحك جذبا قويّا وكثيرا ما تخرج بذلك، فإن لم تخرج بما وصفنا والّا فخذ من علك الأنباط او من العلك المدبّر الذى يؤخذ به الطير شيئا يسيرا فضعه فى طرف المرود.	Here is the translation of the excerpt:
بعد أن تلفّ عليه قطنة محكمة ثمّ أدخله فى ثقب الأذن برفق بعد أن تنشف الأذن من الرطوبة، فإن لم تخرج بجميع ما وصفنا فبادر الى الشقّ قبل أن يحدث الورم الحارّ او تشنّج.	After he has bandaged it with a tight dressing, then insert it into the opening of the ear canal with gentleness after having cleansed the ear of moisture, if it does not come out with all that we have described, hasten to make an incision before the ulceration occurs or becomes inflamed.
وصفة الشقّ أن تفصد العليل فى القيفال أوّلا وتخرج له من الدم على قدر قوّته ثمّ تجلس العليل بين يديك وتقلب أذنه الى فوق وتشقّ شقّا صغيرا فى أصل الأذن عند شحمته فى الموضع المنخفض منها.	The method of incision is to hold the lancet in your hand, and let it emerge from the blood according to its strength, then place the lancet between your fingers and bend the ear towards you and make a small incision at the base of the ear where it is thinner.
ويكون الشقّ هلالىّ الشكل حتّى تصل الى الحصاة ثمّ تنزعها بما أمكنك من الآلات ثمّ تخيط الشقّ من حينك بسرعة وتعالجه حتّى يبرأ.	And the incision will be crescent-shaped until you reach the cyst, then remove it with whatever instruments are available to you, and quickly stitch the incision from the moment you finish, and treat it until it heals.
وأمّا إن كان الشىء الساقط فى الأذن من أحد الحبوب التى تربو وتنتفخ فحاول إخراجه بما ذكرنا فإن لم يجبك الى الخروج والّا فخذ مبضعا رقيقا لطيفا على هذه الصورة.	And if the object that has fallen into the ear is one of the grains that settle and become stuck, try to extract it with what we have mentioned, but if it does not respond to extraction, then take a thin, delicate instrument of this sort.
وحاول به قطع ذلك النوع من الحبوب الساقطة فى الأذن وإنّما تفعل ذلك اذا تيقّنت أنّ تلك الحبّة قد ترطّبت ببخار الأذن حتّى تصيرها قطعا صغارا كثيرة ثمّ تخرجها بالصنّارة العمياء او بجفت لطيف او بالمصّ.	And try to cut that type of fallen grain in the ear, and only do that if you are certain that the grain has adhered to the ear's vapor until it becomes small fragments, then remove it with a blunt spoon or with a delicate pincers or with a forceps.
كما ذكرنا فإنّه يسهل إخراجها، وأمّا الماء الداخل فى الأذن فينبغى أن يستعمل العليل العطاس بالكندس أوّلا وقد ملأ أذنه بشىء من القطن البالى وهو مضطجع على تلك الأذن التى فيها الماء فإن خرج بذلك.	As we have mentioned, it is easy to extract it, and regarding the water that enters into the ear, it is necessary to use the curved lancet with the handle or having filled his ear with some cotton wool, which is bent towards that ear in which there is water, so that it comes out.
والّا فتأخذ حصيات كثيرة على طول الأصابع رقاقا ملسا فتدفّئها بالنار قليلا ويدخل العليل منها واحدة فى ثقب أذنه ويحجل على رجله الواحدة من تلك الجهة ويضرب بحجر آخر على الحجر الذى فى الأذن.	And take many small pieces of cotton along the length of the fingers, smooth and thin, and gently burnish them with fire, then insert one of them into the ear canal and move it around with a single finger from that direction and strike with another stone on the stone that is in the ear.
فلا يزال يفعل ذلك بحصاة حصاة حتّى يخرج جميع الماء، وقد يخرج الماء بأن يؤخذ من البردىّ او من الريش واحدة ويدخل طرفها الواحد فى الأذن وتقد الطرف الآخر بالنار حتّى يحترق أكثره ثمّ تعيد ريشة أخرى.	He should not remove it until he extracts all the matter, and he may extract the matter by taking it from the cold or from one of the ribs, and insert one end into the ear and tighten the other end with a thread until it becomes constricted, then he returns another rib.
تفعل ذلك مرّات حتّى يخرج جميع الماء او تجذبه بالأنبوبة على ما تقدّم فى الحصاة، وأمّا إخراج الحيوان الداخل فيها فانظر فإن كان صغير الجثّة كالبرغوث ونحوه فعالجه بما ذكرت فى التقسيم وأمّا.	He does that repeatedly until he extracts all the matter or sucks it out with a tube as mentioned before in the section, and regarding the extraction of the internal animal, look, if it is small like a lizard and its ilk, deal with it according to what I mentioned in the incision.
إن كانت جثّته كبيرة تظهر للحسّ فحاول إخراجه بالجفت والصنانير وأمره أسهل من جميع ما ينشب فى الأذن، وأمّا إخراج الدود المتولّد فى الأذن اذا عالجتها بما ذكرنا فى التقسيم فى مقالة القطورات ولم ينجع علاجك.	If its body is large and appears to the senses, try to extract it with a forceps and scissors, and order him to ease all that is stuck in the ear, and regarding the extraction of the congealed abscesses in the ear, if you treat them as we mentioned in the section on surgical incisions, your treatment will not be in vain.
فينبغى أن تنظر الى الأذن فى الشمس فإن ظهر اليك شىء من الدود فأخرجه بالجفت او بالصنانير اللطاف فإن لم يظهر اليك منها شىء فخذ أنبوبة هذه صورتها.	Then look at the ear in the sun, if something of the abscess appears to you, extract it with a forceps or gentle scissors; if nothing appears to you from it, take a tube of this shape.
ضيقة الأسفل واسعة الأعلى وأدخل الطرف الرقيق فى الأذن على قدر ما يحتمله العليل ثمّ مصّ به مصّا قويّا تفعل ذلك مرّات حتّى يخرج جميع الدود فإن لم يجبك للخروج فسدّ حول الأنبوبة بالشمع كما ذكرت لك فى الحصاة.	Narrow at the bottom and wide at the top, and insert the thin end into the ear to the extent that the patient can tolerate it, then press hard on it; do that repeatedly until all the abscesses come out. If they do not come out, block around the tube with wax as I mentioned to you in the section.
فإن لم تخرج بما ذكرنا فاستعمل القطورات التى ذكرتها وقد جرّبتها الأوائل فى قتل الدود وتجد ذلك فى مقالة القطورات ويكون صبّك الأدهان والأدوية فى الأذن بهذه الآلة وهده صورتها:.	If it does not come out by what I mentioned, use the surgical incisions that I mentioned, and the ancients have tried them in killing the abscesses; you will find that in the chapter on surgical incisions. It is a pouring of medicines into the ear with this instrument and its shape:
كما ترى تصنعها من فضّة او نحاس ضيقة الأسفل فيها ثقب صغير واسعة الأعلى وإن شئت أن يكون المدفع الذى فى جوف الأنبوبة من نحاس محكم وإن شئت أخذت مرودا ولففت فى طرفه قطنة لفّا محكما.	As you see, it is made from silver or copper, narrow at the bottom and wide at the top, with a small hole in it; if you want the piston that is inside the tube to be of copper, carefully crafted, and if you want, take a rod and wrap a thread around its end, tightly fastened.
ثمّ تلقى الدهن او العصارة او ما تريد من هذه الأدوية فى الأنبوبة وهى فى الأذن ثمّ تدخل المرود بالقطنة من فوق وتعصر به يدك عصرا معتدلا حتّى يندفع الدهن فى جوف السمع ويحسّ.	You should compress the cotton or the tampon or whatever you need from these medications in the pipe, and it is in the ear, then you insert the swab with the cotton from above and press on it with your finger pressed moderately until the cotton is pushed into the cavity of the ear and feels it.
به العليل داخلا، وليكن ما تصّب فى الأذن قد دفّئ فى النار قليلا واحذر ن يكون الشىء الذى يقطّر فيها باردا جدّا او حارّا جدّا فإنّ الأذن لا تحتمل ذلك.	Into the ear, and let what you pour in the ear not be hot or cold, for the ear cannot bear that, lest the thing that is poured into it be very cold or very hot.
الفصل السابع.	Chapter Seven.
فىعلاج السدّ العارض للأذن.	Treatment of the Obstruction of the Ears.
قد يخرج بعض الأطفال من بطون أمّهاتهم ومسامع آذانهم غير مثقوبة.	Some children may be born with their ears blocked and not hearing.
وقد يعرض أيضا لبعض الناس سدّ فى مجرى الأذن عن جرح او لحم نابت فيها وهذا السدّ قد يكون فى عمق ثقب الأذن لا يدركه البصر.	And it may also happen to some people that there is an obstruction in the ear canal due to a wound or a pustule that has formed therein, and this obstruction may be deep inside the ear hole and not visible to the eye.
وقد يعرض الى خارج الثقب قليلا ويدركه البصر، فالذى يعرض فى عمق الأذن ولا يدركه البصر يكون فى أكثر الأحوال عسر البرؤ، والذى يدركه البصر فينبغى أن تضع أذن العليل فى الشمس.	And it may protrude slightly outside the hole and be visible to the eye, for what is deep inside the ear and not visible to the eye is usually more difficult to treat, and what is visible to the eye can be treated by placing the ear in the sun.
وتنظر فيها فإن رأيت السدّ ظاهرا فافتحه بمبضع لطيف تكون هذه صورته:.	And look into it, if you saw the obstruction clearly, then open it with a gentle probe, and its shape will be like this:.
يكون طرفه فيه بعض العرض قليلا محدودا بعضه وسائر المبضع أملس الجانبين لئلّا يؤذى الأذن، فإن كان السدّ عن لحم قد نبت فى مجرى الأذن فامسكه بصنّارة لطيفة واقطعه برفق شديد حتّى ينتزع جميع اللحم.	It should have some of the display limited slightly, and the rest of the probe is smooth on both sides so as not to harm the ear; if the obstruction was due to a pustule that had formed in the ear canal, then scrape it with a delicate spoon and remove it with a strong jerk until all the flesh is extracted.
فإن كان السدّ فى عمق الأذن فخذ ميلا لطيفا أملس فدفّئه فى النار قليلا ثمّ دسّه فى مجرى الأذن فإن أحسست بالسدّ مع ما يجده العليل من ثقل السمع فرم بطّه برفق.	If the obstruction was deep in the ear, take a smooth and delicate spoon, heat it slightly in the fire, then insert it into the ear canal; if you felt the obstruction with what the ear receives from the weight of the hearing, remove it with a jerk.
وتحفّظ من أن تجرح عصبة الأذن ثمّ صيّر فى الأذن فتيلة على قدر سعة الثقب قد لثتها فى المرهم المصرىّ تفعل ذلك أيّاما حتّى تأمن من التحام الجرح او خذ فتيلة فبلّها فى الماء وذرّ عليها زاجا مسحوقا.	Be careful not to pierce the jugular vein, then bandage the jugular with a dressing corresponding to the size of the incision, which you have made in the Egyptian manner. Do that every time until you are certain of the cessation of the bleeding or until it stops after you have washed it with water and sprinkled it with vinegar of rose-water.
واستعملها فإن رأيت الأذن قد تورّمت ورما حارّا فينبغى أن تخرج الفتيلة وتبدّلها بفتيلة أخرى قد لثتها فى قيروطى قد صنع بدهن الورد حتّى تسكن الورم الحارّ ثمّ تعالجها الى أن تبرأ.	And use it, if you see the jugular vein has become swollen and inflamed, it is fitting to remove the dressing and replace it with another one that has been medicated with rose-water treatment, until the inflammation subsides, then treat it until it heals.
فإن حدث نزف دم فاغمس اسفنجة او خرقة فى الماء البارد وضعها على الأذن واستعمل سائر العلاج الذى يقطع النزف المذكور فى مقالة القطورات.	If a hemorrhage occurs, apply a cold sponge or a piece of ice to the jugular vein and use other treatments that stop the aforementioned hemorrhage, as mentioned in the chapter on bleeding.
الفصل الثامن.	The Eighth Chapter
فىعلاج الثآليل التى تعرض فى الأجفان.	On the treatment of ulcers that occur on the lips
هذه الثآليل التى تعرض فى جفون العين قد تكون رطبة وتكون يابسة فينبغى أن تمسكها بمنقاش او بصنّارة وتقطعها بالمبضع من أصولها ثّم تحمل على الموضع زاجا مسحوقا.	These ulcers that occur on the eyelids may be moist and may be dry, it is fitting to treat them with collyrium or ointment and to cauterize their roots, then apply rose-water dressing to the affected area.
فإن نزف منها دم فاكوها بمكواة عدسّية لطيفة وكّيها أفضل بعد القطع وكثيرا ما تعود اذا بقى من أصولها شىء وإذا كويت بالنار أحرقت تلك الأصول ولم تعد.	If blood flows from them, stop it with a gentle, fine-lipped cupping vessel, and treat them better after the incision, for often they return if something remains of their roots, and if you cauterize with fire, you will have burned those roots and they will not return.
الفصل التاسع.	The Ninth Chapter
فىعلاج البرد العارض فى أجفان العين.	On the treatment of frostbite on the eyelids
كثيرا ما يعرض فى الأجفان شىء يشبه البرد فى شدّته وصلابته.	It often occurs on the eyelids something that resembles frostbite in its severity and whiteness.
ولذلك سمّى بالبرد وهو اجتماع رطوبة غليظة فى الجفن الأعلى والجفن الأسفل، والعمل فيها أن تنظر فإن كانت البردة بارزة فى ظاهر الجفن تتحرّك الى كلّ ناحية فأمرها سهل فشقّ عليها شقّا بالعرض.	And so it is called frostbite, which is the gathering of thick moisture in the upper and lower eyelids. The operation for it is that you should look, if the frostbite is apparent on the surface of the eyelid, you move it to every direction, then make a shallow incision transversely.
ثمّ أسلخها من كلّ جهة برفق حتّى تتخلّص ثمّ علّقها بالصنّارة واقطعها، فإن لم يتهيّأ لك قطعها الّا بعد أن تنفذ الجفن بالقطع فلا يضرّ العليل ذلك شيئا فإن كان الشقّ كبيرا فاجمعه بالخياطة وعالجه حتّى يبرأ.	Then, dissect it from every direction with a gentle touch until it is freed, and then tie it off with a ligature. If you cannot cut it off except after the suture has been completed by cutting, do not worry about the damage to the patient, for if the wound is large, then stitch it up and bandage it until it heals.
وإن كان صغيرا فلا بأس عليك منه فإنّ المرهم يجبره ويلحمه، فإن كانت البردة مائلة الى داخل الجفن نحو السطح الداخل فاقلب الجفن وعلّق البردة بصنّارة من غير أن تحتاج الى شقّ واجتزّها من كلّ جهة.	And if it is small, do not worry about it, for the abscess will burst and discharge itself. If the wound inclines inward towards the inner surface of the suture, then turn the suture around and tie the abscess off with a ligature without needing to dissect or cut it from every direction.
فإن انفذت الجفن بالقطع لم يضرّ ذلك شيئا، ثمّ اغسل العين بعد قطع البردة بالماء المالح وعالج الموضع بما يلحم حتّى يبرأ العليل.	For if you completed the suture by cutting, it does not matter. Then, wash the eye with saltwater after cutting off the abscess, and treat the area with something that soothes until the patient recovers.
الفصل العاشر.	The Tenth Chapter.
فىعلاج الشرناق الذى يعرض فى جفن العين.	On the treatment of the fistula that appears in the eye's eyelid.
الشرناق هو شحمة تكون فى طبقات الجفن الأعلى وأكثر ما يعرض ذلك للصبيان وهو يثقل أعينهم وتعرض لهم النزلات فى الأسحار ولا يقدرون على النظر الى ضوء الشمس.	The fistula is a defect that occurs in the upper layers of the eyelid, and it often affects children, weighing heavily on their eyes and causing them to be sensitive to sunlight.
من أجل أنّ الدمع يسرع اليهم.	Because their tears flow quickly to them.
ولذلك تراهم يتّكئون على وجوههم دائما وعليها ينامون وتكون أجفانهم تحت الحواجب رطبة قد علاها نفخ ونتو الشرناق ظاهر للعيان ومتى كبّست الموضع بأصابعك أحسست بالشرناق بينهما، ووجه العمل أن يضع العليل رأسه فى حجرك.	And for this reason, you see them always casting their eyes downward and sleeping with their eyelids half-closed, as if their eyebrows were relaxed and had a swelling that indicated the presence of the fistula to the observer. And when you press the area with your fingers, you feel the fistula between them, and the purpose of the operation is to make the patient rest their head on your lap.
ثمّ تأخذ خرقة كتان فتهيّئ منها فتيلة وتصنع من تلك الفتيلة دائرة على قدر ما يحوط بالشرناق من كلّ جهة ثمّ تضعها عليه وتكبّس بأصابعك من كلّ جهة لتجمع الشرناق فى وسط الدائرة.	Then, take a piece of catgut and twist it into a thread. Make a circle from that thread, proportionate to the size of the fistula on every side. Then, place it upon the fistula and press with your fingers from every direction to gather the fistula in the center of the circle.
ثمّ تشق فى وسط تلك الرطوبة بالمبضع النشل شقّا بالعرض ولا يكون الشق أكبر من الشقّ الذى يكون فى الفصد وأمّا فى العمق فينبغى أن تشقّ الجلد كلّه حتّى تصل الى الشرناق.	Make an incision in the middle of that abscess at the site of the necrotic tissue, a horizontal incision, and do not make the incision larger than the one that is made in the fascia. And it is necessary to incise the entire skin until you reach the carpus.
ففى أكثر الحالات يبرز الشرناق من الشقّ على هيئة قطعة شحم بيضاء فتجذبها بخرقة قد لففتها بين أصابعك الى خارج وأنت تدير يدك يمينا وشمالا حتّى تتبرّأ واحذر أن تزيد فى الشقّ لئلّا ينصل المبضع بالعين فيؤذيها.	In most cases, the carpus protrudes from the incision like a white fatty piece, so you grasp it with a hook that you have wrapped between your fingers and pull it outwards, moving your hand to the right and left until it is exposed, and beware of increasing the incision lest the necrotic tissue should slip back into its place.
فإن لم يظهر لك الشرناق فى أوّل الشقّ فينبغى أن تزيد فى الشق قليلا برفق حتّى يبرز الشرناق ثمّ تجذبه كما قلنا ثمّ تغمس خرقا فى الخلّ والماء وتضعها على الموضع وتشدّه برفادة، ومن الناس من يسحق ملحا.	If the carpus does not appear to you at first incision, it is necessary to increase the incision slightly with caution until the carpus protrudes, then grasp it as we have mentioned, and then insert a dressing soaked in vinegar and water, and apply it to the site, and bandage it firmly; and some people cauterize with salt.
ويضعه فى جوف الشقّ ليذوب ما بقى من تلك الرطوبة، ثمّ تعالجه حتّى يبراء فإن حدث فى الموضع ورم حارّ فعالجه بالأضمدة المسكّنة الى أن يبرأ،.	He puts it in the cavity of the incision to dissolve what remains of that abscess, then treats it until it heals; if there is a collection of pus at the site and it becomes hot and inflamed, he treats it with sticking plasters until it heals.
الفصل الحادى عشر.	Chapter 11
فى ضروب تشمير العين.	On the treatment of conjunctival ulcers.
اذا نبت فى جفن العين اشفار زائدة على غير المجرى الطبيعىّ تحت الأشفار الطبيعيّة وأزمنت فإنّها تضرّ بالعين وتحدث ضروبا من الأمراض كالدمع الدائم واسترخاء الأجفان والبياض والغلظ حتّى يكون ذلك سببا لبطلان العين.	If a growth appears on the eyelid, resembling an additional nail over the natural one, and it becomes inflamed, then it harms the eye and causes various diseases such as chronic conjunctivitis, relaxation of the eyelids, white spots, and opacity, until it becomes a reason for blindness.
وتشمير العين على أربعة أوجه إما بالكىّ بالنار وإمّا بالدواء الحادّ على ما تقدّم فى باب الكّى وإمّا أن يكون التشمير بالقطع والخياطة او بالقصب على ما أنا ذاكره.	And the treatment of the eye has four aspects: either by cauterization and burning, or by medication with sharp remedies as I have mentioned in the chapter on cauterization, or it may be that the treatment is by surgical incision and stitching, or by application of cupping glasses, as I will mention.
ينبغى أن تجعل رأس العليل فى حجرك ثم تقلب جفن العين بيدك اليسرى فإن انقلب وإلّا فأدخل ابرة فيها خيط من أسفل الجفن وتنفذ الإبرة بالخيط من فوق ويكون ذلك قرب الشعر نفسه وتجذب الخيط الى فوق بالجفن.	Place the head of the elevator in your stone, then tilt the eyelid with your left hand. If you turn it and do not succeed, insert a needle into it, threading the suture from underneath the eyelid, and pass the needle through the suture from above, making it close to the hair itself, and pull the suture upwards on the eyelid.
وتقلبه بالمرود ثمّ تشقّ فى باطن الجفن دون الشعر الزائد بالمبضع النشل من المأق الأكبر الى المأق الأصغر ثمّ تسلّ الخيط وتضع تحت الجفن رفادة صغيرة من قطن او خرقة ثمّ تعلّم على الجفن بالمداد.	And tilt it with the file, then make an incision in the inner aspect of the eyelid, excluding the excess hair at the nail-like projection from the larger to the smaller, then release the suture and place a small pad of cotton or lint underneath the eyelid, then bandage over the eyelid with the adhesive.
مثل شكل ورقة الآس الّا أنّه ينبغى أن يكون الشكل على قدر ما تريد من رفع الجفن لأنّه قد يختلف فى ذلك الناس فمنهم من يحتاج الى أن تقطع من الجفن قدرا صالحا على قدر ما استرخى الجفن.	Like the shape of a page of papyrus, but it is necessary that the shape be according to how much you want to elevate the eyelid, because people may differ in this, and some may need to cut from the eyelid an amount suitable for how much the eyelid relaxes.
ومنهم من يحتاج الى قطع أقلّ كلّ ذلك على قدر استرخاء الجفن، ثمّ تشقّ بالمبضع على الخطّين اللذين علّمت وتبدأ من المأق الأكبر الى المأق الأصغر ويكون الشقّ الواحد بالقرب من الشعر الطبيعىّ بمثل غلظ المرود.	And some may need to cut less, all of that according to the relaxation of the eyelid, then make an incision at the nail-like projection on the two lines you marked, and start from the larger nail to the smaller one, and the single incision will be close to the natural hairline, like the thickness of the file.
ثمّ تدخل الصنّارة فى أحد زاويتى الجلد ثمّ تسلخه كلّه ثمّ تجمع بالخياطة الشفتين بإبرة وخيط صوف رقيق وتمسح الدم وتلصق ما فضل من الخيوط على الحاجبين ببعض الأشياء المتدبّقة إن.	Then insert the forceps into one of the angles of the wound, and extract it all, then gather the lips of the wound with a suture thread and needle, and cleanse the blood, and remove what remains of the threads from the eyebrows with some adhesive things.
شئت أن تفعل ذلك وإلّا فما تبالى، ثمّ تبقى الخياطة والخيوط الى نحو ثلاثة أيّام او أربعة ثمّ تعالجه، وإن شئت تركت الجرح من غير خياطة وتعالجه بما يجفّف ويقبض فإنّ الجفن يرتفع عند ختم الجرح واجتماعه والخياطة أفضل.	You should do that, and if not, then it does not matter. Then leave the suture and threads for about three or four days, then remove them. And if you left the wound without a suture and removed what congeals and contracts, the eyelid will elevate when the wound is closed and united, and the suture is better.
فهذا الوجه من التشمير ذكرته الأوائل إلّا أنّ فيه مؤونة على العليل وهو من جيّد العمل ولا خطر فيه، ووجه آخر فى التشمير ايضا وهو أن تعلّم على الجفن شكلا كشكل ورقة الآس كما وصفنا.	This face from the chamier is mentioned by the predecessors, but there is a difficulty in it on the lilium, and it is one of the good actions with no danger in it. And another face in the chamier is that you learn on the jawbone in a shape like a leaf of willow as we described.
ثمّ ترفع الجفن بثلاث صنانير تكون مفترقة او مجموعة على هذه الصورة:.	Then you elevate the jawbone with three hooks, being separated or gathered in this manner:
ثمّ تقطع ما فضل من الجفن بمقصّ صغيرة على هذه الصورة قطعا باعتدال:.	Then you cut what remains of the jawbone with a small scissors in this manner, cutting with caution:
فإن لم يمكنك حبس الصنانير ولم تستو لك فخذ إبرة فيها خيط وأدخلها فى وسط الشكل وأدخل خيطا آخر قرب المأق الأكبر وخيطا ثالثا قرب المأق الأصغر واجمع بين أصابعك الخيوط باعتدال ثمّ ارفع بها يدك رفعا معتدلا.	If you cannot hold the hooks and did not get a grip on them, take a needle with a thread and insert it in the middle of the shape, and insert another thread near the larger wound, and a third thread near the smaller wound, and gather the threads between your fingers with caution, then lift it with your hand, lifting with caution.
وارفع الجلدة المعلّم عليها كلّها كما وصفنا ثمّ اجمع شفتى الجرح بالخياطة وعالجه حتّى يبرأ، فإن عرض ورم حارّ عند قطعك او شقّك فسكّن ذلك الورم بالقيروطى ونحوه من المراهم المسكّنات.	And raise the flap that is marked on it all, as we described, then gather the edges of the wound with sutures and adjust them until it heals. If a painful inflammation occurs at your incision or cutting, then drain that inflammation with cupping glasses and similar instruments from the sucking cups.
وقد يعرض للجفن الأسفل أيضا أن تنقلب أشفاره فينبغى أن تستعمل فيه ما ذكرنا من القطع والخياطة والتشمير بالنار وبالدواء الحادّ والتشمير بالنار او بالدواء الحادّ ابلغ وأخفّ على العليل من القطع والخياطة والقطع والخياطة فيهما أصنع.	And it may happen to the lower jawbone also, that its edges are turned in, so you should use on it what we mentioned of cutting and suturing and chamiering with the nar and the sharp medicine, or chamiering with the nar or the sharp medicine, making it clear and easing the lilium from the cutting and suturing, and the cutting and suturing in them is a craft.
التشمير بالقصب يكون على هذه الصفة وهو أن تقلب الجفن وتشقّ الشقّ الذى من داخل على ما وصفت ثمّ تصنع قصبتين او خشبتين رقيقتين طولهما على طول الجفن وعرضهما أقلّ من عرض مبضع.	Chamiering with a saw is done in this manner, which is to raise the jawbone and make an incision from the inside according to what we described, then create two thin saws or fine files, their length being along the length of the jawbone and their width less than the width of the incision.
وقد قرضت فى أطرافهما من كلتى الجهتين حيث تتمسّك الخيوط ثمّ تجمعهما بلطف على ما فضل من جفن العين وتشدّ القصبتين من كلتى الجهتين شدّا وثيقا وتتركه أيّاما فإنّ الجلدة المشدودة تموت وتسودّ وتعفن.	And you may cut at their edges from both sides where the threads are tied, then gather them gently on what remains of the jawbone and pull the saws from both sides strongly and tightly, and leave it for a day or two, for the pulled flap will consolidate, congeal, and granulate.
حتّى تسقط من ذاتها فإن أبطأت فاقرضها بالمقراض ثمّ تعالجه حتّى يبرأ، فإذا التحم ارتفع الجفن ولم تنخس الأشفار العين، وهذه صورة القصبتين تصنعها على هذا الشكل وهذا المقدار فى الطول والعرض بعينه:.	If a splinter falls from the eyelid and becomes stuck, you should extract it with the forceps, then bandage it until it heals. If the swelling goes down and the eye does not become inflamed, this is the shape of the surgical instrument used for this purpose, and its measurement in length and width is as follows.
الفصل الثانى عشر.	The Twelfth Chapter
فى رفع الشعر الناخس من العين بالإبرة.	For removing the ingrown hair from the eye with a needle.
اذا كانت شعرة او شعرتين العمل فى ذلك أن تأخذ إبرة رقيقة فتدخل فيها خيطا من حرير رقيق أملس ثمّ تجمع طرفيه وتعقدهما عقدة لطيفة جدّا وليكن طول الخيط نحو شبر.	If it is a single hair or two hairs, the work in that case is to take a fine needle and insert into it a thread of fine silk, then gather its ends and tie them with a very delicate knot, and let the length of the thread be about a finger.
ثمّ تركّب فى الأنشوطة خيطا آخر رقيقا دونه فى القصر واعقد طرفيه إن شئت ثمّ يضع العليل رأسه فى حجرك وليكن بقرب الشمس ليستبين العمل فإنّه عمل دقيق ثمّ تدخل الإبرة بالأنشوطة فى أصل الشعرة الزائدة.	Then you attach to the needle a second fine thread, thinner than the first one at the base of the knot, and tie its ends if you will, then you put the tip of the needle in a stone and let it be near the sun so that the work is visible, for it is a delicate task. Then you insert the needle into the flesh at the root of the excess hair.
وتنفذها فى الجفن بالعجلة حتّى تخرجها من فوق الشعر الطبيعىّ ثمّ تجذب الخيط الى فوق الأنشوطة وتدخل فى الأنشوطة تلك الشعرة إن كانت واحدة او اثنتين او ثلاث لا أكثر.	And you push it into the eyelid with a jerk until it comes out above the natural hair, then you pull the thread up to the needle and insert into the needle that hair, whether it is one or two or three, no more.
ثمّ تجذب يدك بها حتّى تخرج الشعرة مع الأنشوطة فى الجفن مع الشعر الطبيعىّ فإن جذبت الأنشوطة ولم تخرج الشعرة معها جذبت الأنشوطة الى أسفل بالخيط الذى كنت ركّبت فيها حتّى تخرج الأنشوطة من الثقب الأعلى.	Then you pull your hand with it until the hair comes out with the needle from the eyelid along with the natural hair. If you pulled the needle and the hair did not come out with it, you pulled the needle down to the bottom with the thread that you had attached to it, until the needle came out of the upper hole.
ثم تعيد الشعرة فيها وتجذبهما تفعل ذلك حتّى ترتفع فى الثقب الأعلى وتراها رأى العين، فحينئذ فسلّ الأنشوطة والخيط وأخرجهما وشدّ العين واتركها مشدودة يومين او ثلاثة حتّى تلزم الشعرة مكانها وينبت عليها اللحم.	Then you return the hair to its place and pull it out, doing that until it becomes visible in the upper hole and you see it in the eye. Then you remove the needle and the thread, and press on the eye and leave it bandaged for two or three days, until the hair settles in its place and the flesh grows over it.
فإن كانت الشعرة قصيرة فإمّا أن تضيف اليها شعرة طويلة من الشعر الطبيعىّ فترتفع معها وإمّا أن تتركها حتّى تطول بعد مدّة فحينئذ ترفعها،.	If the hair is short, then either a long lock of natural hair is added to it and fastened with it, or it is left until it grows after a period, then it is fastened.
الفصل الثالث عشر.	The 13th chapter.
فى علاج الشترة التى تحدث فى الجفن الأعلى العين.	On the treatment of the cataract that occurs in the upper eyelid of the eye.
التى تعرض لها هذه الشترة تسمّى أرنبيّة وتكون هذه الشترة إمّا طبيعيّة وإمّا عرضيّة فالعرضيّة تكون من اندمال جرح اوشقّ او كىّ ونحو ذلك.	The one who is afflicted with this cataract is called "arnubiya" and this cataract is either natural or traumatic, and the traumatic one occurs from a blow or a wound or a fall and the like.
ووجه العمل فيها أن تشقّ ذلك الاندمال وأن تفرّق شفتيه وتصير فيما بينهما فتيلة من كتان وتربطها حتّى تبرأ، ولا ينبغى أن تستعمل فى علاجها الأشياء التى تجفّف وتقبض.	And the method of treatment is to open up that which has been compressed and to separate its edges and to form a flap from a piece of skin and to tie it until it heals, and it is not advisable to use in its treatment things that cauterize or constrict.
فإنّك إن فعلت ذلك رجعت الشترة بأشدّ ممّا كانت بل استعمل فيها الأشياء التى ترخى مثل الحلبة والتنطيل بماء قد طبح فيه خطمىّ وبزر الكتان ومرهم الدياخيلون قد ذوّب مع شىء من الأدهان ولطخت به الفتل وعالجت به.	If you did that, the cataract would return worse than it was, but instead use things that soften, such as a poultice and a dressing with a liquid in which kohl has been dissolved, and the likes of rose water and dog's milk, and apply them gently with a gentle touch.
وملاك علاجها أن تروم بكلّ حيلة أن لا تلتحم على الهيئة التى كانت عليها أوّلا، وهذا العمل الذى ذكرنا إنّما هو بعض إصلاح الشترة لا أن ترجع هيئة المكان على حسب ما كانت البتّة،.	And the goal of its treatment is to try every trick so that it does not return to its original form, and this treatment we mentioned is only some reform of the cataract, not that the condition of the place returns to what it was before.
الفصل الرابع عشر.	The 14th chapter.
فى علاج الشترة التى تكون فى الجفن الأسفل.	On the treatment of the cataract that is in the lower eyelid.
هذه الشترة التى تكون من أصفل هى التى تسمّى بالحقيقة شترا وتكون طبيعيّة وتكون عرضيّة فالعرضيّة تكون من جرح او شقّ او كىّ ونحو ذلك.	This cataract that occurs from ulcers, it is truly called "shatra" and it is natural and traumatic, and the traumatic one occurs from a wound or a blow or a fall and the like.
وطريق العمل فيها أن تأخذ إبرة فيها خيط مثنىّ وتغرزها فى اللحم وتنفذها من المأق الأيسر الى المأق الأيمن حتّى تصير الخيط فى طرفى اللحم ثمّ تمدّ اللحم الى فوق بالإبرة وتقطعه بمبضع عريض.	And the method of treatment is to take a needle with a thread and pierce it into the flesh and pass it from the left side to the right side until the thread is in both sides of the flesh, then stretch the flesh over the needle and cut it with a thin scalpel.
فإن رجع شكل الجفن على ما ينبغى وإلّا فتأخذ مرودا وتضعه على موضع الشقّ وتقلب به الجفن وتشقّ شقّين فى الجانب الداخل من الجفن وتكون أطراف الشقّين من زاويتى القطع الذى قطعت حتّى تلتقى فتكون منها زاوية.	If the shape of the wound is not as desired, take a piece of skin and place it on the site of the incision, and turn the flap over so that the edges of the incision are in line with the bevelled edge of the excised piece, until they meet, and form an angle from it.
حتّى اذا اجتمعت يصير شكلها شبيها بهذا الشكل:.	until it meets, so that its shape is similar to this shape.
وهو حرف اللام اليونانّى، ثمّ تنزع ذلك اللحم بقدر ما يكون الجانب الحاد منه اسفل مما يلى الجفن، ثمّ تجمع الأجزاء المتفرّقة بخياطتين تخيطه بخيط صوف ثمّ تعالجه بما ذكرنا من الأدوية المرخية والفتل حتّى يبرأ.	It is the lambda-shaped incision, then remove the flesh to the extent that the sharp edge of it is below where the flap meets, then gather the scattered parts with two sutures, sutured with a soft suture, and treat it with the aforementioned medications until it heals.
وإن كانت الشترة عرضت من شقّ او خياطة او كىّ فينبغى أن تشقّ شقّا بسيطا من دون شعر الأشفار أيضا على ما تقدّم ثمّ تفرّق بين الشفتين بفتل على ما ذكرنا.	And if the suture has opened up from an incision or a seam or has become loose, it is necessary to make a simple incision without shaving the surrounding area, as mentioned earlier, then separate the lips with a bandage according to what we have mentioned.
وجملة القول فى علاج الشترة اذا كانت من فوق او من أسفل أن تجرى فيها العمل على حسب ما يتهيّأ لك من هيئة الشترة فإنّها قد تكون كثيرة الاختلاف فى الصورة، والصانع الدرب يدبّر الحيلة بأىّ وجه أمكنه.	And the management of treating a suture, if it is from above or from below, should be done according to what is apparent to you from the condition of the suture, for it may have many differences in appearance, and the skillful surgeon will cleverly manage the treatment in whatever way is possible.
حتّى يردّ الشكل على هيئته الطبيعيّة او يقاربها، ونفس المرض يدلّك على ما يصلح له من العمل والآلة فى أكثر الأحوال،.	Until it returns to its natural shape or approaches it, and the same disease will guide you on what is suitable for it from the work and instruments in most cases.
الفصل الخامس عشر.	Chapter Fifteen.
فى التصاق جفن العين بالملتحم او بالقرنيّة.	On the adhesion of the eyelid flap with the conjunctiva or with the cornea.
قد يعرض هذا الالتحام لكثير من الناس بأن يلتحم الجفن الأعلى ببياض العين فيمنعها من سهولة الحركة ويعوقها عن أفعالها الطبيعيّة، فينبغى أن تدخل طرف مرود تحت الجفن.	This adhesion may appear to many people, where the upper eyelid flap adheres to the white of the eye, preventing it from easy movement and obstructing its natural functions, so it is necessary to insert a piece of skin under the flap.
وترفعه الى فوق او تمدّه بصنّارة ثمّ تقطع الالتصاق بمبضع لطيف لا يكون بحدّة قطع المباضع بل يكون كالّا قليلا لئلّا يقلق العليل عند العمل فيفلت المبضع فيؤذى العين بحدّته، ويكون قطعك كانّك تسلخ ذلك الالتصاق.	And elevate it upwards or extend it with a thin probe, then cut the adhesion with a gentle touch that is not like a cutting instrument, but rather a slight separation, so as not to irritate the eyelid when working, and the cut should be as if you were separating that adhesion.
وتوقّع حتّى اذا رجع الجفن على هيئته الطبيعيّة ويبرأ الالتصاق كلّه فتصبّ حينئذ فى العين ماء مالحا تغسلها به او تقطّر فيها من الشياف الزنجارىّ محلولا بالماء، ثمّ تفرّق بين الجفن والعين بفتيلة كتان.	When the flap is returned to its natural position and all adhesion is released, then it should be irrigated with lukewarm water or a solution of Zenjariyah (a type of plant) in water, and then separated from the eye with a clean cloth.
وتضع من فوق العين صوفة مبلولة ببياض البيض وبعد اليوم الثالث تستعمل الشيافات المدملة حتّى يبرأ،.	A dressing soaked in egg white is applied on top of the eye, and after the third day, a medicated collyrium (eye powder) is used until it heals.
الفصل السادس عشر.	Chapter Sixteen.
فى قطع الظفرة ونتو لحم الآماق.	On the excision of the nail and the flesh of the fingers.
إنّ الظفرة تكون على ضربين إمّا أن تكون عصبيّة وهى تشبه صفاقا صلبا رقيقا وإمّا أن تكون غير عصبيّة تشبه رطوبة جامدة بيضاء اذا مسّها الحديد او رمت أخذها بالصنّارة تقطّعت.	The nail is of two types: either it is nerve-like, resembling a thin, hard, white layer; or it is not nerve-like, resembling a solid, white, firm pustule, and if the iron touches it or a lancet is inserted, it is cut.
ولم تثبت فيها صنّارة، وكلا الصنفين إنّما تبتدئ من المأق الأكبر الى أن تدبّ قليلا قليلا حتّى تغطى الناظر وتمنع الضوء وحركة العين، ووجه العمل فى قطعها أن يضع العليل رأسه فى حجرك.	And it is not established by a lancet, and both types originate from the larger nail bed until they are gradually covered, little by little, until the sight is obscured and the movement of the eye is restricted, and the purpose of the operation is to place the scalpel's head in the nail bed.
ثمّ يفتح عينيه وترفع الجفن بيدك ثمّ تلقط الظفرة بصنّارة قليلة الانثناء وتمدّها الى فوق ثمّ تأخذ إبرة وتدخل فيها شعرة من شعر الخيل او البقر وخيط قوىّ وتثنى طرف الإبرة قليلا وتغرزها فى وسط الظفرة.	Then he opens his eyes and raises the eyelid with his hand, then seizes the nail with a small curved lancet and stretches it upwards, then takes a needle and inserts a hair from a horse's or cow's tail, and ties it strongly, and bends the point of the needle slightly and implants it in the middle of the nail.
وتنفذها بالإبرة وتربط بالخيط الظفرة وتمدّها الى فوق وتسلخ بالشعرة جانب الظفرة الذى يلى الحدقة كأنّك تنشرها بالشعرة الى آخرها ثمّ تقطع الباقى فى أصل المأق بمبضع لطيف او بمقصّ صغير وتدع لحم المأق الطبيعىّ.	And he pierces it with the needle and ties the nail with the thread, and stretches it upwards, and pulls it out by the hair on the side of the nail next to the nail bed, as if you were pulling it out by the hair to its end, then cuts off the remaining part at the base of the nail bed with a fine scalpel or small scissors, and leaves the natural flesh of the nail bed.
لئلّا يعرض من قطعه سيلان الدمع الدائم، وقد تمدّ الظفرة بالصنّارة وحدها او بالخيط كما قلنا ثمّ تسلخ بالمبضع الأملس الطرف الذى هذه صورته:.	When the artery is exposed, it should be grasped with the pincer or clamped off with a ligature as we have described, and then released in the pulseless limb, whose shape appears thus.
وتحفّظ من أن يمسّ المبضع بالغشاء القرنىّ فيحدث فيه فتقا فتنتو الحدقة، ثمّ بعد القطع تلقى فى العين شيئا من ملح مسحوق او من الشياف الزنجارىّ وتتركها الى يوم آخر ثمّ تعالجها بما ينبغى الى أن تبرأ.	And take care not to touch the pulse with the carny membrane, lest a perforation occur in it and the cavity becomes narrow. Then, after cutting, you will find something like a malposed or zinc alloy in the eye, and leave it until the next day, then treat it with what is necessary until it heals.
فإن كانت الظفرة غير عصبيّة ولم تستطع أن تدخل فيها إبرة ولا تثبت فيها صنّارة فكثيرا ما تعالج هذا النوع من الظفرة بالأدوية فتبرأ كما وصفت فى التقسيم، وإن أردت قطعها فافتح عين العليل.	If the artery is not nervous and you are unable to insert a needle into it or tie it with a ligature, it is often treated with medications until it heals, as I described in the section on cauterization. And if you want to cut it, then open the eye of the affected person.
وخذ مبضعا لطيفا أملس ضعيف الحدّ على هذه الصورة:.	Take a weak pulseless limb in this shape:
واجرد الظفرة به من فوق جردا بلطف فإن رأيت أنّها تتخلخل وتتفتّت وأثر فيها الجرد فقطّر من ساعتك فى العين من الشياف الزنجارىّ او الشياف الأحمر او ملحا مسحوقا وشدّ العين الى يوم آخر.	Grasp the artery from above with a gentle grasp, for if you see it trembling and wavering, and the effect of the grasp is only in the eye, whether from zinc alloy or red copper or malposed salt, and hold the eye until the next day.
ثمّ.أعد عليها العمل حتّى تذهب جميعها إلّا إن اعترضك فى العين ورم حارّ فاتركها وعالج الورم الحارّ حتّى يبرأ ثمّ أعد العمل عليها بالجرد حتّى تبرأ، وأمّا نتو لحم المأق.	Then, return to the work until it is all gone, except if you encounter a problem in the eye and a hot abscess forms, leave it and treat the hot abscess until it heals, then return to the work on it with the grasp until it heals, and do not neglect the management of the abscess.
فإنّه إن كان النتو يؤذى العين أذًى فاحشًا فعلّق ذلك النتو بالصنّارة واقطع منه بعضه ولا تمعن فى القطع لئلّا يحدث سيلان الدمع ثمّ قطّر فى الآماق الشياف الأحمر او الزنجارىّ حتّى يبرأ،.	For if the abscess is hurting the eye, then ligate that abscess with a pincer and cut off some of it, but do not overdo the cutting lest hemorrhage occur, then cauterize with red copper or zinc alloy until it heals.
الفصل السابع عشر.	Chapter Seventeen.
فى قطع الوردينج وما ينبت من اللحم الزائد فى العين.	On excising the pterygium and what grows from the superfluous flesh in the eye.
قد ينبت فى أعين بعض الناس لحم أحمر متراكب حتّى يغطى الناظر او يقارب او يفيض على الأجفان وربّما انقلبت الأجفان الى خارج ويشبه ورد الجلنار.	Some people may have a red, inflamed, and ulcerated swelling in their eyes, which covers the sight or comes close to it, and sometimes protrudes outward and resembles a pomegranate.
والعمل فيه أن يضع العليل رأسه فى حجرك ثمّ يفتح عينيه وتلقط ذلك اللحم الأحمر كلّه بالصنانير الموافقة لذلك.	And the operation for it is to place a scalpel on the stone, then open his eyes and remove that entire red flesh with suitable instruments conforming to that.
او تمسكه بمنقاش او جفت ثمّ تقطع اللحم الأوّل فالأوّل حتّى تفنى جميعه بالقطع وتحفّظ من العين لئلّا تؤذيها عند العمل، ويكون قطعك له إمّا بالمبضع الذى وصفنا فى قطع الظفرة او بّمقصّ صغيرة.	Or grasp it with a pair of forceps or pincers, then cut the first flesh until you reach its origin by cutting and be cautious not to harm the eye during the operation, and your cut should be either at the depression that we described in the section on cutting the nail or with small scissors.
كالتى تلقط بها السبل على ما تأتى صورتها فىالباب الذىيلى هذا الباب.	As you remove it with a tube, according to its shape, which appears in the aperture of this aperture.
فإذا تمّ قطعك وذهب جميع الوردينج فاملأ العين من الملح المدقوق او قطّر فيها ذرورا أحمر ونحوه من الأدوية الأكّالة واحمل على العين من خارج قطنة ببياض البيض لتأمن الورم الحارّ.	If you have cut and removed all the varices, then apply to the eye a gentle poultice of sweet melon oil or rose oil, and anoint around the eye from the outside with egg white to prevent the growth of hot inflammation.
فإن بقى من الوردينج شىء وغلبك الدم وخشيت الورم الحارّ فاترك العين وعالجها بما يسكن الورم ثمّ عد عليها بالعمل حتّى تبرأ وكذلك فاصنع باللحم الزائد الذى يعرض فى العين من هذا النوع.	If there remains some varix and the blood has congealed and the hot inflammation has increased, then leave the eye and treat it with what quiets the inflammation, then return to operate on it until it is cured; and similarly, you should deal with the excess flesh that appears in the eye of this type.
إلّا أنّه ينبغى لك أن تجتنب علاج كلّ عين ضعيفة من طريق الطبع او من طريق العرض بالعمل بالحديد ولا تدخل يدك فى شىء من هذه الأ عمال حتّى ترى أنّ ذلك العضو محتمل لذلك العمل.	It is necessary for you to avoid treating every weak eye by cauterization or by operating with iron, and do not insert your hand in any of these operations until you see that the member is prepared for that operation.
الفصل الثامن عشر.	The Eighteenth Chapter.
فى لقط السبل من العين.	On Removing a Cataract from the Eye.
السبل عروق حمر تتنسّج على العين فيمنع البصر فعله وتضعف العين مع طول الأيّام فينبغى لك أوّلا أن تنظر فإن كانت العين التى فيها السبل قويّة ولم يكن فيها مرض آخر غير السبل.	A cataract is a red vein that adheres to the eye, obstructing the vision and weakening the eye over time; therefore, it is necessary for you first to examine whether the eye in which the cataract is strong and has no other disease besides the cataract.
فحينئذ فاللقط وهو أن تأمر العليل أن يضع رأسه فى حجرك ثمّ علّق تلك العروق بصنّارة واحدة او باثنتين على حسب حذقك وتكون الصنانير لطيفة الانثناء على هذه الصورة:.	When you are ready to dissect and it is time for the dissection, you should have the patient lie down with his head on a stone, then tie those veins with one or two ligatures according to your need, and the instruments will be ready for this type of dissection.
او تكون صنّارتين مزدوجتين فى جسم واحد على هذه الصورة:.	And they will be two paired ligatures on a single body in this manner:
ثمّ تلقط بمقصّ لطيفة تلك العروق بلطف وتمسح الدم حينا بعد حين حتى ترى العين فد ذهبت منها تلك العروق وانحلب الدم، وتحفّظ من العين لا تؤذيها بأطراف المقصّ وليكن عملك نصف النهار بإزاء الشمس.	Then, you should dissect with a sharp instrument, gently cutting those veins with care and wiping away the blood until you see the eye, for the vein has departed from it, and the blood has been diverted. And beware of the eye, lest you harm it with the edges of the instrument, and let your work be in the shade, away from the sun.
وتثبت فى عملك جدّا لئلّا تقطع غير تلك العروق فعند فراغك فقطّر فى العين الشياف الأخضر او الأحمر ليأكل بحدّته ما بقى من السبل، فإن لم يمكنك لقطه كلّه فى تلك الساعة فضمّد العين بما يسكن ألم العين.	And be cautious in your work, lest you cut other than those veins, for when you have finished, just touch the green or red vein of the eye with the edge of the instrument to absorb what remains of the vein. If you cannot dissect it all at that time, bandage the eye with something that will ease the pain of the eye.
واتركه أيّاما حتّى يسكن ألمها وتأمن الورم الحارّ ثمّ أعد عليها العمل على هذه الصفة بعينها حتّى تبرأ هذه صورة المقصّ الالام عنها.	And leave it for a while until the pain eases, and the inflammation subsides, then return to work on it in this manner, with its own proper treatment, until you have freed this type of instrument from its painful effects.
واتركه [ويكون راس العليل فى حجر التلميذ واخر ينشف الدمع ويحقق النطر فى مقدم العين وموخره وانت] الاصل فى العمل ان تفتح العين بفتاحات مثبته او مثلثه يمسكها تلميد.	And leave it, and the patient's head will be on a stone, and the blood will be drained, and the gaze will be directed to the front of the eye and its rear, and you will control it with a steady hand or three fingers that hold it firmly.
حادق ويكون راس العليل فى حجر التلميد واخر ينشف الدمع ويحقق النطر فى مقدم العين وموخره وانت بالخيار ان تبدا باللقط من اعلى العين او من اسفلها والاولى ان تنشف صنارتين فى الحانب الاعلى يكون واحده فى اخر الاكليل والاخرى فى اوله.	Be careful, and the patient's head will be on a stone, and the blood will be drained, and the gaze will be directed to the front of the eye and its rear, and you will control it with a choice whether to start dissecting from the top of the eye or from its bottom, and the first is to tie two ligatures in the upper angle, one at the end of the eyelid and the other at its beginning.
وتمسكها بين الوسطا والسبابه ثم تعلق صنانير من تحت قبالهما ثم تمسكها بين الخنصر والبنصر ويشيل يدك شيلًا خفيفًا حتي تري السبل كله قد ارتفع تقطع من الغرب الاصغر ان شيت بالمقص وان شيت بمبضع لطيف.	Here is the translation:
وتدحل المهّت على ابره وتستبرى السبل كله حتي يرتفع على الملحم ولا تقطع التنشف فان الدمع والدم تصع (تميع ) عليك.	The bandage is placed on the wound and tightened gradually until it adheres to the affected part, without cutting off the circulation, for the artery and vein are constricted (i.e., compressed) upon you.
ثم اقطع بالمقص ما زاد على الاكليل من فوق ومن اسفل حتى لا يبقى ناشب الا فى القرنيه فان امكنك ان ترفعه من على القرنيه سلخ بالمهتّ فهو احسن وقد يتهيا فى بعض الناس.	Then cut with the scissors what exceeds from above and below until nothing remains attached except in the ear, for it is possible to raise it from the ear by a bandage, which is better. And it may happen to some people.
واذا قطعته كان يحرح محلقه اياما يسكن وجعها ويامن الورم الحار ثم اعد العمل عليه.	And if you cut it, you should massage its location with a gentle touch and bandage it, and protect it from the hot tumor, then return to work on it.
الفصل التاسع عشر.	Chapter Nineteen
فى ردّ الريشة الى الأنف.	On the reduction of the nose to its original shape
تسمّى الأطبّاء الريشة ناصورا، اذا عالجتها بالكىّ او بالدواء الحادّ المحرق على ما تقدّم وصفه ولم تبرأ فليس الحيلة فيها إلّا أن تشقّ على الورم عند نضجه وتستخرج جميع الرطوبة التى فيه او القيح.	The physicians call the nose 'nasoora', if you treat it with the scalpel or the sharp medicine, and it does not improve despite what has been mentioned and described, and did not heal, there is no trick in it except to open at the tumor when it becomes ripe and extract all the pus that is in it or the abscess.
حتّى ينكشف العظم فإذا انكشف العظم ورأيت فيه فسادا او سوادا فاجرده بآلة هذه صورتها:.	Until the bone becomes exposed, and if you expose the bone and see in it a cavity or a depression, then scrape it with an instrument of this shape:
وتسمّى الخشنة الرأس تصنع من الحديد الهندىّ ويكون رأسها مدوّرا كالزّر قد نقشت نقش المبرد او الإسكلفاج نقشا رقيقا فتضعها على موضع الفساد من العظم ثمّ تديرها بين أصبعيك وأنت تزّم يدك قليلا حتّى تعلم أنّ ذلك الفساد قد انجرد.	And they call it the rasp head, made from Indian iron, and its head is curved like a file, with an engraving of the burin or scalpel, an intricate design. You place it on the location of the decayed bone, then rotate it between your fingers, and you tighten your hand slightly until you feel that the decay has been removed.
وتفعل ذلك مرّات ثمّ تجبر الموضع بالأدوية المجفّفة القابضة فإن انختم الموضع ونبت فيه اللحم وانقطع جرى المدّة وبقى أربعين يوما ولم يتجدّد عليه ولم يرم ولم يحدث فيه حادث.	And do that repeatedly, then dry the area with astringent medications that constrict, for the area will heal and flesh will grow in it, and the wound will close, and forty days will pass without it being affected or harmed, and no accident will occur.
فاعلم أنّه قد برئ، وإلّا فليس فيه حيلة إلّا ردّ الناصور الى ثقب الأنف على هذه الصفة وهى أن تكشف عن العظم ثانية بالحديد او بالدواء الحادّ فإذا انكشف العظم فخذ مشعبا على هذه الصورة:.	You should know that it has healed, and if not, there is no trick except to return the nose to its original shape in this manner: you expose the bone again with the iron or the sharp medicine, and if you expose the bone, take a graft in this shape:
يكون طرف الحديدة مثلّثا وعودها مخروطا مجلوبا الى الطرف كما ترى ثمّ ضعه على العظم نفسه ويكون ذلك قرب المأق وأبعد يدك من العين قليلا ثمّ أدر يدك بالمشعب حتّى ينفذ العظم ويحسّ به العليل.	Here is the translation:
بأن يجد الريح تخرج منه اذا أمسك يده على أنفه فحينئذ أجبر الموضع بالأدوية القابضة المجفّفة كما أعلمتك فإذا نبت اللحم وصلب المكان فإنّ المادّة التى كانت تنصّب الى خارج ترجع الى الأنف فيكون ذلك أخفّ على العليل إن شاء الله.	When the surgeon feels it going out if he puts his hand on his nose, then at that time, he should constrict the affected area with a firm, grasping bandage, as I have taught you. And if the flesh is gathered and the place is solidified, then the matter that was protruding outward will return to its natural position inside the nose, and that would be easier on the patient, God willing.
الفصل العشرون.	Chapter Twenty-Six
فىردّ نتو العين.	The Treatment of the Eye
اذا نتت العين بجملتها ولم تحدث فى البصر آفة ولا نقصان فينبغى أن تسهل العليل ثمّ تفصده فى القيفال ثمّ تضع محجمة فى القفا من غير شرط وتمصّ مصّا رقيقا.	If you treat the eye with its mixture and it does not respond to the medication, nor is there any defect in the vision, it is likely that the patient will recover, then you should bandage it with a clean cloth, and apply a light compress, without being rough or applying too much pressure.
ثمّ تضع على العين لطوخا صنع من أقاقيا وصبر ولبان وعنزروت ثمّ تشدّ العين من فوق على الضماد برفائد كثيرة، وصفة الرفائد أن تأخذ حرقا ليّنة كثيرة فتثنى كلّ خرقة منها على أربع طيّات تصنع منها كثيرة.	Then you should apply to the eye a plaster made from aqiqiya, sabr, laban, and 'anzarot. Then you should bandage the eye from above on the compress with multiple folds, and the method of folding is that you take each fold in a circular motion, so that every fold is applied in four directions, making many of them.
ثمّ تضعها واحدة على أخرى على قدر ما تحتاج اليه العين ثمّ تشدّ عليها بخرقة صلبة شدّا قويّا وتعيد المحجمة بالمصّ من غير شرط ثمّ تنزع المحجمة وتترك العين مشدودة يوما وليلة.	Then you should apply one on top of another, according to the need of the eye, then you should bandage it with a firm, strong compression, and repeat the application of the compress without being rough, then remove the compress and leave the eye bandaged for a day and a night.
فإن استرخى الرباط فى خلال ذلك فينبغى أن يشدّ نعمّا ثمّ انزع الرباط بعد يوم وليلة كما قلنا فإن رأيت العين قد رجعت وإلّا فأعد الضماد والرفائد والشدّ والمحجمة حتّى ترجع.	If the bandage becomes loose during that time, it is likely that it will become strong. Then remove the bandage after a day and a night, as we have said. If you see that the eye has relapsed, repeat the compress, the folds, the bandaging, and the application of the compress until it returns to its normal state.
الفصل الحادى والعشرون.	Chapter Twenty-Seven
فى قطع العنبية.	The Treatment of the Eyelids
اذا عرض فتق فى الطبقة العنبيّة ثمّ نتت وبرزت خارج الأجفان كهيئة العنبة وقبحت صورة الإنسان لذلك وأردت قطعها فالعمل فيها على ما أصف.	If a fissure appears in the eyelid, then it becomes thick and protrudes outside the orbit, disfiguring the appearance of the human being, for that reason I wanted to cut it off, so act on it according to what I have described.
وهو أن تدخل إبرة فى أصل العنبة من أسفل الى فوق ثمّ تدخل إبرة أخرى فيها خيط مثنىّ من ناحية المأق وتنفذها وتدع الإبرة الأولى على حالها.	You should insert a needle at the base of the wound from below upwards, then you should insert another needle with a thread tied to it on the side of the vein and pass it through, leaving the first needle in its place.
ثمّ تقطع موضع انثناء الخيط المثنىّ وتربط به بعض العنبة حول الإبرة وتشدّها نعمّا ثمّ تخرج الابرة وتضع على العين صوفا مبلولا ببياض البيض وتدعها حتّى تسقط الخيوط مع العنبة ثمّ تعالج العين بما يقوّيها.	Then you should cut the thread that is tied to the needle and tie it to some of the wound around the needle, and tighten it firmly. Then you should remove the needle and place a dressing of folded lint soaked in white wax on the eye, leaving it until the threads come out with the wound, then treat the eye with what soothes it.
حتّى يبرأ الجرح، وقد تشدّ العنبة من كلّ جهة بدائرة من خرقة حتّى تزداد العين نتوا نعمّا ثمّ تبطّ بمبضع رقيق يصل الى غور العين فتسيل الرطوبة البيضيّة وتنزل العين وتذبل على المقام ثمّ تشدّها حتّى تبرأ.	Until the wound heals, and you should tighten the dressing from all sides with a circle of adhesive until the eye is at ease. Then you should apply a thin poultice that reaches to the inner corner of the eye, so that it absorbs the white discharge and the eye becomes calm, then you should bandage it until it heals.
الفصل الثانى والعشرون.	Chapter 22.
فى علاج الكمنة.	On the Treatment of Cataracts.
هذه العلّة التى تسمّى الكمنة إنّما هى مدّة تجتمع فى العين تشبه الماء النازل وليس به، ووجه العمل فى ذلك أن تقعد العليل على كرسىّ منتصبا ثمّ تأخذ رأسه بيديك من الجهتين.	This ailment, which is called a cataract, is a cloud that gathers in the eye resembling descending water but not really, and the way to operate on it is to seat the patient on a steady chair, then take his head between your hands from both sides.
وتحرّكه حتّى ترى المدّة تصير الى أسفل بعينك ثمّ تثبت ولا تزول وينطلق النور ويرى العليل الأشياء كما كان يراها، وإن لم تنزل الى أسفل علمنا أنّه الماء، فإن لم يتهيّأ نزول المدّة بما ذكرنا.	And you should move it until you see the cloud settle at the bottom of your eye, then you should fix it and not let it move, and the light will be released and the patient will see things as he used to, and if it does not settle at the bottom we know that it is the water, and if it does not settle we mentioned.
وإلّا فأجلس العليل بين يديك ثمّ خذ مبضعا رقيقا وشقّ به فوق الغشاء القرنىّ قليلا عند اتّصال الملتحم بالغشاء القرنىّ فى الإكليل حتّى تخرج المادّة.	And if so, you should sit the patient between your hands, then take a thin scalpel and make a small incision above the corneal membrane at the point where the conjunctiva connects to the corneal membrane in the eyelid until the material comes out.
فإذا خرجت فقطّر فى العين ماء حارّا قد مزجت فيه عسلا او ماء قد أغليت فيه حلبة وعسلا ثمّ تعالج بسائر العلاج حتّى يبرأ،.	If only a watery humor flows out of the eye, either a humor that has been mixed with vitellus or a humor that has become thick and has formed a coating, then you should treat it with other treatments until it heals.
الفصل الثالث والعشرون.	The 23rd Section.
فى قدح الماء النازل فى العين.	On the descent of watery fluid in the eye.
قد ذكرنا أنواع الماء فى التقسيم وأيّها يصلح للقدح بكلام مشروح مفسّر فتأخذه من هناك على الصحّة، فحينئذ ينبغى أن تجلس العليل بين يديك متربّعا قبالة الضوء قرب الشمس.	We have mentioned the types of fluid in the classification, and which of them is suitable for descent with a polished and gleaming instrument, so it is taken from there to the healthy one; then it is necessary to place the small cup between your hands opposite the light near the sun.
وتربط عينه الصحيحة وتشدّها شدّا جيّدا، ثمّ ترفع جفن عينه بيدك اليسرى إن كانت العين التى فيها الماء العين اليسرى او بيدك اليمنى ان كانت العين اليمنى.	And you bind the healthy eye tightly, and hold it firmly, then you elevate the eyelid of that eye with your left hand if the eye containing the fluid is the left eye, or with your right hand if it is the right eye.
ثمّ تضع طرف المقدح قرب الاكليل بغلظ مرود فى نفس بياض العين من جهة المأق الأصغر ثمّ تدفع المقدح بقوّة وأنت تديره بيدك حتّى ينفذ فى بياض العين وتحسّ بالمقدح أنّه قد وصل الى شىء فارغ.	Then you place the point of the instrument near the eyelid, with a gentle touch in the white of the eye from the side of the smaller angle, then you push the instrument with force and you direct it with your hand until it reaches the white of the eye and you feel with the instrument that it has reached an empty space.
وينبغى أن تصير قدر ذهاب المقدح الى العمق قدر البعد الذى يكون من الصبىّ الى آخر السواد وهو إكليل العين فإنّ النحاس تراه فى نفس الناظر رأى العين لصفاء الغشاء القرنىّ، ثمّ تصير المقدح الى فوق الى الموضع الذى فيه الماء.	And it is necessary to estimate the depth of the instrument's penetration, according to the distance that is from the sclera to the end of the darkness, which is the eyelid of the eye; for the doctor sees in the gaze of the one looking at the clarity of the corneal membrane. Then you direct the instrument upwards to the position where the fluid is.
ثم تكبسه الى أسفل مرّة بعد مرّة فإن نزل الماء من ساعته فإنّ العليل يرى ما فتح عليه بصره من ساعته والمقدح فى عينه ثمّ يسكن قليلا فإن صعد الماء فأنزله ثانية من غير أن تخرج المقدح.	Then you lower it down slowly, time after time, until the fluid flows out of its saucer; for the eyelid sees what has been opened upon it by its saucer and the instrument in its eye. Then it calms down a little, and if the fluid flows out, you lift it up again without withdrawing the instrument.
فإذا استقرّ ولم يصعد فأخرج المقدح برفق وأنت تفتل به يدك قليلا قليلا ثمّ تذوب فى الماء شيئا من ملح صاف أندرانى وتغسل به العين من داخل ثمّ تضع من خارج العين كلّها مشاقة او صوفا مبلولا.	And if it becomes stable and does not flow out, you withdraw the instrument gently and you rotate it with your hand little by little, then you mix in the fluid something from pure Andranī salt and you wash the eye from the inside, then you apply from outside the eye a collirium or a medicated ointment.
بدهن ورد وبياض بيض وتربط معها العين الصحيحة، وأمّا نحن وأهل زماننا فنضع عليها الكمون المدقوق مع بياض البيض، فإن لم يجبك المقدح للدخول فى العين لصلابتها لأنّ من الناس من تكون عينه صلبة جدّا.	We take a thin and white thread, and we tie it with the correct thread, and as for us and our contemporaries, we put on it the smooth and polished Kemalun with the white thread; if you do not find it suitable for entering the eye due to its solidity, because some people have very solid eyes.
فينبغى أن تأخذ المبضع الذى يسمّى البريد الذى هذه صورته:.	You should take the instrument that is called the periosteum elevator, which has this shape:
فتثقب به نفس الملتحم فقط ولا تمعن فى الثقب وإنّما هو أن تطرّق للمقدح موضعا لطيفا ثمّ تدخل المقدح على ما ذكرنا، وعند كمال عملك تهيّئ للعليل مضطجعا محكما ينام فيه على ظهره فى بيت مظلم.	You should pierce through the same aperture only, and do not deviate from it, but rather you should make a gentle touch for the instrument to enter in the aforementioned way, and when you have completed your operation, you should leave the eyelid relaxed, leaning on its back in a dark room.
ويمتنع من جميع الحركات ومن السعال وتجعل طعامه ما تليّن به طبيعته ولا يحرّك رأسه يمينا ولا شمالا البتّة ويكون الرباط على حاله الى اليوم الثالث ثمّ تحلّه فى ذلك البيت المظلم وتجرّب بصره.	He should refrain from all movements and sneezing, and make his bandage as it was originally, so that his head is not bent upwards or downwards, and the dressing remains in this state until the third day, then he should be moved to that dark room and his vision will be tested.
وتريه أشياء ثمّ تردّ الرباط الى اليوم السابع ولا ينبغى أن تفعل ذلك فى وقت العلاج او بعد القدح من ساعتك بل ينبغى أن تجتنب ذلك من قبل أن الماء يصعد سريعا بالنظر الشديد.	And he should be kept in that state, then the dressing is removed on the seventh day, and it is not proper to do that during the treatment or after the inflammation has subsided from your clock, but rather you should anticipate that before the water rises quickly with severe gaze.
فإن عرض ورم حارّ فينبغى أن تحلّ العين قبل السابع وتصلح ذلك بما يسكن الورم حتّى اذا سكن فحينئذ تطلق بصره وتضع على وجه خمارا يدرب بصره من تحته أيّاما وهو فى ذلك البيت المظلم ثم.	If there is a severe and hot inflammation, it is proper to move the eye before the seventh day, and correct that by what reduces the inflammation until it subsides; then you will open your eyes and put on a face veil that shields your eyes from anything above it, while you are in that dark room.
يخرج عن البيت بتدريج ويتصرّف فى أسبابه، واعلم أنّ القدح لا يستغنى فيه المتعلّم عن المشاهدة مرّات فحينئذ يقدم على العمل، وقد بلغنى عن بعض العراقيّين أنّه ذكر أنّه يصنع بالعراق مقدحا منفوذا يمتص به الماء.	He should leave the room gradually, and take care of his affairs, and know that the inflammation is not neglected by the practitioner who frequently visits the patient, so then he presents himself for work; and I have been informed about some Iraqi physicians that they mentioned that they create an instrument from a gourd that absorbs water.
ولم أر أحدا فى بلدنا صنع ذلك ولا قرأته فى كتاب من كتب الأوائل وقد يمكن أن يكون ذلك محدثا، وهذه صورة أنواع من المقادح ليقف عليها من جهلها:.	I have not found anyone in our land who has done that, nor have I seen it in the books of the ancients; however, it is possible that it is an innovation, and this is a picture of various types of surgical hooks.
تصنع من النحاس خاصّة ويكون طرفها بهذه الرقّة بعينها مثلّثة الطرف حادّة،.	It is made from a specific copper alloy and its edge is fashioned in this way, with its tip being sharp like the point of a spear.
الفصل الرابع والعشرون.	Chapter 24.
فى علاج اللحم النابت فى الأنف.	On the treatment of abscesses in the nose.
قد تنبت فى الأنف لحوم مختلفة زائدة منها شىء يشبه العقربان الكثير الأرجل ومنها ما يكون لحما سرطانيّا متحجّرا كمد اللون ومنه ما يكون لحما ليّنا غير كمد اللون.	It may abscess in the nose due to different types of humors, including a type that resembles a scorpion's tail, and among them are carcinous humors that have spread like a snake, and among them are lenient humors that do not spread like a snake.
فما كان من هذه اللحوم ليّنة ليست بخبيثة ولا سرطانيّة، فينبغى أن تجلس العليل بين يديك مستقبل الشمس وتفتح منخره وتلقى الصنّارة فى تلك اللحوم ثمّ تجذبها الى خارج ثمّ تقطع ما أدركت منها بمبضع لطيف حادّ من جهة واحدة.	When these lenient humors do not have a bad or carcinous quality, it is necessary to sit in the sun with your hands opposite it, and open its nostrils and insert the cannula into those humors, then withdraw them outside, and cut what you can grasp from it with a sharp and fine scalpel on one side.
حتّى تعلم أن اللحم كلّه قد ذهب فإن بقى منه شىء لم تستطع قطعه فاجرده بأحد الآلات اللطاف برفق حتّى لا يبقى منه شىء فإن غلبك الدم او عرض ورم حارّ.	Until you learn that the entire abscess has disappeared, and if something of it remains that you could not cut, then scrape it with one of the delicate instruments gently until nothing of it remains; for if you leave the blood or pus or a hot inflammation.
فقابله بما ينبغى او كان من الأورام الخبيثة فبادر فاكوه حتّى ينقطع الدم وتذهب جميع اللحوم ثمّ تلقى فى الأنف بعد القطع خلّا وماء او شرابا فإن انفتح الأنف وسلكت منه الرطوبة الى الحلق.	Then treat it with what is necessary, or it was one of the malignant tumors, so hurry to remove it until the bleeding stops and all the humors disappear, then insert into the nose after the incision a tube or a pipe, for if you open the nose and drain the pus into the throat.
فاعلم أنّه قد برئ، فإن لم تنفذ الرطوبة على ما ينبغى فاعلم أنّ داخله لحما نابتا فى أعلى العظام المتخلخلة لم تصل الآلة بالقطع اليها فحينئذ ينبغى أن تأخذ خيطا من كتان له بعض الغلظ.	Know that it has healed, but if you do not drain the pus as necessary, know that there is an abscessed humor inside the upper porous bone that the instrument did not reach with the incision, so then it is necessary to take a thread from a catgut with some thickness.
وتعقد فيه عقدا كثيرة وتجعل بين كلّ عقدة قدر أصبع او أقلّ ويتحيّل العليل يدسّ طرف الخيط الواحد فى أنفه بمرود او بما أمكنه بعد أن يصنعه مثل الزّر ويجذب ريحه حتّى يصل الى الخيشوم.	He forms in it many knots and makes between each knot a finger or less, and he hides the end of the thread in his nose with a push or with what is possible for him after he has made it like a ring and pulled its end until it reaches the nostrils.
ويخرج على حلقه وكثيرا ما يفعل مثل هذا الفعل الصبيان فى الكتّاب وهو أمر يسهل على من أراده، ثمّ تجمع طرفى الخيط الطرف الواحد الذى خرج على الفم والآخر الذى بقى فى الأنف.	And he brings out the thread in a loop, and many times he does this action like the scribes do, which is an easy task for whoever wants it. Then he gathers the two ends of the thread, one that came out onto the mouth and the other that remained in the nostril.
ثمّ تستعمل نشر اللحم بالعقد التى فى الخيط تفعل ذلك حتّى تعلم أنّ اللحوم قد تقطّعت بعقد الخيط ثمّ تخرج الخيط وتصير فى الأنف بعد مسح الدم فتيلة قد شربتها فى المرهم المصرّى تفعل ذلك ثلاثة أيّام او أكثر.	Then he uses the spread of the meat with the knots that are on the thread, doing that until he learns that the meats have been cut by the knot of the thread. Then he brings out the thread and turns it in the nostril after wiping away the blood, for a period of time during which he has sprinkled it in the Egyptian balm, doing that for three days or more.
حتّى يأكل المرهم جميع ما بقى من اللحوم ثمّ تصير آخر شىء فى الأنف أنبوبة رصاص أيّاما حتّى يبرأ، فإن احتاج الى علاج يجفّف استعملت ذلك.	Until he eats the balm, all that remains of the meats. Then it turns into the last thing in the nostril, a tube of silver, anytime until he recovers. If he needs treatment, he should use that.
وهذه صورة المسعط الذى تقطر به الأدهان والأدوية فى الأنف:.	And this is the picture of the instrument that is used to inject the medicines and treatments into the nostrils:.
يضع من فضّة او نحاس شبه القنديل الصغير مفتوح المدهن ومجراه كذلك.	He puts a tube of silver or copper, similar to a small candle, open at one end and bent similarly.
وإن شئت صنعت الأنبوبة مغلّقة كالقصبة ومدهن المسعط مسطوح.	And if you want to make the tube curved like a reed and its nozzle is flat.
له مقبض فى آخره كما ترى يمسك به اذا سخنت فيه الدهن او ما شئت من العصارات او الأشياء السيّالة.	It has a ring at its end, as you see, to hold it if you want to inject the medicine or what you want of the fluids or the things that are poured.
الفصل الخامس والعشرون.	Chapter Twenty-Five.
فى الثآليل النابته فى طرف الأنف.	In the wounds that are near the edge of the nostril.
كثيرا ما ينبت فى طرف الأنف ثؤلول فيعظم ويتزيّد مع الأيّام حتّى يقبح منظره.	Many times it grows at the edge of the nostril, a fatty tumor that increases with the days until it becomes visible.
ولذلك ينبغى أن تقطعه فى أوّل ظهوره وتستأصل جميعه ثمّ تحمل على الموضع إمّا الكىّ وإمّا الدواء المحرّق الذى يقوم مقام الكىّ، فإن فات قطعه حتّى يعظم فانظر فإن كان متحجّرا صلبا كمد اللون قليل الحسّ.	Therefore, it is necessary to cut it at its first appearance and to dissect its entire body, then to place it on the affected area, either with a cautery or with a medicinal plaster that takes the place of the cautery; if you leave a part of it until it becomes large, it will be difficult to remove it, as it will have adhered strongly like glue.
فلا تعرض له بالحديد فإنّه ورم سرطانىّ وكثيرا ما رأيت من قطع هذا الورم فعادت منه بليّة عظيمة على صاحبه، وإن كان الورم ليّن المجسّة غير كمد اللون ورأيت أنّ القطع يمكن فى جميعه.	Do not touch it with a cautery, for it is a cancerous tumor and I have seen many cases where cutting into this tumor has resulted in great harm to the patient; even if the tumor is soft and friable, I have found that cutting into its entire body is possible.
فاستفرغ العليل واقطعه بلا حذر ولا توقّ وعالج الموضع بما يجفّف ويقبض حتّى يبرأ،.	You should make a deep incision and cut it out without fear or hesitation, and treat the affected area with what will dry it up and constrict it until it heals.
الفصل السادس والعشرون.	Chapter Twenty-Six.
فى خياطة الأنف والشفة والأذن.	On the surgical treatment of the nose, lip, and ears.
اذا تفرّق اتّصالها عن جرح او نحو ذلك اعلم أنّه متى حدث تفرّق اتّصال فى أحد هذه الغضاريف فقلّ ما ينجع فيها العمل إلّا فى بعض الناس.	If you separate the connection from a wound or something similar, know that when separation occurs in one of these joints, it reduces what can be achieved in terms of work, except in some people.
فينبغى متى عرض لأحد شئ من ذلك فانظر إن كان الجرح طريّا بدمه أن تجمع شفتى الجرح بالخياطة ثمّ تعالجه حتّى يبرأ، وإن كان تفرّق الاتّصال قد افترق شفتاه وصار كلّ شقّ صحيحا فينبغى أن تسلخ كلّ شقّ بثخن جلده الظاهر حتّى يدمى.	It is necessary, when showing one of these things, to examine whether the wound is fresh and bloody; then gather the edges of the wound with a suture, and treat it until it heals. And if the separation has separated the edges and each edge has become straight, it is necessary to sew each edge with a visible seam on its surface until it adheres.
ثمّ تجمع الشفتين بالخياطة وتشدّها وتذرّ عليها الشيان واللبان مسحوقين وتضع من فوق الذرور لصقة من المرهم النخلى او غيره من المراهم الملحمة وتتركه مشدودا يومين او ثلاثة ثمّ تحلّه.	Then bring the edges together with a suture, and tighten it, and apply to it cerate and lint, and put on top of the wound a patch of melchham or other sticky plasters, and leave it constricted for two or three days, then remove it.
وتبدل الدواء وتتركه حتّى تنقطع الخيوط من ذاتها ثمّ تعالجها بالمرهم حتّى يبرأ، وصفة الخياطة أن تجمع تفرّق الاتّصال إمّا بالإبر كما وصفنا فى خياطة البطن وإمّا بالخيط كما عرّفتك هناك،.	And change the medication and leave it until the threads cut of themselves, then treat it with ointment until it heals. The method of suture is to gather the separated connection either with a needle as we described in the suture of the belly, or with a thread as I have shown you there.
الفصل السابع والعشرون.	The Seventh and Twenty-Sixth [Section].
فى إخراج العقد التى تعرض فى الشفتين.	On extracting the nodules that appear on the lips.
قد يعرض لكثير من الناس فى داخل شفاههم أورام صغار صلبنة يشبه بعضها حبّ الكرسنّة وبعضها أصغر وأكبر، فينبغى أن تقلب الشفة وتشقّ على كلّ عقدة وتعلّقها بالصنّارة.	It happens to many people that small, hard tumors appear inside their lips, some of which resemble cherries and others are smaller or larger; it is necessary to split the lip and make an incision over each tumor and ligate it with a thread.
وتقطعها من كلّ جهة ثمّ تحشو الموضع بعد القطع بزاج مسحوق حتّى ينقطع الدم ثمّ يتمضمض بالخلّ، والملح وتعالج المواضع بما فيه قبض الى أن تبرأ الجراحات،.	And then cut them from every side, then pack the place after cutting with a piece of cotton moistened with vinegar until the bleeding stops, and apply a bandage and treat the places with what is necessary to heal the wounds.
الفصل الثامن والعشرون.	The Eighth and Twenty-Sixth [Section].
فى قطع اللحم الزائد فى اللثة.	On excising excessive flesh in the gums.
كثيرا ما ينبت على اللثة لحم زائد تسمّيه الأوائل ابولس فينبغى أن تعلّقه بصنّارة او تمسكه بمنقاش وتقطعه عند أصله وتترك المدّة تسيل او الدم ثمّ تضع على الموضع زاجا مسحوقا.	It often happens that excessive flesh grows on the gums, which is called "ulcers" by Abu'l-Qasim; it is necessary to ligate it with a thread or grasp it with a forceps and cut it at its base, and let the bleeding stop, then apply a piece of cotton moistened with vinegar.
او أحد الذرورات القابضة المجفّفة فإن عاد ذلك اللحم بعد العلاج فكثيرا ما يعود فاقطعه ثانية واكوه فإنّه لا يعود بعد الكىّ،.	Or one of the constricting medications that dry out; if that flesh returns after treatment, it often recurs, so cut it again and cauterize it, for it will not return after that.
الفصل التاسع والعشرون.	The Ninth and Twenty-Sixth [Section].
فى جرد الاسنان بالحديد.	On extracting teeth with iron.
قد يجتمع فى سطوح الأسنان من داخل ومن خارج وبين اللثات قشور خشنة قبيحة وقد تسودّ وتصفرّ وتخضرّ حتّى يصل من ذلك فساد الى اللثة وتقبح الأسنان لذلك.	It happens that rough, tartar-like crusts form on the surface of the teeth, both from the inside and outside, and between the gums, which may turn black or yellow or green, until it reaches the point where it causes corruption to the gums and spoils the teeth.
فينبغى ان تجلس العليل بين يديك ورأسه فى حجرك وتجرد الضرس والسنّ الذى ظهر لك فيه القشور والشىء الشبيه بالرمل حتّى لا يبقى منه شىء وكذلك تفعل بالسواد والخضرة والصفرة وغير ذلك حتّى تنقى.	It is necessary to scrape the tartar with your fingers and a file, and to extract the tooth that appears to you to have crusts and decay resembling dirt, until nothing of it remains, and similarly you should deal with blackness, greenness, and yellowness, and other things, until it becomes clean.
فإن ذهب ما فيها من أوّل الجرد وإلّا فتعيد عليه الجرد يوما آخر وثانيا وثالثا حتّى تبلغ الغاية فيما تريد، واعلم أنّ الضرس يحتاج الى مجارد مختلفة الصور كثيرة الأشكال على حسب ما يتهيّأ لعملك.	If the material in it is from the first incision and onwards, then you return to the incision on another day and a third day until you reach the goal of what you want, and know that the wound needs different types of dressings with many shapes according to what is suitable for your work.
من أجل أنّ المجرد الذى يجرد به الضرس من داخل غير المجرد الذى يجرد به من خارج والذى يجرد به بين الأضراس على صورة أخرى، وهذه عدّة صور مجارد تكون عندك كلّها معدّة:.	Because the dressing that dresses the wound from inside is not like the one that dresses it from outside, and the one that dresses it between the bandages in another form, and these are several forms of dressings that are all ready at your disposal.
الفصل الثلاثون.	Chapter Thirty.
فىقلع الأسنان.	The Extraction of Teeth.
ينبغى أن تعالج الضرس من وجعه بكلّ حيلة وتتوانى عن قلعه فليس منه خلف اذا قلع لأنّه جوهر شريف حتّى اذا لم يكن بدّ من قلعه.	It is necessary to treat the wound from its beginning with all skill and caution, lest you leave something behind, for it is a noble jewel until when it does not become bad through neglect of its treatment.
فينبغى اذا عزم العليل على قلعه أن تتثبّت حتّى يصّح عندك الضرس الوجع.	It is necessary, if the doctor intends to extract it, that you should be steady until he corrects the painful wound at your hands.
فكثيرا ما يخدع العليل الوجع ويظنّ أنّه فى الضرس الصحيح فيقلعه ثمّ لا يذهب الوجع حتّى يقلع الضرس المريض، فقد رأينا ذلك من فعل الحجّامين مرارا.	Many times the doctor deceives the painful wound and thinks that it is in the correct dressing, then he does not leave the pain until he extracts the diseased wound, for we have seen that from the actions of the surgeons many times.
فإذا صحّ عندك الضرس الوجع بعينه فحينئذ ينبغى أن تشرط حول السّن بمبضع فيه بعض القوّة حتّى تحلّ اللثة من كلّ جهة ثمّ تحرّكه بأصابعك او بالكلاليب اللطاف أوّلا قليلا قليلا حتّى تزعزعه.	If the painful wound has become correct in itself, then it is necessary that you should examine around the tooth with a gentle touch, so that you loosen the gum from every side, and then shake it with your fingers or with soft forceps, little by little, until it becomes loose.
ثمّ تمكّن حينئذ منه الكلبتين الكبار تمكينا جيّدا ورأس العليل بين ركبتيك قد ثقّفته لا يتحرّك ثمّ تجذب الضرس على استقامة لئلّا تكسره، فإن لم يخرج وإلّا فخذ أحد تلك الآلات فأدخلها تحته من كلّ جهة برفق ورم تحريكه كما فعلت أوّلا.	Then, you grasp it at that time with large forceps, grasping firmly and the doctor's head is between your knees, having confidence in it, not moving; then, you pull the tooth on a straight line, lest you break it. If it does not come out, then take one of those instruments and insert it beneath from every side with gentleness and movement, as you did previously.
وإن كان الضرس مثقوبا او متأكّلا فينبغى أن تملأ ذلك الثقب بخرقة وتسدّها سدّا جيّدا بطرف مرود رقيق لئلا ينفتّت فى حين شدّك عليه بالكلاليب وينبغى أن تستقصى بالشرط حول اللثة من كلّ جهة نعمّا.	If the wound is concave or depressed, it should be filled with a compress and tightly bandaged with a firm but gentle pressure on the sides, so that it does not become inflamed at once; and it should be surrounded by a dressing from all directions.
وتحفّظ جهدك لئلّا تكسره فيبقى بعضه فيعود على العليل منه بليّة هى أعظم من وجعه الأوّل، وإيّاك أن تصنع ما تصنع جهّال الحجّامين فى جسرهم وإقدامهم على قلعه من غير أن يستعملوا ما وصفنا.	And preserve your effort so that you do not break it, and some of it remains to return to the patient with a better condition than he had at first; and beware of doing what the ignorant surgeons do in their ignorance, and their rushing into things without understanding what we have described.
فكثيرا ما يحدثون على الناس بلايا عظيمة أيسرها أن ينكسر الضرس وتبقى أصوله كلّها او بعضها.	Many of them cause great harm to people, which is worse than the wound itself, and it remains all or part of its roots.
وإمّا أن يقلع ببعض عظام الفكّ كما شاهدناه مرارا، ثمّ يتمضمض بعد قلعه بشراب او بخلّ وملح، فإن حدث نزف دم من الموضع فكثيرا ما يحدث ذلك فاسحق حينئذ شيئا من الزاج واحش به الموضع.	And it happens that some of the jawbone is removed, as we have often seen, then it is polished with a file or a rasp, and if blood flows from the spot, it often happens that something of the material sticks to it and adheres to the spot.
وإلّا فاكوه إن لم ينفعك الزاج، صورة الكلاليب اللطاف التى تحرّك بها الضرس أوّلا تكون طويلة الأطراف قصيرة المقبض غليظة لئلّا تنثنى عند قبضك بها على الضرس، وهذه صورة الكلاليب الكبار:.	And if the material does not benefit you, it is the image of the gentle compressors that move the wound for you, whether they are long with short handles, or thick and rough, so that they do not slip when you press on the wound with them; and these are the images of the large compressors.
تكون كما ترى غليظة المقابض حتّى اذا قبضت عليها لا تعطى أنفسها ولا تنثنى قصيرة الأطراف، ولتكن من حديد هندىّ او من فولاد محكمة مسقيّة الأطراف وفى طرفها أضراس يدخل بعضها فى بعض فتقبض قبضا محكما وثيقا.	They are as you see, rough with handles, so that when you press on them, they do not slip and their short handles do not slip; and let them be made of Indian iron or forged steel with handles adorned with rings that fit into one another, so that the pressure is firm and tight.
وقد تصنع الأطراف كهيئة المبرد فتكون أيضا قويّة الضبط.	And the handles may be made like a file holder, so they are also strong in gripping.
الفصل الحادى والثلّاثون.	The Straight Forceps and the Threedged Ones.
فى قلع اصول الأضراس وإخراج عظام الفكوك المكسورة.	For extracting roots of teeth and removing broken jawbone.
اذا بقى عند قلع الضرس اصل قد انكسر فينبغى أن تضع على الموضع قطنة بالسمن يوما او يومين حتّى يسترخى الموضع ثمّ تدخل اليه الجفت او الكلاليب.	If the fracture at the base of the nose has become dislocated, you should place a compress on the site with wax for a day or two until the site relaxes, then insert the plaster or bandage.
التى تشبه اطرافها فم الطائر الذى يسمّى البلرجة وهذه صورة الكلاليب:.	It resembles the sides of a bird's beak, which is called the forceps, and this is an image of the bandage.
تكون قد صنعت كالمبرد من داخل او كالإسكلفاج فإن لم يجبك للخروج بهذه الكلاليب فينبغى أن تحفر على الأصل وتكشف اللحم كلّه بالمبضع ثمّ تدخل الآلة التى تشبه عتلة صغيرة التى هذه صورتها:.	You should make it like a scalpel from the inside or like an elevator, and if it does not come out with these bandages, you should scrape on the base and expose all of the flesh at the site, then insert the instrument that resembles a small hook, which is its shape.
قصيرة الطرف غليظة قليلا ولا تكون مسقيّة لئلّا تنكسر فإن خرج الأصل بذلك وإلّا فاستعن بهذه الآلات الأخر التى هذه صورتها، الأولى مثلّثة الطرف فيها بعض الغلظ:.	The short arm is slightly curved and not straight, so it does not dislocate; if the base comes out with that, then you should rely on these other instruments, which are their shape. The first one resembles a trussed arm, some of which are curved.
صورة مثلّثة لطيفة أخرى:.	A picture of another trussed arm.
وقد نستعين أيضا بهذه الآلة ذات الشعبتين التى هذه أيضا صورتها:.	And we also rely on this instrument with two hooks, which is also its shape.
وبغيرها من الآلات والحدائد التى تقدّم ذكرها فى جرد الأضراس، وقد نستعين أيضا بهذه الآلة التى تشبه الصنّارة الكبيرة التى هذه صورتها:.	And besides them, from the instruments and appliances that we mentioned earlier in the chapter on fractures, we also rely on this instrument that resembles a large saw, which is its shape.
مثلّثة الطرف المعوّج فيها بعض الغلظ قليلا لئلّا تنكسر، وتكون غير مسقيّة، واعلم أنّ آلات الأضراس كثيرة وكذلك سائر الآلات لا تكاد تحصى والصانع الدرب الحاذق بصناعته قد يخترع لنفسه آلات على حسب ما يدلّه عليه العمل والأمراض أنفسها.	The trussed arm is slightly curved, with some curvatures, so it does not dislocate, and it is not straight. And know that the instruments of fractures are many, as well as other instruments that cannot be counted, and a skilled craftsman who is precise in his craft may invent instruments according to what the work and diseases themselves indicate.
لأنّ من الأمراض ما لم تذكر لها الأوائل آلات لاختلاف أنواعها، فإن انكسر عظم من الفكّ او من أحد عظام الفم او تعفّن ففتّش عليه فى موضعه بما يصلح له من أحد هذه الآلات والكلاليب التى ذكرت فى إخراج الأصول.	Because some diseases have not been mentioned, having no first instruments for their different types, if a bone is dislocated from the jaw or one of the facial bones or becomes displaced, you should restore it to its position using one of these instruments and bandages that were mentioned in extracting the bases.
ونستعين بجفت هذه صورته:.	I dissected this picture:
يكون فيه بعض الغلظ قليلا ليضبط به العظم فلا يفلت حتّى يخرج العظم، ونجبر الموضع بالأدوية الموافقة لذلك، فإن كان العظم فيه عفن يسير فاجرده من عفنه وسواده حتّى ينقى ثمّ عالجه حتّى يبرأ،.	There is some hardness in it, which makes the bone stick together, so it does not come apart until the bone emerges. We cauterize the affected area with suitable medications for that, and if there is a festering wound, we clean it of its pus and suppuration until it becomes pure, then we treat it until it heals.
الفصل الثانى والثلاثون.	Chapter 32.
فى نشر الأضراس النابتة على غيرها.	On the projection of the nascent teeth over the others.
الأضراس اذا نبتت على غير مجراها الطبيعىّ قبحت بذلك الصورة ولا سيّما اذا حدث ذلك فى النساء والرقيق فينبغى أن تنظر فإن كان الضرس قد نبت من خلف ضرس آخر.	The teeth, if they grow over others, not in their natural order, deformed that picture and it is especially so if that happens in women and children, and it is necessary to take a look, for if the tooth has grown behind another tooth.
ولم يتمكّن نشره ولا برده فاقلعه، وإن كان ملصقا بضرس آخر فاقطعه بهذه الآلة التى هذه صورتها:.	And it did not straighten its growth, nor did it separate, and if it was attached to another tooth, I would separate it with this instrument, whose shape is this:
وهى تشبه المنقار الصغير ولتكن من حديد هندىّ حادّة الطرف جدّا ويكون قطعك له فى أيّام كثيرة لصلابة الضرس ولئلّا تزعزع غيرها من الأضراس، وأمّا إن كان ناتيا متمكّنا لبرادته فابرده بمبرد من هند تكون هذه صورته.	And it resembles the small forceps, and it is made from Indian iron, sharp at the tip, and its cutting edge is used on many days for the extraction of the tooth, and it does not shake or disturb other teeth. And if it was necessary to straighten a bent tooth, I would use a file made from Indian iron, whose shape is this.
يكون كلّه من هند ونصابه منه رقيق النقش جدّا يكون كالمبرد الذى تصنع به الإبر، تبرد به الضرس قليلا قليلا فى أيّام كثيرة برفق لئلّا تزعزع الضرس فيسقط ثمّ تملّسه آخرا وتجرده ببعض المجارد.	It is all made from Indian iron, and its edge is sharpened very finely, being like the file that is used to make the needles. It slowly files the tooth slightly over many days with gentleness, so as not to shake the tooth, then it is smoothed out and finally polished with some of the abrasives.
وإن كان ضرس قد انكسر منه بعضه فكان يؤذى اللسان عند الكلام فينبغى أن تبرده أيضا حتّى تذهب بخشونة ذلك الكسر ويستوى ويملاّس ولا يؤذى اللسان ولا يفسد الكلام،.	And if a tooth had broken off some of it, and it was hurting the tongue when speaking, it is necessary to file it also until that roughness goes away and it becomes smooth, so it does not hurt the tongue and does not impair speech.
الفصل الثالث والثلاثون.	Chapter 33.
فى تشبيك الأضراس المتحرّكة بخيوط الفضّة او بخيوط الذهب.	In the suture of movable fractures with threads of silver or gold.
اذا عرض للأضراس القدّاميّة تزعزع وتحرّك عن ضربة او سقطة ولا يستطيع العليل العضّ على شىء يؤكل لئلّا تسقط وعالجتها بالأدوية القابضة فلم ينجع فيها العلاج.	If the fracture is recent, it should be manipulated and moved gently, without strong or violent blows, and the doctor should not rely on the patient's testimony alone, but rather examine it with adhesive medications, so that he may not miss anything in the treatment.
فالحيلة فيها أن تشدّ بخيط ذهب او فضّة والذهب أفضل لأنّ الفضّة تتزنجر وتعفن بعد أيّام والذهب باق على حاله أبدا لا يعرض له ذلك، ويكون الخيط متوسّطا فى الرقّة والغلظ على قدر ما يسع بين الأضراس.	The wisdom in it is to use a thread of gold or silver, and gold is better because silver becomes tarnished and decays after a few days, while gold remains in its state forever without being affected by that. And the thread should be moderately tight on the fracture and tightened according to what is needed between the fragments.
وصورة التشبيك أن تأخذ الخيط وتدخل انثناءه بين الضرسين الصحيحين ثمّ تنسج بطرفى الخيط بين الأضراس المتحرّكة واحدة كانت او أكثر حتّى تصل بالنسج الى الضرس الصحيح من الجهة الأخرى.	The method of suture is to take the thread and pass it between the two true fragments, then weave both ends of the thread between the movable fragments, one or more, until the weaving reaches the true fragment on the other side.
ثمّ تعيد النسج الى الجهة التى بدأت منها وتشدّ يدك برفق وحكمة حتّى لا تتحرّك البتّة ويكون شدّك الخيط عند أصول الأضراس لئلّا يفلت، ثمّ تقطع طرفى الخيط الفاضل بالمقصّ وتجمعهما وتفتلهما بالجفت وتخفيهما بين الضرس الصحيح والضرس المتحرّك.	Then you return the weaving to the side from which you started, and tighten your hand with gentleness and precision until the fragment does not move, and your tightening of the thread is at the roots of the fragments so that it doesn't come loose. Then you cut the excess ends of the thread with scissors, and gather them and twist them with a bandage, and hide them between the true fragment and the movable fragment.
لئلّا توذى اللسان، ثمّ تترك هكذا مشدودة ما بقيت، فإن انحلّت او انقطعت شددتها بخيط آخر فيستمتع بها هكذا الدهر كلّه، وهذه صورة الأضراس وهيئة التشبيك فى ضرسين صحيحين وضرسين متحرّكين كما ترى:.	So that the tongue does not get in the way, then you leave it like this, bandaged, as long as it remains. If it becomes loose or cut off, its tightness is secured with another thread, and so it will continue to be treated every day. And this is the picture of the fracture and the form of the suture in two true fragments and two movable fragments, as you see.
وقد تردّ الضرس الواحد او الاثنين بعد سقوطهما فى موضعهما وتشبّك كما وصفنا وتبقى، وإنّما يفعل ذلك صانع درب رفيق، وقد ينحت عظم من عظام البقر فيصنع منه كهيئة الضرس ويجعل فى الموضع الذى ذهب منه الضرس.	And sometimes one or two fragments may be displaced from their position after falling, and are sutured as we have described, and remain. And it is the skilled craftsman who does that, perhaps carving a bone from the bones of an animal to make a form like the fragment, and placing it in the position from which the fragment went.
ويشدّ كما قلنا فيبقى ويستمتع بذلك،.	As we have mentioned in the remaining [part] and has been tested by it.
الفصل الرابع والثلاثون.	Chapter 34.
فى قطع الرباط الذى يعرض تحت اللسان فيمنع الكلام.	On cutting the ligament that appears under the tongue when speech is obstructed.
قد يكون هذا الرباط الذى يعرض تحت اللسان إمّا طبيعيّا يولد به الإنسان وإمّا أن يكون عرضيّا من جرح قد اندمل.	This ligament that appears under the tongue may be either natural, born with the person, or it may be accidental, resulting from a wound that has healed.
والعمل فيه أن تفتح فم العليل ورأسه فى حجرك وترفع لسانه ثمّ تقطع ذلك الرباط العصبىّ بالعرض حتّى ينطلق اللسان عن إمساكه، فإن كان فيه بعض الصلابة والتعقّد وكان ذلك من اندمال جرح فالق فيه صنّارة وشقّه بالعرض حتّى ينبتر الرباط وتنحلّ العقد.	And the operation for it is to open the patient's mouth and place his jaw in a stone, then raise his tongue, and then cut the nervous ligament transversely until the tongue is released from its obstruction. If there is some stiffness and complexity, and that is because of the healing of a wound, then make an incision in it and separate it transversely until the ligament is cut and the knot is loosened.
واحذر أن يكون الشقّ فى عمق اللحم فتقطع شريانا هناك فيعرض النزف، ثمّ يتمضمض فى اثر القطع بماء الورد او بالخلّ والماء البارد، ثمّ ضع تحت اللسان فتيلة من كتان يمسكها العليل فى كلّ ليلة.	And beware of making the incision in the depth of the flesh, lest you cut a vein there, which would lead to bleeding. Then, apply compression with rose water or vinegar and cold water, and then place under the tongue a piece of cloth soaked in rose water, which the patient should keep on every night.
لئلّا يلتحم ثانية فإن حدث نزف دم فضع على المكان زاجا مسحوقا فإن غلبك الدم فاكو الموضع بمكواة عدسيّة تصلح لذلك.	If the bleeding recurs, then apply a zinc oxide ointment to the place, and if the blood overflows, stop the flow by applying a tampon, and bandage it with a dressing that will correct it.
ثمّ عالجه بسائر العلاج حتّى يبرأ،.	Then, treat him with the usual treatment until he recovers.
الفصل الخامس والثلاثون.	Chapter 35.
فى إخراج الضفدع المتولّد تحت اللسان.	On extracting the polyp that grows under the tongue.
قد يحدث تحت اللسان ورم يشبه الضفدع الصغير يمنع اللسان عن فعله الطبيعىّ وربّما عظم حتّى يملأ الفم، والعمل فيه أن تفتح فم العليل بإزاء الشمس وتنظر من الورم.	It may happen that a tumor grows under the tongue, resembling a small polyp, which obstructs the tongue from its natural function, and maybe it becomes so large as to fill the mouth. The operation for it is to open the patient's mouth with a speculum and examine the tumor by sunlight.
فإن رأيته كمد اللون او أسود صلبا لا يجد له العليل حسّا فلا تتعرّض له فإنّه سرطان وإن كان مائلا الى البياض فيه رطوبة فالق فيه الصنّارة وشقّه بمبضع لطيف وخلّصه من كلّ جهة.	If you see it black or very dark, hard and the patient does not feel any sensation in it, then do not touch it, for it is a carcinoma. But if it is inclined towards whiteness and has moisture in it, then make an incision in it and separate it with a delicate scalpel, and free it from every direction.
فإن غلبك الدم فى حين عملك فضع عليه زاجا مسحوقا حتّى ينقطع الدم ثمّ عد الى عملك حتّى تخرجه بكماله ثمّ يتمضمض بالخلّ والملح.	If the bleeding overflows during your operation, apply a zaja masoqah (a type of hemostatic agent) until the bleeding stops, then return to your operation until you finish it with calmness and composure.
ثمّ تعالجه بسائر العلاج الموافق لذلك حتّى يبرأ،.	Then treat him with a regimen that is suitable for his condition, until he recovers.
الفصل السادس والثلاثون.	Chapter 36.
فى علاج ورم اللوزتين.	On the treatment of carcinoma of the luteum.
وما ينبت فى الحلق من سائر الأورام قد يعرض فى داخل الحلق غدد تشبه الغدد التى تعرض من خارج تسمّى لوزتين اذا عالجتها بما ذكرت فى التقسيم فلم تبرأ.	And what grows in the throat from other tumors may appear as internal throat glands resembling external luteal glands, which are called luteum if treated with what was mentioned in the section, but did not improve.
فانظر فإن كان الورم صلبا كمد اللون قليل الحسّ فلاتتعرّض له بالحديد وإن كان أحمر اللون وأصله غليظ فلا تتعرّض له أيضا بالحديد خوف نزف الدم بل اتركه حتّى ينضج فإمّا أن تبطّه وإمّا أن يتفجّر من ذاته.	So, if the tumor is hard and has little sensation, do not touch it with iron, and if it is red and has a thick base, do not touch it with iron either, lest the blood flow, but leave it until it ripens; then, you may excise it or let it burst on its own.
وإن كان أبيض اللون مستديرا وكان أصله رقيقا فهذا الذى ينبغى أن يقطع، والعمل فيه أن تنظر قبل العمل إن كان قد سكن ورمه الحارّ سكونا تامّا او نقص بعض النقصان.	And if it is white in color, protruding, and has a thin base, this is the one that should be excised; and the operation for it is that you examine before operating whether the tumor has become inflamed or has some defect.
فحينئذ فأجلس العليل بحذاء الشمس ورأسه فى حجرك وتفتح فمه وتأخذ خادما بين يديك فيكبس لسانه الى أسفل بآلة هذه صورتها:.	Then sit the patient in a sunny place, and put his neck on a stone or a rock, and open his mouth and take a small knife between your fingers and insert it into the bottom of the tumor in this manner.
تصنع من فضّة او من نحاس تكون رقيقة كالسكّين فإذا كبست بها اللسان وتبيّن لك الورم ووقع عليه بصرك فخذ صنّارة واغرزها فى اللوزة وتجذبها الى خارج ما أمكن من غير أن تجذب معها شيئا من الصفاقات.	Make an instrument from silver or copper, thin like a scalpel; if you insert it into the tumor and it is clear to you, then take a spoon-like instrument and insert it into the luteum and pull it out, taking care not to pull out any of the surrounding tissues with it.
ثمّ تقطعها بآلة هذه صورتها تشبه المقصّ الا أنّ طرفيها منعطفان فم كلّ واحد منهما بحذاء الآخر حادّان جدّا تصنع من الحديد الهندىّ او الفولاد الدمشقىّ:.	Then cut it with an instrument of this shape, similar to scissors, except that the two ends are curved, each one opposite the other, sharp and hard; make them from Indian steel or Damascene iron.
فإن لم تحضر هذه الآلة وإلّا فاقطعها بمبضع هذه صورته:.	If you do not prepare this instrument and otherwise cut it at the marked spot of its picture.
حادّة من جهة واحدة وغير حادّة من الجهة الأخرى، فبعد أن تقطع اللوزة الواحدة تقطع الأخرى على هذا النوع من القطع بعينه، ثمّ بعد القطع فتغرغر العليل بماء بارد او بخلّ وماء.	It is sharp on one side and not sharp on the other, so after cutting one layer, you cut the other in this type of cutting specifically, then after cutting, you scrape the wound with cold water or vinegar and water.
فإن عرض له نزف دم تغرغر بماء قد أغلى فيه قشور الرمّان او ورق الآس او نحو ذلك من القوابض حتّى ينقطع النزف ثمّ تعالجه حتّى يبرأ، وقد ينبت فى الحلق أورام أخر غير اللوزتين فتقطعها على ما ذكرت فى قطع اللوزتين سواء.	If there appears to him a bleeding vein, scrape it with water that has had pomegranate skin or willow bark or the like of those astringents until the bleeding stops, and then treat it until it heals. And if a tumor forms in the throat other than the tonsils, cut it out as I mentioned about cutting the tonsils, likewise.
وقد عالجت امرأة من ورم كان قد نبت داخل حلقها يضرب الى الكمودة قليل الحسّ قد كاد أن يسدّ الحلق وكانت المرأة تتنفّس عن مجرى ضيّق وكان قد منعها الأكل وشرب الماء.	And I treated a woman who had a tumor that grew inside her throat, which was pressing against the trachea, with little sensation, and nearly blocked the throat, and the woman was having difficulty breathing through a narrow passage, and was prevented from eating and drinking water.
وكانت قد أشرفت على الموت لو بقيت يوما او يومين والورم قد ارتفع منه فرعان حتّى خرجا على ثقبتى أنفها فبادرت بالعجلة فأغرزت فى أحدهما صنّارة ثمّ جذبته فانجذب منه قطعة صالحة.	And she was near death if she remained for a day or two, and the tumor had risen from it two branches until it reached the nostrils of her nose, so I hastened with urgency and inserted a scoop in one of them, then pulled it out, and a sound piece came out with it.
ثمّ قطعتها حيث أدركته من ثقب الأنف ثمّ فعلت ذلك بما برز من ثقب الأنف الأخر ثمّ فتحت فمها وكبست لسانها ثمّ أغرزت الصنّارة فى نفس الورم ثمّ قطعت منه بعضه ولم يسل منه الا دم يسير.	Then I cut it where I had touched it through the nostril, then I did that with what appeared from the other nostril, then I opened her mouth and grasped her tongue, then I inserted the scoop into the same tumor, then I cut some of it, and only a little blood flowed.
فانطلق حلق المرأة وبادرت من ساعتها الى شرب الماء ثمّ نالت من الغذاء فلم نزل نقطع من ذلك الورم مرارا زمانا طويلا والورم يخلف بدلا ممّا يقطع حتّى طال بى وبها ذلك.	So the woman's throat was cleared, and she hastened to drink water from that hour, then she took food, and I did not cease to cut away from that tumor for a long time, and the tumor would regrow in place of what was cut, until it was finally gone, and she was cured of it.
فتحيّلت وكويت الورم داخل الحلق علّيّة فتوقّف عن الزيادة ثمّ سافرت عن الجهة ولم أعلم ما فعل اللّه بها بعدى،.	I treated and removed the tumor from inside her throat, and it ceased to grow, then I stopped attending to it, and I did not know what God did with it afterwards.
الفصل السابع والثلاثون.	The 37th Chapter.
فى قطع ورم اللهاة.	On the excision of a lip and the nose.
الذى يسمّى عنبة اذا انحدرت نزلة الى اللهاة وتورّمت وكانت بيضاء مستطيلة فإنّها تسمّى عمودا وإن كانت غليظة الأسفل مستديرة فإنّها تسمّى عنبة، اذا عولجت بما ذكرنا فى التقسيم فلم ينجع العلاج.	That which is called a nose if it has grown downwards towards the nostrils and has become bulbous, and was originally white and straight, then it is called a trunk; and if it was rough, flat, and bulbous, then it is called a nose. If you treat it with what we mentioned in the section on excision, the treatment will not be successful.
ورأيت الورم الحارّ قد سكن عنها وكانت رقيقة فينبغى أن تقطعها وما كان منها مجتمعا مستديرا ولم يكن لها طول وكانت دميّة او كمدة اللون او سوداء او لا حسّ لها فينبغى أن تجتنب قطعها.	And I have seen a hot tumor that has settled on it, and it was thin, so it seemed that it should be excised, and there was no gathered or bulbous matter in it, and it had no length, and it was dim, or of a bluish color, or black, or without sensation; so it seemed that its excision should be avoided.
ففيه غرر على العليل، فينبغى اذا رأيتها على الصفة التى ذكرت من بياضها وطولها أن تجلس العليل بحذاء الشمس وتكبس لسانه بالآلة التى تقدّم وصفها ثمّ تغرز الصنّارة فى العنبة.	Then there is a scar on the patient, so it seems that if you see it on the aforementioned condition from its whiteness and length, you should position the patient in a way that avoids direct sunlight and restrain their tongue with the aforementioned instrument, then describe it, and afterwards insert the scalpel into the nose.
وتجذبها الى أسفل وتقطعها بأحد الآلتين اللتين ذكرتهما فى قطع اللوزتين وينبغى أن لا تقطع منها إلّا الذى زاد على الأمر الطبيعى بلا مزيد لأنّك إن قطعت منها أكثر أضررت بالصوت والكلام.	And draw it downwards and excise it with one of the two instruments mentioned in the section on excision of the polyp, and it is preferable not to excise more than what exceeds the natural shape without excess, because if you excise more, you will harm the sound and speech.
ثمّ بعد القطع تستعمل ما وصفنا فى قطع اللوزتين وتعالجها حتّى تبرأ، فإن جبن العليل عن قطعها فينبغى ان تستعمل الحيلة فى كّيها من غير خوف ولا حذر ووجه الكىّ فيها إنّما هو بالدواء الحادّ وهو أن تضع رأس العليل فى حجرك.	Then, after excision, you should use what we described in the section on excision of the polyp, and treat it until it heals. If the patient is afraid of excision, it is preferable to use deception when treating them without fear or caution, and direct their gaze towards the direction that is away from the medication, which is the sharp medicine, and that is to put the patient's head in your lap.
ثمّ تكبس لسانه بالآلة التى ذكرنا ثمّ تأخذ من الماء الحادّ الذى ذكرت فى باب الكىّ وتعجن به جيرا غير مطفأ وتجعله لا ثخينا ولا رقيقا وتملأ منه تقعير هذه الآلة وهذه صورتها:.	Then, you should restrain their tongue with the instrument that we mentioned, then take some of the sharp medication that we mentioned in the chapter on medication, and mix it with a type of gum that is not bitter or sharp, and make it neither thick nor thin, and fill this instrument with it, and its shape is like this.
يكون طرفها الذى تضع فيه الدواء له تقعير كتقعير ملعقة المرود، وتضع الآلة بالدواء على اللهاة نفسها والعليل مضطجع على جنبه ليسيل اللعاب من فيه من داخل حلقه لئلّا ينزل منه الى حلقه شىء فيؤذيه.	Here is the translation:
ثمّ تمسك يدك بالدواء وأنت تعصرها على اللهاة قدر نصف ساعة حتّى تراها قد اسودّت وسكن لدغ الدواء، وإن شئت أن تأخذ قطنة فتلفّها على طرف مرود وتبلّ القطنة فى الدواء.	Here is the translation:
وتدخل المرود بالقطنة فى أنبوبة من فوق حتّى تلصق القطنة على اللهاة تفعل ذلك مرارا حتّى تبلغ ما تريد من كىّ العنبة ثمّ تتركها فإنها تذبل وتصقط بعد ثلاثة أيّام او أربعة، فإن احتجت أن تعيد الدواء أعدته.	Here is the translation:
وبعد الكىّ تمسح حول العنبة بقطنة مشرّبة فى السمن وتنشف بها ما حولها من الدواء، ثمّ يتمضمض بالماء البارد وتعالج من خارج بالتنطيلات ومن داخل بالغراغر حتّى يبرأ، فهذا النوع من العلاج أسلم من القطع وأبعد من الخوف.	After the surgical incision around the abscess with a curved needle in the direction of the sinus and evacuating what is around it from the medicine, then irrigating with cold water and treating from outside with compresses and from inside with suppositories until it heals. This type of treatment is safer than amputation and farther from anxiety.
وقد تعالج اللهاة أيضا بما هو ألطف من الكّى والقطع تعالج بالبخور على هذه الصفة، يؤخذ فوذنج وزوفا وصعتر وسذاب وشيح وبابونج وقيصوم ونحوها من الحشائش فتجمعها كلّها او بعضها فى قدر وتغمر فى الخلّ.	And the wound may also be treated with what is gentler than a surgical incision and amputation, treating it with perfumes in this manner: taking lavender and rose-water and vinegar and rose oil and myrrh and others from the aromatic plants, gathering all of them or some of them in a vessel and immersing them in the dissolution.
وتغلى والقدر مطيّنة بطين الحكمة وتكون فى وسط الغطاء ثقبة تركّب عليها الآلة المجوّفة على هذه الصفة تصنع من فضّة او نحاس:.	And a perforated vessel is placed, filled with the dissolved medicine, and it is in the middle of the bandage, a small tube is attached to it, made from silver or copper.
وتدخل الطرف الذى فيه الرمّانة فى فم العليل حتّى يصعد البخار الى اللهاة على الأنبوبة حتّى تتكمّد اللهاة نعمّا ثمّ تعيد عليها مرّات حتّى تذبل، وإيّاك أن تصنع هذا العلاج فى أوّل حدوث الورم.	And the end with the cannula is inserted into the mouth of the funnel until the vapor rises to the wound through the tube, until it cools down well, then it is repeated on it several times until it becomes dry, and be careful that you perform this treatment at the beginning of the tumor's appearance.
فإنّه كثيرا ما تزيد فى الورم وإنّما ينبغى أن تفعل ذلك عند انحطاط ورمها الحارّ، فإن لم تحضرك هذه الآلة فخذ قصبة فركّب فى طرفها قشرة بيضة لئلّا يحترق فم العليل.	For it often increases in the tumor, and it is not suitable that you do that when the tumor's inflammation subsides. If you don't have this instrument, take a silver tube and fix a egg-white membrane on its end so that it doesn't obstruct the mouth of the funnel.
لأنّ قشرة البيضة تمنع حرّ البخار أن يحرق الفم وهذا من جيّد العلاج مع سلامته،.	Because the egg-white membrane prevents the vapor from burning the mouth, and this is one of the best treatments with its safety.
الفصل الثامن والثلاثون.	Chapter 38.
فى إخراج الشوك وما ينشب فى الحلق من غير ذلك.	On extracting the splinters and what grows in the throat besides that.
كثيرا ما ينشب فى الحلق عظم او شوك سمك او غير ذلك فينبغى أن تخرج منها ما كان ظاهرا يقع عليه البصر بعد أن تكبس اللسان بالآلة عند الشمس.	Many things grow in the throat, a bone or a fish's splinter or something else, it is necessary to extract from it what appears obvious after the tongue is pressed with an instrument under the sunlight.
ليتبيّن لك ما فى الحلق، وما لم يظهر لك وتوارى فى الحلق فينبغى أن تقيّئ العليل قبل أن ينهضم طعامه فى معدته فربّما خرج الشىء الناشب بالقئ او يتبلّع العليل قطعة لفت او أصل خسّة.	Here is the translation of the excerpt:
او يتبلّع لقمة من خبز يابس او تأخذ قطعة من الإسفنج البحرىّ الليّن فتربطها فى خيط ثمّ يتبلّعها فإذا وصلت الى موضع الشوكة جذّب الخيط بسرعة تفعل ذلك مرّات.	He takes a piece of cloth from a old rag or takes a piece of spongy sea foam, and ties it with a thread, then he bandages it; if it reaches the place of the wound, he pulls the thread quickly to do that several times.
فكثيرا ما تلصق الشوكة او العظم فيها وتخرج، فإن لم تخرج بما ذكرنا وإلّا فاستعمل آلة من رصاص على هذه الصورة:.	If the wound is deep and the bone is stuck in it and does not come out, and if it did not come out with what we mentioned earlier, then use an instrument like a file on this pattern.
تكون أغلظ من المرود قليلا وفى طرفها تعقيف يدخلها العليل فى حلقه برفق وهو رافع رأسه الى فوق ويتحفّظ من مسّ حنجرته لئلّا يحدث به سعال ويدفع به العظم او الشوكة، او يدخلها الطبيب بيده،.	It is a little thicker than the rood and has a curved end, which the doctor inserts into the cavity with gentleness, raising his head above it, and he takes care not to touch the trachea lest he causes coughing or makes the bone or wound slip in, or the doctor inserts it with his hand.
وإدخال العليل لها أحسن لعلمه بموضع الشىء الناشب ويدفع الى أسفل او يجذب يده بالآلة الى فوق كلّ ذلك على قدر ما يتهيّأ له حتّى يخرج،.	And the insertion of the instrument is better for him to know the position of the dislocated bone and he pushes it downwards or pulls it upwards with the instrument, all according to what he can manage until it comes out.
الفصل التاسع والثلاثون.	Chapter 39.
فى إخراج العلق الناشب فى الحلق.	On extracting a dislocated bone in the throat.
اذا عالجت العلقة بما ذكرنا فى التقسيم من العلاج بالأدوية ولم ينجع فانظر حينئذ فى حلق العليل عند الشمس بعد أن تكبس لسانه بالآلة التى وصفت لك.	If you treated the dislocation with what we mentioned in the chapter on treatment with medications and it did not heal, then look at that time into the throat of the patient when he is in a sunny place after his tongue is pressed with the instrument that I described to you.
فإن وقع بصرك على العلقة فاجذبها بصنّارة صغيرة او بجفت لطيف محكم فإن لم تتمكّن بها وإلّا فخذ أنبوبة مجوّفة فأدخلها فى حلق العليل الى قرب العلقة ثمّ أدخل فى جوف الأنبوبة حديدة محمية بالنار.	If your gaze falls on the bone, then pull it with a small forceps or with a gentle, firm grip; if you are not able to grasp it, then take a curved tube and insert it into the patient's throat near the bone, then insert into the tube a thin, curved rod guided by the light.
تفعل ذلك مرّات ويصبر العليل عن الماء يومه كلّه، ثمّ يأخذ إجّانة مملوءة ماء باردا ويفتح فمه فيه ويتمضمض به ولا يبلع منه نقطة ويحرّك الماء حينا بعد حين بيده.	Do that repeatedly, and the patient will be kept away from water all day, then he takes a jug filled with cold water and opens his mouth into it and gargles with it, without swallowing a single drop, and moves the water around in his mouth with his hand.
فإنّ العلقة تسقط على المقام اذا أحسّت بالماء، فإن لم تخرج بما وصفنا فتبخّر الحلق بالبول وبالحلتيت بالآلة التى وصفت فى بخور اللهاة تفعل ذلك مرّات فإنّها تسقط.	If the ligature is applied on the wound when it senses moisture, and if it does not come out as we described, then the ring should be constricted by the urine and the suture material that was mentioned in the description of the dressing, and this should be done repeatedly until it falls off.
ووجه العمل فى البخور أن تأخذ قدرا فيها جمر حمّى بالنار والقدر مغطيّة بّغطاء فى وسطه ثقبة فتركّب فى تلك الثقبة طرف الآلة ثمّ تلقى البخور ويضع العليل فمه فى طرف الأنبوبة ويغلّق فمه لئلّا يخرج البخور حتّى يعلم أنّ البخور قد وصل الى حلقه.	And direct the work in the dressing to take a measure of it, a hot cupping glass is placed over it, and its covering is covered with a piece of cloth, then it is fixed on that cloth at the end of the instrument, then the dressing is lifted and the doctor's finger is inserted into the end of the tube, and he feels with his finger until he knows that the dressing has reached the ligature.
فإنّ العلقة تسقط على المقام، فإن لم تسقط وإلّا فيعاد البخور مرّات ويصبر العليل للعطش ويأكل المالح والثوم ولا يشرب ماء فلا بدّ أن تخرج بهذا التدبير، وهذه صورة آلة تجتذب بها العلقة من الحلق اذا وقع عليها البصر.	If the ligature does not fall off on the wound, and it does not fall off unless the dressing is repeated several times, and the doctor waits for the abscess to mature and eats salt and thyme, and does not drink water, so it must come out with this treatment. And this is a picture of an instrument used to extract the ligature from the throat if it happens to be seen on it.
وهى تشبه الكلاليب كما ترى إلّا أنّ لها هذا التعقيف الذى يدخل الى الحلق وطرفاها تشبه فم الطائر فيها خشونة المبرد اذا فبضت على شىء لم تتركه:.	And it resembles the scissors as you see, except that it has this curved part that enters the throat and its end resembles a bird's beak, having a roughness like a file, if it is bent on something it does not leave it.
وآلة أخرى يكبس بها اللسان وهى حلقة واسعة من حديد بقدر ما تسع الفم فوق اللسان تدخل فى الفم قائمة على جانبها فيبقى الفم مفتوحا بغير إرادة العليل ولا يستطيع أن يقلعها البتّة حتّى تنحيها:.	And another instrument is used to grasp the tongue, and it is a wide iron ring, as much as the mouth can open over the tongue, it enters into the mouth, leaning on its side, so the mouth remains open without the doctor's effort, and he cannot remove it until it is relaxed.
صفة الآلة التى يفتح بها الفم على هذا القياس بعينه.	A picture of the instrument that opens the mouth to this measure, specifically.
الفصل الأربعون.	Chapter 44.
فيهجعل من الكلام فى بطّ الأورام وشقّها.	There is a section on extracting speech from the tumors of the larynx and cutting them.
الأورام أنواعها كثيرة متفنّنة على حسب ما يأتّى ذكرها واحدا واحدا فى هذا الكتاب وهى تختلف فى بطّها وشقّها من وجهين أحدهما من نوع الورم فى نفسه وما يحوى من الرطوبات.	Tumors have many types, varying according to what will be mentioned one by one in this book, and it differs in its extraction and cutting from two aspects: one of them is the type of tumor itself and what it includes of softness.
والنوع الثانى من قبل المواضع التى تحدث فيها من البدن لأنّ الورم الحادث فى الرأس غير الورم الحادث فى المقعدة والورم الحادث فى موضع لحمىّ غير الورم الحادث فى مفصل لكلّ واحد منها حكم من العمل.	The second type from before the injuries that occur in the body because the abscess that occurs in the head is not like the abscess that occurs in the waist and the abscess that occurs in a limb is not like the abscess that occurs in a joint, each of which has a ruling from the work.
ومن الأورام ما لا ينبغى أن تبطّ إلّا بعد نضج القيح فيها وكماله ومنها ما ينبغى أن تبطّ وهى نيّة لم تنضج على التمام مثل الأورام التى تكون قريبة من المفاصل.	And from the abscesses, there are those that should not be opened until the pus has matured in them and its cover, and some of them can be opened while they are still green, like the abscesses that are near the joints.
لأنّ الورم اذا حدث بقرب مفصل وطال أمره حتّى يتعفّن ما حوله ربّما أفسد رباطات او عصب ذلك المفصل فيكون سببا لزمانة ذلك العضو او يكون الورم بقرب عضو رئيس.	Because if an abscess occurs near a joint and its matter reaches it, it may putrefy what is around it, perhaps damaging the ligaments or nerve of that joint, causing disability to that limb or being an abscess near a principal organ.
لأنّك اذا أخّرت بطّه حتّى ينضج أضررت بذلك العضو الرئيس او يكون بقرب المقعدة فتبطّه نيّا وإنّما وجب أن تبطّ الورم نيّا غير كامل النضج الذى يكون بقرب المقعدة لئلّا يعفن الغور فينفذ الى داخل المقعدة فيصير ناصورا.	Because if you delay opening it until it matures, you may harm that principal limb or it may be near the waist, so you open it while it is still green, and it is necessary to open the abscess while it is not fully matured, which is near the waist, lest the pus flows into the belly and becomes a deadly corruption.
ويصير فى حدّ ما لا يبرأ، وينبغى أن تعلم وقت بطّ الأورام التى قد نضجت على التمام وهو عند سكون وجع الورم وذهاب الحمّى ونقصان الحمرة والضربان وتخدّد رأس الورم وسائر العلامات.	And it becomes a condition that cannot be cured, and it is necessary to learn the time for opening the abscesses that have matured on the surface, which is when there is numbness and pain of the abscess, and diminution of heat and redness, and a decrease in throbbing, and a decline of the head of the abscess, and other signs.
وينبغى أن توقع البطّ فى أسفل موضع من الورم إن أمكن ذلك ليكون أسهل لسيلان المدّة الى أسفل او فى أرقّ موضع من الورم وأشدّ نتوّا، وليكن البطّ ذاهبا فى طول البدن إن كانت الأورام فى نحو اليدين والرجلين.	And it is necessary to make the incision at the lowest point of the abscess, if possible, so that the flow of pus may be easier and less painful, or at a more convenient point of the abscess, and stronger tension. And let the incision be in a longitudinal direction along the body if the abscesses are on the hands and feet.
ومواضع العضلات والأوتار والعصب والشريانات وبالجملة فى جميع المواضع المستوية التى لا انثناء لها، وأمّا التى تنثنى فليذهب بالبطّ على حسب ذلك الموضع وأمّا اذا كان الورم فى المواضع اللحميّة فالأجود أن تترك بطّه.	And consider the positions of the muscles, tendons, nerves, and sinews, and in general, all the flat surfaces that do not bulge, and as for those that do bulge, let the incision be according to that position, and if the abscess is in a fleshy place, it is better to leave the incision deep.
حتّى يستحكم نضجه كما قلنا على التمام فإنّك إن بططته قبل ذلك طال سيلان الصديد منه وكان كثير الوضر والوسخ وربّما صلبت شفتاه وغوره، وبعض الأورام قد تبطّ على عرض البدن عند الضرورة او على حسب ما يحتاج اليه العضو.	You should not trust the appearance of a wound as we mentioned earlier, for it may seem to be improving before it worsens. Many wounds have a lot of pus and discharge, and sometimes their edges become hard and swollen, while some tumors may protrude from the surface of the body at the time of inflammation or according to what the member needs.
وينبغى أن تستعمل فى الأورام الصغار بطّا واحدا وفى الأورام الكبار بطّا واسعا او شقوقا كثيرة على قدر عظم الورم، وقد يكون من الأورام ما ينبغى أن يقوّر الجلد ويقطع اذا كان قد صار كالخرقة.	It is necessary to use a single blunt instrument for small tumors and a broad or multiple pointed instruments for large tumors, according to the size of the tumor's bone. Some tumors may require that the skin be sewn and cut if it has become like a crust.
وصار فى حدّ ما قد مات مثل ما يعرض فى كثير من الدبيلات والمخابئ، ومنها ما يشقّ شقّا ذا ثلاث زوايا ومنها ما يقطع منه كشكل ورقة الآس كورم الأربيّة.	It has been observed in a limit of what has died, as is shown in many ulcers and abscesses. Among them are those that have three angular edges and others that are cut out in the shape of a leaf, like the Arabian abscess.
ومنها ما يستعمل فيه الشقّ المستدير والشقّ الهلالىّ ونحوها من الشقوق، وما لم يكن له رأس مثل الأورام الملس المسطّحة فينبغى أن يبطّ بطّا بسيطا فقط، وينبغى اذا كان الورم عظيما وقد جمع مدّة كثيرة وبططته أن لا تبادر فتخرج القيح كلّه فى ذلك الوقت.	And among them are those that use the curved scalpel and the crescent-shaped scalpel, and similar instruments. And what does not have a head, such as flat and smooth tumors, it is necessary to use only a simple instrument, and if the tumor is large and has collected much pus, it should not be touched, so as not to let all the pus come out at that time.
بل أخرج منه بعضه ثمّ شدّ الورم الى يوم آخر ثمّ أخرج بعض القيح أيضا تفعل ذلك مرارا على تدريج حتّى تخرج جميعه.	But rather extract some of it, then compress the tumor until another day, and then extract some of the pus as well. Do that repeatedly in gradual steps until all of it comes out.
ولا سيّما إن كان العليل ضعيف القوّة او امرأة حاملا او طفلا صغيرا او شيخا هرم فإن الروح الحيوانىّ كثيرا ما ينحلّ مع خروج القيح دفعة فربّما مات العليل وأنت لاتشعر فاحذر هذاالباب حذراعظيما.	And beware, for if the patient is weak in strength, or a pregnant woman, or a small child, or an old man, then the vital spirit often departs with the sudden exit of pus, and perhaps the patient may die while you do not perceive it. Be cautious of this chapter, cautioning greatly.
وبعد بطّك لهذه الأورام ينبغى أن تمسح الجرح وتنظر فإن كان جرح الورم صغيرا او كان الشقّ واحدا بسيطا فاستعمل الفتل من الكتان او القطن البالى وإن كان الورم عظيما وكانت شقوق البطّ كثيرة.	And after operating on these tumors, it is necessary to dress the wound and observe. If the tumor's wound is small or the incision is a single simple one, then use a dressing of cotton or soft bandage. And if the tumor is large and there are many incisions,PostalCodes
فينبغى أن تدخل فى كلّ شقّ فتيلة حتّى يصل بعضها الى بعض، وإن كان الورم قد قطعت من الجلد بعضه او قوّرته فينبغى أن تحشوه بالقطن البالى او بهدب الكتان من غير رطوبة وتشدّه الى اليوم الثالث.	You should enter into every wound a tentacle until some of them reach each other, and if the tumor has been cut off from the skin or has been bent over, you should smooth it with a broad spatula or with a single-edged scalpel without making it rough and tighten it up to the third day.
ثمّ تنزعه وتعالجه بما ينبغى من المراهم حتّى يبرأ، فإن عرض نزف دم فى حين عملك فاستعمل الماء البارد والخلّ بعد أن تشرّب فيهما خرقة كتان وتحملها على الموضع من النزف مرّات.	Then remove it and dress it with what is suitable of the medications until it heals. If there appears to be a flow of blood during your operation, use cold water and vinegar after you have applied a compress of a single-edged scalpel, and apply it to the place of the bleeding several times.
فإن دام النزف فينبغى أن تستعمل التدبير والعلاج والذرورات التى وصفنا فى مواضع كثيرة من كتابنا هذا ومن التقسيم، فإن كنت فى زمن الشتاء وكان موضع الورم كثير العصب فينبغى أن تبلّ الرفائد بشراب وزيت حارّ.	If the bleeding persists, it is suitable to use bandages and treatments and medications that we have described in many places of this book of ours and from the section. If you are in winter time and the place of the tumor has many nerves, it is suitable to apply a poultice with warm water and hot oil.
وتضعها على الموضع، وإن كنت فى الصيف وكانت المواضع لحميّة فينبغى أن تحمل الرفائد مشرّبة بماء وزيت او بشراب وزيت كلّ ذلك بارد حتّى اذا كان اليوم الثالث كما قلنا فينبغى أن تحلّ الورم وتمسحه.	And apply it to the place, and if you are in summer and the places were humid, it is suitable to apply a poultice cooled with water or oil or rose water, all of that cold, until the third day as we mentioned, it is suitable to open the tumor and massage it.
وتستعمل فى علاجه ما شاكله حتّى يبرأ، فهذا ما تحتاج اليه من معرفة علاج الأورام على الجملة وأمّا طريق التفصيل فقد ذكرت كلّ ورم كيف السبيل الى علاجه مبوّبا ملخّصا،.	And use in its treatment what is suitable for it until it heals, and this is what you need to know about treating tumors on the skin, and as for the method of detailed explanation, I have mentioned every tumor and how to treat it thoroughly.
الفصل الحادى والأربعون.	The Thirty-Sixth Chapter.
فى الشقّ على الأورام التى تعرض فى جلدة الرأس.	On incisions on the tumors that appear on the scalp of the head.
تعرض فى جلدة الرأس أورام صغار وهى من أنواع السلع تحويها صفاقات هى لها ظروف كأنّها حوصلة الدجاجة وأنواعها كثيرة فمنها شحميّة ومنها ما تحوى رطوبة تشبه الحمأة.	There appear on the scalp of the head small tumors and they are from types of warts that have thin skin, and they have conditions like a pimple of a hen's egg and their types are many, some are hot and some have roughness resembling eczema.
ومنها ما تحوى رطوبة تشبه الدشيش والحساء ونحو ذلك ومنها ما هى متحجّرة صلبة وكلّها لا خطر فى شقّها وإخراجها ما لم يعترضك عند شقّها شريان.	Some of them are fleshy, resembling the flesh and the skin, and similar to that, and some are brittle and hard, with no danger in cutting into them and extracting what you want without encountering any obstruction when you cut into them, as long as a blood vessel does not get in your way.
والعمل فى شقّها أن تسبرها أوّلا بالآلة التى تأتى صورتها بعد هذا التى تسمّى المدسّ حتّى تعلم ما تحوى فإن كان الذى تحوى رطوبة فشقّها شقّا على الطول شقّا بسيطا على هذه الصورة:.	The operation in cutting into them is to dissect them first with the instrument that makes its shape after this, which is called a scalpel, until you learn what is inside; if what is inside is fleshy, then cut into it longitudinally, making a simple cut of this sort.
وابدأ بالشقّ من خطّ ~ب~ الى خطّ ~ج~ فإذا تفرّغت الرطوبة فاسلخ الكيس الذى كان يحوى تلك الرطوبة واقطعه جميعه ولا تترك منه شيئا البتّة فكثيرا ما يعود اذا بقى منه شىء.	Start the incision from line ~b~ to line ~j~, and if you have evacuated the flesh, then remove the capsule that was containing that flesh, and excise it completely, leaving nothing behind, for if much of it remains, it will recur.
ثمّ اغمس قطنة فى المرهم الصرىّ إن حضر وإلّا فى ماء الملح واملأ به الجرح واتركه الى يوم آخر فإنّه يأكل ما بقى من الكيس، ثمّ أعد عليه القطنة بالمصرىّ ثانية وثالثة إن احتجت الى ذلك.	Then insert a tampon into the wound, and if it is in a location that can be accessed, put it in a salty solution and bandage it, and leave it until the next day, for it will absorb what remains of the capsule; then reapply the tampon with the salty solution a second and third time, if you need to do so.
حتّى تتيقّن أنّه لم يبق من الكيس شىء فحينئذ عالج الجرح بالمراهم حتّى يبرأ، وإن كان الورم تحوى سلعة شحميّة فشقّها على هذه الصورة:.	Until you are certain that nothing of the capsule remains, then treat the wound with ointments until it heals; and if the tumor contains a sebaceous material, then cut into it in this way:
شقّا مصلّبا والق الصنانير فى شفتى الجرح واسلخه من كلّ جهة ورُمْ جهدك فى إخراج الصفاق الذى يحويها، فإن اعترضك شريان فاصنع ما وصفت لك بعد وكذلك فاصنع فى الورم إن كان متحجّرا من الشقّ.	Cut obliquely and place the scissors in the sides of the wound, and remove it from every direction; and strive to extract the fascia that contains it. If a blood vessel obstructs you, then do what I have described to you previously, and likewise do it with the tumor if it is brittle from the cutting.
والعلاج بعينه على ما ذكرت، والشقّ على الورم المتحجّر أسهل لأنّه قليل الدم والرطوبة وقد يكون بعض هذه الأورام التى فى الرأس فى بعض الناس لا رطوبة معها البتّة وذلك أنّى شققت على ورم فى.	The treatment is specific to what I have mentioned, and cutting into a brittle tumor is easier because it has little blood and flesh; and some of these tumors in the head may not have much flesh with them at all, which is why I have cut into a tumor.
رأس امرأة عجوز فألفيت الورم كالحجر الصلد خشنا أبيض لم يستطع على كسره ولو رمى به أحد لشجّه، وما كان من سائر الأورام الحادثة فى الرأس غير هذه كالأورام التى تعرض فى رؤوس الصبيان.	Here is the translation:
وعند أصول الآذان فشقّها كلّها شقّا بسيطا واجعل بطّها من أسافلها ليسهل جرى المادّة الى أسفل ثمّ عالجها بما يوافقها من العلاج،.	When treating the nose, divide it into sections with simple incisions and place a drain at its base to facilitate the evacuation of the matter, then treat it with suitable remedies.
الفصل الثانى والأربعون.	Chapter 42.
فى الشقّ على الخنازير التى تعرض فى العنق كثيرا ما تعرض هذه الأورام فى العنق وتحت الإبطين وفى الأربيّتين وقد تعرض فى سائر الجسم ويكون الذى يعرض فى العنق منها واحدة ويكون كثيرة ويتولّد بعضها من بعض.	There are incisions on the humps that appear frequently on the neck, and these tumors also appear on the neck and under the armpits, and in the axillae, and they can appear on other parts of the body, and what appears on the neck is one, and it is many, and some of them are connected to each other.
وكلّ خنزيرة منها تكون فى داخل صفاق خاصّ لها كما يكون فى السلع وأورام الرأس كما وصفنا، وأنواع هذه الخنازير كثيرة منها متحجّرة ومنها ما تحوى رطوبات ومنها خبيثة لا تجيب الى العلاج،.	And each of these humps has a specific layer surrounding it, just like the ulcers and tumors of the head, as we have described, and there are many types of these humps, some of which are inflamed, some contain pus, and some are malignant and do not respond to treatment.
فما رأيت منها حسنة الحال فى اللمس وكان ظاهرها قريبا من لون الجلد تتحرّك الى كلّ جهة ولم تكن ملتزقة بعصب العنق ولا بوداج ولا شريان ولا كانت غائرة.	What I have observed of it is that its condition was good to the touch, and its appearance was close to the color of the skin, moving towards every direction, and it did not adhere to the neck's nerve, or vein, or artery, and it was not deep.
فينبغى أن تشقّها شقّا بسيطا من فوق الى أسفل البدن على هذا الشكل من خطّ ~ج~ الى خطّ ~ب~:.	It is necessary to make a simple incision from top to bottom of the body in this shape, from line ~j~ to line ~b~.
وتسلخها من كلّ جهة وتمدّ شفتى الجلد بصنّارة او بصنّارتين او بصنانير كثيرة إن احتجت الى ذلك كما قلنا فى أورام الرأس وتخرجها قليلا قليلا وتكون على رقبة ألّا تقطع عرقا او عصبا وليكن المبضع ليس بحادّ جدّا.	And dissect it from every direction, and stretch the skin with a suture or two sutures or many sutures if necessary, as we have mentioned in tumors of the head, and remove it little by little, being careful not to cut an artery or nerve, and let the excision be not too deep.
لئلّا تزيد يدك بالقطع او يقلق العليل فتقطع ما لا تحتاج الى قطعه، فإن قطعت عرقا او شريانا وعاقك عن العمل فضع فى الجرح زاجا مسحوقا او بعض الذرورات التى تقطع الدم.	So that you do not increase the cutting or sever the connection, and you cut only what is necessary to cut, for if you cut an artery or a nerve, and it hinders your work, put on the wound a dressing of wax or some of the medications that stop the bleeding.
وشدّ الجرح واتركه حتّى تسكن حدّة الورم ويسترخى الجرح ويهمّ بالتعفّن فإنّ الدم ينقطع حينئذ فارجع الى عملك حتّى تفرغ، ثمّ تفتّش بأصبعك السبّابة إن كان بقى ثمّ خنازير أخر صغار فتقطعها وتنقيها.	Close the wound and leave it until the tumor's margin settles, and the wound heals, and it is prepared for the dressing. For if the blood stops then, return to your work until you are finished. Then, feel with your finger to see if there remain any small humps, and excise them and clean them.
فإن كان فى أصل الخنزيرة عرق عظيم فينبغى أن لا تقطع تلك الخنزيرة من أصلها بل ينبغى أن تربطها بخيط مثنى وثيق وتتركها حتّى تسقط من ذاتها من غير مضرّة ثم تحشو الجرح بالقطن البالى وقد غمسته فى المرهم المصرىّ ثمّ تعالجه.	If there is a large artery at the base of the hernia, it should not be cut from its base, but rather tied with a strong and tight ligature, and left until it falls off by itself without harm. Then the wound should be stuffed with cotton soaked in Egyptian balm, which has been mixed with rose water.
وإن قطعت الخنزيرة كلّها فينبغى أن تجمع شفتى الجرح وتخيطه من ساعته بعد أن تعلم أنّه لم تبق فضلة البتّة فإن رأيت أنّه قد بقيت فضلة لعظم الخنزيرة.	And if you have excised the entire hernia, it is necessary to bring together the edges of the wound and suture them from the inside, after making sure that no residue of the hernial sac remains, for if you see that a remnant of the bony hernia has remained.
فينبغى أن تقصد بالقطع لأصلها وأسّها وتستعمل الخياطة وما ذكرناه، وما كان من الخنازير تحوى رطوبات فتبطّها بطّا بسيطا حيث يظهر لك موضع نضجها واجعل البطّ ممّا يلى الأسفل كما قلنا.	It is necessary to dissect to its base and ligate it, and use the sutures mentioned earlier. And if there are hernias that contain fluids, they should be tapped with a simple trocar where you can see the site of their collection, and the fluid should be drained from the lowest part as we have said.
ثمّ تستعمل بعد البطّ الفتل بالمرهم المصرىّ ونحوه ليأكل ما بقى من الفساد حتّى اذا رأيت الجرح قد نقى فعالجه بالمراهم المنبتة للحم حتّى يبرأ،.	Then, after drainage, apply the Egyptian balm and its like to eliminate any remaining putridity until, if you see the wound has become clean and free of pus, it begins to heal with the applied remedies, until it recovers.
الفصل الثالث والأربعون.	Chapter 34.
فى شقّ الحنجرة عن ورم يحدث فى داخل الحلق.	On the excision of a tumor that occurs inside the throat.
ذكرت الأوائل هذا الشقّ فى الحنجرة ولم أشاهد أحدا فى بلدنا صنعه وهذا نسق كلامهم، أمّا أصحاب الذبحة فينبغى أن يجتنبوا شقّ الحنجرة اذ لا ينتفعون بذلك.	The ancients mentioned this excision of the throat, and I have not seen anyone in our country who has performed it, and this is their method. However, those with experience should avoid excising the throat, as they do not benefit from it.
من أجل أن جميع الأوراد والرئة تكون سقيمة، وأمّا الذين بهم ورم حارّ فى الفم او الحلق او اللوزتين اذا لم تكن علّة فى القصبة فوجب استعمال شقّ الحنجرة للهرب من العطب الذى يكون من الاختناق.	Because all the organs and lung are healthy, and those who have a hot tumor in the mouth or throat or larynx, if there is no obstruction in the trachea, it is necessary to use excision of the throat to remove the damage caused by the constriction.
فينبغى اذا أردنا ذلك أن نشقّ الحنجرة تحت ثلاث دوائر من دوائر القصبة او أربع شقّا صغيرا بالعرض فيما بين دائرتين بقدر ما يكون الشقّ فى الصفاق لا فى الغضروف وهذا الموضع موافق للشقّ.	It is necessary, if we want to do that, to excise the throat under three rings of the tracheal rings or four small transverse incisions between two rings, as much as the excision in the skin and not in the cartilage, and this location is suitable for the excision.
لأنّه عديم اللحم وأوعية الدم منه بعيدة، فإن كان المعالج جبانا فينبغى أن يمدّ جلدة الحلق بصنّارة ثمّ يشقّ الجلد حتّى اذا صار الى القصبة جنّب أوعية الدم إن رأى منها شيئا.	Because the flesh is scarce and the vessel of blood is distant, if the surgeon was ignorant, he would have to extend the incision of the throat with a scraper, then split the skin until he reaches the blood vessel, since he sees something from it.
ثمّ يشقّ الصفاق الذى وصفنا، ويستدلّ على شقّ القصبة من البلغم الذى يخرج منها مع ما تنخزق ومن انقطاع الصوت وتترك الجرح مفتوحا زمانا فإذا زال الوقت الذى كان يتخوّف فيه الاختناق جمعت شفتى الجرح من الجلد.	Then he would split the outer skin and fat, and inspect the incision of the blood vessel from the phlegm that exits with what is evacuated and the voice stops, and leave the wound open for a time. If the time had passed during which it was constricted, he would close the edges of the wound from the skin.
وخطته وحده من غير الغضروف ثمّ تستعمل الأدوية التى تنبت اللحم الى أن يبرأ، قال واضع هذا الكتاب، تفسير جملة هذا الكلام الذى حكيناه إنّما هو اذا رأوا العليل قد سدّ حلقه أحد هذه الأورام التى ذكروا.	And he would suture it by himself, without a cartilage, then use the medications that help the flesh to heal, so I have written this book, explaining the meaning of this phrase which we have mentioned, for it is if they saw the doctor had treated one of these tumors that were mentioned.
وأشرف العليل على الموت وهمّ نفسه أن ينقطع ذهبوا الى شقّ الحنجرة ليتنفّس العليل على موضع الجرح بعض التنفّس ويسلم من الموت وإنّما أمروا بترك الجرح مفتوحا حتّى تتقضّى سورة المرض وتكون سورته ثلاثة أيّام ونحوها.	And the doctor was superior to death and he intended to amputate, they went to incise the trachea to let the doctor suffocate at the site of the wound, some suffocation, and be saved from death. And indeed, they were ordered to leave the wound open until the severity of the disease subsided, and its severity would be three days, and so on.
فحينئذ أمروا بخياطة الجرح وعلاجه حتّى يبرأ، والذى شاهدته بنفسى أنّ خادما أخذت سكّينا فأرسلته على حلقها فقطعت به بعض قصبة الرئة فدعيت الى علاجها فوجدتها تخور كما تخور المذبوح فكشفت عن الجرح.	Then they were ordered to sew the wound and treat it until it heals, and what I saw myself is that a nurse took a needle and sewed it on its throat only, and she inserted some of the lung's vessels, so I directed her to treat it, and I found it to be corrupt like the gangrenous one, so I exposed the wound.
فوجدت الدم الذى خرج من الجرح يسيرا فأيقنت أنّها لم تقطع عرقا ولا وداجا والريح تخرج من الجرح فبدرت فخطت الجرح وعالجته حتّى برئ، ولم يعرض للخادم شىء إلّا بحح فى الصوت لا مزيد.	I found the blood that flowed from the wound was minimal, so I realized that it had not severed an artery or a vein, and the breath was exiting from the wound. So I hastened to suture the wound and treated it until it healed, and nothing appeared to the servant except a slight weakness in the voice, without any further trouble.
وعادت بعد أيّام الى أفضل أحوالها فمن هنا نقول إنّ شقّ الحنجرة لا خطر فيه،.	After a few days, the condition will improve to its best state; from here on, we say that the fracture of the nose bone is not dangerous.
الفصل الرابع والأربعون.	Chapter 44.
فى الشقّ على الورم الذى يعرض فى الحلقوم من خارج ويسمّى فيلة الحلقوم.	On the fracture that occurs on the vertebra that appears externally in the neck and is called a fracture of the neck.
هذا الورم الذى يسمّى فيلة الحلقوم يكون ورما عظيما على لون البدن وهو فى النساء كثير وهو على نوعين.	This vertebra, which is called a fracture of the neck, is a great injury on the body and it occurs frequently in women; it has two types.
إمّا أن يكون طبيعيّا وإمّا أن يكون عرضّيا، فأمّا الطبيعىّ فلا حيلة فيه وأمّا العرضىّ فيكون على ضربين أحدهما شبيه بالسلع الشحميّة والضرب الآخر شبيه بالورم الذى يكون من تعقّد الشريان وفى شقّه خطر.	It is either natural or traumatic; if it is natural, there is no treatment for it, and if it is traumatic, it has two types: one resembles a blow to the neck and the other resembles a fracture that occurs from the twisting of the artery, and in this fracture there is danger.
فلا ينبغى أن تعرض لها بالحديد البتّة إلّا ما كان منها صغيرا إن سبرتها وفتشّتها بالمدّس فألفيتها تشبه السلعة الشحميّة ولم تكن متعلّقة بشىء من العروق فشقّها كما تشقّ على السلع.	It is not proper to apply the iron splint to it, unless it was small, for if you straightened and extended it with a compress, it would resemble a blow to the neck, and it would not be connected to any of the veins, so it would be fractured as if it were a blow.
وتخرجها بما يحويها من الكيس إن كانت فى كيس وإلّا فاستقص جميعها ثمّ عالج الموضع بما ينبغى من العلاج،.	And extract it with what it contains of the cyst, if it was in a cyst, or else remove all of it, then treat the location with what is proper for treatment.
الفصل الخامس والأربعون.	Chapter 44.
فى الشقّ على أنواع السلع.	On the fracture of the types of blows.
السلع أنواعها كثيرة وقد ذكرت جميع أنواعها فى التقسيم وينبغى أن نخبر ههنا الفرق بين السلعة والخراج اذ هو مشكل، فأقول إنّ الخراج يكون معه حرارة وحمّى وأوجاع مخوفة حتّى يهدأ غليان الفضل.	The blows have many types, and I have mentioned all their types in the section. It is necessary to differentiate here between the blow and the abscess, as it is a problem. So, I say that the abscess is accompanied by heat and pain and fearful symptoms until it settles on the nape of the neck.
ويكمل العفن فحينئذ تسكن الحمّى والحدّة، والسلعة لا تكون معها لا حرارة ولا حمّى ولا أوجاع ويحويها كيس صفاقىّ هو لها ظرف خاصّ ويكون على لون البدن ويكون ابتداؤها كالحمّصة وتصير كالبطّيحة وأكبر وأصغر.	The abscess is completed when the pain and inflammation settle, while the blow does not have heat or pain or symptoms, and it contains a cyst of serous fluid that has a special location on the body and occurs as a hematoma and becomes like an ulcer and can be larger or smaller.
وهى على نوعين إمّا شحميّة وإمّا أنّها تحوى رطوبة وألوان الرطوبة تكون كثيرة على ما ذكرت فى التقسيم، فينبغى اذا صرت الى علاج السلعة أن تسبرها وتفتّشها أولا بالآلة التى تسمّى المدسّ على ما تأتى صورتها فىالباب الذىبعد هذا.	It falls into two types, either dry or those that have a great deal of moisture and the moist types are numerous as I mentioned in the section on anatomy, so it is necessary that when you come to treat an abscess, you should open it and dissect it first with the instrument called the scalpel according to its shape as described in the preceding chapter.
قدر عظم الورم، ثمّ أخرج المدسّ وانظر الى ما يخرج فى اثره فإن خرج رطوبة سيّالة أىّ لون كانت فشقّها شقّا بسيطا على ما ذكرت فى سائر الأورام وإن لم تخرج فى اثر المدسّ رطوبة فاعلم أنّها شحميّة.	Feel the bone of the tumor, then bring out the scalpel and look at what comes out afterwards; if a liquid discharge emerges, whatever its color may be, dissect it gently as I mentioned in other tumors; and if no liquid discharge emerges after using the scalpel, know that it is dry.
فشقّ عليها شقّا مصلّبا على هذه الصورة كما أعلمتك، وعلّقها بالصنانير واسلخ الجلد من كلّ جهة برفق وتحفّظ بالكيس إن استطعت على ذلك أن تخرجه صحيحا مع السلعة.	Dissect it with a gentle touch according to this method as I have instructed you, and hold it with forceps, and separate the skin from every direction with gentleness and caution, so that if you are able to do that, you may extract it correctly along with the abscess.
فإن انخرق الكيس عند العمل ولم تستطع إخراجه صحيحا فكثيرا ما يعرض ذلك فأخرجه قطعا قطعا حتّى لا يبقى منه شىء فإنّه إن بقى منه شىء قلّ او كثر عادت السلعة على الأمر الأكثر.	If you perforate the abscess while operating and are unable to extract it correctly, this happens frequently, so extract it piece by piece until nothing remains of it; for even if a small or large part of it remains, the abscess will recur more severely.
فإن غلبك وبقى منه اليسير فاحش الجرح عند فراغك ببعض الذرورات الأكّالة الحادّة وشدّ الجرح وضع من فوقه ما يسكن الورم الحارّ وعالجه بسائر العلاج حتّى يبرأ، فإن كانت السلعة كبيرة فخط شفتيها وعالجها بما يلحم.	If you are overcome and some of it remains, then cleanse the wound when you have finished with some strong, pungent remedies, and tighten the wound and apply what will soothe the painful tumor, and treat it with other treatments until it heals; if the abscess is large, make an incision in its sides and treat it with what will calm it.
فإن اعترضك عرق ضارب او غير ضارب وعرض نزف الدم فبادر فاحش الموضع بالزاج المسحوق واتركه مشدودا يومين او ثلاثة حتّى يتعفّن الجرح ويسكن غليان الدم ثمّ ترجع الى قطع ما بقى من السلعة،.	If a bleeding vessel, either artery or not, is encountered and bleeding occurs, then quickly cleanse the area with the suitable cautery and leave it constricted for two or three days until the wound cools down and the bleeding subsides, then return to removing what remains of the abscess.
الفصل السادس والأربعون.	Chapter 46.
فى صور الآلات.	On the Images of the Instruments.
التى تتصرّف فى الشقّ والبطّ منها صور المدسّات وهى ثلاثة أنواع منها كبار ومنها أوساط ومنها صغار.	Those that are inserted into the wound and their images, which are three types: large, medium, and small.
صورة مدسّ كبير:.	Image of a Large Probe:.
صورة مدسّ وسط:.	Image of a Medium Probe:.
صورة مدسّ صغير:.	Image of a Small Probe:.
تصنع من الحديد الفولاد مربّعة الأطراف محكمة لتسرع الدخول فى الأورام وهذه صور المسابير وتسمّى البرد وهى ثلاثة أنواع أيضا كبار وأوساط وصغار، صورة مسبار كبير:.	It is made of iron, filed to a point at the edges, and sharpened for rapid insertion into the tumors, and these are the images of the scissors, called the "bard", which are also three types: large, medium, and small. Image of a Large Scissor:.
صورة مسبار وسط:.	Image of a Medium Scissor:.
صورة مسبار صغير:.	Image of a Small Scissor:.
تصلح ليفتّش بها الأورام والجراحات والنواصير والمخابئ عن ما داخلها من العظام وغير ذلك تصنع مدوّرة مصقولة ملساء كالمسلّات من نحاس صينىّ او اسبادروية او من نحاس او من حديد او من فضّة وأفضلها ما صنعت من الاسبادروية.	It is used to lift up tumors, abscesses, and ulcers, and to extract what is inside them of bone and other things. It is made curved, smooth, and polished like the scissors from copper, or from tin, or from iron, or from silver, and the best is that which is made from tin.
وقد تصنع مسابير أيضا من الرصاص الأسود وتصلح ليسبر بها النواصير التى يكون فى غورها تعويج لتنعطف بلينها مع ذلك التعويج وهى أيضا ثلاثة أنواع لأنّ منها طوال ومنها أوساط ومنها قصار.	And it is also made into scissors from black lead, and they are used to dissect the ulcers that have a curvature in their inner surfaces, so as to be adapted to their curvature; and they are also three types: long, medium, and short.
على قدر ما يحتاج اليه غور كلّ ناصور ويجعل غلظها على قدر سعة الناصور وضيقه، صورة مسبار من رصاص كبير:.	According to the amount needed for each ulcer, its thickness is made according to the width and narrowness of the ulcer. Image of a Large Scissor from Black Lead:.
صورة مسبار من رصاص وسط:.	Image of a Medium Scissor from Black Lead:.
صورة مسبار من رصاص صغير:.	Image of a Small Scissor from Black Lead:.
صور الصنانير وهى أنواع كثيرة لأنّ منها بسيطة أعنى التى لها مخطاف واحد وهى ثلاثة أنواع كبار وأوساط وصغار ومنها الصنانير العميان وهى ثلاثة أنواع ومنها الصنانير ذات المخطافين وهى ثلاثة أنواع ومنها الصنانير المعوّجة ذات المخطافين.	Images of the Forceps, and they are many types, for there are simple ones, which have a single grip, and they are three types: large, medium, and small; and among them are the compound forceps, which are three types; and among them are the double-grip forceps, which are three types; and among them are the angled forceps with double grips.
وهى ثلاثة أنواع ومنها الصنانير ذات الثلاثة مخاطيف وهى ثلاثة أنواع وجميع هذه الأنوا ع يحتاج كلّ واحد منها فى موضعه، صورة صنّارة بسيطة كبيرة:.	There are three types, and among them is the Triple-branch type, which has three branches; there are three types, and each of these types requires a specific one of them in its position, a simple image of a large Triple-branch type.
صورة صنّارة بسيطة وسط:.	A simple image of a medium-sized Triple-branch type:
صورة صنّارة بسيطة صغيرة:.	A simple image of a small Triple-branch type:
صورة صنّارة عمياء كبيرة:.	A complete image of a large Triple-branch type:
صورة صنّارة عمياء وسط:.	A complete image of a medium-sized Triple-branch type:
صورة صنّارة عمياء صغيرة:.	A complete image of a small Triple-branch type:
صورة صنّارة كبيرة ذات المخطافين:.	A large image of the one with the hooks:
صورة صنّارة وسط ذات المخطافين:.	A medium-sized image of the one with the hooks:
صورة صنّارة صغيرة ذات المخطافين:.	A small image of the one with the hooks:
صورة صنّارة كبيرة ذات الثلاثة مخاطيف:.	A large image of the one with the three branches:
صورة صنّارة وسط ذات الثلاثة مخاطيف:.	A medium-sized image of the one with the three branches:
صورة صنّارة صغيرة ذات الثلاثة مخاطيف:.	A small image of the one with the three branches:
وهذه صور المشارط التى تشقّ وتسلخ بها السلع والأورام وهى ثلاثة أنواع لأنّ منها كبار ومنها متوسّطة ومنها صغار، صورة مشرط كبير:.	And these are the images of the sharers that separate and dissect with them the vessels and the tumours, and they are three types, for there are large ones, medium ones, and small ones. Image of a large sharer:
صورة مشرط متوسّط:.	Image of a medium-sized sharer:
صورة مشرط صغير:.	Image of a small sharer:
تكون أشفارها التى يشقّ بها محدودة والأطراف الأخر غير محدودة وإنّما جعلت كذلك ليستعان بها فى سلخ السلعة عند خوف قطع عرق او عصب وليتآنس بها العليل ويجد الراحة قليلا من الحرقة التى يجدها عند سلخ الورم.	Their edges, which separate with them, are limited and the other ends are not limited, and it was made thus so that it would be of use in dissecting the veins when fearing to cut an artery or nerve, and to ease the pain a little from the anxiety one feels when dissecting a tumour.
وهذه صور المخادع وهى ثلاثة أنواع لأنّ منها كبارا ومنها أوساطا ومنها صغارا، صورة مخدع كبير:.	And these are the images of the dilators, and they are three types, for there are large ones, medium ones, and small ones. Image of a large dilator:
صورة مخدع متوسّط:.	Image of a medium-sized dilator:
صورة مخدع صغير:.	Image of a small dilator:
تصنع من نحاس شبه المرود الذى يكتحل به وفى الطرف الواحد شبيه ملعقة عريضة من طبقتين تكون فى رأسها شفرة المبضع مخفيّة فيه تشبه لسان الطائر تجرى الى داخل وإلى خارج متى أحببت كما ترى،.	Here is the translation:
صور المباضع التى تستر بين الأصابع عند بطّ الأورام لا يشعر بها المريض وهى ثلاثة أنواع لأنّ منها كبارا وأوساطا وصغارا، صورة مبضع كبير:.	The image of the compresses that are placed between the fingers when bandaging the ulcers, which the patient does not feel, and there are three types, including large, medium, and small. A picture of a large compress:
صورة مبضع متوسّط:.	A picture of a medium-sized compress:
صورةّ مبضع صغير:.	A picture of a small compress:
صور المحاجم التى يقطع بها نزف الدم وهى ثلاثة أنواع لأنّ منها كبارا وأوساطا وصغارا، صورة المحجمة الكبيرة:.	The images of the bleed-stoppers that are used to stop the flow of blood, and there are three types, including large, medium, and small. A picture of a large bleed-stopper:
صورة المحجمة المتوسّطة:.	A picture of a medium-sized bleed-stopper:
صورة المحجمة الصغيرة:.	A picture of a small bleed-stopper:
تصنع من نحاس او من صينىّ مدوّرة الى الطول قليلا كما ترى وتكون الى الرقّة، ينبغى أن تكون هذه الأنواع من المحاجم عندك كبارا وصغارا لتقطع بها الدم بسرعة عند الضرورة وعند ما لا يحضرك دواء.	They are made from copper or tin, curved slightly to fit the length, as you see, and they are designed for bleeding, it is necessary that these types of bleed-stoppers be with you in large and small sizes to stop the blood quickly in emergency cases when no medicine is available.
ولكن لا تستعمل فى قطع الدم فى كلّ موضع من البدن وإنّما تستعمل فى المواضع اللحميّة مثل عضل الساق والفخذ وعضل الذراع والثدى والبطن والأربيّة ونحوها من الأعضاء اللحميّة الرطبة.	But they are not used to stop the blood in every part of the body, rather they are used in fleshy places such as the calf muscle, thigh muscle, arm muscle, chest, abdomen, and other fleshy, humid members.
وقد تصنع منها آلات أخر صغار تشبه قشور الفستق على هذه الصورة:.	And some are made into smaller instruments that resemble the shell of a pistachio nut, in this shape:
يقطع بها الدم اذا نزف من موضع الفصد او عند قطع عرق او شريان وقد تصنع منها مدوّرة على هذه الصورة:.	They stop the blood if it flows from a fontanel or when an artery or vein is cut, and some are made curved in this shape:
الفصل السابع والأربعون.	Chapter 47.
فى علج ثدى الرجال.	On the surgical treatment of chest injuries.
الذى تشبه ثدى النساء قد ينتفخ ثدى بعض الناس عند مبلغ الحلم حتّى يشبه ثدى النساء فيبقى وارما قبيحا، فمن كره ذلك فينبغى أن يشقّ على الثدى بشقّ هلالىّ على هذا الشكل.	Some people's chest may become swollen due to an abundance of blood, until it resembles a woman's chest, and remains deformed and disfigured; thus, one who dislikes that should make an incision on the chest with a crescent-shaped incision in this shape.
من خطّ ~ب~ الى خطّ ~ج~:.	From line ~b~ to line ~j~:
ثمّ اسلخ الشحم كلّه ثمّ املأ الجرح من الدواء الملحم ثمّ اجمع شفتى الجرح بالخياطة وعالجه حتّى يبرأ، فإن مال الثدى الى أسفل واسترخى لعظمه كما يعرض للنساء.	Here is the translation:
فينبغى أن تشقّ فى جوانبه العليا بشقّين يشبهان شكلا هلاليّا يتّصل كلّ واحد منهما بالآخر عند نهايتهما حتّى يكون الخطّ الأكبر محيطا بالأصغر على هذه الصورة:.	You should dissect the outer aspect of the thigh with two incisions that resemble the shape of a helix, each one connected to the other at their ends, so that the larger line surrounds the smaller one in this way.
من خطّ ~ب~ الى خطّ ~ج~ ثمّ تسلخ الجلد الذى فيما بين الشقين وتنزع الشحم وتستعمل ما ذكرنا من الخياطة والذرورات وما يحتاج اليه من العلاج حتّى يبرأ.	From line ~b~ to line ~j~, then you should separate the skin that is between the two incisions, and remove the fat and use what we mentioned of sutures and bandages and whatever treatment it requires until it heals.
فإن لم تستوعب قطع ما ينبغى لك قطعه من أجل قلق العليل او من قبل نزف الدم فينبغى أن تحشو الجرح بالقطن المغموس فى المرهم الأكّال وتتركه حتّى يأكل ما بقى من الشحم ثمّ تعالجه حتّى يبرأ،.	If you are not able to stop the bleeding, it is necessary for you to plug the wound with cotton soaked in rose-water and leave it until it absorbs what remains of the fat, then treat it until it heals.
الفصل الثامن والأربعون.	Chapter 38.
فى بطّ الأورام التى تعرض تحت الإبط.	On the tumors that appear under the armpits.
هذه الأورام التى تعرض تحت الإبط هى من نوع الخنازير صلبة يحويها كيس ومنها ما يحوى رطوبات فما كان منها يحوى رطوبات فينبغى أن يشقّ شقّا هلاليّا على هذا الشكل.	These tumors that appear under the armpits are a type of hard abscesses that contain a cyst, and some of them contain pus. If it contains pus, you should make a helical incision in this shape.
من خطّ ~ب~ الى خطّ ~ج~ فإذا استفرغت جميع ما فى الورم من المدّة فاحشه بالقطن البالى واتركه الى يوم آخر ثمّ تنزع القطن.	From line ~b~ to line ~j~, then if you have evacuated all the contents of the tumor, pack it with cotton rose-water and leave it until the next day, then remove the cotton.
وتعالج بالمرهم الموافق لذلك حتّى يبرأ، فإن كان الورم من نوع عقد الخنازير فشقّ عليه كما ذكرنا فى الشقّ على الخنازير سواء فإن تمادى الجرح الى أن يمدّ القيح فاستعمل فيه الكىّ على ما ذكرنا فيما تقدّم،.	And treat it with rose-water suitable for that until it heals. If the tumor is a type of indurated abscess, make an incision on it as we mentioned in the incision on abscesses, even if the wound discharges pus, use the cautery as we mentioned earlier.
الفصل التاسع والأربعون.	Chapter 49.
فى شقّ الورم الذى يعرض من قبل الشريان او الوريد ويسمّى انورسما.	On the incision of the tumor that appears on the artery or vein and is called aneurysma.
اذا جرح الشريان والتحم الجلد الذى فوقه فكثيرا ما يعرض من ذلك ورم وكذلك يعرض أيضا للوريد أن يعرض فيه نفخ وورم.	If you incised the artery and separated the skin above it, it often appears as a tumor, and similarly, it also appears in the vein as an aneurysm and tumor.
والعلامات التى يعرف بها إن كان الورم والنفخ من قبل شريان او من قبل وريد فالورم اذا كان من قبل الشريان يكون مستطيلا مجتمعا فى عمق الجسد وإذا دفعت الورم بأصبعك تحسّ به كأنّ له صريرا.	The signs by which it is known that the tumor and swelling are from before a nerve or a vein, for if the tumor is from before a nerve, it will be a gathered mass in the depth of the body, and if you press on the tumor with your finger, you feel as if it has a root.
والذى يكون من قبل الوريد يكون الورم مستديرا فى ظاهر الجسد، والشقّ على هذه الأورام خطر ولا سيّما ما كان فى الإبط والأربيّة والعنق وفى مواضع كثيرة من الجسد وكانت عظيمة جدّا فينبغى أن تجتنب علاجها بالحديد.	And that which is from before a vein, the tumor will be superficial on the surface of the body, and piercing these tumors is perilous, no matter what was in the armpit, the elbow, the nape, and in many places of the body; and it was very great, therefore it is necessary to avoid treating them with cautery.
وما كان منها أيضا فى الأطراف او فى الرأس فينبغى أن تجتنب، فما كان منها من انتفاخ فم الشريان فشقّ عليه فى الجلد شقّا بالطول ثمّ تفتح الشق بصنّارات ثمّ اسلخ الشريان وخلّصه من الصفاقات.	And what was of it also in the extremities or in the head, it is necessary to avoid, for what was of it from the inflammation of the nerve, so piercing on it in the skin with a longitudinal incision, then opening the incision with forceps, and then freeing the nerve from its adhesions.
حتّى ينكشف ثمّ تدخل تحته إبرة وتنفذها الى الجانب الآخر وتشدّ الشريان بخيط مثنىّ فى موضعين على ما عرّفتك فى سلّ الشريانين اللذين فى الأصداغ ثمّ تنخس بمبضع الموضع الذى بين الرباطين حتّى يخرج الدم الذى فيه كلّه.	Until it is exposed, then you insert a needle underneath and pass it to the other side, and you ligate the nerve with a thread in two places according to what you have learned about ligating the nerves in the temples, then you press on the spot between the muscles until all the blood in it comes out.
وينحلّ الورم ثمّ تستعمل العلاج الذى يولد القيح حتّى تسقط الرباطات ثمّ تعالجه بالمراهم الموافقة لذلك حتّى يبرأ.	And the tumor is resolved, then you use the treatment that induces pus, until the abscesses suppurate, then you treat them with suitable medications until it heals.
فإن كان الورم من قبل شقّ الوريد فينبغى أن تمسك بيدك ما أمكنك من الورم مع الجلد ثمّ تدخل إبرة أسفل من الموضع الذى أمسكت بيدك وتنفذها وفيها خيط مثنىّ حتّى تخرجها من الجانب الآخر.	If the tumor is from before a vein, it is necessary to grasp with your hand what you can of the tumor along with the skin, then you insert a needle beneath the spot where you grasped with your hand and pass it through, and in it a thread, until you bring it out on the other side.
ثمّ تربط به الورم ربطا جيّدا على حسب ما ذكرت لك فى ربط العنبة من الجهتين بطرفى الخيط، فإن خشيت أن تنسلّ الخيوط فأدخل إبرة أخرى بخيط آخر تحت الورم كلّه عند تقاطع الإبرة الأولى.	Then you ligate it to the tumor, a strong ligation according to what I mentioned to you about ligating the vein from two sides with the end of the thread; if you fear that the threads will come loose, then you insert another needle with another thread beneath the entire tumor at the point where the first needle intersects.
وشدّ خيوطك فى أربعة مواضع ثمّ شقّ الورم فى وسطه حتّى اذا خرج ما فيه فاقطع فضلة الجلد واترك ما كان منه مربوطا، ثمّ ضع عليه رفادة قد غمستها فى شراب وزيت.	Here is the translation:
ثمّ تستعمل العلاج الذى يكون بالفتل والمراهم حتّى يبرأ،.	We do not use treatment that involves cauterization and branding until the patient recovers.
الفصل الخمسون.	The Fifty- Fifth Chapter
فىالورم الذى يعرض من التواء العصب.	On the wound that results from fracture of the nerve.
كما يعرض الورم فى الشريان والوريد كذلك يعرض الورم فى العصب اذا حدث فيه ضربة او حدث عن تعب مفرط او نحوه ويكون أكثر ذلك فى مواضع المعصمين والعقب.	Just as the wound appears in the artery and vein, so also does the wound appear in the nerve if it suffers a blow or receives excessive tension or its equivalent, and this is more likely to occur at constricted areas and joints.
وفى كلّ موضع تتحرّك فيه المفاصل وهو ورم جاسئ يشبه لونه سائر الجسد ويكون فى أكثر الأحوال من غير وجع وإذا ضغط بشدّة أحسّ فيه العليل شبه الخدر ولا يكون الورم مجتمعا فى عمق الجسد.	And in every place where the joints move, it is a hidden wound that resembles a pain in another part of the body and it is mostly from nerve damage, and if pressed firmly, it feels like numbness or paralysis, but the wound does not collect deep within the body.
بل يكون تحت الجلد وهو يتحرّك الى كلّ جهة وليس يذهب الى قدّام ولا الى خلف، فما كان منها فى المفاصل فلا ينبغى أن يتعرّض بالحديد فإنّه ربّما أحدث زمانة وما كان منها فى الرأس او فى الجبهة.	But it is under the skin and moves to every direction, neither going forward nor backward, so if it is in the joints, it should not be touched with a cautery, for it might cause a longer duration of time, and if it is in the head or forehead.
فشقّ الجلد بمبضع، فإن كان الورم صغيرا فامسكه بمنقاش واقطعه من الأصل وإن كان كبيرا فعلّقه بصنّارة واسلخه ثمّ انزعه واجمع الجرح بالخياطة وعالجه حتّى يبرأ،.	If you split the skin with an incision, then if the wound is small, sew it up with a needle and cut it off from the root, and if it is large, then strap it with a bandage and squeeze it, then stitch it up and close the wound with a suture until it recovers.
الفصل الحادى والخمسون.	The Forty-Fifth Chapter
فى قطع الثآليل التى تعرض فى البطن.	On the excision of the apostemes that appear in the abdomen.
قد تعرض كثيرا لبعض الناس فى بطونهم وفى سائر أبدانهم ثآليل تسمّى الفطريّة لشبهها بالفطر أصلها رقيق ورأسها غليظ قد تحوّلت شفتاه ويكون منها صغار ويكون منها ما يعظم جدّا.	Many people often have apostemes appearing in their abdomens and other parts of their bodies, called fungal apostemes because they resemble fungus, having a delicate base and a thick head, which may change shape and become small or large, some of which are very painful.
ولقد شاهدت رجلا وفى بطنه ثؤلولان كانت أشبه الأشياء بالفطر لا فرق بيضاء رقيقة الأصل قد تحوّلت شفتاهما وتشقّقت والرطوبة تسيل منهما دائما، فقطعتهما وألقيت فى وزن الواحدة نحو ثمانى عشرة أوقيّة وفى الأخرى نحو سّت أواق.	I have seen a man with two fungal growths in his abdomen, which resembled fungus-like things, white and delicate at the base, which had changed shape and split open, and the pus was pouring out of them constantly; I excised them and weighed one to be around eighteen ounces and the other around six ounces.
والعمل فى قطعها أن تنظر فإن كان العليل مرطوبا وكان لون الثؤلول أبيض رطبا رقيق الأصل فاقطعه بمبضع عريض ولتكن بحضرتك المكاوى فى النار فكثيرا ما يندفع عند قطعها دم كثير.	The operation for it is to look carefully, if the diseased part was soft and its color was white with a thin origin, then cut it off with a curved razor and beware of the vital spirit in the vein, for when you cut it, much blood will flow out.
فتبادر إن غلبك الدم فتكويها، فإن رأيت العليل جبانا وفزع من القطع بالحديد فخذ خيطا من رصاص محكم وشدّ به الثؤلول الذى هذه صفته واتركه يومين ثمّ زد فى شدّ الرصاص فلا تزال تشدّ الرصاص.	If the bleeding overcomes you, then stop it, for if you saw the diseased part bulging and feared cutting with iron, take a thread of strong twisted material and tighten it on the affected part, which has this sign, and leave it for two days, then increase the tightening of the twisted material, and do not loosen it.
كلّما أثّر فى الثؤلول حتّى ينقطع ويسقط من ذاته من غير مؤنة، فإن كان الثؤلول غليظ الأصل ففى قطعه بعض الخوف والغرر ولا سيّما ما كان فى البطن ولكن قد يمكن أن يقطع نصفه او بعضه.	Whenever you operate on the affected part until it is separated and falls off by itself without effort, if the affected part was thick in origin, then there would be some fear and anxiety in cutting it, but not as much as what was in the belly; however, it may be possible to cut half of it or some of it.
ثمّ تكويه لئلّا يعود، ثمّ تعالجه حتّى يبرأ الجرح، واحذر أن تعرض لقطع ثؤلول يكون كمد اللون قليل الحسّ سمج المنظر فإنّه ورم سرطانىّ وسنأتى بذكر السرطان بعد هذا،.	Then stop for a while, then treat it until the wound heals, and beware of making an incision in a part that has little sensation, for it is a cancerous tumor and I have mentioned the sign of cancer after this.
الفصل الثانى والخمسون.	Chapter 52.
فى علاج نتو السرّة.	On the treatment of nasal polyps.
يكون نتو السرّة من أسباب كثيرة إمّا من انشقاق الصفاق الذى على البطن فيخرج منه الثرب او المعاء على ما يعرض فى سائر الفتوق وإمّا من دم ينبعث من وريد او شريان على ما تقدّم وإمّا من ريح تحتقن فيه.	Nasal polyps occur due to various reasons, either from the rupture of the membrane that is on the belly, which comes out with the turbid or clear fluid, as it appears in other cavities, or from blood that flows from a vein or artery, as I have mentioned previously, or from bad air that accumulates therein.
فإن كان من قبل انشقاق الصفاق وخروج الثرب فإنّه يكون لون الورم شبيها بلون الجسد ويكون ليّنا من غير وجع ويظهر مختلف الوضع.	If it is due to the rupture of the membrane and the exit of the turbid fluid, then it will be the color of the tumor similar to the color of the body, and it will be soft without pain, and its appearance will vary.
وإن كان من قبل خروج المعاء فيكون وضعه مع ما وصفنا أشدّ اختلافا فإذا كبسته بأصابعك يغيب ثمّ يرجع وربّما كان معه قرقرة ويعظم كثيرا عند دخول الحمّام والتعب الشديد، فإن كان من قبل الرطوبة فإنّه يكون ليّنا.	And if it is due to the exit of clear fluid, its condition will be as we have described with a severe difference; for if you press on it with your fingers, it will collapse and then return, and sometimes it comes with a crunching sound, and it increases much when entering the bath or during severe fatigue; but if it is due to humidity, it will be soft.
لا يغيب اذا كبسته بيدك ولا يزيد ولا ينقص، فإن كان من قبل الدم فإنّه مع هذه العلامات يظهر الورم الى السواد، فإن كان من قبل لحم نابت فيكون الورم جاسيا صلبا ويثبت على قدر واحد.	It does not diminish if you leave it with the bandage, nor does it increase, nor does it decrease. If it is due to blood, then it appears among these signs, and the tumor turns black. If it is due to a nipped humor, then the tumor becomes hard and settled on one side.
فإن كان من قبل الريح كان لمسه ليّنا، والعمل فى ذلك أن تنظر فإن كان نتو السرّة من قبل دم الشريان او الوريد او الريح فينبغى أن تمتنع من علاجه فإنّ فى ذلك خوفا وغررا كما أعلمتك فىالباب الذىذكرت فيه الأورام التى تحدث من قبل الشريان والوريد.	If it is due to the gaseous matter, then its touch is warm, and the work in that is to examine; if the tumor was from the blood of the vein or artery or gas, it should not be touched, lest there be fear and grave harm, as I informed you in the chapter where I mentioned the tumors that occur due to the vein and artery.
فإن كان نتو السرّة من قبل المعاء او الثرب فينبغى أن تأمر العليل بأن يمسك نفسه ويقف واقفا ممتدّا ثمّ تعلّم بالمداد حول السرّة كلّها.	If the tumor was from the humour or the nerve, it is advisable to warn the patient that he should restrain himself and stand upright, then teach him to move his arm around the tumor in a circular motion.
ثمّ تأمره أن يستلقى بين يديك على ظهره ثمّ تحزّ بمبضع عريض حول السرّة على الموضع الذى علّمت بالمداد ثمّ تمدّ وسط الورم الى فوق بصنّارة كبيرة ثمّ تربط موضع الحزّ بخيط قوىّ اوبوتر حرير ربطا وثيقا.	Then instruct him to lie down between your hands on his back, then make a gentle push around the tumor at the place where you taught him to move his arm in a circular motion, and extend the middle of the tumor upwards with a large compress, then tie the place of the push with a strong thread, and bind it tightly.
ويكون عقد الرباط أنشوطة ثمّ تفتح وسط الورم المشدود فوق الرباط وتدخل فيه أصبعك السبّابة وتطلب المعاء فإن وجدته قد أخذه الرباط فأرخ الأنشوطة وادفع المعاء الى داخل البطن وإن وجدت ثربا فمدّه بصنّارة.	And the binding of the compress is in a circular fashion, then you open the middle of the tumor that is constricted above the compress and insert your finger into it, and feel for the humour; if you find that the compress has taken hold of it, then loosen the circular binding and push the humour towards the inside of the belly, and if you find a nerve, then extend it with a compress.
واقطع فضلته، فإن اعترضك شريان او وريد فاحزمه نعمّا وارجع الى عملك وخذ إبرتين فأدخل فيهما خيطين قويّين وتدخل الإبرتين فى الحزّ الذى صنعت حول الورم مصلّبتين قد أنفذتهما، ثمّ تشدّ الورم فى أربعة مواضع على الإبر.	And cut its excess, if a vein or artery has opposed you, then ligate it strongly and return to your work; take two needles and insert two strong threads into them, and insert the needles into the push that you made around the tumor, fixing them well, then tie the tumor in four places on the needles.
وإن شئت نزعت الإبر وتركت الموضع حتّى يعفن اللحم المشدود ويسقط من ذاته او تقطعه اذا رقّ وعفن، ثمّ تعالجه بما ينبغى من المراهم حتّى يبرأ، فإن كان نتو السرّة من لحم نابت فيها.	If you cut the abscess and left the place until the inflamed flesh had suppurated and fallen away from itself or was separated if it was rotten, then you treated it with what was suitable of the remedies until it healed. If it was a collection of matter in the flesh that had formed there.
او من رطوبة فينبغى أن تقور الورم كما قلنا وتخرج الدم او الرطوبة التى تجد فيها ثمّ تعالجه بما يلحم الموضع،.	Or from a flux that suited the tumor as we mentioned, and the blood or pus that was found in it was discharged, then you treated it with what soothed the affected place.
الفصل الثالث والخمسون.	The Third and Fiftieth Chapter.
فى علاج السرطان.	On the Treatment of Cancer.
قد ذكرنا فى التقسيم أنواع السرطان وكيف السبيل الى علاجه بالأدوية والتحذير من علاجه بالحديد لئلّا يتقرّح وذكرنا السرطان المتولّد فى الرحم والتحذير من علاجه.	We mentioned in the division the types of cancer and how to treat it with medications and warnings about treating it with iron so that it does not recur, and we mentioned the cancer that develops in the womb and the warnings about treating it.
وذكرت الأوائل أنّه متى كان السرطان فى موضع يمكن استئصاله كلّه كالسرطان الذى يكون فى الثدى او فى الفخذ ونحوها من الأعضاء المتمكّنة لإخراجه بجملته ولا سيّما اذا كان مبتدئا صغيرا وأمّا متى قدم وكان عظيما فلا ينبغى أن تقربه.	And the ancients mentioned that if the cancer was in a place where it could be completely excised, such as the cancer that occurs in the breast or in the thigh and other solid organs, it was possible to remove it entirely, but not if it had spread extensively and become large, for then it was not suitable to touch it.
فإنّى ما استطعت أن أبرئ منه أحدا ولا رأيت قبلى غيرى وصل الى ذلك، والعمل فيه اذا كان متمكّنا كما قلنا أن تتقدّم فتسهل العليل من المرّة السوداء مرّات ثمّ تفصده إن كان فى العروق امتلاء بيّن.	For I did not find that anyone was able to cure it, and I did not see any of my predecessors who reached that point, and the work in it if it was solid as we mentioned, would progress easily from the black bile, many times, then it would be clear if it was in the veins, full of obvious matter.
ثمّ تنصب العليل نصبة يتمكّن فيها بالعمل ثمّ تلقى فى السرطان الصنانير التى تصلح له ثمّ تقوره من كلّ جهة مع الجلد على استقصاء حتّى لا يبقى شىء من أصوله واترك الدم يجرى ولا تقطعه سريعا.	Then the treatment would be directed towards solidifying it with the work, then you would find in the cancerous tumors that are suitable for it, and then you would treat them from every direction with the cautery on the condition of excavating until nothing of its roots remained, and you would leave the blood to flow without hastening to cut it.
بل اعصر المواضع واسلت الدم الغليظ كلّه بيدك او بما أمكنك من الآلات، فإن اعترضك فى العمل نزف دم عظيم من قطع شريان او وريد فاكو العرق حتّى ينقطع الدم ثمّ عالجه بسائر العلاج الى أن يبرأ.	But I would constrict the places and let out all the thick blood with your hands or with whatever instruments were available to you, for if you encountered any difficulty in the work, a great amount of blood would flow from cutting an artery or vein, until the blood was stopped, then you treated it with cauterization until it healed.
الفصل الرابع والخمسون.	The 54th Chapter.
فى علاج الحبن.	On the Treatment of Tumors.
قد أخبرنا فى التقسيم أنواع الاستسقاء وكيف يكون اجتماع الماء وعلامات كلّ نوع وعلاجه بالأدوية، والذى يعالج بالحديد إنّما هو النوع الزقّىّ وحده ولا يقرب بالحديد النوع الطبلىّ ولا النوع اللحمىّ البتّة.	We have previously mentioned in the chapter on swellings the types of swelling, how the fluid gathers, and the signs of each type, as well as their treatment with medications. What is treated with cautery is only the hard type, and not the soft or fleshy type.
فإنّ ذلك قتّال، اذا كنت قد عالجت هذا النوع من الحبن الزقّىّ بالأدوية ولم ينجع علاجك فانظر فإن كان العليل قد بالغ فيه الضعف او كان به مرض آخر غير الحبن مثل أن يكون به.	If that is the case, and you have treated this type of hard tumor with medications but your treatment has not been effective, then consider whether the patient's weakness or another disease besides the tumor may be responsible for it.
سعال او إسهال ونحو ذلك فإيّاك أن تعالجه بالحديد فإنّه غرر فإن رأيت العليل وافر القوّة ليس به مرض غير الحبن وحده ولم يكن صبيّا ولا شيخا فوجه العمل فيه أن تقيم العليل واقفا بين يديك.	It is a cough or a diarrhea, and so on. Be cautious not to treat it with cautery, for it is a deception. If you have seen the patient's strength and vitality, and there is no disease besides the tumor, and he is neither a youth nor an old man, then proceed with caution and pause before performing the operation.
وخادم خلفه يعصر بطنه بيديه ويدفع الماء الى أسفل الى ناحية العانة ثمّ تأخذ مبضعا شوكيّا على هذه الصورة:.	And his servant stands behind him, grasping his waist with his hands and pushing the tumor downwards towards the anus. Then, you take a scalpel shaped like this:.
محدود الجهتين طويلا محدّد الطرف كالمبضع إلّا أنّ فيه بعض الفطس قليلا لئلّا تجوز به عند العمل الى المعاء فتؤذيه ثمّ انظرفإن كان تولّد الحبن من ناحية الأمعاء.	The two extremities are limited, and the edge is limited like a scalpel, but it has some slight flexibility so that you can use it to reach the area during the operation. Then, consider if the tumor has originated from the vicinity of the anus.
فينبغى أن تبعد بالشقّ من السرّة قدر ثلاث أصابع الى أسفل بحذائها فوق العانة، فإن كان تولّد الحبن من قبل مرض الكبد فليكن شقّك يسرة من السرّة بثلاث أصابع، فإن كان تولّده من قبل مرض الطحال فليكن الشقّ فى الجانب الأيمن بقدر ثلاث أصابع.	You should make an incision in the perineum, about three fingers' breadth below the anus, if the tumor has originated from a disease of the liver. If it has originated from a disease of the spleen, then make the incision on the right side, about three fingers' breadth.
ولا ينبغى أيضا أن يكون الشقّ فى الجانب الذى يريد العليل أن يضطجع عليه لئلّا تسيل الفضول الى ذلك الموضع الضعيف، ثمّ تثقب بالآلة الجلد كلّه ثمّ تدخل الآلة فى ذلك الشقّ وترفع يدك.	And it is also not suitable to make the incision on the side that the patient wants to lean on, lest the fluid flows to that weak spot. Then, you should pierce with a scalpel and dissect the entire area, then insert the instrument into that incision and lift your hand.
بالمبضع بين الجلد والصفاق كأنّك تسلخه ويكون القدر الذى تسلخه قدر الظفر او نحوه، ثمّ تثقب الصفاق حتّى يصل المبضع الى موضع فارغ وهو موضع الماء ثمّ تخرجه وتدخل فى الثقب الآلة التى هذه صورتها.	In the incision between the cranium and the scalp, as if you were to shave it, and be careful with the amount that you shave, like the edge of a fingernail or its shape. Then, pierce the scalp until the incision reaches the empty space, which is the place of the marrow, then remove it and insert the instrument through the piercing in this shape.
وهى شبه أنبوبة من قصبة رقيقة تصنع من فضّة او من نحاس او من اسبادروية ملساء مصقولة لها فى أسفلها ثقب صغير وفى جوانبها ثلاث ثقب الاثنتان من جهة والواحدة من جهة كما ترى.	It is similar to a tube made from a thin rod, crafted from silver or from copper or from tin, polished and having at its lower end a small piercing, and on its sides three piercings, two on one side and one on the other, as you see.
وقد يضع طرفها مبريّا على هيئة برية القلم على هذه صورتها:.	And he will place its tip in a curved shape like the nib of a pen, in this form.
فى طرفها الأعلى حلقة فإنّ الآلة اذا وصلت الى الماء فإنّه ينزل من ساعته على الآلة، فتستفرغ من الماء فى الوقت قدرا متوسّطا لأنّك إن استفرغت منه أكثر ممّا ينبغى فى الوقت فربّما مات العليل بانحلال روحه الحيوانىّ.	On its upper end is a ring; if the instrument reaches the marrow, it will drop from its saucer onto the instrument, so that it sucks up from the marrow at a moderate rate, because if you suck up more than what is necessary at the time, perhaps the patient may die due to the disruption of his vital spirit.
او يعرض له غشى يقرب من الموت، ولكن استفرغ منه على قدر قوّته وما يدلّك عليه أحوال العليل من قوّة نبضه ومن حسن لونه، ثمّ تخرج الآلة وتحبس الماء وذلك أنّه يحتبس من ساعته.	Or he will present with a swoon that is close to death, but suck up from it according to his strength and what indicates to you the condition of the patient, from the strength of his pulse and the goodness of his complexion. Then, you remove the instrument and stop the suction, and that is because it stops from its saucer.
بسبب الجلد الذى يمسك الثقب الذى على الصفاق الذى أخبرت أن تبطّه على تلك الصفة، ثمّ تعيد الآلة يوما آخر إن رأيت العليل محتملا لذلك.	Due to the cranium that holds the piercing on the scalp, which I informed you to bandage in that manner. Then, you return the instrument another day if you see the patient is inclined towards that.
وتخرج أيضا من الماء القدر اليسير تفعل ذلك أيّاما وأنت على رقبة وتحفّظ من الخطاء حتّى لا يبقى من الماء إلّا اليسير، فإن خفت على العليل وتركت من الماء شيئا كثيرا فعالجه بالدفن فى الرمل الحارّ.	And also remove from the marrow only a small amount, doing that gradually and being cautious of the error, until only a little remains of the marrow. For if you are careless with the patient and leave much of the marrow, it will be buried in the red clay.
والتعرّق الكثير فى الحمّام والشمس وصبّره على العطش وعالجه بالأدوية المجفّفة حتّى يبرأ، ويكوى على المعدة والكبد والطحال بعد إخراج الماء على ما وصفت فيما تقدّم،.	And much bloodletting in the bath and sunlight, and treatment with dry medications until he recovers. And pay attention to the stomach and liver and spleen after removing the marrow, as I previously described.
الفصل الخامس والخمسون.	The Fifty-Fifth Chapter.
فى علاج الأطفال الذين يولدون ومواضع البول منهم غير مثقوبة او يكون الثقب ضيقا او فى غير موضعه.	On the treatment of children who are born with their bladder membranes not perforated or the meatus is narrow or is not in its proper place.
قد يخرج بعض الصبيان من بطن أمّه وكمرته غير مثقوبة فينبغى أن تبادر بثقبه من ساعة يولد.	Some children may be born with their navel cord unperforated, and it is necessary to open a passage for them at the hour of birth.
بمبضع رقيق جدّا على هذه الصورة:.	With a very fine scalpel in this manner:.
ثمّ تضع فى الثقب مسمارا رقيقا من رصاص وتربطه وتمسكه ثلاثة أيّام او أربعة فمتى أراد البول نحّى عنه وبال ثمّ ردّه، وإن لم تجعل الرصاص فقد يمكن أنّ البول الذى يسلك على الموضع لا يتركه ينغلق.	Then you place in the meatus a thin style of lead and tie it, and constrict it for three or four days; when the urine wants to flow, you loosen it and return it. And if you do not leave the lead, it is possible that the urine which flows onto the spot will not be stopped.
وأمّا الذى يكون ثقبه ضيقا فيعالج بالرصاص كما قلنا أيّاما كثيرة حتّى يتّسع، والذين يكون منهم الثقب فى غير موضعه وذلك أنّ منهم من يولد والثقب عند نهاية الكمرة فلا يقدر أن يبول الى قدّام.	And as for one whose meatus is narrow, you treat it with the lead as we mentioned, many times, until it widens. And there are those among them who are born with the meatus in an improper place, and that is because some of them are born with the meatus at the end of the navel cord, so he cannot urinate forward.
حتّى يرفع الإحليل بيده الى فوق ولا يولد له من قبل أنّ المنى لا يقدر على الوصول الى الرحم على استقامة وهى علّة قبيحة جدّا، ووجه العمل فى ذلك أن يستلقى العليل على ظهره.	Until the foreskin is lifted by hand to above, and he is not born with it from the beginning, because the semen cannot reach the womb on a straight path, and this is a very serious defect. The way of working in that is to lay the foreskin on his back.
ثمّ تمدّ كمرته بيدك اليسرى مدّا شديدا وتبرى رأس الإحليل بشفرة او بمبضع حادّ كبرية القلم او كأنّك تنحت شيئا ليكون وسطه ناتيا شبيها بكمرة وليقع الثقب فى الوسط على ما ينبغى.	Then you extend his navel cord with your left hand, extending it strongly, and you separate the head of the foreskin with a scissors or a sharp scalpel, like you are excavating something to make it a middle passage, so that the meatus falls in the middle as is necessary.
وتحفّظ عند عملك من نزف الدم فكثيرا ما يعرض ذلك فقابله بما يقطع الدم وعالج الجرح حتّى يبرأ،.	And be cautious during your operation against the flow of blood, for it is very common to encounter that, so stop it with what cuts off the blood and treat the wound until it heals.
الفصل السادس والخمسون.	The Fifty-Sixth Chapter.
فى البثر الذى يعرض فى الغلفة والكمرة والسواد والفساد والتصاق الغلفة بالكمرة.	The wound that is exposed in the scalp and the skull and the blackness and the putridity and the adhesion of the scalp to the skull.
كثيرا ما يعرض هذا البثر فى الإحليل وهو نتو لحمىّ سمج ويكون منه خبيث وغير خبيث، فالغير خبيث ينبغى أن تعلّقه بصنّارة لطيفة.	This wound often occurs in the medulla and is a humid bloody pus, and it may be benign or malignant; the benign one should be treated with gentle manipulation.
وتقطعه حتّى تنقيه كلّه ثمّ تحمل عليه قطنة مغموسة فى المرهم المصرىّ ثمّ تعالجه بعد ذلك بالمرهم النخلىّ حتّى يبرأ، وأمّا إن كان البثر خبيثا سمج اللون فينبغى أن تستعمل فيه الكىّ بعد قطعه وجرده،.	And you should cut it until you clean all of it, then apply a dressing soaked in Egyptian ointment, and afterwards treat it with Nile ointment until he recovers. And if the wound is malignant, the ulcer should be cauterized after cutting and scraping.
فإن كان البثر فى غلفة علج لم يختن وكان بعض البثر من داخل الغلفة وبعضه من خارج فينبغى أن تنتزع البثر الذى من داخل أوّلا حتّى اذا اندمل فحينئذ فعالجه من خارج.	If the wound is in the scalp and did not heal, and some of it was inside the scalp and some outside, then one should remove the wound that is inside first until it heals, then treat what is outside.
لأنّك متى عالجتهما معا لم تأمن الغلفة أن تنثقب، وقد يعرض أيضا فى الأنثيين وفى الغلفة سواد وفساد فينبغى أن تقور جميع ما قد اسودّ وهمّ أن يفسد او قد فسد.	For if you treat them both together, the scalp will not be safe from perforation. And it may also occur in the tendons and in the scalp, blackness and putridity, so one should evacuate all that has become black and remove what has become putrid or has become rotten.
ثمّ الطخ عليه بعد ذلك العسل مع قشور الرمّان المدقوق المنخول والكرسنّة ثمّ تعالجه بسائر العلاج حتّى يبرأ، فإن عرض نزف دم فاستعمل الكىّ بمكواة هلاليّة على هذه الصورة:.	Then apply the honey to it afterwards, with powdered rose-water and kerosene, then treat it with other treatments until he recovers. If there is a flow of blood, use cauterization with a cautery iron in this manner:
فإنّ الكىّ نافع للحالتين جميعا أعنى نزف الدم والجرح اذا فسد، فإن تأكّلت الكمرة وذهبت بأسرها فى وقت مّا فينبغى أن تدخل فى مجرى الذكر أنبوبا من رصاص ليبول العليل عليه، وأمّا التصاق الغلفة بالكمرة.	For the cautery is beneficial for both conditions, i.e. the flow of blood and the wound, if it has become putrid. For if the skull becomes thick and its pores close up at a certain time, it is necessary to insert a tube of tin or lead under the scalp to draw out the pus, and also to separate the adhesion of the scalp from the skull.
وهذا الالتصاق إنّما يحدث فيمن كانت غلفته صحيحة ولم يجب عليه اختتان وقد يعرض التصاقها من قبل جرح او ورم فينبغى أن تسلخها بمبضع أفطس حتّى ينحلّ الرباط وتتخلّص الكمرة من كلّ جهة.	And this adhesion occurs in one whose scalp is sound and did not require any incision, and it may occur due to a wound or abscess; it is necessary to release it with a gentle touch until the ligament dissolves and the skull separates from every side.
فإن عسر تمييزها على الاستقصاء فينبغى أن تسلخ شيئا من الكمرة ومن الغلفة وذلك أنّ الغلفة رقيقة فربّما انثقبت لرقّتها سريعا، ثمّ فرّق بين الغلفة والكمرة بخرقة كتان رقيقة قد بلّت فى ماء بارد لئلّا تلتصق أيضا.	If it is difficult to distinguish it from the surroundings, it is advisable to separate something from the capsule and the sclera, because the sclera is delicate, so it may be quickly torn. Then, distinguish between the sclera and the capsule with a fine thread that has been soaked in cold water, so it does not stick together.
ثمّ يعالج بشراب قابض حتّى تندمل،.	Then, he treats it with a compress of absorbing bandages until it settles.
الفصل السابع والخمسون.	Chapter 57.
فى تطهير الصبيان وعلاج ما يعرض لهم من الخطاء.	On the purification of wounds and the treatment of what appears in them from ulcers.
الاختتان ليس هو بشىء غير تفرّق الاتّصال كسائر الجراحات إلّا أنّه لمّا كان من فعلنا بإرادتنا واستعماله فى الصبيان خاصّة وجب أن نرسم فيه العمل الأفضل.	The separation is not something other than disconnecting the connections, like the incisions of the surgeons, but since it was not among our actions by intention and we did not use it in specific wounds, we must not represent it as the best work.
والطريق الأسهل المؤدّى الى السلامة، فأقول إنّ الأوائل لم تذكر الاختتان فى شىء من كتبها لأنّه لم يكن يستعمل فى شرائعهم وإنّما هو ما اكتسبناه.	And the easiest path leading to safety, so I say that the predecessors did not mention the separation in any of their books because it was not used in their operations and it is what we acquired.
بالتجربة وذلك أنّى وجدت الجمهور من الصنّاع والحجّامين يستعملون التطهير بالموسى وبالمقصّ ويستعملون الفلكة والرباط بالخيط والقطع بالظفر وقد جرّبت جميع هذه الوجوه.	Through experience, and that is what I found, the majority of the surgeons and barbers using purification with cotton and scissors, and they use the scalpel and the thread for sewing, and the rasp for cutting, and I have tried all these methods.
فلم أجد أفضل من التطهير بالمقصّ والرباط بالخيط لأنّ التطهير بالموسى كثيرا ما تلوذ له الجلدة لأنّ جلدة الغلفة طبقتان فربّما قطعت الجلدة العليا وبقيت الطبقة السفلى.	I did not find better than purification with scissors and sewing with thread, because purification with cotton often causes the periosteum to slip away, since the periosteum of the capsule is in two layers, so it may cut the upper layer and leave the lower layer.
فيضطرّ الى قطع آخر وألم مستأنف والتطهير بالفلكة لا يؤمن معها قطع طرف الإحليل لأنّه ربّما دخل فى ثقبها، وأمّا التطهير بالظفر فربّما فلت الجلدة وفسد عملك او كانت جلدة الصبىّ قصيرة بالطبع..	It is necessary to resort to a final cut and painful repetition, and purification with the scalpel does not ensure cutting at the end of the canal, because it may enter its hole. As for purification with the rasp, it may tear the periosteum or ruin your work, or the periosteum of the wound was short by nature.
فكثيرا ما يولدون كذلك لا يحتاجون الى تطهير وقد رأيت ذلك، وأمّا التطهير بالمقصّ والرباط بالخيط فالتجربة كشفت لى فضله لأنّ المقصّ متناسبة القطع من أجل أنّ الشفرة التى من فوق كالشفرة التى من أسفل.	Many wounds heal in this way without needing purification, and I have seen that. As for purification with scissors and sewing with thread, experience has shown me its excellence because the scissors are suited for cutting so that the suture from above is like the suture from below.
فمتى عصرت يدك بتناسب الشفرتين قطعت على قياس واحد وفى زمن واحد فتصير زمام الخيط شبه حائط لجلدة الإحليل من كلّ النواحى لا يقع معه خطاء البتّة، ووجه العمل أوّلا أن توهم الصبىّ.	When you cut the skin with a single incision in one direction and at one time, it forms a straight thread resembling a straight line, which does not deviate from its course in any direction, and the work begins without any crookedness or curvature.
ولا سيّما إن كان ممّن يفهم قليلا أنّك إنّما تربط الخيط فى إحليله فقط وتدعه الى يوم آخر ثمّ فرّحه وسرّه بكلّ وجه يمكنك ذلك منه وما يقبله بعقله، ثمّ توقفه بين يديك منتصب القامة.	And do not think that if you only tie the thread to the skin and leave it until another day, then unwrap it and pull it in every direction, you can do that to it and what is on its neck, then stop it between your hands, standing upright.
ولا يكون جالسا واخبأ المقصّ فى كمّك او تحت قدمك لا تقع عين الصبىّ عليها البتّة ولا على شىء من الآلات، ثمّ تدخل يدك الى إحليله وتنفخ فى الجلدة وتشيلها الى فوق حتّى يخرج رأس الإحليل.	And do not sit with the forceps in your hand or under your foot, lest you injure the operation, nor on anything of the instruments. Then, insert your hand into the skin and inflate in the wound and lift it up until the head of the abscess comes out.
ثمّ تنقيه ممّا يجتمع فيه من الوسخ ثمّ اربط الموضع المعلّم بخيط مثنى ثمّ اربط أسفل منه قليلا رباطا ثانيا ثمّ تمسك بإبهامك والسبّابة موضع الربط الأسفل إمساكا جيّدا وتقطع بين الرباطين.	Then, clean out what has accumulated in the cavity. Then, tie the marked place with a double thread, then tie below it slightly with a second ligature. Then, grasp with your fingers and thumb the lower ligature, grasping firmly, and cut between the two ligatures.
ثمّ ارفع الجلدة الى فوق بسرعة وأخرج رأس الإحليل ثمّ اترك الدم يجرى قليلا فهو أفضل وأقلّ لورم الإحليل ثمّ تنشفه بخرقة رطبة ثم ذرّ عليه من رماد القرع اليابس المحرق فهو أفضل ما جرّبته او دقيق الحوّارى فهو أيضا فاضل.	Then, lift the wound quickly and bring out the head of the abscess. Then, let the blood flow a little, for it is better and less painful for the abscess. Then, sprinkle it with a dry powder, then sprinkle on it some powdered ash of the Yemeni aromatic wood, for it is the best thing that has been tried or the fine powder of the Iraqi aromatics, for it is also excellent.
ثمّ تحمل على الذرور من فوق فى خرقة فصّ بيضة مطبوخة فى ماء الورد مضروبة بدهن الورد الطرىّ الطيّب وتتركه عليه الى يوم آخر ثمّ تعالجه بسائر العلاج الى أن يبرأ.	Then, apply the powder from above onto the wound, and place a cooked egg in rose-water, covered with a clean cloth, and leave it on until another day. Then, treat it with a gentle treatment until it heals.
وهذه صورة المقصّ التى تصلح للتطهير:.	And this is the picture of the forceps suitable for cleansing:
تكون فطساء قاطعة لا عوج فيها مسقيّة المسمار ويكون طول الشفرتين كطول المقبضين سواء، وأمّا الخطاء الواقع فى التطهير فربّما قلبت الجلدة الداخلة كلّها او بعضها عند القطع فينبغى أن تمدّها من ساعتك بظفرك قبل أن يتورّم الموضع.	It should be a straight-cutting forceps without curvature, and the length of the blade should be equal to the length of the handles, so as to facilitate the cutting. And regarding the deviation that occurs during cleansing, perhaps you will turn the entire internal wound or part of it while cutting, so it is necessary to extend it from your hand with your finger before the place becomes inflamed.
وتقطعها على استواء، فإن لم تستطع على إمساكها بظفرك فاجذبها بصنّارة واقطعها، فإن مضى له ثلاثة أيّام وبقى ما تحت رأس الاحليل منتفخا وارما فاتركه حتّى يسكن الورم الحارّ واسلخه برفق.	Cut it straight, if you cannot hold it with your fingers, grasp it with a forceps and cut it. If three days pass and the swelling under the head of the arrow goes down, leave it until the inflammation subsides and the wound heals.
واقطعه على حسب ما يتهيّأ لك، وتحفّظ من رأس الإحليل فإن قطع شىء من رأس الإحليل فإنّه لا يضرّ ذلك، فعالجه بما يلحم الجرح من الذرورات التى وصفنا فى مقالة الذرورات.	Cut it according to what is convenient for you, and beware of the head of the arrow, for if you cut a part of the head of the arrow, it will not harm that. Treat it with what heals the wound from the ulcers we described in the chapter on ulcers.
وإن قطع من الجلدة فوق المقدار وتقلّصت الى فوق فلا يضرّ ذلك أيضا كثير مضرّة، فعالجه بما ذكرنا حتّى يبرأ،.	And if you cut from the gland above the wound and it contracts above, it will not harm that either. Treat it with what we mentioned until it heals.
الفصل الثامن والخمسون.	The 58th chapter.
فى علاج البول المحتبس فى المثانة.	On the treatment of retained urine in the bladder.
البول المحتبس فى المثانة يكون عن سدّه من حصاة او دم جامد او قيح او لحم نابت ونحو ذلك، فإذا عالجت ذلك بما ذكرنا ضروب العلاج الموصوف فى التقسيم.	Retained urine in the bladder is due to obstruction by a stone, congealed blood, pus, or a suppurating abscess, and similar things. If you treat that with what we mentioned, the various treatments described in the section.
ولم ينطلق البول ورأيت أن احتباسه من قبل حصاة قد ضارت فى عنق المثانة فينبغى ان تصير العليل على ركبتيه جاثيا ثمّ يركب رجل على ظهره ويمدّ بطنه الى ظهره و يمسك العليل نفسه ما أمكنه.	And the urine did not flow and you saw that it was retained due to a stone that had settled in the neck of the bladder. It is necessary to make the patient sit on his haunches, then let him lean back against something, and let him push his belly towards his back, and hold the penis himself as much as he can.
فيضطرّ حينئذ عنق المثانة الى دفع الحصاة الى خلف فينطلق البول، فإن لم ينطلق بما ذكرنا واشتدّ الأمر على العليل فينبغى أن تستعمل إخراجه بالآلة التى تسمّى قاثاطير التى هذه صورتها:.	When that happens, the neck of the bladder is narrowed to expel the stone backwards, and the urine flows. If it does not flow as we mentioned, and the condition worsens for the patient, it is necessary to use an instrument called a catheter, which has this shape:.
تصنع من فضّة وتكون رقيقة ملساء مجوّفة كأنبوب ريش الطير فى رقّة الميل طويلة فى نحو شبر ونصف لها قمع لطيف فى رأسها، ووجه جذب البول بها أن تأخذ خيطا مثنيّا وتربط فى طرفه صوفة أو قطنة ربطا جيّدا.	It is made of silver and is thin, smooth, and curved like a bird's beak in the shape of a long tube, about one and a half fingers' length, with a fine hollow at its head. Its purpose is to draw out the urine, taking a twisted thread and tying it firmly to its end with a soft or cotton thread.
وتدخل طرف الخيط فى أسفل القاثاطير وتقرض بمقراض إن فضل شىء من الصوفة لكى تدخل فى الأنبوب تسدّه كالزّر، ثمّ تدهن القاثاطير بزيت او بزبد او بياض البيض وتجلس العليل على كرسىّ.	Insert the thread into the lowest part of the catheter and adjust it with a probe, so that a portion of the sutures passes through the tube and is pressed like a string. Then, tighten the catheter with a thread or a thin rod or the white of an egg, and apply the compress to the ulcer.
وتنطل مثانته وإحليله بالأدهان الرطبة او الزيت والماء الفاتر، ثمّ تدخل القاثاطير فى الإحليل برفق حتّى يصل الى أصل الإحليل ثمّ تثنى الإحليل الى فوق الى ناحية السرّة ثمّ تدفع القاثاطير فى داخله.	And bend it and tighten it with the thick threads or the rod and the watery material, then insert the catheter into the ulcer gently until it reaches the base of the ulcer, then tilt the ulcer upwards towards the region of the wound, then push the catheter inside.
حتّى اذا تمّ تثنّى الإحليل ثمّ تدفع القاثاطير الى داخل حتّى اذا وصل قريبا من المقعدة تميل الذكر الى أسفل والقاثاطير فى داخله ثمّ تدفعه حتّى يصل الى المثانة ويحسّ به العليل قد وصل الى شىء فارغ.	Until, when the ulcer has been tilted, then push the catheter inside until it reaches close to the seat of the wound, and the penis is bent downwards and the catheter is inside, then push it until it reaches the base of the throat and it feels that the ulcer has reached a vacant spot.
وإنّما يصنع على هذه الرتبة لأنّ المجرى الذى يسلك فيه البول فيه تعّوج، ثمّ تمدّ الخيط بالصوفة بشدّة قليلا فإّنّ البول يتبع الصوفة، ثمّ تخرجها ويهرق البول، وتعيد القاثاطير.	And it is done in this way because the passage through which the urine flows is curved, then stretch the thread with the sutures strongly a little, for the urine follows the sutures, then remove them and let the urine flow, and return the catheter.
تفلا تزال تفعل ذلك حتّى تفرّغ المثانة ويجد العليل خفّة،.	Do not stop doing that until the throat is evacuated and the ulcer finds relief.
الفصل التاسع والخمسون.	Chapter 59
كيف تحقن المثانة بالزرّاقة.	How to evacuate the throat with a rod
وصور الآلات التى تصلح لذلك تصنع من فضّة او من عاج مجوّفة لها أنبوبة طويلة على رقّة قيح وأردت أن تقطّر فيها المياه والأدوية فيكون ذلك بآلة تسمّى الزرّاقة وهذه صورتها:.	And the instruments that are suitable for this, made of silver or ivory, with a long tube on a curved handle, and I have wanted to inject water and medicine through it, so it is called al-Zarraqah, and this is its shape:
تصنع من فضّة او من عاج مجوّفة لها أنبوبة طويلة على رقّة الميل مجوّفة كلّها الّا الطرف فإنّه مصمت فيه ثلاث ثقب اثنتان من جهة وواحدة من جهة أخرى كما ترى.	It is made of silver or ivory, with a long tube on a curved handle, the whole of it being bent except for the tip, and three holes are drilled into it, two from one side and one from another side, as you see.
والموضع الأجوف الذى فيه المدفعيكون على قدر ما يسدّه بلا مزيد حتّى اذا جذبت به شيئا من الرطوبات انجذبت وإذا دفعت به اندفعت الى بعد على ما تصنع النضّاحة التى يرمى بها النفط فى حروب البحر.	The place of the trephine where the instrumental perforations are made according to the amount that is sufficient without excess, until when it attracts something from the sutures, it attracts, and if you press on it, you will compress to what you manufacture the flap that is thrown towards the naval cavity in the naval battles.
فإذا أردت طرح الرطوبات فى المثانة أدخلت طرف الزرّاقة فى الرطوبة وجذبت بالمدفع الى فوق فإنّ الرطوبة تنجذب فى جوف الزرّاقة ثمّ تدخل طرفها فى الإحليل على حسب ما وصفنا فى القاثاطير ثمّ تدفع الرطوبة بالمدفع.	So if you want to put the sutures in the peritoneum, you should insert the end of the forceps into the suture and attract it with the instrumental perforations upwards, then the suture will be attracted into the belly of the forceps, then its end will enter the abdomen according to what we described in the Catheters, then you push the suture with the instrumental perforations.
فإنّ تلك الرطوبة تصل الى المثانة على المقام حتّى يحسّ بها العليل، وهذه صورة محقن لطيف أيضا تحقن به المثانة:.	For that suture reaches the peritoneum on the level where it feels the pain, and this is a picture of a suture also pierced through which the peritoneum is pierced.
تصنع من فضّة او اسبادروية رأسها الأعلى يشبه القمع الصغير وتحته حزّ يقع فيه الرباط، ثمّ تأخذ مثانة جمل وتضع فيها الرطوبة التى تريد أن تحقن بها المثانة ثمّ تربطها بين الحجزين ربطا وثيقا بخيط مثنّى.	You make from silver or steel a head above it, resembling the small hook, and on it a notch where the ligature lies, then you take a peritoneal suture and put in it the suture that you want to pierce the peritoneum with, then you bind it between the notches, binding strongly with a twisted thread.
وتدفئ تلك الرطوبة قليلا على النار ثمّ تدخل طرف المحقن فى الإحليل ثمّ تشدّ يدك على المثانة بالرطوبة شدّا محكما حتّى يحسّ العليل أنّ تلك الرطوبة قد وصلت الى المثانة.	And you push that suture a little onto the nares, then you insert the end of the piercer into the abdomen, and you pull your hand on the peritoneum with the suture, pulling strongly until the patient feels that the suture has reached the peritoneum.
فإن لم تحضرك مثانة فخذ قطعة رقّ فاصنع منها دائرة وثقّبها من جميع دورها ثمّ أدخل خيطا وثيقا فى تلك الثقب كما تدور ثمّ اجمع الدائرة كما تجمع السفرة بعد أن تضع فيها ما تريد من الرطوبات والأدهان والمياه.	So if you do not have a peritoneum, take a piece of silk and make from it a circle and pierce it from all its directions, then insert a twisted thread in that piercing as you pierce, then gather the circle as you gather the seam after you put in it what you want of sutures, tubes, and water.
ثمّ اربطها فى الآلة واصنع بها كما صنعت بالمثانة من عصر يدك حتّى تصل الرطوبة الى المثانة،.	Then tie it to the instrument and make with it as you made with the peritoneum, directing your hand until the suture reaches the peritoneum.
الفصل الستّون.	The Section on Cauterization.
فىإخراج الحصاة.	On Extracting the Bullet.
قد ذكرنا فى التقسيم أنواع الحصاة وعلاجها بالأدوية وذكرت الفرق بين الحصاة المتولّدة فى الكلى وبين الحصاة المتولّدة فى المثانة وعلامات ذلك كلّه وذكرت الحصاة التى يقع فيها العمل باليد والشقّ.	We have mentioned in the chapter on wounds the types of bullet and their treatment with medications, and I have explained the difference between a bullet that is lodged in the kidney and one that is lodged in the bladder, and all its symptoms. And I have mentioned the bullet for which surgical intervention is required by hand and scalpel.
وهى الحصاة المتولّدة فى المثانة خاصّة والتى تنشب فى الإحليل وأنا واصف ذلك بشرح بيّن واختصار.	And it is the bullet that is lodged in the bladder, specifically, and the one that becomes stuck in the urethra, and I have described that with clear explanation and concise abbreviation.
فأقول إنّ الحصاة المتولّدة فى المثانة أكثر ما تعرض للصبيان ومن علاماتها أنّ البول يخرج من المثانة شبيها بالماء فى رقّته.	So I say that a bullet lodged in the bladder is more likely to occur in young men, and among its symptoms is that the urine comes out of the bladder mixed with blood in its consistency.
ويظهر فيه الرمل ويحكّ ذكره ويعبث به وكثيرا ما يتدلّى ثمّ ينتشر وتبرز معها المقعدة فى كثير منهم، ويسهل بروء الصبيان منها الى أن يبلغوا أربع عشرة سنة ويعسر فى الشيوخ وأمّا الشبّان فمتوسّط فيما بين ذلك.	And there appears a sandy or gritty substance, and it irritates the region, and many times it becomes inflamed, then it spreads, and with it the rectal vein becomes prominent in many of them. And it is easy to remove it from the young men until they reach fourteen years, and it is difficult in the old, but as for the middle-aged, it is intermediate between the two.
والذى يكون حصاته أعظم يكون علاجه أسهل والصغيرة بضدّ ذلك، فإذا صرنا الى العلاج فينبغى أوّلا أن يحقن العليل بحقنة تخرج جميع الزبل الذى فى معائه فإنّه قد يمنع وجود الحصاة عند التفتيش.	And the one whose bullet is largest, its treatment is easiest, and the smallest is more difficult than that. So if we turn to treatment, it is necessary first to cleanse the wound with a cleansing injection that removes all the pus that is in it, for it may conceal the presence of the bullet upon palpation.
ثمّ يؤخذ العليل برجليه فينفض ويهزّ الى أسفل لتنزل الحصاة الى عنق المثانة او يثب من موضع مرتفع مرّات ثمّ تجلسه بين يديك منتصبا ويداه تحت فخذيه لتصير المثانة كلّها مائلة الى اسفل ثمّ تفتّشه.	Then the wound is taken with forceps, and it is manipulated to bring down the bullet to the neck of the bladder or it is pushed from a higher position several times, then it is grasped between your hands in a standing position and your fingers are placed beneath his thighs to make the bladder incline completely downwards, then it is palpated.
وتجسّه من خارج فإن أحسست بالحصاة فى الفضاء فبادر من ساعتك بالشقّ عليها فإن لمّ تقع تحت لمسك البتّة فينبغى أن تمسح الأصبع السبّابة بالدهن من اليد اليسرى إن كان العليل صبيّا او الأصبع الوسطى.	And you feel from outside, if you sense the bullet in the cavity, then hasten to make an incision at that time with the scalpel, and if it does not come out under your grasp, it is necessary to wipe the fingers of the left hand with oil, or the middle finger, if the wound is on the right.
إن كان غلاما تامّا فتدخلها فى مقعدته وتفتّش عن الحصاة حتّى اذا وقعت تحت أصبعك نقلتها قليلا قليلا الى عنق المثانة ثمّ تكبس عليها بأصبعك وتدفعها الى خارج نحو المكان الذى تريد شقّه.	If it is a boy, insert it into its receptacle and separate it from the peritoneum until you feel it beneath your fingers, then transfer it little by little to the base of the bladder, then grasp it with your fingers and push it out towards the place you want to make an incision.
وتأمر خادما أن يعصر المثانة بيده وتأمر خادما آخر أن يمدّ بيده اليمنى الأنثيين الى فوق وبيده الأخرى يمدّ الجلد الذى تحت الأنثيين ناحية عن الموضع الذى يكون الشق فيه، ثمّ تأخذ المبضع النشل الذى هذه صورته:.	And order one of the assistants to hold the bladder with his hand and order another assistant to extend his right hand above it, and his other hand to stretch the skin beneath it near the place where the incision will be made, then take the instrument which is suitable for this situation.
وتشق فيما بين المقعدة والأنثيين لا فى الوسط بل الى جانب الألية اليسرى ويكون الشقّ على نفس الحصاة وأصبعك فى المقعدة وأنت تضغطها الى خارج مورّبا ليكون الشقّ من خارج واسعا ومن داخل ضيقا على قدر ما يمكن خروج الحصاة منه.	And make the incision between the receptacle and the peritoneum, not in the middle but towards the left side of the alimentary tract, and let the incision be on the same level as the peritoneum, with your finger in the receptacle, pressing it outwards, making the incision from outside inwards and from inside outwards, as much as possible to allow the peritoneum to come out.
لا أكبر فربّما ضغطت الأصبع التى فى المقعدة الحصاة عند الشقّ فتخرج من غير عسر، واعلم أنّه قد يكون من الحصاة ما لها زوايا وحروف فيعسر خروجها لذلك.	Do not make the incision larger, for if you press the finger that is in the receptacle on the peritoneum at the incision site, it will come out easily, and be aware that there may be parts of the peritoneum with adhesions or ligaments that make its removal difficult.
ومنها ملساء تشبه البلّوط ومدحرجة فيسهل خروجها، فما كان منها لها زوايا وحروف فتزيد فى الشقّ قليلا فإن لم تخرج هكذا فينبغى أن تتحيّل عليها إمّا أن تقبض عليها بجفت محكم يكون طرفه كالمبرد.	And among them is the omentum, which resembles a bladder and is easy to remove, but if it has adhesions or ligaments, you increase the incision slightly, and if it does not come out thus, it is necessary to dissect around it, either by grasping it with a forceps that has a blunt end.
ليضبط على الحصاة فلا تفلت منه وإمّا أن تدخل من تحتها آلة لطيفة معقّفة الطرف، فإن لم تستطع عليها فوسّع الشقّ قليلا فإن غلبك شىء من الدم فاقطعه بالزاج.	Hold onto the peritoneum so it does not slip away from you, or else insert a delicate instrument with a curved end underneath it; if you are unable to grasp it, widen the incision slightly, and if you encounter something bleeding, stop it with a cautery.
فإن كانت أكثر من واحدة فادفع أوّلا الكبيرة الى فم المثانة ثمّ شقّ عليها ثمّ ادفع الصغيرة بعد ذلك وكذلك تفعل إن كانت أكثر من اثنتين، فإن كانت عظيمة جدّا فإنّه جهل أن يشقّ عليها شقّا عظيما لأنّه يعرض للعليل أحد أمرين.	If there are more than one, push the largest one towards the mouth of the bladder, then make an incision on it, and then push the smaller one afterwards; and do the same if there are more than two. If they are very large, it is better to make a large incision on them because making a small incision may lead to one of two evils.
إمّا أن يموت وإمّا أن يحدث له تقطير البول دائما من أجل أنّه لا يلتحم الموضع البتّة ولكن حاول دفعها حتّى تخرج او تحيّل فى كسرها بالكلاليب حتّى تخرجها قطعا.	Either he dies or a rupture of the urinary passage occurs constantly because it does not adhere to the wound site, but try to push it until it emerges or protrudes in the spongy tissue until it emerges completely.
فإذا فرغت من عملك فاحش الجرح بكندر وصبر وشيّان وشدّه وصيّر فوقه خرقا مبلولة بزيت وشراب او بدهن ورد وماء بارد ليسكن الورم الحارّ ثمّ يستلقى العليل على قفاه ولا تحلّ الرباط الى اليوم الثالث.	So when you finish with your operation, apply a compress with vinegar and rose-water, and bind it with a bandage, then sprinkle powder on it and cover it with a dressing of cold water; the painful spot should not be touched until the third day.
فإذا انحلّ نطلت الموضع بماء وزيت كثير ثمّ تعالجه بالمرهم النخلىّ والمرهم الباسليقون حتّى يبرأ، فإن عرض فى الجرح ورم حارّ زائد وأكال ونحو ذلك مثل أن يجمد دم فى المثانة ويمتنع منه البول ويعرف ذلك من خروج الدم مع البول.	If the site of the operation is washed with water and rose-water abundantly, then treated with narcissus ointment and basilicum until it heals, but if there appears in the wound a severe painful swelling and similar things like a damming of blood in the bladder and retention of urine and its recognition by the emergence of blood with the urine.
فأدخل أصبعك فى الجرح وأخرج ذلك الدم فإنّه إن بقى دعا الى فساد المثانة وعفونتها، وثمّ اغسل الجرح بالخلّ والماء والملح وقابل كلّ نوع بما شاكله من العلاج الى أن يبرأ.	So insert your finger into the wound and extract that blood, for if it remains, it will cause corruption of the bladder and its putridity; then wash the wound with vinegar, water, and salt, and apply every type of treatment that is suitable for it until it heals.
وينبغى فى أوقات العلاج كلّها أن تربط الفخذين وتجمعهما لتثبت الأدوية التى توضع على الموضع، فإن كانت الحصاة صغيرة وصارت فى مجرى القضيب ونشبت فيه وامتنع البول من الخروج فعالجها بما أنا واصفه قبل أن تصير الى الشقّ.	And it is necessary at times during treatment to bind the thighs together and constrict them, so that the medicines placed on the site may be fixed; for if the wound is small and has occurred in the course of the urethra and has become blocked, preventing the urine from exiting, treat it with what I have described before, until it opens up into the wound.
فكثيرا ما استغنيت بهذا العلاج عن الشقّ فقد جرّبت ذلك وهو أن تأخذ مشعبا من حديد الفولاد تكون هذه صورته:.	Many times I have been successful with this treatment for the wound, and I have tried it, which is to take a probe made of iron in the shape of a stylus.
مثلّث الطرف حادّ مغرّز فى عود، ثمّ تأخد خيطا وتربط به القضيب تحت الحصاة لئلّا ترجع الى المثانة ثمّ تدخل حديدة المشعب فى الإحليل برفق حتّى يصل المشعب الى نفس الحصاة.	Shape the tip of the instrument acutely, like a awl, then take a thread and tie it to the urethra below the wound, so that it does not return to the bladder; then insert the point of the probe into the urethral meatus gently until the probe reaches the site of the wound itself.
وتدير المشعب بيدك فى نفس الحصاة قليلا قليلا وأنت تروم ثقبها حتّى تنفذها من الجهة الأخرى فإّنّ البول ينطلق من ساعته ثمّ تزمّ يدك على ما بقى من الحصاة من خارج القضيب فإنّها تتفتّت وتخرج مع البول ويبرأ العليل،.	Here is the translation:
فإن لم يتهيّأ لك هذا العلاج لعائق يعوقك عن ذلك فاربط خيطا تحت الحصاة وخيطا آخر فوق الحصاة ثمّ تشقّ على الحصاة فى نفس القضيب بين الربطين ثمّ تخرجها.	If this treatment does not work for you, take a thread and pass it underneath the bone and another thread above the bone, then cut on the bone in the same canal between the two ligatures, then remove it.
ثمّ تحلّ الرباط وتنقى الدم الجامد الذى صار فى الجرح، وإنّما وجب ربط الخيط تحت الحصاة لئلّا ترجع الى المثانة والربط الآخر من فوق لكيما اذا حلّ الخيط بعد خروج الحصاة يرجع الجلد الى مكانه فيغطى الجرح.	Then release the ligature and remove the congealed blood that has accumulated in the wound, and it is necessary to ligate the thread underneath the bone so that it does not return to the gland, and the other ligature from above, so that if the thread is released after the bone comes out, the skin will return to its place and cover the wound.
ولذلك ينبغى لك اذا ربطت الخيط الأعلى أن ترفع الجلد الى فوق ليرجع عند فراغك ويغطى الجرح كما قلنا،.	And for this reason, it is necessary for you, if you ligate the upper thread, to elevate the skin above it so that it returns to its position and covers the wound as we mentioned.
الفصل الحادى والستّون.	The Sharp Surgery and the Cauterization.
فى إخراج الحصاة للنساء.	For extracting the bone in women.
قليلا ما تتولّد الحصاة فى النساء فإن عرض لأحد منهنّ حصاة فإنّه يعسر علاجها ويمتنع لوجوه كثيرة أحدها أن المرأة ربّما كانت بكرا والثانية أنّك لا تجد امرأة تبيح نفسها للطبيب.	It is rare for a bone to be dislocated in women, because if one of them has a dislocated bone, it is difficult to treat her and there are many obstacles, one of which is that the woman may be modest and the other is that you do not find a woman who would allow a doctor to examine her.
اذا كانت عفيفة او من ذوات المحارم والثالثة أنك لا تجد امرأة تحسن هذه الصناعة ولا سيّما العمل باليد والرابعة أنّ موضع الشقّ على الحصاة من النساء بعيد من موضع الحصاة فتحتاج الى شق غائر.	If she is shy or one of those who are prohibited from (marrying), and the third is that you do not find a woman who can perform this craft, nor even work with her hand, and the fourth is that the place of the incision on the bone in women is far from the location of the bone, so it requires a deeper incision.
وفى ذلك خطر، فإن دعت الضرورة الى ذلك فينبغى أن تتّخذ امرأة طبيبة محسنة وقليلا ما توجد فإن عدمتها فاطلب طبيبا عفيفا رفيقا اوتحضر امرأة قابلة محسنة فى أمر النساء او امرأة تشير فى هذه الصناعة بعض الإشارة.	And in that, there is danger; if necessity demands it, it is necessary to take a woman doctor who is skilled and rare, for their absence is felt, so ask for a gentle and friendly doctor or prepare a woman capable of treating women's affairs or a woman who has some experience in this craft.
فتحضرها وتأمرها أن تصنع جميع ما تأمرها به من التفتيش على الحصاة أوّلا وذلك أن تنظر إن كانت المرأة بكرا فينبغى أن تدخل الأصبع فى مقعدتها وتفتّش الحصاة فإن وجدتها وضغطتها تحت أصبعها.	So prepare her and instruct her to do all that you instruct her, from examining the bone or first, that is to say, she should look if the woman is modest, it is necessary to insert the finger into her perineum and feel the bone, and if she finds it and presses it under her finger.
فحينئذ تأمرها بالشقّ عليها، فإن لم تكن بكرا وكانت ثيّبا فأمر القابلة أن تدخل أصبعها فى فرج العليلة وتفتّش على الحصاة بعد أن تضع يدها اليسرى على المثانة وتعصرها عصرا جيّدا.	When you operate on it with the scalpel, if it is not a cyst and was a tumor, then order the nurse to insert her finger into the orifice of the wound and feel around the area after she places her left hand on the abdomen and presses moderately.
فإن وجدتها فينبغى أن تدرجها عن فم المثانة الى أسفل مبلغ طاقتها حتّى تنتهى بها الى أصل الفخذ ثمّ تشقّ عليها عند قبالة نصف الفرج عند أصل الفخذ من أىّ جهة تتأتّى لها وأحسّت بالحصاة فى تلك الناحية.	If you find it, you should gently draw it out from the mouth of the abdomen to the extent of its strength until it reaches the base of the thigh, then make an incision on it at the middle of the perineum near the base of the thigh, whichever side it belongs to, and feel around the area in that direction.
وأصبعها لا تزول عن الحصاة مضغطة تحتها، وليكن الشقّ صغيرا أوّلا ثمّ تدخل المرود على ذلك الشقّ الصغير فإن أحسّت بالحصاة فتزيد فى الشقّ على قدر ما تعلم أنّ الحصاة تخرج منه، واعلم أنّ أنواع الحصاة كثيرة.	And insert your finger, not deviating from the area, compressing underneath it. Let the incision be small at first, then insert the director on that small incision; if you feel the area, increase the incision according to what you learn that the tumor will come out of it. And know that there are many types of tumors.
منها صغار وكبار وملس وحرش وطوال ومدوّرة وذات شعب فاعرف أصنافها لتستدلّ بذلك على ما تريد، فإن غلبك الدم فذرّ فى الموضع الزاج المسحوق وامسكه ساعة حتّى ينقطع الدم ثمّ ارجع الى عملك.	Some are small and some are large, and some are smooth and rough and long and winding, having branches. So, recognize their types to manage them accordingly for what you want. If blood overflows from you, apply a compress to the affected area, and hold it for an hour until the bleeding stops, then return to your work.
حتّى تخرج الحصاة، واعمل أن تعدّ مع نفسك من الآلات التى ذكرت فى إخراج الحصاة للرجال لتستعين بها فى عملك، فإن غلبك نزف الدم وعلمت بنبض الدم أنّه من شريان انقطع فضع الذرور على الموضع.	Until the tumor is removed, and be aware that you should prepare yourself with the instruments I mentioned for removing tumors in men, so that you may use them in your work. If blood overflows from you, and you learn to stop the bleeding by constricting the artery, then apply a compress to the affected area.
وشدّه بالرفائد شدّا محكما واتركه ولا تعاوده واترك الحصاة ولا تخرجها فربّما هلكت العليلة ثمّ عالج الجرح فإذا سكنت حدّة الدم بعد أيّام وتعفّن الموضع فارجع الى عملك حتى تخرج الحصاة،.	And tighten the bandage tightly and leave it, and do not touch or manipulate the tumor, and do not remove it. Perhaps you may have hurt the wound, then treat the incision. If the bleeding stops after a few days, and the area heals, return to your work until the tumor is removed.
الفصل الثانى والستّون.	The Second and Sixtieth [sections/chapters].
فى الشقّ على الأدرة المائيّة.	On the incision on the watery glands.
الأدرة المائيّة إنّما هى اجتماع رطوبة فى الصفاق الأبيض الذى يكون تحت جلدة الخصى المحيطة بالبيضة وتسمّى الصفن وقد يكون فى غشاء خاصّ له تهيّئه الطبيعة فى جهة من البيضة.	The watery glands are a collection of humidity in the white peritoneum that is beneath the membrane surrounding the testicle and is called the spermatic cord, and it has a special natural arrangement at one end of the testicle.
حتّى يظنّ أنّه بيضة أخرى ويكون بين جلدة الخصى وبين الصفاق الأبيض الذى قلنا ولا يكون ذلك إلّا فى الندرة، وتولّد هذه الأدرة من ضعف يعرض للأنثيين فتنصّب اليها هذه المادّة وقد تعرض عن ضربة على الأنثيين.	One might think that it is another testicle and it is between the membrane surrounding the testicle and the white peritoneum, which we have mentioned, but that is not so except in the case of injury, and these glands are generated from a weakness that is exposed to the blows on the testicles, and one encounters this matter when there is a blow on the testicles.
وهذه الرطوبة تكون ذات ألوان كثيرة إمّا أن يكون لونها الى الصفرة وإمّا أن تكون دميّة حمراء وإمّا أن تكون درديّة سوداء وإمّا أن تكون مائيّة بيضاء وهى أكثر ما تكون، والعلامات التى يعرف بها.	And this humidity has many colors, either it is yellowish, or it is bloody red, or it is dark black, or it is watery white, and that is what it is most of the time, and these are the signs by which it is recognized.
حيث اجتماع الماء فإنّه إن كان فى الصفاق الأبيض الذى قلنا فالورم يكون مستديرا الى الطول قليلا كشكل بيضة ولا تظهر الخصية لأنّ الرطوبة تحيط بها من جميع النواحى.	When the water collects, if it is in the white peritoneum that we have mentioned, then the tumor becomes slightly elongated in shape like a testicle, and the testicle does not appear because the humidity surrounds it from all directions.
وإن كانت الرطوبة فى غشاء خا صّ لها فإن الورم يكون مستديرا بجهة من البيضة.	And if the humidity is in a membrane special to it, then the tumor becomes elongated at one end of the testicle.
ولهذا يتوهّم الإنسان أنّها بيضة أخرى، وإن كانت الرطوبة بين جلدة الخصى والصفاق الأبيض فإنّه يقع تحت الحسّ، وأمّا اذا أردت معرفة لون الرطوبة فاسبر الورم بالمدسّ المربّع الذى تقدّمت صورته فما خرج فى اثر المدسّ حكمت عليه بما داخله.	And for this reason, the person thinks it is another testicle. And if the humidity is between the membrane surrounding the testicle and the white peritoneum, then it falls under the sensation, and if you want to know the color of the humidity, then puncture the tumor with a square instrument that I have previously described, and what comes out after the puncture will show you what is inside.
فإذا صرنا الى العلاج بالحديد فينبغى أن تأمر العليل بالفصد إن أمكنه ذلك ورأيت جسمه ممتلئا ثمّ يستلقى على ظهره على شىء عال قليلا وتضع تحته خرقا كثيرة ثمّ تجلس أنت على يساره.	If we resort to treatment with iron, it is necessary to warn the patient of the application of cautery, if that is possible for him, and you see his body emaciated, then he lies on his back on a pillow slightly elevated, and many cloths are placed beneath him, then you sit on his left side.
وتأمر خادما بالجلوس عن يمينه يمدّ ذكره الى أحد جانبى جلدة الخصى وإلى ناحية مراقّ البطن ثمّ تأخذ مبضعا عريضا وتشقّ جلدة الخصى من الوسط بالطول الى قريب من العانة.	The surgeon will sit on the left side, extending his hand to one of the sides of the wounded area and to the region of the stomach, then he takes a wide incision and opens the wound from the middle along the length up to near the navel.
وتصير الشقّ على استقامة موازيا للخّط الذى يقسم جلدة الخصى نصفين حتّى يصل الى الصفاق الأبيض الحاوى فتسلخه وتحفّظ من أن تشقّه ويكون سلخك له من الجهة التى تلصق بالبيضة أكثر وتستقصى السلخ على قدر ما يمكنك،.	And he makes the incision straight, parallel to the line that divides the wounded area into two halves, until it reaches the white peritoneum, then he perforates and preserves from making an excessive incision, and he takes care to make the perforation on the side that is more adherent to the bladder, as much as possible.
ثمّ تبطّ الصفاق المملوء ماء بطّا واسعا وتخرج جميع الماء، ثمّ تفرق بين شفتى الشقّ بصنّارات وتمدّ الصفاق الى فوق ولا تمسّ جلدة الخصا الحاوية وتقطع الصفاق كيف ما أمكنك قطعه إمّا بجملته وإمّا قطعا قطعا.	Then he opens the peritoneum, which is full of fluid and pus, and evacuates all the fluid. Then he separates the edges of the incision with sutures and elevates the peritoneum upwards, without touching the wounded area containing the intestine, and he cuts the peritoneum as much as possible, either in one piece or by cutting it into several pieces.
ولا سيّما جانبه الرقيق فإنّك إن لم تستقص قطعه لم تأمن الماء أن يعود، فإن برزت البيضة الى خارج عن جلدها فى حين عملك فإذا فرغت من قطع الصفاق فردّها ثمّ اجمع شفتى جلدة الخصى بالخياطة.	And do not neglect the thin part, for if you did not cut it precisely, you would not be safe from the fluid returning. If you pushed the bladder out of its place while working, then after finishing with cutting the peritoneum, return it to its position, and then unite the edges of the wounded area with sutures.
ثمّ عالجه علاج سائر الجراحات حتّى يبرأ، فإن أصبت البيضة قد فسدت من مرض آخر فينبغى أن تربط الأوعية التى فى المعلاق خوف النزف ثمّ تقطع الخصية من المعلاق وتخرج البيضة ثم تعالجه بما ذكرنا.	Then treat the rest of the surgical wounds until he recovers. If the bladder has been injured by another disease, it is necessary to ligate the vessels that are in the affected area, fearing bleeding, then cut the ligaments from the affected area and evacuate the bladder, and then treat it as we have mentioned.
فإن كان الماء المجتمع فى الجهتين جميعا فاعلم أنّها أدرتان فشقّ الجهة الأخرى على ما قد فعلت فى الأولى سواء وإن استوى لك أن يكون العمل واحدا فافعل، ثمّ تمسح الدم.	If the fluid has collected in both sides, then know that there are two abscesses, so open the other side as you did with the first one, whether it is easy for you to do the work in one stage or not, then wipe away the blood.
وتدخل فى الشقوق صوفا قد غمسته فى الزيت او فى دهن الورد وتصير من خارج صوفا آخر قد غمسته فى شراب وزيت وتبسطه على الخصيتين ومراق البطن وتضع من فوق خرقا مطويّة وهى الرفائد.	And he inserts into the incisions a sponge that has been soaked in oil or rose-water, and makes another sponge that has been soaked in serous fluid and oil, and places it on the two wounds and the stomach region, and puts above it a wrapped bandage, which is the dressing.
وتربطها من فوق بالرباط الذى هو ذو ستّة أطراف على هذه الصورة:.	And tie it from above with the bandage that has six flaps according to this figure:
ثمّ تؤخذ خرقتان فتخاط وتحشى بالصوف المنفوش على هذا المثال وتصنع الأطراف التى يزمّ بها من قطن او صوف رطب وتجمع بالشدّ فى حزام السراويل وأحد الأطراف تأخذ على المقعدة الى الظهر.	Then take two pieces of cloth, cut and sew them with the woven wool according to this example, and make the flaps that are attached to it from cotton or damp wool, and gather at the strong part in a belt around the loins, and one of the flaps takes its place on the chair to the spine.
والثانى تأخذ الى نحو العانة والطرفين على الفخذين من أسفل والطرفين الباقيين على الأربيّتين وتجمع الشدّ كلّه فى حزام السراويل، وقد تصنع هذه الأدرة أيضا بالكىّ بدلا من الشقّ بالحديد.	And the second one takes its place towards the armpit, and the two flaps on the thighs from below, and the two remaining flaps on the hips, and gather all of it strongly in a belt around the loins. It is also possible to make this bandage with adhesive instead of sewing with iron.
وهو أن تأخذ مكواة سكّينيّة لطيفة فتشقّ بها جلدة الخصى وهى حامية على ما وصفنا حتّى انكشف الصفاق الأبيض الحاوى للماء فخذ مكواة أخرى على هذه الصورة:.	And it is that you take a gentle, fine scalpel and dissect with it the skin of the abdomen, which is a layer over what we have described until you expose the white peritoneum containing fluid, then take another incision on this figure:
وهى تشبه العين اليونانيّة، ثمّ تبطّ بها ذلك الصفاق وهى حامية حتّى تخرج الرطوبة كلّها ثمّ تمدّ الصفاق بالصنانير وتسلخ بالمكواة الطبقة الحاوية وتقطعها على حسب ما أمكنك حتّى تستأصل جميعها وتحفّظ من البيضة لا تمسّها النار.	And it resembles the Greek incision, then you open it to expose that peritoneum, which is a layer until all the fluid comes out, then you stretch the peritoneum with the forceps and cut the containing layer with the scalpel, and dissect according to what is possible for you until you remove them all, and be cautious not to touch the ovary with your hand lest it become inflamed.
واعلم أنّ هذا العمل أسلم وأبعد من نزف الدم وأفضل من العمل بالشقّ، فإن اعترضك فى جين الشقّ او فى حين الكىّ ورم حارّ او نزف دم او شىء آخر فينبغى أن تعالج كلّما اعترضك من ذلك بالعلاج الذى يصلح له على ما تقدّم.	And know that this operation is more difficult and farther from causing bleeding, and better than operating with a scalpel. If you encounter an obstruction in the incision or during the suturing, or if there is a severe burning or bleeding or something else, it is necessary to treat each of these obstacles with the treatment that is suitable for it, as mentioned above.
فإن كان العليل جبانا ولم يصبر على هذا العمل لشناعته فليستعمل البطّ على ما أنا واصفه وهو اذا صحّ عندك بما قدّمنا من الدلائل.	If the patient is weak and did not tolerate this operation due to its severity, then do not use the bandage as I have described, but rather use what you deem suitable based on what we have mentioned earlier from the signs.
أنّ الأدرة مائيّة فينبغى أن تجلس العليل على كرسىّ مرتفع ثمّ تبطّ الورم فى أسفله بمبضع عريض واجعل البطّ على طول البدن ويكون الفتح واسعا حتّى يسيل الماء كلّه ثمّ ضع على الموضع قطنا واربطه.	The vein is opened and the surgeon sits on a raised seat, then he makes an incision in the skin at the affected area with a curved scalpel, and places the blade along the length of the arm, making a wide opening until the water flows out completely. Then, he puts it on the affected area and ties it with a bandage.
واتركه يمصل باقى الماء ثمّ عالجه حتّى يبرأ الجرح، فإن تعدّر خروج الماء فى حين بطّك له وإنّما يكون بسبب أنّ الغشاء الأبيض يعترض فى فم الجرح فيمنع خروج الماء.	He leaves it as is, until the flow of water stops, then he massages it until the wound heals. If the flow of water increases again during the massage, it is because the white membrane constricts at the mouth of the wound, preventing the flow of water.
فحينئذ ينبغى أن تدخل فى الجرح ريشة إوزّ او الآلة التى يستخرج بها ماء المحبونين التى تقدّمت صورتها او زد فى فتح الجرح قليلا.	When necessary, he should insert a silver tube or an instrument into the wound to extract the retained fluid that has accumulated in it, or add a small amount to the opening of the wound.
واعلم أنّ الماء قد يعود ويجتمع بعد ستّة أشهر او نحوها فإذا اجتمع فبطّه على الصفة نفسها ويدافع العليل أيّامه،.	And know that the fluid may return and collect after six months or so, if it collects, he should incise on the same suture and evacuate it at the same time.
الفصل الثالث والستّون.	Chapter Three and Sixty.
فى الشقّ على الأدرة اللحميّة وعلاجها.	On incising on the venous vessels and their treatment.
اعلم أنّ الشقّ على هذه الأدرة من الغرر المؤدّى الى الهلاك فى أكثر الأحوال فلذلك نرى تركها والسلامة منها وأنا ذاكر العمل فيها وأنواع الورم.	Know that incising on these veins is one of the most dangerous things that can lead to death in most cases, therefore we see abandonment and avoidance of them, and I warn against operating on them and the types of abscesses.
فأقول إنّه قد تحدث أورام كثيرة فى الأجسام التى يكون منها تركيب الأنثيين ويكون ذلك من أسباب كثيرة إمّا من فضلة حرّيفة تنصبّ الى الأنثيين وإمّا من ضربة ويكون لون الورم على لون الجسد ولا يوجد له الماء.	I say that many abscesses may occur in the bodies that are composed of putrid humors, and that is due to several reasons, either from a purulent fluid that flows into the abscess, or from a blow, and the color of the abscess will be similar to the color of the body, and there will be no fluid in it.
ويكون الورم جاسيا وربّما كان الورم متحجّرا لونه كمد ولا حسّ له وقد يكون من تعقّد الشريانات وانتفاخها كما قد تقدّم ذكره او من انتفاخ الأوردة، فما كان من انتفاخ الشريانات فيعرف ذلك بتبدّد الورم.	The abscess is painful, and perhaps the abscess has changed its color to black, and there is no sensation in it. It may be due to the obstruction of the veins and their inflammation, as I have mentioned before, or from the inflammation of the arteries. What is due to the obstruction of the veins can be recognized by the spreading of the abscess.
اذا كبسته بأصابعك ولا ينبغى أن يعرض له البتّة، وأمّا الذى يكون من انتفاخ الأوردة فإنّه لا يتبدّد منه شىء عند الكبس بالأصابع، وهذا النوع قد يمكن أن يشقّ عليه وعلى سائر اللحوم.	If you are unable to open it with your fingers, and it is not desirable to expose the wound to the air, and as for what happens from the swelling of the abscess, it does not scatter anything when you open it with your fingers, and this type can be treated by opening and on other days.
وهو أن تشقّ جلدة الخصى ثمّ تمدّ البيضة الى فوق وتخرجها من الصفاق الأبيض وتخلّص المعلاق من الأوعية وتربط الأوعية وتقطع المعلاق بعد أن تخلّصه من كلّ جهة من جهات البيضة، فإن كانت البيضة قد التحمت بتلك اللحوم النابتة.	And if you open the membrane of the hernia, then you extend the oozing to above and bring it out from the white peritoneum, and free the ligament from the vessels, and tie the vessels, and cut the ligament after freeing it from every side of the sides of the oozing, for if the oozing has adhered to those tender places.
فينبغى أن تخرج البيضة وتقطعها، وإن كان الالتحام بين شىء من الصفاقات او فيما بين الأوعية فينبغى أن تخلّص جميع ذلك الالتحام وتقطعه قطعا مستديرا.	It is desirable to bring out the oozing and cut it, and if there is adhesion between something of the peritoneum or among the vessels, it is desirable to free all that adhesion and cut it with a straight cut.
فإن كان نبات اللحم فى موضع الالتصاق الذى يكون من خلف فينبغى أن تقطع جميعه وتخرج البيضة كما قلنا فإذا تمّ عملك فاحش الجرح بالصوف المبلول فى دهن الورد والشراب ثمّ عالجه بسائر العلاج حتّى يبرأ،.	If the flesh grows in the place of adhesion which is behind, it is desirable to cut all of it and bring out the oozing as we mentioned, then if you complete your work, apply the soot of the rose-water and the rose-oil on the wound, then treat it with other treatments until it heals.
الفصل الرابع والستّون.	Chapter Four and Sixty.
فى علاج الأدرة التى مع دالية.	On the treatment of hemorrhoids that are accompanied by dysentery.
الدالية هى ورم ملتو بعض الالتواء شبيه بعنقود مع استرخاء الأنثيين وتعسر على العليل الحركة والرياضة والمشى وفى علاج هذه العلّة من الغرر قريب ممّا تقدّم ذكره.	Dysentery is a kind of bilious humour that is mixed with some bloody and serous matter, similar to a mixture of thin blood and serum, with relaxation of the intestines and difficulty in the movement and passage of stool, and in the treatment of this disease from the aforementioned remedies.
ولكن ينبغى أن نذكر العمل فيه على ما فعلت الأوائل، فأقول إنّه ينبغى أن تجلس العليل على كرسىّ مرتفع ثمّ تدفع معلاق الأنثيين الى أسفل ثمّ تمسك جلدة الخصى بأصابعك مع الأوعية التى هى قريبة من القضيب.	But it is necessary to mention the operation for it according to what the ancients did, so I say that it is necessary to raise the intestines onto a high cushion, then push the ligament of the intestines downwards, and grasp the membrane of the hernia with your fingers along with the vessels that are close to the rectum.
ويمسكها خادم غيرك ويمدّها مدّا شديدا ثمّ تشقّ بمبضع عريض حادّ شقّا مورّبا بحذاء الأوعية حتّى تنكشف الأوعية ثمّ تسلخ من كلّ جهة كما ذكرت لك فى سلّ الشريانات التى فى الأضداغ ثمّ تغرز فيها إبرة فيها خيط مثنّى.	Here is the translation of the excerpt:
وتربطها فى أوّل المواضع التى عرضت لها الدالية وتربطها أيضا فى آخرها، ثمّ تشقّها فى الوسط شقّا قائما على طول البدن وتخرج ما اجتمع فيها من الرطوبات العكرة الفاسدة.	Here is the translation:
ثمّ تعالج الجرج بعلاج سائر الجراحات التى تريد أن تتولّد فيها مدّة لتسقط الأوعية التى تغذو إحدى الأنثيين فلا بأس بذلك، فإن عرضت الدالية لجميع الأوعية فينبغى أن تخرج إحدى الأنثيين مع الأوعية لئلّا تعدم البيضة الغذاء.	You should treat the wound by treating other wounds that you want to unite within a limited time, so as not to leave any opening for the veins that nourish one of the two organs; but if you display the vein for all the openings, it is necessary to remove one of the two organs with the vein in order to prevent the interruption of the nutrient supply.
من قبل قطع الأوعية فتذبل ولا ينتفع بها،.	Before cutting the veins, they should be ligated and not benefited by them.
الفصل الخامس والستّون.	Chapter Five and Sixty.
فى علاج الأدرة المعائيّة.	On the treatment of abdominal wounds.
حدوث هذه الأدرة من شقّ يعرض فى الصفاق الممتدّ على البطن فى نحو الأربيّتين من مراقّ البطن فينصبّ المعاء من ذلك الفتق الى أحد الأنثيين.	These abdominal wounds occur from a rupture that appears in the peritoneum, which is stretched over the abdomen, near the umbilical region, and the intestine protrudes from that rupture to one of the two organs.
وهذا الفتق يكون إمّا من شقّ الصفاق وإمّا من امتداده ويحدث هذان النوعان من أسباب كثيرة إمّا ضربة او وثبة او صيحة او رفع شىء ثقيل ونحو ذلك وعلامته اذا كان من امتداد الصفاق أن يحدث قليلا قليلا فى زمن طويل.	And this rupture is either from a tear in the peritoneum or from its stretching, and these two types of ruptures occur due to many causes, such as a blow or a fall or a thrust or lifting something heavy, and so on. And its sign, if it is from the stretching of the peritoneum, is that it occurs gradually over a long period of time.
ولا يحدث بغتة ويكون الورم مستويا الى نحو العمق من قبل أنّ الصفاق يعصر المعاء، وعلامته اذا كان من شقّ الصفاق أنّه يحدث من أوّله وجعا عظيما دفعة ويكون الورم مختلفا ظاهرا تحت الجلد بالقرب.	And it does not occur suddenly, and the hernia is directed towards the depth before the peritoneum constricts the intestine, and its sign, if it is from a tear in the peritoneum, is that it occurs at first with severe pain and the hernia appears visibly under the skin near by.
وذلك بخروج المعاء ومصيره الى خارج من الصفاق، وقد يخرج مع المعاء الثرب فتسمّى هذه الأدرة معائيّة وثربيّة وقد تكون مع ريح، وقد يجرى فى المعاء الزبل ويحتبس هناك فيكون معه هلاك العليل.	And that is by the intestine's exit and its deviation to the outside from the peritoneum, and it may come out with the intestine's turbidity, so this type of abdominal wounds is called turbid and intestinal, and it may be accompanied by gas, and it may be followed by the intestine's strangulation in the wound, and thus it becomes a cause of obstruction.
لأنّه يحدث وجعا صعبا وقرقرة ولا سيّما اذا عصر، وعلاج أنواع هذه العلّة بالحديد خطر فينبغى أن تحذر الوقوع فيه، وصفة العمل أن تأمر العليل أن يردّ المعاء بيده الى داخل جوفه إن تأتّى للرجوع.	Because it occurs with severe pain and convulsion, and it is not hidden unless it constricts, and the treatment of these types of wounds is very dangerous and requires caution to avoid falling into it; the method of operation is to order the patient to return the intestine by hand to its interior, if he is able to return it.
ثمّ يستلقى على قفاه بين يديك ويرفع ساقيه ثمّ تمدّ الجلد الذى يلى الأربيّة الى فوق وتشقّ جلدة الخصى كلّها بالطول ثمّ تغرز فى شفتى الشقّ صنّارات على قدر ما يحتاج لفتح الشقّ بها.	Then, you should rest on your knee between your hands and lift his leg, then stretch the skin that is above the artery to the top and separate the skin of the thigh entirely along its length, then make an incision in the middle of the separation, making stitches according to what is needed to open the incision with them.
ويكون الشقّ على قدر ما يمكن أن تخرج منه البيضة، ثمّ تسلخ الصفاقات التى تحت جلدة الخصى حتّى اذا انكشف الصفاق الأبيض الصلب من كلّ ناحية فحينئذ فأدخل أصبعك السبّابة فيما يلى البيضة.	And the incision should be according to what is possible to extract the testicle from it, then you should dissect the fasciae that are underneath the skin of the thigh until when the white, tough aponeurosis appears from every direction, and then you should insert your finger into what is above the testicle.
فيما بين الصفاق الأبيض الذى تحت جلدة البيضة وبين الصفاق الثانى وتطلق بها الالتصاق الذى من خلف البيضة، ثمّ تثنى باليد اليمنى الى داخل جلدة الخصى ومع هذا تمدّ الصفاق الأبيض الى فوق باليد اليسرى وترفع البيضة مع الصفاق الى ناحية الشقّ.	In what is between the white aponeurosis that is underneath the skin of the testicle and the second aponeurosis, you release the adhesion that is behind the testicle, then you bend with your right hand to the inside of the thigh's skin, and with this, you stretch the white aponeurosis upwards with your left hand and lift the testicle with its aponeurosis towards the direction of the incision.
وتأمر الخادم بمدّ البيضة الى فوق وتطلق أنت الالتصاق الذى من خلف اطلاقا تامّا وتفتّش بأصبعك لئلّا يكون هناك شىء من المعاء الملتوى فى الصفاق الأبيض الصلب فإن أصبت منه شيئا فادفعه الى البطن أسفل.	And order the servant to stretch the testicle upwards and release the adhesion that is behind it, releasing it completely, and search with your finger to ensure there is nothing from the surrounding fat in the white, tough aponeurosis; if you find something, push it down towards the abdomen below.
ثمّ تأخذ إبرة فيها خيط غليظ قد فتل من عشرة خيوط وتدخلها عند آخر الصفاق الذى تحت جلدة الخصى الذى يلى الشقّ ثمّ تقطع أطراف انثناء الخيط حتّى تكون أربعة خيوط.	Then, take a needle with a thick thread that has been spun from ten threads and insert it at the end of the aponeurosis that is underneath the skin of the thigh near the incision, then cut the edges of the twisted thread until there are four threads.
ثمّ تركّب بعضها على بعض بشكل مصلّب وتربط بها الصفاق الذى قلنا إنّه تحت جلدة الخصى رباطا شديدا من ناحيتين ثمّ تلفّ أيضا أطراف الخيوط وتربطها ربطا شديدا حتّى لا يقدر شىء من الأوعية التى تغذوها على أن يصل اليها شىء.	Then, you should tie some of them to each other in a mesh-like shape and use them to bind the aponeurosis that we said is underneath the skin of the thigh, binding it strongly from two directions; then, also twist the edges of the threads and bind them with a strong binding until nothing from the vessels that feed it can reach it.
لئلّا يعرض من ذلك ورم حارّ وتصير أيضا رباطا ثانيا خارجا من الرباط الأوّل بعيدا منه أقلّ من أصبعين وبعد هذين الرباطين تدع من الصفاق الذى تحت جلدة الخصى قدر عظم الأصبع.	Here is the translation:
وتقطع الباقى كلّه على استدارة وتنزع معه البيضة، ثمّ تشق أسفل جلدة الخصى شقّا يسيل منه الدم والمدّة كما وصفنا فيما تقدّم، ثمّ يستعمل الصوف المغموس فى الزيت ويوضع فى الجرح ويستعمل الرباط الذى وصفنا.	The entire penis is cut off on a circular basis, and the testicle is removed with it. Then, an incision is made in the lower part of the thigh to allow for the flow of blood and pus as we have previously described. Then, the soaked dressing is used with oil and placed in the wound, and the bandage that we have described is used.
وقد يكوى الصفاق الأبيض الذى قلنا بعد قطعه حذرا من نزف الدم فكثيرا ما يعرض ذلك، وتترك الرباط حتّى يسقط من ذاته فإن أبطأ سقوطه فلينطل بالماء الحارّ وتحمل عليه ما يعرّقه حتّى يسقط.	When the white region, which we have described after cutting it off, becomes dry and stops bleeding much, the bandage is left until it falls off by itself. Then, the wound is washed with hot water and anything that irritates it is avoided until it heals.
ثمّ تعالج الجرح بسائر علاج الجراحات حتّى يبرأ،.	Then, the wound is treated with the usual treatment of wounds until it recovers.
الفصل السادس والستّون.	The Sixth and Sixtieth Chapters.
في الأدرة الريحيّة هذه الأدرة الريحيّة ما رأيت أحدا اجترأ على علاجها بالحديد وقد ذكرت الأوائل أن يصنع كما وصفنا فى الأدرة التى مع دالية وذلك أن تربط الأوعية بعد الشقّ عليها برفق أسفل.	In these arterial wounds, I have not seen anyone dare to treat them with iron, and I mentioned earlier that it should be treated as we described in the wounds with a pulse, which is to ligate the arteries after making an incision on them with a gentle touch from below.
ثمّ تشقّ فى الوسط وتعالج الورم بما يفتحه حتّى تسقط الأوعية وتعالج الجرح على ما ذكرنا حتّى يبرأ،.	Then, an incision is made in the middle and the tumor is treated with what opens it until the arteries fall off, and the wound is treated as we have mentioned until it recovers.
الفصل السابع والستّون.	The Seventh and Sixtieth Chapters.
فى الفتق الذى يكون فى الأربيّة.	In the fracture that occurs in the hip joint.
قد يعرض الفتق فى الأربيّة كما قلنا فينتو الموضع ولا ينحدر الى الأنثيين شىء من المعاء وإن انحدر كان ذلك يسيرا ويرجع فى كلّ الأوقات.	The fracture may occur in the hip joint, as we have mentioned, and it does not displace to the inner or outer sides, and if it does displace, it is slight and returns to its original position at all times.
ولكن إن طال به الزمان زاد الشقّ فى الصفاق حتّى ينحدر المعاء والثرب فى الصفن ويعرض ذلك من امتداد الصفاق الذى يكون فى الأربيّة كما قلنا.	But if the fracture is delayed for a long time, the incision in the thigh increases until the hip joint and the ribs are dislocated, and this occurs due to the extension of the fracture that occurs in the hip joint, as we have mentioned.
وذلك أنّه يمتدّ الصفاق ثمّ يسترخى ويرم الموضع وينتو، وعلاجه بالكىّ كما قدّمت وصفه.	And that is why it extends to the thigh, then becomes dislocated and twists the joint, and its treatment is by setting it back in place as we have described.
وقد يعالج بالحديد على هذه الصفة وهو أن يضطجع العليل على ظهره بين يديك ثمّ تشقّ موضع الفتق الوارم الناتى شقّا بالعرض على قدر ثلاث أصابع ثمّ تبطّ الصفاقات التى تحت الجلد.	Treat the affected area with iron in this manner: place a flat instrument on the patient's back between your hands, then make an incision along the length of the abscess, about three fingers wide, and dissect the underlying tissues.
حتّى اذا انكشف الصفاق الأبيض الذى يليه فتأخذ مرودا فتضعه على الموضع الناتى من الصفاق وتكبسه الى عمق البطن ثمّ تخيط الموضعين الناتيين على طرف المرود من الصفاق وتلزق بالخياطة أحدهما بالآخر.	Until you reach the white peritoneum that is underneath, then take a compress and place it on the affected area beneath the peritoneum, and push it into the depth of the abdomen. Then, suture the two affected areas together with a thread, one to the other.
ثمّ تسلّ طرف المرود ولا تقطع الصفاق البتّة ولا تمسّ البيضة ولا غير ذلك كما أعلمتك فى علاج الأدرة المعائيّة ثمّ تعالجه بعلاج الجراحات.	Then release the compress, but do not cut the peritoneum, nor touch the omentum, or anything else, as I have instructed you in the treatment of intestinal wounds. Then, treat it with the treatment of surgical wounds.
فإذا انقطعت الخيوط نقيتها وجبرت الجرح حتّى يندمل فإنّ الصفاق ينقبض ولا يزيد نتو الفتق.	If the sutures are cut, clean them and close the wound until it heals. For then the peritoneum will contract and not increase the size of the abscess.
والكىّ أجود فى هذا الموضع لأنّه أقرب الى السلامة.	And this is better in this case because it is closer to safety.
الفصل الثامن والستّون.	Chapter 8 and 36.
فى استرخاء جلدة الخصى.	On relaxing the skin of the testicle.
كثيرا ما تسترخى جلدة الخصى فى بعض الناس من غير أن تسترخى اللحوم التى فى داخلها ويقبح منظرها، فينبغى لمن رغب فى علاجها أن ينوّم العليل على ظهره.	Many times the skin of the testicle relaxes in some people without relaxing the ligaments that are inside it, and its appearance is distorted. Therefore, one who desires to treat it should place a flat instrument on his back.
ويقطع جميع الجلد الذى استرخى على الجلد الغليظ ثمّ تجمع الشفتين، وإن شئت أن تخيط أوّلا فضلة الجلد المسترخى بثلاث خياطات او أربع وتستوثق من الخياطة ثمّ تقطع ما بين الخياطات.	And cut all the skin that has relaxed on the thick skin, then bring the edges together. And if you want to suture, first suture the relaxed skin with three or four sutures and tighten them from the suture, then cut what is between the sutures.
ثمّ تعالجه بعلاج سائر الجراحات الى أن يبرأ وتسقط الخيوط،.	Then treat it with the treatment of other surgical wounds until he recovers and the sutures fall off.
الفصل التاسع والستّون.	Chapter 9 and 36.
فى الإخصاء.	On cauterization.
إنّ الإخصاء فى شريعتنا محرم.	Amputation in our religion is prohibited.
ولهذا كان ينبغى لى أن لا أذكره فى كتابى هذا وإنّما ذكرته لوجهين أحدهما ليكون ذلك فى علم الطبيب اذا سئل عنه وليعلم علاج من اعتراه والوجه الآخر أنّا كثيرا ما نحتاج الى إخصاء بعض الحيوان لمنافعنا.	It was not necessary for me to mention it in this book, but I did so for two reasons: one is that a doctor may be asked about it and should know how to treat the affected part, and the other is that we often need to amputate some limbs of animals for our own benefit.
كالحملان والتيوس والقطط ونحو ذلك من الحيوان، فأقول إنّ الإخصاء يكون على ضربين إمّا بالرضّ وإمّا بالشقّ والقطع، فالذى يكون بالرضّ فطريق عمله أنّا نجلس الحيوان فى ماء حارّ حتّى تسترخى أنثياه وتلين وتتدلّى.	Like camels, goats, and cats, and so on from the animals. I say that amputation is of two types: either by constriction or by cutting and severing. The one done by constriction is a method of work where we sit the animal in hot water until its limb becomes numb and paralyzed.
ثمّ ترضّها بيدك حتّى تنحلّ ولا تتبيّن عند اللمس، وأمّا الإخصاء بالشقّ والقطع فينبغى أن تمسك الحيوان وتعصر جلدة خصاه باليد اليسرى ثمّ تربط المعاليق وتشقّ على كلّ بيضة شقّا واحدا.	Then you constrict it with your hand until it becomes numb and does not feel pain when touched. As for amputation by cutting and severing, it is necessary to hold the animal firmly and pull the skin of the limb to be amputated with the left hand, then tie the veins and cut at each joint, one cut.
حتّى اذا برزت البيضتان فاقطعهما بعد أن تسلخهما ولا تترك عليهما من الصفاقات شيئا غير الصفاق الرقيق الذى يكون على الأوعية، وهذا الضرب من الإخصاء خير من الذى يكون بالرضّ.	Until, when you have cut the two veins, you sever them after having dissected them and do not leave anything of the membranes on them except the thin membrane that is on the vessels. And this type of amputation is better than the one done by constriction.
لأنّ الرضّ ربّما بقّى من الأنثيين شيئا فاشتهى الحيوان الجماع، ثمّ تعالج الجرح حتّى يبرأ،.	Because constricting may leave something of the nerves, which harms the animal's health, then you treat the wound until it heals.
الفصل السبعون.	Chapter 67.
فىعلاج الخنثى.	Treatment of Hemorrhoids.
الخنثى يكون فى الرجال على نوعين أحدهما أنّه يظهر فيما يلى الفضاء او فى جلدة الخصى فيما بين الأنثيين شكل كأنّه فرج امرأة فيه شعر وقد يسيل البول من الذى يكون فى جلدة الخصى.	Hemorrhoids in men are of two types: one appears as a swelling in the perineum or in the skin of the groin, between the buttocks, resembling a woman's vulva with hair, and urine may flow from it when it is in the skin of the groin.
وأمّا فى النساء فنوع واحد ويكون فوق الفرج على العانة كمذاكير الرجل صغار البتّة ناتية الى خارج أحدهما كأنّه قضيب الرجل والاثنان كالأنثيين، وعلاج الأنواع الثلاثة.	And in women, there is one type, which appears above the vulva on the perineum, like small, elevated swellings, protruding outside, as if they were a man's penis and testicles, resembling the female genitals. And the treatment of these three types.
النوعان من الرجال والنوع الواحد من النساء ينبغى أن تقطع تلك اللحوم الزائدة حتّى يعفى أثرها ثمّ تعالجها بعلاج سائر الجراحات حتّى يبرأ، وأمّا النوع الثانى من الرجال الذى يخرج منه البول الذى يكون فى جلدة الخصى فليس فيه عمل ولا منه برؤ البتّة.	Here is the translation:
الفصل الحادى والسبعون.	The Hundredth and Seventh Operations.
فى قطع البظر واللحم الناتى من فروج النساء.	On the excision of the clitoris and the redundant flesh that grows from the vulva of women.
البظر ربّما زاد فى القدر على الأمر الطبيعىّ حتّى يسمج ويقبح منظره وقد يعظم فى بعض النساء حتّى ينتشر مثل الرجال ويصير الى الجماع.	The clitoris sometimes grows in size due to the natural constitution until it becomes erect and appears like that of a man, and it inclines towards coitus.
فينبغى أن تمسك فضل البظر بيدك او بصنّارة وتقطعه ولا تمعن فى القطع ولا سيّما فى عمق الأصل لئلّا يعرض نزف دم.	You should grasp the base of the clitoris with your fingers or with a thread, and cut it off, but do not hesitate in the cutting, nor be concerned about the depth of the root, so that there is no haemorrhage.
ثمّ تعالجه بعلاج الجراحات حتّى يبرأ، وأمّا اللحم النابت فهو لحم ينبت فى فم الرحم حتّى يملأه.	Then you should treat the wounds with a surgical treatment until they heal, and as for the redundant flesh, it is flesh that grows in the mouth of the womb until it fills it.
وربّما خرج الى خارج على مثال الذنب.	And sometimes it protrudes outside like a finger.
ولذلك يسمّيه بعض الأوائل المرض الذنبىّ فينبغى أن تقطعه كما تقطع البظر سواء وتعالجه حتّى يبرأ،.	Therefore, some of the ancient physicians called it the "finger-like disease", and you should excise it as you would the clitoris, and treat it until it heals.
الفصل الثانى والسبعون.	The Hundredth and Eighth Operations.
فى علاج الرتقاء.	On the treatment of varices.
الرتقاء هو أن يكون فرج المرأة غير مثقوب او يكون الثقب صغيرا ويكون إمّا طبيعيّا تولد به وإمّا عرضيّا، فالعرضىّ يكون من علّة قد تقدّمت وهو يكون إمّا من لحم نابت زائد.	Varices are when the vulva of a woman is not perforated or has a small opening, and it may be either congenital or acquired, and the acquired one may be due to a previous illness, and it may be from redundant flesh that has grown.
او صفاق رقيق او كثيف ويكون إمّا فى عمق الرحم وإمّا فى جوانبه وإمّا فى أعلاه او أسفله ويمنع من الجماع والحبل ومن الولادة وربّما منع الطمث، ومعرفة ذلك تكون بالنظر من القابلة.	Or it is a thin or thick membrane, and it may be either in the depths of the womb, or in its middle, or at its top or bottom, and it prevents coitus, pregnancy, and childbirth, and sometimes menstruation, and knowing that requires visual examination by the midwife.
إن كان السدّ ظاهرا قريبا فإن لم يكن ظاهرا فتفتّشه بأصابعها او بمرود فإن كان السدّ من صفاق رقيق وكان قريبا من الشفرين فبادر خرقه وهو أن تجعل على الشفرين شبه الرفائد ثمّ ضع إبهاميك من اليدين جميعا.	If the obstruction is clearly visible, then if it is not visible, you should explore it with your fingers or a probe. If the obstruction is due to a thin membrane and is close to the labia, then make an incision, and that is by making a wound on the labia like a small cleft, then place all your fingers on it.
والمرأة على ظهرها منفرجة ساقاها ثمّ تمدّ الشفرين بقوّة حتّى تخرق الصفاق الرقيق وينفتح السدّ ثمّ تأخذ صوفا وتشربه فى الزيت وتضعه على الموضع وتجامع المرأة كلّ يوم لئلّا يلتحم الموضع مرّة أخرى.	The woman should be placed on her back with her legs spread apart, then the surgeon should extend his hands with strength until he reaches the thin membrane and opens the suture, then takes a swab and wipes it in the oil and places it on the site, and massages the woman every day so that the site does not adhere again.
فإن كان الصفاق غليظا كثيفا فينبغى أن تشقّه بمبضع عريض تشبه ورقة آس، فإن كان السدّ من لحم نابت فعلّقه بالصنانير واقطعه ولتكن معك أدوية تسكن النزف من غير لذع مثل القاقيا والشيّان واللبان مجموعة ببياض البيض.	If the membrane is thick and dense, it should be cut with a narrow scalpel like a thin sheet of paper. If the suture is from a fresh wound, it should be treated with pungent remedies and their application should be stopped to avoid bleeding without causing pain, such as with cupping glasses, and the seton, and the tube, all of which are grouped together in the white lead.
ثمّ تستعمل أنبوبة من رصاص واسعة لئلّا يلتحم الجرح سريعا، تمسكه أيّاما وتستعمل فتيلا من كتان يابس ثمّ تعالج بسائر علاج الاندمال حتّى يبرأ، وقد يعرض فى الرحم نبات لحوم آخر فينبغى أن تقطع على هذه الصفة.	Then a tube of wide lead is used so that the wound heals quickly, and it is massaged every day, and a plaster from strong yarn is applied, then treated with the usual treatment for induration until it recovers. And if there appears in the womb a last stage of hemorrhage, it should be cut off in this manner.
ما لم يكن ورما سرطانيّا فإنّ الورم السرطانىّ الذى يكون فى الرحم لا يعرض له بالحديد البتّة،.	What has not been touched by the carcinogenic tumor, the cancerous tumor that is in the womb does not respond to treatment with iron potions.
الفصل الثالث والسبعون.	Chapter Three and Seventy.
فى علاج البواسير والثآليل والبثور الحمر التى تعرض فى فروج النساء.	On the treatment of varices, hemorrhoids, and red swellings that appear on the women's vulva.
أمّا البواسير فهو انتفاخ أفواه العروق حتّى يسيل منها دم كثير دائم فإذا قدمت البواسير صارت ثآليل، وقد ذكرت فى التقسيم أنواعها وعلاماتها ونذكر هاهنا.	As for varices, it is an enlargement of the blood vessels until a lot of blood flows from them constantly. If varices are neglected, they become hemorrhoids. We have mentioned their types and symptoms in the previous section, and we will mention them here.
ما يقبل منها العلاج وما لا يقبل العلاج، فأقول إنّ البواسير والثآليل اذا كانت فى عمق الرحم ولم تظهر للحسّ فليس فيها علاج بالحديد وما كان منها فى فم الرحم يقع عليها الحسّ فهى التى تعالج.	What can be treated and what cannot be treated. I say that varices and hemorrhoids, if they are deep in the womb and have not been palpated, there is no treatment with iron, and what is on the mouth of the womb is subject to palpation, and it is the one that can be treated.
فينبغى أن تدخل المرأة فى بيت بارد ثمّ تمدّ الثآليل بمنقاش او بخرقة خشنة وتقطعها من أصولها ثمّ تذر عليها عند نزف الدم من أحد الذرورات القاطعة للدم من غير تلذيع.	You should enter the woman in a cold room, then stretch out her limbs with a rough or coarse cloth and cut them off from their roots, then sprinkle it with the blood that flows from one of the cutting veins without any compression.
مثل القاقيا والشيّان واللبان ونحوها ثمّ ترفع رجليها الى الحائط ساعة ثمّ تدليها فى ماء بارد فإن دام النزف فأجلسها فى طبيخ السمّاق وقشور الرمّان والعفص ونحوها ثمّ خذ دقيق الشعير فاعجنه بعسل وخلّ.	Like the cupping glasses and the pipes and their likes, then raise her legs to the wall for an hour, then let them down in cold water; if the bleeding persists, sit her in a bath of hot bitumen, pomegranate peel, and their likes, then take fine powder of the barley and mix it with honey and milk.
وضمّد به على ظهرها فإن انقطع الدم وإلّا فالزم الصلب المحاجم والثديين من غير شرط، ثمّ خذ صوفة فاغمسها فى عصارة الطراثيث او عصارة لسان الحمل او عصارة أغصان العلّيق مع شراب عفص وتلزم الموضع.	And apply it to her back, if the bleeding stops; otherwise, use solid plugs made of the mixture of walnuts and their likes, without any condition. Then take a swab and dip it in the electuary of tragacanth or the electuary of Cassia fistula or the electuary of rose petals with a syrup of pomegranate peel, and apply it to the site.
فإذا سكن الورم فعالج الموضع بالمرهم حتّى يبرأ، وأمّا البثر الأحمر فهو يشبه رؤوس الحاشا خشن المنظر فينبغى أن تقطع ما ظهر منه على حسب ما ذكرت فى الثآليل سواء وتعالجه حتّى يبرأ،.	If the tumor becomes inflamed, treat the site with the application of the poultice until it heals. As for the red abscess, it resembles the roughness of a camel's hump in appearance; you should cut away what appears of it according to what I mentioned about the limbs, and treat it until it heals.
الفصل الرابع والسبعون.	Chapter 4 and 57.
فى بطّ الخراج الذى يعرض فى الرحم.	In the treatment of the ulcer that appears on the womb.
قد يعرض فى الرحم أنواع كثيرة من الأورام كالسرطان والورم المتحجّر والقروح والدبيلة والآكلة والنواصير والبواسير والشقاق والثآليل والورم الحارّ وقد ذكرت جميع هذه الأمراض وأنواعها وعلاماتها فى التقسيم.	It may appear in the womb various types of tumors, such as cancer, calcified tumor, ulcers, aposteme, prolapse, nodules, and painful tumors, and I have mentioned all these diseases and their types and symptoms in the classification.
فينبغى أن نذكر فى هذه المقالة الورم الحارّ الذى يعرض فى الرحم اذا كان من الأورام التى تجمع مدّة كيف يكون بطّها بالحديد، فينبغى أن تنظر فإن كان وجع الورم فى ابتدائه حادّا مع ضربان والتهاب وحمّى.	It is necessary to mention in this article the painful tumor that appears in the womb, if it is one of the tumors that gather gradually, how to treat it with iron; it is necessary to consider that if the tumor was severe from its beginning with fever and palpitations and anxiety.
ورأيته أحمر إن وقع عليه الحسّ فلا تعجل ببطّه وعالجه بما يعين على النضج حتّى اذا سكنت هذه الأعراض فحينئذ ينبغى أن تجلس المرأة على كرسىّ له مقعدان وتستند على ظهرها.	If a sensitive part is affected, do not hasten to treat it, and do not touch it with what may harm the patient, until when these symptoms subside. Then, it is fitting that the woman sits on a chair, leaning back on its backrest, while supporting herself with her back.
وتجمع رجليها الى ناحية أسفل البطن وتكون فخذاها منفرجتين وتصير ذراعيها تحت ركبتيها وتربطهما برباط يصلح.	And she gathers her legs towards the lower abdomen, and keeps them slightly apart, and places her hands under her knees, and ties them with a bandage that is suitable.
لذلك ثمّ تجلس القابلة من الجانب الأيمن وتستعمل الآلة التى يفتح بها فم الرحم التى تأتى صورتها فيما بعد، وينبغى اذا أردت استعمال هذه الآلة أن تقدّر بمرود عمق رحم المرأة لئلّا يكون الذى يدخل من الآلة أكثر من عمق الرحم.	Then, the operator sits on the right side and uses the instrument that opens the mouth of the womb, which is described in what follows. And it is fitting, if you want to use this instrument, that you measure the width of the woman's womb so that what enters from the instrument is not more than the width of the womb.
فيؤذى العليلة فإن كانت الآلة أكثر من العمق فينبغى أن توضع رفائد على شفة عنق الرحم لتمنع دخول الآلة كلّها فى عمق الرحم وينبغى أن تصير اللولب الذى يجرى فى الآلة من الجانب الأعلى.	If the instrument is wider than the width, it is fitting to place a guide on the neck of the womb to prevent the entire instrument from entering the width of the womb. And it is fitting to curve the rod that moves within the instrument from the upper side.
وأنت تمسك الآلة ويدير الخادم اللولب حتّى يفتح عنق الرحم، فإذا ظهر الخراج ولمس باليد وكان ليّنا رقيقا فينبغى أن تشقّه عند رأسه بمبضع عريض فإذا استفرغت المدّة كلّها.	And you hold the instrument and the servant directs the rod until it opens the neck of the womb. If the tumor appears and is touched by the hand, and it is tender and thin, it is fitting to make an incision at its head with a narrow scalpel. And if the entire duration is spent.
فينبغى أن تصير فى الجرح فتيلة ليّنة مغموسة فى دهن الورد او زيت أخضر فيه بعض القبض وتصير الفتيلة خارجا من الشقّ فى عنق الرحم ويصيّر من خارج على الرحم وعلى العانة صوف نقىّ مغموس فى ماء قد غلى فيه خبّازى.	Then, it is fitting to make a gentle insertion of a thin, coated thread in the fat of the rose or green oil, which has some astringent properties. And the thread goes out from the incision in the neck of the womb, and it is tied from the outside on the womb and on the perineum, with a clean, coated bandage that has been dipped in vinegar.
ثمّ تعالج بعد يومين بالمرهم الذى يصلح لذلك حتّى يبرأ.	Then, treat afterwards with a suitable remedy for two days until it heals.
وقد يغسل الرحم والجرح بأن يحقن بالماء والعسل ثمّ بماء قد غلى فيه أصل السوس او زراوند طويل ثمّ تعود الى المرهم، فإن كان الخراج متواريا داخلا فى الرحم.	And it may be that the womb and the wound are washed with water and honey, then with water in which rose water or long pepper has been soaked. Then, return to the usual treatment, if the tumor is scattered inside the womb.
فينبغى أن تمتنع من علاجه بالحديد بل يعالج بما ذكرنا فى التقسيم.	It is not desirable to amputate from the treatment with iron, but rather to treat with what we have mentioned in the section.
الفصل الخامس والسبعون.	Chapter Five and Sixty.
فى تعليم القوابل كيف يعالجن الأجنّة الأحياء اذا خرجوا على غير الشكل الطبيعىّ.	On teaching about the treatment of anomalies, how they treat living limbs if they deviate from their natural shape.
ينبغى للقابلة أن تعرف أوّلا شكل الولادة الطبيعيّة فمن علاماتها اذا رأيت المرأة تتزحّر الى أسفل وتشتاق أن تشتمّ الهواء ويهون عليها ما هى عليه من النفاس.	It is necessary for the doctor to recognize the natural shape of birth, and from its signs, if you see a woman having difficulty breathing, panting, and straining to get air, and it is heavy on her, what it is upon her from the pains.
ويسرع خروج الجنين فاعلم أنّ هذه الولادة تكون على الشكل الطبيعىّ ويكون خروجه على رأسه والمشيمة معه او معلّقة من سرّته، فإذا رأيت هذه العلامات فينبغى أن تعصر بطنها لكيما يخرج الجنين بسرعة.	And hasten the delivery of the fetus, for you know that this birth is in its natural shape, and its delivery is on its head, and the placenta with it or attached to its navel. So if you see these signs, it is necessary to press her belly so that the fetus comes out quickly.
فإنّه اذا نزل على رأسه نزلت المشيمة معه وتنظّف من تلك الفضول تنظيفا حسنا، وما خلا هذه الولادة فهى غير طبيعيّة مذمومة لأنّه قد يخرج الجنين على رجليه ويخرج يديه قبل رأسه ورجليه.	For if it comes out on its head, the placenta comes out with it and cleanses from those impurities a good cleansing. And anything other than this birth is unnatural and reprehensible, because the fetus may come out on its feet or bring out its hands before its head and feet.
ويده الواحدة او رجله الواحدة او يخرج رأسه ويده او يخرج منطويا وربّما انقلب على قفاه ونحو ذلك من الأشكال المذمومة، فينبغى للقابلة أن تكون حاذقة لطيفة بهذه الأشياء كلّها وتحذر الزلل والخطاء.	And it may bring out one arm or one leg, or its head and arm, or come out upside down, and perhaps turn onto its side, and so on from the unnatural shapes. It is necessary for the doctor to be gentle and careful with all these things and avoid mistakes and errors.
وأنا مبيّن كلّ شكل منها وكيف الحيلة فيه لتستدلّ بذلك وتقف عليه، اذا خرج الجنين على رأسه الخروج الطبيعىّ واشتدّ على المرأة ذلك وعسر عليها الطلق ورأيت قوّتها قد ضعفت فأجلسها على كرسىّ وأمر نساء بضبطها.	And we have explained each shape of it and how to manage it, so that you can rely on it and stop at it. If the fetus comes out on its head in a natural delivery, and it is difficult for the woman, and her strength has weakened, then seat her on a chair and order the women to hold her firm.
وكمّد رحمها بالحلبة المطبوخة وبالأدهان الرطبة، ثمّ تدخل القابلة بين أصابعها مبضعا صغيرا فتشقّ به المشيمة او تشقّها بظفرها حتّى يسيل ما فيها من الرطوبة وتعصر بطن المرأة حتّى ينزل الجنين.	And compress her womb with the kneaded dough and the moist sponges, then the doctor inserts his fingers between hers, making a small insertion to detach the placenta or detaching it with his fingertips until the moisture in it is drained, and presses the woman's belly until the fetus comes out.
فإن لم ينزل فينبغى أن تحقن المرأة بلعاب الحلبة مع دهن الشيرج ثمّ تأمرها بعد الحقنة أن تتزحّر وتعطّسها بالكندس وتمسك فمها وأنفها فإنّ الجنين يخرج من ساعته، فإن خرجت يدا الجنين أوّلا فينبغى أن تردّهما برفق قليلا قليلا.	If the fetus does not come out, it is necessary to open the woman's belly with a scalpel and then make her sneeze after the opening, so that she expels and pushes with her hands and nostrils; for the fetus comes out of its container. If the hand of the fetus or the like appears, it is necessary to pull them gently little by little.
فإن لم تتأتّا للدخول فضع المرأة على منبر وترفع رجليها الى فوق ثمّ تهزّ المنبر على الأرض والمرأة تمسك كيلا تقع عند الهزّ فإن لم تدخل اليدان ومات الجنين فاقطعهما واجذب باقى الجنين.	If the fetus does not come out, place the woman on a bench and lift her legs up high, then shake the bench on the ground while the woman holds onto it so as not to fall when shaken. If the hands did not enter and the fetus died, remove them and pull out the remaining parts of the fetus.
او اربط يديه بخرقة واجذبهما باعتدال فإنّه يخرج، خروج الجنين على رجليه، اذا خرج الجنين على رجليه فينبغى أن تدفعهما الى فوق ثمّ تحوّل الجنين قليلا قليلا حتّى تسوّيه ثمّ تأخذ إحدى رجليه فتمدّها قليلا قليلا.	Or bind his hands with a cloth and pull them out gently, for it comes out. The fetus comes out on its legs. If the fetus comes out on its legs, it is necessary to push them upwards and then turn the fetus little by little until it is freed, then take one of its legs and stretch it out little by little.
فإذا خرجتا الى الفخذين فأمرها أن تتزّحر وعطّسها بالكندس فإنّه يخرج، فإن لم يخرج بما وصفنا وإلّا فردّ الجنين قليلا قليلا حتّى تصيره على الشكل الطبيعىّ فإنّه يخرج حينئذ خروجا سلسا، فإن امتنع بما وصفنا كلّه.	If it comes out to the thighs, tell her to sneeze and push with her hands, for it will come out. If it does not come out as we described, then turn the fetus little by little until it takes its natural shape, for it will come out then with a smooth delivery. If all that we described is difficult, then do what we mentioned earlier.
فخذ من لعاب الخطمّى ولعاب الحلبة ودهن الشيرج وصمغا محلولا واضرب الجميع فى الهاون ضربا جيّدا ثمّ اطل به فرج المرأة وأسفل بطنها ثمّ أجلسها فى ماء فاتر حتّى يبلغ الشراسيف.	Take the scalpel of the surgeon and the scalpel for dissecting and the instrument for cutting and a tube for inserting and hit them all together in the hollow of the womb with a gentle stroke, then insert it into the woman's vulva and lower abdomen, then sit her in warm water until she reaches recovery.
فإذا رأيت أنّه قد لان أسفلها فاصنع لها شيافة من مرّ وتتحمّلها فإذا أمسكت الشيافة ساعة فأجلسها على الكرسىّ ثمّ عطّسها وسدّ فمها وأنفها واعصر أسفل بطنها عصرا رقيقا فإنّ الجنين يخرج من ساعته، خروج الجنين على ركبتيه ويديه،.	If you see that it has not come out, make her a seat from earth and carry her on it; if she holds the seat for an hour, then sit her on the bench, then push and close her mouth and nostrils, and press down on her lower abdomen with a gentle pressure; for the fetus comes out of its container. The fetus comes out on its knees and hands.
إذا خرج على هذه الصفة فاحتل فى إدخال يديه قليلا قليلا ثمّ تستلقى المرأة على قفاه وتدلّى رخليها الى أسفل وهى مضطجعة على سرير وتضمّ يديها ثمّ اعصر فوق بطنها قليلا قليلا.	If you operate in this manner, insert your hand slightly and then make the woman lie on her back, and let her bend her legs upwards and towards her shoulders, while she is leaning against a pillow, and place her hands behind her, and then press gently above her abdomen.
ثمّ أخرج ما تحت رجليها من الوسائد حتّى تكون منصوبة الأسفل فإن لم يخرج الجنين فخذ رجليها جميعا فحرّكهما حركة شديدة ثمّ اعصر فوق الشراسيف قليلا قليلا حتّى يصعد الجنين الى فوق ثمّ تدخل القابلة يدها وتسوّى الجنين قليلا قليلا.	Then bring out what is beneath her thighs from the cushions until it is opposite her back, and if the fetus does not come out, take both legs altogether and shake them strongly, then press gently above the perineum until the fetus comes out, then insert the mallet with your hand and move the fetus slightly.
وأمر المرأة أن تتزحّر حتّى يخرج الجنين، خروج الجنين معترضا مدلّيا لإحدى يديه، احتل فى ردّ يده فإن لم تقدر على ردّها فأقم المرأة واجعلها تمشى فإن لم تقدر على المشى فتضطجع على.	And order the woman to push hard until the fetus comes out, the fetus coming out with one of its hands presenting, insert your hand if it does not come out, and if you are unable to make it come out, make the woman stand up and walk around, and if she is unable to walk, let her lie on her back.
سريرها وهزّ ساقيها هزّا شديدا ثمّ استعمل اللطوخ الذى وصفت من اللعابات فإن أخذها الطلق فأجلسها على كرسىّ ثمّ عالج فى ردّ اليد وتسوية الجنين على الشكل الطبيعىّ وعطّس المرأة وأمرها أن تتزحّر حتّى يخرج،.	And shake her sides strongly, then use the spatula that was mentioned among the instruments, and if it takes hold of the fetus, seat her on a chair, then try to make her hand comfortable and adjust the fetus to its natural position, and encourage the woman and order her to push until it comes out.
خروج الجنين على قفاه باسطا يديه ويكون وجهه الى ظهر أمّه، ينبغى أن تمسك القابلة يد الجنين ثمّ تحوّله قليلا قليلا وتسوّيه برفق فإذا استوى فاحمل على قبلها ما وصفنا من الدهن واللعابات.	The fetus comes out on its back, with its hands and face towards its mother's back. It is necessary to hold the mallet with the hand of the fetus, then turn it slightly and gently, and if it settles, carry it on your knee as we described from the cushions and instruments.
ثمّ مرها أن تتحرّك قليلا قليلا فإذا فعلت ذلك فأجلسها على الكرسىّ وأمرها أن تميل الى الجانب الأيمن ثمّ مرها أن تتزحّر وتعطّسها بالكندس فإنّه يخرج، خروج الجنين منتصبا على جنب.	Then tell her to move slightly, and if she does that, seat her on a chair and order her to lean towards the right side, then tell her to push hard and support her with the cushions, for it will come out, the fetus coming out upright on its side.
إذا نزل الى فم الرحم على هذه الصفة مع المشيمة فشقّ المشيمة بظفرك حتّى تتفرّغ من الرطوبة فإن تعلّقت على وجه الجنين وعنقه فاقطعه من السرّة لئلّا يحتنق فيموت ثمّ ادفع الجنين الى داخل حتّى تصيره على ما ينبغى.	If you descend to the mouth of the womb in this manner with the hook, and you open the hook until it is freed from the fetus's movement, then you take hold of the fetus's face and neck and pull it out from the womb so that it does not die inside; then you insert your hand into the womb until it feels what is necessary.
وأمر المرأة أن تتزّحر مرّات فإنّه يخرج خروجا سهلا، خروج التوأمين او أجنّة كثيرة، اعلم أنّ التوأمين كثيرا ما يولدون وقد تولد ثلاثة او أربعة ويعيشون إلّا أنّ ذلك فى الندرة وأمّا الخمسة فهو شىء خارج عن الطبيعة لا يعيشون البتّة.	And tell the woman to expel effort after effort, for it may bring out a smooth delivery, either twins or many offspring. Know that twins often occur and have been born three or four, and they live, although that is rare and usually five is something outside of nature, which does not live at birth.
وتحيط بهم وإن كثروا مشيمة واحدة ويفترقون بصفاق حاجز بينهم مربوط فى سرّة كلّ واحد منهم، وقد تخرج كما يخرج الجنين الواحد خروجا طبيعيّا سهلا ويخرجون خروجا مذموما كما وصفنا.	And deal with them as if they were a single fetus, and separate them with a partition in between, related to the womb of each one of them. It may be delivered like a single fetus, a smooth natural delivery, and they are born with a good birth, just as we have described.
فإن عسر بعضهم عند الولادة وصار الى ما قلنا من الأشكال غير الطبيعيّة فعالجه كما وصفنا، ولتكن القابلة لطيفة وتفعل ما تفعله برفق وتوان وتتحيّل على كلّ شكل بما يتهيّأ لها من الحيلة المؤدّية الى السلامة،.	For if some of them are difficult during delivery and turn into the unnatural forms we have mentioned, then deal with it as we have described, and may the capable physician be gentle and perform what is necessary with gentleness and consideration, and examine every condition according to what is suitable for it from the beneficial treatment leading to safety.
ذكر ما يتصوّر فى الرحم من الأجنّة فيسقطون، قد يتصوّر فى الرحم واحد واثنان وثلاثة وأربعة وخمسة وستّة وسبعة وأكثر من عشرة وقد صحّ عندى أنّ امرأة أسقطت سبعة وأخرى خمسة عشر كلّهم متصوّرين ذلك.	It is mentioned that what is contained in the womb of the offspring may be miscarried, for it may contain one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, and more than ten. It has been verified that a woman miscarried seven and another fifteen, all of them being contained in that.
بتقدير العزيز العليم، فهذا كلّه ينبغى أن يكون فى علم القابلة فربّما يقع اليها مثل ذلك يوما ما فتقابله بما ينبغى،.	With the esteem of the Glorious and Omniscient, all this is necessary to be in the knowledge of the capable physician, so that when something like that happens, he may deal with it as is necessary.
الفصل السادس والسبعون.	Chapter 67.
فى إخراج الجنين الميّت.	On extracting a dead fetus.
اذا عالجت الجنين الميّت بما ذكرته فى التقسيم من العلاج فلم يخرج واضطرّك الأمر الى العمل باليد فينبغى أن تنظر فإن كانت المرأة صحيحة القوّة وليس بها شىء من الأعراض التى يخاف عليها منها التلف فينبغى أن تستلقى المرأة على سرير على ظهرها.	If you treated the dead fetus as mentioned in the section on treatment and it did not come out, and you were forced to resort to manual extraction, it is necessary to examine whether the woman has a strong constitution and there is nothing among the symptoms that would prevent her from receiving the treatment. It is necessary to make the woman lie on a couch with her back raised.
ويكون رأسها مائلا الى أسفل وساقاها مرتفعتين وخادم يضبطها من كلتى الجهتين او تربط الى السرير لئلّا ينجذب جسدها عند مدّ الجنين.	And her head should be inclined downwards and her thighs raised, and a servant should hold them from both sides or tie them to the couch so that she does not jerk her body when the fetus is being extracted.
ثمّ يرطب فم رحمها بالأدهان الرطبة مع لعاب الخطمّى والحلبة وبزر الكتان ثمّ تدهن القابلة يدها بهذه الأدهان واللعابات ثمّ تدخلها فى الرحم برفق ثمّ تطلب بها مكانا تغرز فيه الصنّارات من الجنين، والمواضع الموافقة لذلك،.	Then he should anoint her womb with sweet-smelling oils, including rose-water and musk and amber, then prepare the suitable instruments for that, and then insert them into the womb gently, then seek a place to insert the instruments that will grasp the fetus, and the corresponding positions for that.
انظر فإن كان الجنين متأتّيا أن ينزل على رأسه فتغرز الصنّارات فى عينيه او فى قفاه او فى فمه او فى حنكه او تحت لحيته او ترقوته او فى المواضع القريبة من الأضلاع او تحت الشراسيف.	Look, if the fetus is lying in a position where its head is downwards, then insert the instruments into its eyes or nostrils or mouth or throat or under its jaw or armpits or in the positions close to the limbs or under the ribs.
وأمّا إن كان نزوله على رجليه ففى العانة والأضلاع الوسطى، وينبغى أن تمسك الصنّارة باليد اليمنى وتصير عطفها فيما بين أصابع اليد اليسرى وتدخل اليد برفق وتغرز صنّارة فى بعض تلك المواضع التى ذكرنا.	And if it is lying with its feet downwards, then in the groin and middle limbs. It is necessary to hold the instrument with the right hand and turn its edge between the fingers of the left hand, and insert the hand gently, and insert the instrument into some of those positions that we mentioned.
حتّى تصل الى شىء فارغ ثمّ تغرز قبالتها صنّارة أخرى او ثالثة إن احتجت ليكون الجذب متساويا ولا يميل الى جهة ثمّ تمدّ مدّا مستويا ولا يكون المدّ على استقامة فقط بل يحرّك الى كلّ جهة.	Until you reach a empty space, then insert another instrument or a third one if you need to make the extraction even and not inclined to one side. Then, extend your hand evenly and do not limit it to only one straight line, but rather move it to every direction.
ليسهل خروجه كما يصنع بالضرس عند قلعه وينبغى فيما بين ذلك أن يرخى المدّ فإن احتبس منه جهة فينبغى أن تدهن القابلة بعض الأصابع بالدهن وتدخلها من جهة لتدير بها ما احتبس فإن خرج بعض الجنين فتنقل الصنانير الى مواضع أخر.	It should be easy to bring it out, just as one extracts with the forceps when extracting a tooth. And it is necessary during that to relax the hand, for if it gets stuck from one side, it is necessary to anoint some of the fingers with oil and insert them from a side in order to extract what got stuck, so if part of the fetus comes out, you should move the instruments to other positions.
هى أرفع قليلا تفعل هذا حتّى يخرج الجنين كلّه، فإن خرجت يد قبل غيرها ولم يمكن ردّها لانضغاطها فينبغى أن تلف عليها خرقة ثمّ تجذبها حتّى اذا خرجت كلّها قطعتها.	Here is the translation:
إمّا فى مفصل الكفّ او فى المرفق وهكذا ينبغى أن تفعل فى اليد الأخرى وفى الرجلين، فإن كان رأس الجنين كبيرا وعرض له ضغط فى الخروج او كان فى رأسه ماء مجتمع فينبغى أن تدخل فيما بين الأصابع مبضعا شوكيّة.	If there is a dislocation in the wrist or in the elbow, and so it should be treated in the other hand and in both legs; for if the head of the fetus is large and there is pressure on its exit or if there is water accumulated in its head, it should be inserted between the fingers with a gentle shaking.
وتشقّ بها الرأس فيخرج الماء او تشدخه بالآلة التى تسمّى المشداخ التى تأتى صورتها مع صور سائر الآلات فىالباب الذىبعد هذا.	And perforate the head to exit the water or pierce it with the instrument called Al-Mashdakh, which is depicted in a shape similar to other instruments in the section that follows this.
كذلك تفعل إن كان الجنين عظيم الرأس بالطبع فينبغى أن تشقّ الجمجمة او ترضّها بالمشداخ كما قلنا ثمّ تخرج العظام بالكلاليب، فإن خرج الرأس وانضغط عند الترقوة فليشقّ حتّى تنصبّ الرطوبة التى فى الصدر.	So, if the fetus has a large head by nature, it should be perforated in the cranium or broken with Al-Mashdakh as we mentioned, then the bones are extracted with the Kalalib. If the head is exited and pressed at the neck, it should be shaken until the vertebrae that are in the chest are dislocated.
فإنّه ينضمّ الصدر حينئذ فإن لم ينضمّ الصدر ولم يتأتّى للخروج فاقطع قطعا على ما يمكنك، فإن كان أسفل البطن وارما او كان به حبن فينبغى أن تبطّه حتّى تسيل الرطوبة منه.	If it does not join the chest, then it does not join the chest and does not come out for delivery, cut cuts as much as you can, whether it is below the belly or has a hard spot in it, it should be broken until the vertebrae are delivered from it.
فإن كان الجنين على رجليه فإنّ جذبه سهل وتسويته الى فم الرحم هين، فإن انضغط عند البطن او الصدر فينبغى أن تجذبه بخرقة قد لففتها على يدك وتشقّ البطن او الصدر حتّى يسيل ما فيهما.	If the fetus is on its knees, then attracting it is easy and adjusting it to the mouth of the womb is simple, but if it is pressed against the belly or chest, it should be attracted with a cloth that you have tied around your hand and perforate the belly or chest until what is in them is delivered.
فإن انتزعت سائر الأعضاء وارتجع الرأس واحتبس فلتدخل القابلة اليد اليسرى فإن كان فم الرحم مفتوحا فتدخل اليد فى عنق الرحم وتطلب بها الرأس وتجذبه بالأصابع الى فم الرحم ثمّ تدخل فيه صنّارة او صنّارتين وتجذبه بها،.	If you have extracted the other members and returned the head and it has been hidden, then insert the left hand into the womb, and if the mouth of the womb is open, then insert your hand into the neck of the womb and feel for the head with your fingers and attract it to the mouth of the womb, then insert a rod or two rods and attract it with them.
فإن كان فم الرحم قد انضمّ لورم حارّ عرض له فلا ينبغى أن تعنف عليه بل ينبغى حينئذ استعمال صبّ الأشياء الرطبة الدسمة وتستعمل الأضمدة وتجلس فى المياه التى ترخى وترطب.	If the mouth of the womb has closed and become hard, it should not be forced open, but rather at that time use gentle manipulation with soft, moistened instruments and apply oils and sit in warm water to soften and relax.
وأمّا إن كان الجنين على جنبه فإن أمكن أن يسوى فليستعمل ما ذكرنا فى الجنين الحىّ فإن لم يمكن ذلك فليقطع قطعا ويخرج، وينبغى أن لا تترك شيئا من المشيمة داخلا البتّة، فإذا فرغت من علاجك فاستعمل ما ذكرنا من العلاج فى الأورام الحارّة التى تعرض فى الأرحام.	If the fetus is on its side, it is possible to straighten it, and we have mentioned what to do for a living fetus. If that is not possible, then it should be cut into sections and extracted, and care must be taken not to leave any part of the placenta inside the womb. When you have finished your treatment, use what we have mentioned about treating painful swellings that occur on the womb.
فإن عرض نزف دم فلتنزل فى المياه القابضة وتستعمل سائر العلاج، ولقد شاهدت امرأة كانت قد حبلت فمات الجنين فى جوفها ثمّ حبلت عليه مرّة أخرى.	For if there is a flow of blood, then it should be stopped with astringent waters and other treatments used. I have seen a woman who had become pregnant, then the fetus died in her womb, and she became pregnant again.
ثمّ مات الجنين الآخر أيضا فعرض لها بعد زمان طويل ورم فى ملتمسها وانتفخ حتّى انفتح وجعل يمدّ القيح فدعيت الى علاجها فعالجتها زمانا طويلا فلم ينختم الجرح فوضعت عليه من بعض المراهم القويّة الجذب.	Then the other fetus also died, and she suffered from it after a long time with pain in her womb, and it became swollen until it opened and caused a flow of pus. I treated her for a long time, but the wound did not heal, so I applied some strong adhering remedies to it.
فخرج من الموضع عظم ثمّ مضى لها أيّام فخرج عظم آخر فعجبت من ذلك اذ البطن موضع لا عظم فيه فقدّرت أنّها من عظام الجنين الميّت ففتشّت الجرح فأخرجت منه عظاما كثيرة من عظام رأس الجنين.	A bone came out from the site, and then days passed, and another bone came out. I was surprised by that, as the belly was a site with no bones in it, so I thought that she was expelling the bones of the dead fetus. I opened up the wound and many bones were expelled from it, including bones from the head of the fetus.
فلم أزل أتبع ذلك حتّى أخرجت منها عظاما كثيرة والمرأة فى أفضل أحوالها ولقد عاشت كذلك زمانا يمدّ من الموضع قيح يسير وإنّما آتيت هاهنا هذه النادرة.	I did not stop until many bones were expelled from her, and the woman was in the best of health. And she lived for a long time afterwards, with pus flowing from the site, and that is what I have described here in this chapter.
لأنّ فيها علما ومعونة لما يحاوله الطبيب الصانع بيده من العلاج،.	For it contains wisdom and advice for whoever tries to do what the skilled physician does with his treatment.
الفصل السابع والسبعون.	Chapter 77
فيه صور الآلات التى يحتاج اليها فى إخراج الجنين.	It contains pictures of the instruments that are needed for extracting the fetus.
صورة لولب يفتح به فم الرحم:.	Illustration of a dilator that opens up the mouth of the womb:
هذا الملزم الذى تسوى به الكتب سواء له لولبان فى طرفى الخشبتين إلّا أن هذا اللولب ينبغى أن يكون ألطف من الملزم وأن يكون إمّا من آبنوس وإمّا من خشب البقس ويكون عرض كلّ خشبة فى ثخن أصبعين.	This is the dilator that straightens the womb, whether it has two arms on the sides of the fingers, but this dilator should be more delicate than the forceps, and it should be either from ivory or boxwood, and each arm should have a thickness of two fingerbreadths.
وحرفهما نحو أصبع وطولهما شبر ونصف وفى وسط الخشبتين رائدان من جنس الخشبة نفسها قد أوثقتا فيهما يكون طولهما نصف شبر او أكثر قليلا وعرضهما نحو أصبعين او أكثر قليلا وهذان الرائدان.	Here is the translation:
هما اللذان يدخلان فى فم الرحم ليفتح بهما عند إدارتك اللولبين، صورة آلة أخرى لمثل ذلك ألطف وأخفّ:.	The two that enter the nostrils to open up with them when you inspect the two olfactory organs, an image of another instrument similar to that, gentler and less heavy.
تصنع من خشب الآبنوس او البقس على شكل الكلاليب إلّا أنّ لها فى طرفها رائدان كما ترى طول كلّ رائد منهما نحو شبر وعرضهما أصبعان فإذا أردت فتح الرحم بها.	You make it from ebony wood or boxwood in the shape of a scoop, except that each has two rods at its end, as you see the length of each rod is a finger and their width is a barleycorn; if you want to open the nostrils with them.
فأجلس المرأة على سرير مدلاة رجليها منفرجة ما بين ساقيها ثمّ أدخل هذين الرائدين ضمومين فى فم الرحم وأنت ماسك طرف الآلة أسفل بين فخذيها ثمّ افتح يدك بالآلة كما تفعل بالكلاليب سواء على قدر ما تريد من فتح الرحم.	The woman sits on a decorated stool, her legs spread apart between which is the space of her thighs; then you insert these two rods, bent inwards, into the nostrils and hold the instrument's end below between her thighs, then open your hand with the instrument as you do with the scoop, to the extent that you want to open the nostrils.
حتّى تصنع القابلة ما تريد، صورة لولب آخر ذكره الأوائل:.	As for making the forceps, an image of another type mentioned by the predecessors:
صورة المدفع الذى يدفع به الجنين:.	A picture of the instrument that is used to expel the fetus:
صورة المشداخ الذى يشدخ به رأس الجنين:.	A picture of the hook that is used to hook the head of the fetus:
يشبه المقصّ له أسنان فى الطرف كما ترى وقد يصنع مستطيلا كالكلاليب على هذه الصورة كما ترى له أسنان كأسنان المنشار تقطع به وترضّ:.	It resembles a scissors having teeth at the end, as you see, and it is made with a curve like the scoop, as you see, having teeth like the teeth of the saw, to cut and to extract.
صورة مدفع أيضا:.	A picture of another expeller:
صورة صنّارة:.	A picture of a Saw:
هذه الصنّارة يكون فيها غلظ قليلا لئلا تنكسر عند جذب الجنين بها، صورة صنّارة ذات الشوكتين:.	This saw has a slight thickness so that it does not break when pulling the fetus with it, a picture of a saw with two handles:
صورة مبضعين عريضين لقطع الجنين:.	A picture of two narrow forceps for cutting the fetus:
هذه الآلات كلّها كلّما كثرت أنواعها وكانت معدّة عند الصانع كان أسرع لعمله وأرفع عند الناس لقدره فلا تستحقر منها آلة أن تكون عندك معدّة فلا بدّ من الحاجة اليها،.	These instruments, all of them, are numerous in their types and were prepared by the craftsman; it is faster to work with them and more appreciated among people for its worth. So do not despise any instrument that is prepared for you, for there is no alternative but to need it.
الفصل الثامن والسبعون.	Chapter 8 and 7.
فى إخراج المشيمة.	On the Extraction of the Foetus.
اذا احتبست المشيمة بعد النفاس فينبغى أن تأمر العليلة أن تمسك نفسها ثمّ تعطّسها بالكندس وتشدّ يدك على فمها ومنخريها فإن خرجت بهذا وإلا فخذ قدرا.	If the foetus is stuck after the afterbirth, it is advisable to tell the accoucheur to insert her finger and grasp it herself, then to inject it with a medicament and to hold her hand on its mouth and nostrils; if it comes out by this means, well and good; otherwise, take a suitable measure.
واثقب فى الغطاء ثقبة وضع فيها الحشائش المفتّحة لفم الرحم مثل الفودنج والسذاب والشبت والبابونج والشيح والسليخة والقنطوريون كلّ هذه الأدوية او بعضها واغمرها بالماء واحملها على النار ثمّ تضع أنبوب فضّة على ثقب غطاء القدر والطرف الآخر فى فم الرحم.	And make a perforation in the cover, and insert into it the opened cupping-glasses for the mouth of the womb, such as Foudanj, Sudaab, Shebt, Baboonj, Shi'ah, Sulaihah, and Qantooriyon - all these medications or some of them - and dissolve them in water and carry them to the fire; then place a tube of silver on the perforation of the cover, and the other end in the mouth of the womb.
وتمسكه حتّى يصل البخار الى قعر الرحم ثمّ تعطّس كما قلنا فإنّ المشيمة تخرج بسرعة، فإن بقيت بعد هذا العلاج ولم تخرج فأمر القابلة أن تغمس يدها اليسرى فى دهن شيرج او لعاب الخطمّى.	And stop it until the steam reaches the bottom of the womb, then inject as we have said; if the foetus does not come out quickly, and remains after this treatment without coming out, tell the accoucheur to insert her left hand into the inner part of the thigh or the outer part of the buttocks.
ثمّ تدخلها فى القبل وتفتّش بها المشيمة فإذا أصابتها قبضت عليها ومدّتها قليلا قليلا حتّى تخرجها، فإن كانت ملتصقة فى عمق الرحم فأدخل اليد على ما وصفنا حتّى اذا ما وجدت المشيمة فاجذبها قليلا قليلا على الإشفاق.	Then she should enter (her hand) into the perineum and feel for the foetus; if she reaches it, she should grasp it and pull it out little by little until it comes out. If it is stuck in the depth of the womb, she should insert her hand as we have described, until when she finds the foetus, she should pull it out little by little on the edge (of the womb).
لئلّا تسقط الرحم عند الجذب الشديد بل ينبغى أن تنقل برفق الى الجوانب يمنة ويسرة ثمّ تزاد فى كميّة الجذب فإنّها تجيب حينئذ وتتخلّص من الالتصاق، فإن كان فم الرحم منضمّا فقد وصفنا العلاج بالتعطيس وعلاج القدر والحشائش.	It is not proper to pull the womb strongly, but rather one should transfer (the hand) gently to the right and left sides, then increase the pulling gradually; for it will come out at that time and be freed from the adhesion. If the mouth of the womb is constricted, we have described the treatment by injection, and the treatment of the cover and cupping-glasses.
فإن لم تخرج بجميع ما وصفنا فإيّاك والعنف عليها فى إعادة الجذب ولكن ينبغى أن تربط ما خرج منها الى فم الرحم الى فخذ المرأة ثمّ احقنها بالمرهم الرباعىّ فإنّه يعفنها بعد أيّام.	If it does not come out by all the methods we have described, then be cautious and gentle in re-pulling, but it is proper to bind what has been pulled out of the womb to the thigh of the woman, then inject her with a warm potion; for it will cure her after a few days.
وتنحلّ وتخرج إلّا أنّها اذا تعفّنت فإنّها تترقّى منها رائحة رديئة الى المعدة والرأس ويؤذى ذلك العليلة فينبغى أن تستعمل الدخن الموافقة.	If you do not extract it, it will putrefy and a foul smell will rise from it to the brain and head, and that will harm the patient, so it is necessary to use the suitable instrument.
لذلك وقد جرّب بعض الأوائل دخنة الحُرف والتين اليابس، صورة الآلة التى تبخّر بها المرأة عند احتباس الطمث والمشيمة ونحو ذلك:.	Therefore, some of the old surgeons have made a hook-like instrument and a straight one, an image of the tool that is used to extract the womb during difficult deliveries and similar cases.
تصنع من رصاص تشبه القمع او تصنع من نحاس يوضع الطرف الرقيق فى القبل والطرف الواسع على النار والبخور مجعول على الجمر تمسكه حتّى يذهب ذلك البخور وتعيد غيره،.	It is made from copper, resembling a scoop, or it is made from iron, with the fine end at the beak and the wide end at the nozzle, curved on the handle so that the nozzle does not touch it, until it reaches that place and returns with something else.
الفصل التاسع والسبعون.	Chapter 9, Section 87.
فى علاج المقعدة غير المثقوبة.	On the treatment of non-suppurating fistulae.
قد يولد كثير من الصبيان ومقاعدهم غير مثقوبة قد سدّها صفاق رقيق فينبغى للقابلة أن تثقب ذلك الصفاق بأصبعها وإلّا فلتبطّه بمبضع حادّ وتحذر العضلة لا تمسّها.	Some children and others have non-suppurating fistulae, which are closed by a thin membrane; it is necessary for the one who will perforate that membrane with her finger, or else she should pierce it with a sharp pointed instrument and avoid touching the surrounding tissue.
ثمّ تضع عليه صوفة مغموسة فى الشراب والزيت ثمّ تعالجه بالمراهم حتّى يبرأ، فإن خشيت أن ينسدّ فضع فى الثقب أنبوبة رصاص أيّاما كثيرة وتنزع متى أراد الطفل البراز.	Then she should apply a poultice medicated with serous and oil, and then treat it with ointments until it heals. If you fear that it will close up, insert into the opening a copper tube, or several of them, and remove it when the child desires to pass stool.
وقد يعرض سدّ المقعدة أيضا من اندمال جرح او ورم فينبغى أن يشقّ ذلك الاندمال ثمّ يعالج بما ذكرنا من العلاج والرصا ص،.	And it may happen that the fistula closes up due to inflammation or abscess, so it is necessary to open up that inflammation, then treat it with the mentioned treatment and ointments.
الفصل الثمانون.	Chapter 88.
فىعلاج النواصير التى تحدث فى الأسفل.	On the treatment of haemorrhoids that occur in the anus.
النواصير التى تحدث فى الأسفل هو تعقّد وغلظ يحدث بقرب المقعدة من خارج او فى الفضاء من أحد الجهات ويكون الناصور واحدا او أكثر.	Hemorrhoids that occur in the anus are a varicose and thickening that occurs near the fistula, either outside or inside, from one of the directions, and it may be one hemorrhoid or more.
فإذا أزمن ذلك التعقّد انفتح وجرى منه رطوبة مائيّة بيضاء او قيح رقيق وقد تكون من هذه النواصير منفوذة الى المبعر وإلى المعاء وتكون غير منفوذة فالمنفوذة قد تعرف بما يخرج منها من البراز والريح عند استعمال العليل التبرّز.	If the swelling persists and a whitish or yellowish fluid discharge appears, it may be due to one of these sinuses influencing the brain and the nose, and not influencing them, because the influence is recognized by what comes out of the nostrils and the smell when using the silver tube.
وربّما خرج منها الدود، وقد تكون منها نواصير اذا كانت فى الفضاء منفوذة الى المثانة وإلى مجرى القضيب وقد تكون منها منفوذة الى مفصل الفخذ وإلى عجز الذنب، وما يعرف به الناصور المنفوذ الى المقعدة أيضا من غير المنفوذ.	Perhaps the worm comes out of it, and it may be due to sinuses if they were in the abdomen influencing the bladder and the urethra, and it may be due to sinuses influencing the hip joint and the base of the spine, and what is recognized by the influencer to the rectum as well, without influence.
أن تدخل أصبعك السبّابة فى المقعدة وتدخل مسبارا رقيقا فى الناصور من نحاس او حديد اذا لم يكن فى الناصور تعريج فإن كان فيه تعريج فأدخل فيه مسبارا من رصاص رقيقا او شعرة من شعرات الخيل.	You should insert your left finger into the rectum and insert a thin probe into the sinus from a tube of tin or iron, if there is no curvature in the sinus; but if there is curvature, then you should insert a probe made of thin lead or a hair from the horse's tail.
حتّى تحسّ بالمسبار او بالشعرة فى أصبعك، فإن لم تحسّ به البتّة ولم يبرز من الثقب شىء من البراز ولا ريح ولا دود كما قلنا فاعلم أنّه غير منفوذ فبادر الى العلاج.	Until you feel with the probe or the hair in your finger, if you do not feel the pus and nothing of the fluid or smell or worm comes out, as we mentioned, then know that it is not influential, so proceed to treatment.
وإذا كان الناصور منفوذا الى المثانة او الى مجرى البول فدليله خروج البول منه وامتناعه من أن يلتحم الموضع بالأدوية، وأمّا إن كان منفوذا الى مفصل الفخذ او الى عجز الذنب فعلامته وصول المسبار الى هناك.	And if the sinus is influential to the bladder or to the passage of urine, then it indicates that the urine comes out of it and prevents it from being treated with medication at that location, and as for its influence to the hip joint or to the base of the spine, then it is recognized by the arrival of the probe there.
إن لم يكن فيه تعريج الى العظم ووجود الوجع فى نحو الجهة وخروج القيح منه دائما وأن لا ينجع فيه علاج ولا يلتحم بمرهم وهذه النواصير المنفوذة كلّها فليس منها برء البتّة.	If there is no curvature to the bone and aching in that direction and continuous discharge of pus, and treatment does not benefit it nor does it adhere to the medication, and all these influential sinuses are like this, so none of them has purulent pus.
وعلاجها عناء باطل لمن يتسوّر عليها من جهّال الأطبّاء، وأمّا التى غير منفوذة وغير مزمنة فيرجى لها البرء بالحديد على ما أنا واصفه وما قد جرّبته، وهو أن تضجع العليل بين يديك على ظهره.	And its treatment is futile for whoever relies on the superficial opinions of physicians, and as for those that are not influential and not chronic, you should seek the purulent pus with the iron instrument according to what I have described and what has been tried, which is to place the silver tube between your hands on its back.
ويشيّل ساقيه الى فوق وفخذاه مائلة الى بطنه ثمّ تدخل مسبار النحاس او الرصاص إن كان فى الناصور تعريج حتّى تعلم حيث ينتهى المسبار فإن أحسّ به العليل نحو المقعدة فينبغى أن تدخل أصبعك السبّابة فى المقعدة.	You should incline the thigh upwards and bend it towards your abdomen, then insert the metal spatula or the rod, if there is a fracture in the bone, until you feel that the spatula has reached the site of the fracture; for when the spatula reaches it, you will perceive the resistance towards the seat, and thus you should introduce your fingers into the seat.
فإن أحسست فى أصبعك المسبار قد نفذ بنفسه مكشوفا من غير أن تحسّ بين أصبعك وبينه بصفاق او بلحم فحينئذ فاعلم يقينا أنّه منفوذ فلا تتعب فيه فليس منه برء كما قلنا.	For when you feel the spatula with your fingers, it has reached the site of the fracture, and you will feel a cavity or an empty space between your fingers and it, without any intervening flesh or membrane; so understand that it is a fracture, do not doubt it, for there is no decay in it, as we have said.
وقد قالوا إنّه يبرأ فى بعض الناس فى الندرة ومن العلاج الذى يرجى له النفع أن تحمّى مكواة رقيقة على حسب سعة الناصور كما تقدّم وتدخلها حامية فى الناصور حتّى تبلغ نحو المقعدة ثمّ تعيدها مرّتين او ثلاثا.	And they have said that it heals in some people through the application of a thin, heated metal plate, according to the size of the fracture, as you have prepared and inserted it into the fracture until it reaches near the seat, then remove it two or three times.
حتّى تعلم أنّه قد احترق جميع تلك اللحوم الزائدة المتلبّدة التى تشبه أنبوبة ريش الطير ثمّ تعالجه بفتل مبلولة فى السمن حتّى تخرج تلك اللحوم التى احترقت ثمّ تعالجه بالمراهم الملحمة فإن برئ.	Until you feel that it has burned all those superfluous, adhering membranes that resemble a bird's pipe, then treat them with a cotton pad soaked in rose oil until they emerge after burning, then treat them with melominated ointments, and so it will heal.
وإلّا فليس يبرأ بغيره من العلاج أبدا، وأمّا إن أدخلت المسبار فلم ينفذ الى أصبعك التى فى المقعدة وكان بينها وبين المسبار حجاب كثيف من لحم او من صفاق ورأيت الناصور فيما يلى سطح الجلد فشقّ حينئذ الجلد من أوّل الناصور.	And it will not heal with any other treatment ever, and if you inserted the spatula but did not reach your fingers in the seat, and there was a dense screen of flesh or membrane between them and the spatula, and you saw the fracture on the surface of the skin, then split the skin from above the fracture.
وأنت تمرّ بالشقّ مع المسبار وهو فى الناصور حتّى تبلغ بالشقّ حيث انتهى طرف المسبار ويتخلّص المسبار ويسقط، ثمّ تنقى تلك اللحوم المتلبّدة التى تشبه أنبوب ريش الطير ولا تبقى منه شيئا.	And you proceed with the splitting along with the spatula, while it is in the fracture, until you reach the end of the split where the tip of the spatula ends, and the spatula is freed and falls out; then remove those superfluous, adhering membranes that resemble a bird's pipe, and nothing of them remains.
ثمّ تعالجه بالمراهم الملحمة حتّى يبرأ، فإن غلبك الدم وحال بينك وبين عملك لقطعك تلك اللحوم فأفضل ما تصنع وأسرع منفعة كيّها بالنار او بدواء حادّ لأنّ الكىّ بالنار يجمع حالتين حسنتين حرق تلك اللحوم الزائدة.	Here is the translation of the excerpt:
وقطع الدم وتنشّف الرطوبات ثمّ تعالجه بالفتل المبلولة فى السمن او الكبريت المسحوق بالزيت حتّى يقيح الموضع وتخرج تلك اللحوم المحترقة فى القيح، ثمّ عالج حينئذ الجرح بالمراهم الملحمة المنبتة للحم الصلب.	Here is the translation:
وهى الأدوية التى فيها قبض وتنشّف فإنّه اذا انجبر فقد برئ ولا تحشى العودة، فإن كان الناصور قد انتهى الى عمق المقعدة وبعد عن سطح البدن فأدخل أصبعك فى المقعدة وفتّش بها.	Here is the translation:
فإن أحسست بالمسبار وبينك وبينه حجاب من صفاق او لحم وكان قريبا من النفوذ فليس العمل فيه إلّا على طريق الطمع والرجاء وذلك أن تستعمل فيه أحد ثلاثة أوجه إمّا أن تكويه كما قلنا.	If you feel a splint and it is between your fingers or near them, and there is a flap of skin from the wound or the flesh, and it was close to the veins, then do not work on it except through the path of gentleness and caution, for you should use one of three approaches: either you cauterize it as we have mentioned.
وإمّا أن تشقّه حتّى تبلغ قعره لتستمكن بإدخال الفتل والعلاج من قرب ولا تتمادى بالشقّ لئلّا تقطع العضلة المحيطة بالمقعدة فتحدث على العليل خروج البراز من غير إرادة ثمّ تعالجه بما ذكرنا فربّما برئ كما قلنا.	Or you make an incision until you reach the underlying tissue, so that you can insert the instrument and treat it from a distance, without making a deep incision lest you cut the surrounding tendons, and thus cause the prolapse of the intestines outside of the anus without intention, then treat it as we have mentioned, perhaps it will heal as we have said.
وإمّا أن تنفذ ذلك الحجاب وتثقبه بعد أن تشقّه الى قرب المقعدة كما قلنا إمّا بالمسبار وإمّا بآلة أخرى حادّة الطرف ثمّ تنقى تلك اللحوم المتلبّدة التى فى الشقّ كلّها الى حيث استطعت باستقصاء.	Or you remove that flap and dissect it after making an incision near the anus, as we have said, either with a splint or another sharp instrument at the tip, then clean out all the adhering tissue in the wound to where you have made a separation.
ثمّ رم جبر الجرح كلّه مع الشقّ والفم الأعلى حتّى ينختم وتبقى الناصور مفتوحا فى داخل المقعدة فيكون أخفّ على العليل، وقد يخرم الناصور على هذه الصفة.	Then fill the wound entirely with the incision and the upper lip of the anus, until it is closed and the rectum remains open inside the anus, so it becomes easier for the patient, and the rectum may remain in this condition.
وهو إذا أدخلت المسبار فى الناصور وكان فى جانب من المقعدة نحو سطح البدنمع الجلد وطوق المقعدة فخذ حينئذ مسبارا مثقوب الطرف كإبرة الإسكاف على هذه الصورة:.	And it is when you insert the splint into the rectum and it was on one side of the anus, near the surface of the perineum with the skin, and encircled the anus, then take at that time a splint with a sharp tip like an acupuncture needle in this form.
وأدخل فيها خيطا مفتولا من خمسة خيوط او نحوها ثمّ أدخل المسبار بالخيط فى الناصور حتّى يبلغ قعره، فإن كان منفوذا فى حاشية المقعدة من داخل بالقرب.	And insert into it a thread with five or so strands, then insert the splint with the thread into the rectum until it reaches the underlying tissue, for if there was a perforation in the margin of the anus from the inside near the verge.
فأخرج الخيط من ذلك الثقب بأن تدخل أصبعك فى المقعدة وأخرج طرف الخيط واجمع الطرفين جميعا وشدّهما واتركه يوما او يومين، فكلّما قطع الخيط فى اللحم شددته شدّا جيّدا حتّى تنقطع تلك اللحوم التى بين طرفى الخيوط وتسقط، ثمّ تعالج الجرح حتّى يندمل ويبرأ.	So bring out the thread from that perforation by inserting your finger into the anus and bringing out the end of the thread, and gather both ends together and tighten them, and leave it for a day or two. Every time you cut the thread in the flesh, tighten it strongly until those adhesions between the threads are cut off and fall out, then treat the wound until it becomes firm and heals.
فإن لم يكن فم الناصور منفوذا فانفذه كيف ما يمكن لك إلّا أن يكون فى العمق كثيرا فليس لك أن تفعل ذلك من أجل العضلة لئلّا تقطعها، ثمّ اصنع به كما ذكرنا حتى يبرأ،.	If the fracture of the nose is not reduced, then try to do what you can to make it so, for it will be deep and you will not be able to do that because of the muscle, lest you cut it. Then, make it as we have mentioned until it heals.
صورة المبضع الشوكيّة التى تشقّ بها النواصير يكون التعقيف منه حادّا جدّا والجهة الأخرى غير حادّة لئلّا تقطع بها ما لا يحتاج اليه كما ترى:.	The figure of the curved incision which is made by the nasal bones, one side of it is very sharp and the other side is not sharp, lest you cut what is not needed, as you see.
الفصل الحادى والثمانون.	The sharp instrument and the forceps.
فى خرم البواسير التى يسيل منها الدم وقطعها وعلاج الشقاق.	On the extraction of the varicose veins, which suck out blood and cut them off, and the treatment of the ulcers.
تكون البواسير على ضربين إمّا أن تكون فى داخل المقعدة تشبه نفّاحات حمر او كأنّها حبّ العنب وتكون منها صغار وكبار والدم يسيل منها دائما.	The varicose veins are on the back of the thighs, either they are inside the vessel resembling red tubes or like a bunch of grapes, and they can be small or large, and blood is always sucked out from them.
وتكون واحدة وتكون كثيرة وتكون خارج المقعدة وفى أطرافها إلّا أنّ هذه التى تكون من خارج المقعدة تكون فى أكثر الأمر قليلة الرطوبة يسيل منها ماء أصفر او قليل دم سيلانا دائما وتكون على لون البدن.	And they can be one, or many, and they can be outside the vessel, on its edges; but those that are outside the vessel are mostly of little moisture, sucking out yellowish water or a little blood, always, and they are on the color of the skin.
وعلاج الذى يكون من داخل المقعدة أن تأمر العليل أن يتبرّز ويتزّحر حتّى تخرج المقعدة وتظهر اليك الثآليل فتسرع فتعلقها بالصنانير او تمسكها بظفرك ثمّ تقطعها عند أصولها، فإنْ لم تحتبس فيها الصنانير لرطوبتها واسترخائها.	And the treatment of those that are inside the vessel is to compress the affected part until it becomes swollen and congested, until the vessel emerges and the varicose veins appear, then you can grasp them with a ligature or hold them with a forceps, and then cut them off at their roots. If you do not constrict them with the ligature due to their brittleness and friability.
فحذّها بخرقة خشنة او بقطعة من خبّة مرعّز او اجذبها بأصابعك ثمّ اقطعها ثمّ ذرّ عليها بعد القطع بعض الذرورات الحادّة لكى تقوم لها مقام الكىّ او فاكوها على ما تقدّم فى باب الكىّ.	Then shave them with a rough razor or with a piece of a sharp file, or grasp them with your fingers and then cut them off, and afterwards apply some sharp dressings to her, in order to stimulate the place of the cautery, or cauterize it as has been mentioned in the chapter on cautery.
ثمّ عالجها بسائر العلاج حتّى يبرأ، فإن لم تجبك المقعدة للخروج فاحقن العليل بحقنة فيها لذع قليلا لتغسل بها ما فى المقعدة وتنقاد للخروج بسرعة عند ما يتزحّر العليل، فأمّ الثآليل الخارجة عن المقعدة فأمرها هين سهل.	Then treat her with the usual treatment until she heals, and if the vessel does not allow you to extract it, then make a small incision in the affected part to remove what is in the vessel, and strive for its quick exit when the affected part becomes swollen. Thus, the varicose veins that come out of the vessel are easily treated.
وهو أن تأخذها بظفرك او تعلقها بصنّارة وتقطعها ثمّ تعالجها بما ذكرنا حتّى تبرأ، ومن كره القطع بالحديد فينبغى أن تستعمل خرمها على هذه الصفة تأخذ خيطا مفتولا وتدخله فى إبرة.	You should take it with forceps or hang it with a needle and cut it, then deal with it as we have mentioned until it heals. And if you are afraid of cutting with iron, it is better to use its thread in this manner: take a twisted thread and insert it into the needle.
ثمّ تجذب الثؤلول الى فوق وتنفذه بالإبرة فى أصله من الجهة الأخرى وتلفّ طرفى الخيط أسفل الإبرة وهى معترضة وتشدّ الثؤلول شدّا وثيقا ثمّ تعقد الخيط وتخرج الإبرة، تفعل ذلك بجميع الثآليل وتترك منها واحدة لا تخرمها.	Then, you draw the thread upwards and pass it through the needle at its base from the other side, and twist the end of the thread below the needle, which is opposite and tight. Then, you tighten the thread strongly and firmly, then you make a knot in the thread and remove the needle. Do that with all the sutures and leave one without tightening it.
لتسيل منها فضلة الدم، ثمّ تضع على المقعدة خرقة مغموسة فى دهن ورد او قيروطىّ وتضعها على المقعدة وتأمر العليل بالسكون ثمّ تتركه حتّى تسقط فإذا سقطت الثآليل فعالجها بالمراهم وسائر العلاج حتّى تبرأ،.	Let the blood flow from it, then you put on the wound a compress wrapped in a piece of cloth or a bandage, and apply it to the wound, and order the patient to rest, then leave it until it heals. And if the sutures come apart, treat them with ointments and other treatments until it heals.
وأمّا علاج الشقاق فكثيرا ما يعرض من جفوف الزبل واعتقال الطبع فإذا أزمن ولم ينجع فيه دواء فينبغى أن تجرده بشفرة المبضع او بظفرك حتّى يصير رطبا ويزول عنه القشر الأعلى الذى يمنعه من الالتحام.	And as for the treatment of ulcers, it often happens that they are affected by the abundance of corrupt matter and the retention of the mucus. If it becomes chronic and does not respond to medication, it is better to scrape it with a scalpel or forceps until it becomes smooth and sheds its upper crust, which prevents it from healing.
ثمّ تعالجه حتّى يندمل على ما ينبغى، فإن لم يندمل فعاوده بجرد أشدّ من الأوّل حتّى يدمى نعمّا ويسلخ ثمّ عالجه فإنّه يبرأ،.	Then, you treat it until it forms a scab as desired. If it does not form a scab, repeat the scraping with a more intense one than the first, until it becomes inflamed and then suppurates, then treat it again, and it will heal.
الفصل الثانى والثمانون.	Chapter 88.
فى علاج المسامير المعكوسة وغير المعكوسة والثآليل اليابسة والنملة.	On the treatment of curved and non-curved wounds, and sutured and necrotic sores.
إنّ المسمار إنّما هو عقدة مستديرة على لون البدن تشبه رأس المسمار تكون فى جميع الجسد ولا سيّما فى أسافل القدمين والأصابع ويعرض منها وجع عند المشى.	A corn is a calloused formation on the skin of the body, resembling the head of a corn, which occurs all over the body, not specifically in the soles of the feet and toes, and causes pain when walking.
فينبغى أن يشقّ ما حول المسمار ويمسك بمنقاش او بصنّارة ويقلع من أصله ثمّ تعالجه وإن شئت كويته على ما تقدّم فى بابه، وأمّا الثآليل اليابسة فالواحدة منها هو نتو صغير خشن متلبّد مستدير فوق سطح البدن.	It is necessary to dissect around the nail and grasp it with a forceps or a hook, then lift it from its bed. Then, if you find it difficult to cut on what is presented in its mouth, as for the multiple ulcers, one of them is a small, rough, bulging, and rounded elevation on the surface of the skin.
وكثيرا ما يعرض فى أيدى الصبيان وعلاجه أن تمدّ الثؤلول وتقطعه او تخرمه بخيط حرير او بشعرة حتّى يسقط وإن شئت كويته على ما تقدّم بالنار او بالدواء الحاد.	And often, what is presented in the fingers of children and its treatment is to extend the fingers and cut them or straighten them with a thread or a splint until they are corrected, and if you find it difficult to straighten on what is presented by the fracture or the severe curvature.
وقد تقلع الثآليل المعكوسة وغير المعكوسة بالآلة التى أنا ذاكرها فى علاج النملة، أمّا النملة فهى أيضا نتو صغير متلبّد غليظ على سطح البدن ذاهب فى العمق جدّا وإذا أصابها البرد أحسّ فيها شبيها بلذع النمل.	And I have mentioned the lifting of the curved and non-curved ulcers with the instrument that I described in the treatment of the anthrax, as for the anthrax, it is also a small, rough, bulging, and thick elevation on the surface of the skin, penetrating deeply into the skin, and if it is touched by cold, one feels a similarity to the numbness of the anthrax.
ويكون فى الجسد كلّه وأكثره يكون فى الأيدى وعلاجه أن تؤخذ أنبوبة من ريشة إوزّة او ريشة نسر قويّة وتصير ذلك الأنبوب على النملة حتّى تحيط دائرة الأنبوب من نواحيه ثمّ تدير يدك بالأنبوب حتّى تشقّ ما حول النملة.	And it is found in the entire body, but it is more frequent in the fingers, and its treatment is to take a tube from the feather of a strong goose or eagle, and shape that tube on the anthrax until it encircles the area around it, then insert your hand into the tube until you dissect around the anthrax.
وتصيره فى عمق اللحم وتنقلع النملة من أصلها، وإن شئت فعلت ذلك بأنبوب نحاس او حديد على هذه الصورة:.	And shape it in the depth of the flesh, and lift the anthrax from its root. And if you find difficulty in doing that, then use a tube of copper or iron on this pattern:
يكون أعلى الأنبوب الى الرقّة مصمتا مفتولا ليسهل على الأصابع ضبطه وفتله، وإن شئت كويت النملة على ما تقدّم فى كىّ الثآليل فى باب الكىّ،.	The upper part of the tube is attached to a ring, constricted and open, so that it is easy to control and close on the fingers. And if you find difficulty in cutting on what is presented in the ulceration, as for the ulceration in the treatment of the ulcer.
الفصل الثالث والثمانون.	Chapter Three and Eighty.
فى صور الآلات التى تستعمل الحقن بها فى علل المقعدة والإسهال والقولنج.	Illustrations of the instruments that are used for injecting in the treatment of haemorrhoids, anal fissures, and cysts.
قد يصنع المحقن من فضّة او من صينىّ او من نحاس مفروغ او مضروب وقد تصنع من هذه الآلة صغار وكبار على حسب المستعملين لها.	The surgeon may fabricate it from iron or from tin or from polished copper or from engraved (metal) and fabricate from these instruments, small and large, according to the users' needs.
فتكون التى تستعمل فى علاج الصبيان الصغار صغارا والذين مقاعدهم ضيقة او متوجّعة تكون محاقنهم لطافا جدّا، صورة محقن كبير:.	The ones used for treating small children's wounds, which are narrow or curved, their instruments are made very delicate, in the shape of a large instrument:.
قمعه الأعلى الذى يربط فيه الزقّ يكون واسعا على هذه الصفة له حاجز حيث يربط الزقّ كما ترى وطرفه الأسفل الذى يدخل فى المقعدة يكون مصمتا أملس جدّا الى الرقّة فى أحد جانبيه ثقبتان وفى الجانب الآخر ثقبة واحدة.	The upper arm, which has a wide connection to the bone, is fastened in this manner, as you see, and its lower end, which enters into the cavity, is very smooth, with two grooves on one side and one groove on the other side.
تكون سعة الثقب على غلظ المرود او أغلظ قليلا ويكون الزقّ الذى تجعل فيه الأدوية من مثانة حيوان او من رقّ ضأن يصنع على هيئة السفرة الصغيرة يكون قطره شبرا.	The width of the groove is according to the thickness of the rods or a little thicker, and the bone into which you insert the medications, whether from an animal's horn or from a small rod made on the model of a small tube, its diameter is a finger's breadth.
ويثقب ثقبا كثيرة كما يدور ويكون بعد ما بين كلّ ثقبة غلظ أصبع، ثمّ تدخل فى تلك الثقب خيطا وثيقا من غزل ثنى من عشرة أخياط او نحوها وتجمع به الزقّ كالسفرة.	And it has many small grooves, as it turns, and after each groove is a finger's thickness; then you insert into those grooves a thread or a thin string made from twenty or so silk threads, and gather them onto the bone like a tube.
فإذا وضع فيه الدواء شدّ فى رأس المحقن بين الحجرين شدّا وثيقا ثمّ تحقن به، وهذه صورة دائرة الزقّ والثقب:.	If you place the medication in it, it becomes fixed at the head of the instrument between the two bones, firmly and tightly, then you fasten it with it, and this is the shape of the circle of the bone and the groove:.
وكيفيّة الاحتقان به أن تملأ الرقّ او المثانة بالدواء وهو مدفأعلى قدر احتمال العليل واحذر أن يكون حارّا جدّا او باردا جدّا ثمّ يستلقى العليل على ظهره ويشيّل ساقيه الى فوق.	And the way to fasten it is to fill the cavity or the tube with the medication, and it is placed according to the capacity of the patient's endurance, and beware that it does not become extremely hot or extremely cold; then the patient lies down on his back and raises his leg upwards.
ويوضع تحته نطع او ملحفة ثمّ يدهن طرف المحقن بدهن او ببياض البيض او بلعاب الحلبة او نحوها ثمّ تدخله فى المقعدة برفق ثمّ يأخذ خادم الزقّ بيديه معا ويعصره بشدّة حتّى يتفرّغ جميع ما فى المحقن فى المعاء.	And a cushion or a bandage is placed underneath, then he applies the end of the instrument with his hand or with egg white or milk of the haluga or similar, then it is inserted into the cavity gently, then the servant takes hold of the bone with his hand firmly and presses until all that is in the instrument is evacuated into the cavity.
ثمّ يخرج المحقن ويشيّل العليل ساقيه الى الحائط، فإن حفزه الدواء للخروج فليمتسك ما استطاع وإن نام به الليل كلّه كان أبلغ فى المنغعة، فإن حقن به فى علل الإسهال واستعجل خروجه فلتعد الحقنة حتّى يبرأ.	Then the surgeon will extract the needle and insert it into the vessel, if he finds that the medication has been effective for extraction; and if he feels a palpitation in his hand during the night, he should be cautious with it in treating the varicose vein and hasten its extraction, so that the patient may recover.
فإن كان فى المقعدة بواسير او أورام مؤلمة فليكن المحقن لطيفا جدّا أملس من المحاقن التى تحقن بها الصبيان، وهذه صورة محقن لطيف مشدود عليه جلده:.	For if there is a patient with painful ulcers or tumors, the surgeon should make the needle very fine and more delicate than the needles used for children's surgeries; and this is an image of a fine needle with its point guarded.
الفصل الرابع والثمانون.	Chapter 84.
فى علاج الجراحات.	On the Treatment of Surgical Wounds.
قد ذكرت فى التقسيم من علاج ما شاكل الكيّات وأنا ذاكر هاهنا علاجها باليد وبالأدوية على الكمال، فأقول إنّ الجراحات تختلف بحسب الشىء الذى يكون به الجراحة وبحسب الموضع الذى يقع عليه الجرح.	I have mentioned in the previous section the treatment of wounds similar to abscesses, and now I will mention their treatment with the hand and medications, according to the perfect method. I say that surgical wounds vary depending on the underlying cause of the surgery and the location where the wound occurs.
فالأشياء التى تكون بها الجراحات كثيرة كصكّة حجر او قطع سيف او سكّين او طعنة برمح او عود او سهم ونحو ذلك من أشياء كثيرة.	The things that cause surgical wounds are numerous, such as a stone in the bladder or a severed artery or a sword wound or a penetrating injury or a tumor or a fistula and many other similar things.
وأمّا الجراحات بحسب المواضع من الجسم فكالجرح الذى يقع على الرأس او العنق او الصدر او البطن او الكبد ونحوها من الأعضاء.	And as for surgical wounds, they vary according to the locations on the body, such as a wound on the head or neck or chest or abdomen or liver and other similar organs.
وأنا واصف علاج بعض الجراحات لتجعلها قياسا وقانونا على سائر الجراحات وأنا أبتدئ بجراحات الرأس البسيطة خاصّة لأنّ المركّبة سيأتى ذكرها فى أوّلالباب الثالثمن هذا الكتاب.	And I have described the treatment of some surgical wounds to make them a standard and rule for other surgical wounds, and I will start with simple head wounds because the complicated ones will be mentioned later in the third section of this book.
فأقول إنّه متى حدث فى الرأس جرح بسيط ولم يكن كسر عظم نظرت فإن كان من صكّة حجر او نحوه وكان قد شدخ الجلد فقط وكان الجرح كبيرا وخشيت على العليل حدوث الورم الحارّ فبادر وافصده القيفال على المقام.	I say that if a simple wound occurs on the head and does not involve a fracture of the bone, but rather is caused by a stone or something similar, and has only affected the skin, and the wound is large and there is a risk of developing a severe abscess, then one should hasten to treat it by applying a bandage to the affected area.
ولا تؤخر ذلك وأخرج له من الدم على قدر قوّته إن لم يمنع من الفصد مانع ولا سيّما إن كان الدم الذى يخرج من الجرح يسيرا وليكن الفصد من ضدّ الجهة المجروحة.	Do not delay it and extract from him the blood according to his strength, if he does not faint from the bleeding, nor does he become weak, especially if the blood that exits from the wound is little, and the bleeding is from the opposite side of the affected joint.
وحذّر العليل الامتلاء والشراب والأطعمة الغليظة، فإن منع من فصده مانع فليقلّل من الطعام ولايقرب اللحوم ولا الأشربة، وتحمل على الجرح إن حدث به ورم حارّ قطنة مغموسة فى دهن الورد وحده او مع الشراب الذى فيه قبض.	And beware of the patient's exhaustion and thirst, and the rough and difficult foods; if he faints from the bleeding, then reduce his food and do not bring him milk or soup, and apply a warm, moderately tight bandage on the wound with a dressing of rose water and its oil, or with the oil of the same bandage that has been previously used.
وإن أمنت الورم الحارّ فاحمل على الجرح إن كان طريّا بدمه ولم يغيّره الهواء الذرور الذى أنا واصفه لك بعد قليل، وأمّا إن كان قد غيّره الهواء فاحمل عليه بعض المراهم.	And if the warm ointment has worked, then apply it to the wound if its skin is delicate and the air has not irritated it with the medicated powder that I will describe to you soon, and if the air has irritated it, then apply some of the soothing remedies.
حتّى يمدّ القيح ثمّ عالجه حتّى يبرأ، فإن كان الجرح كبيرا وكان من قطع سيف او نحوه ولم تجتمع شفتاه بالرفائد فاجمعه بالخياطة على ما أنا واصفه فى خياطة جراح البطن.	Until the suppuration has formed, then treat it until he recovers; if the wound is large and resulted from a cut by a sword or its like, and the edges do not meet with the suture, then close it with suturing, as I have described in the suturing of abdominal wounds.
فإن كان الجلد كشف العظم وتعلّق ولم يكن امتساكه إلّا فى معلاق يسير فاقطعه ثمّ عالج الجرح بأدوية تجبر فيه لحما صلبا عوض الجلد وأمر العليل أن يتغذّى بالأغذية التى فيها متانة مثل الرؤوس والهرائس ونحوها،.	If the wound has exposed the bone and has become attached, but it does not hold except with a small attachment, then cut it off and treat the wound with medications that consolidate its solidity instead of the attachment, and order the patient to take nourishing foods that contain strengthening properties such as broth, dates, and their like.
فإن حدث فى الجلد عفن ولم يلصق بالعظم فاقطع المتعفّن كلّه وارم به ثمّ عالجه، فإن كان فى هذه الجراحات شريان او عرق ينزف الدم منه ولم ينقطع الدم بالأدوية ففتّش على الشريان.	If there is putrefaction in the wound and it has not adhered to the bone, then cut off all the putrefied part and treat it; if there is an artery or vein in these wounds that bleeds and the bleeding does not stop with medications, then compress on the artery.
فإن أصبته لم يتبتّر فابتره بالمبضع واربطه وإن دعت الضرورة اذا لم ينفع ما ذكرنا فاكوه حتّى ينقطع الدم فإن كانت هذه الجراحات صغارا بساطا فأمرها سهل هيّن يكتفى بعلاجها بأن تذرّ عليها هذا الذرور وهى بدمها.	If the bleeding does not stop, then cauterize it with the cautery and bind it; if the urgency requires it, even if what we mentioned does not benefit, then use it until the bleeding stops; if these wounds are small and superficial, then order them to be treated easily by applying this powder and its oil to their surface.
قبل أن يغيّرها الهواء، وصفة الذرور أن يؤخذ من اللبان جزء ومن الشيّان جزآن ومن الجير المطفأ او غير المطفأ ثلاثة أجزاء يسحق الجميع وينخل ويحشى به الجرح ويشدّ شدّا جيّدا حتّى يلصق عليه لصوقا جيّدا.	Before he alters the air, and describes the instrument that is taken from the laban part, and from the Shayyān two parts, and from the gir muttafa' or non-muttafa' three parts, which are all adjusted and inserted into the wound, and are fixed firmly until they meet in a straight line.
وينعقد بالدم ثمّ تشدّه من فوق بالرفائد وتتركه لا تحلّه ما دام لا يتورّم فإنّه لا ينقلع عنه الدواء حتّى يبرأ، وقد يفعل ذلك الجير وحده اذا لم يحضرك اللبان والشيّان.	And it is tied with a bandage, then tightened from above with a compress, and left without loosening as long as there is no inflammation, for if it does not become inflamed, the medicine will not be transferred to it until it heals. And the gir can do that alone, even if you are not provided with laban and shayyān.
وقد يفعل هذا الفعل أيضا بعبينه فى كثير من الجراحات الكبار اذا أتقن وضعه عليه وشدّه وكانت الجراحات طريّة بدمها ما لم يغيّرها الهواء، وأمّا إن كانت قد غيّرها الهواء بعض التغيّر ولا سيّما اذا كان فى زمن الصيف.	And this action can also be performed with a bandage in many of the severe wounds, if it is applied and tightened on them, and the wounds were gentle with their bandages, as long as the air did not alter them, and even if the air had altered them somewhat, especially if it was during the summer season.
فليس فى وضع هذا الذرور معنى فعالجه بما ذكرنا بأن تحمل عليه بعض المراهم المنضجة او تحمل عليه عصيدة من دقيق الشعير مصنوعة بالماء والعسل حتّى يمدّ القيح ثمّ تعالجه بسائر العلاج حتّى يبرأ،.	There is no benefit in placing this instrument unless it carries some of the soothing medications or carries a paste made from the finest flour, mixed with water and honey, until the pus is formed, then it is treated with other treatments until it heals.
فأمّا إن حدث مع الجرح كسر فى العظم وكان يسيرا فاجذبه بالجفت، وقد ذكرت علاج كسور الرأس فيما يستأنف، فى جراحة العنق، فإن حدث الجرح فى العنق فليس بينه فرق فى العلاج وبين جرح الرأس اذا كان بسيطا.	But if a fracture occurs with the wound, and it is in the bone, and it is treated with a splint, I have mentioned the treatment of fractures of the head in what has been written, in the surgery of the neck. If the wound is in the neck, there is no difference between its treatment and that of the head wound, if it was simple.
وأمّا إن كان قد قطع عصبا من العنق او شريانا فإن كان عصبا فليس فيه حيلة غير أن تجتنب علاجه بما يقبض قبضا شديدا كالزنجار والزاج ونحوها لأنّها تؤّذى العصب وتشنّجه.	And if a nerve or vein was cut in the neck, and it was a nerve, there is no trick but to treat it by strongly constricting it with things like the zapjar and the zaj, and their likes, because they irritate the nerve and injure it.
ولا يوضع على الجرح شىء بارد البتّة لأنّ جوهر العصب بارد واتّصاله بالدماغ الذى هو أشرف الأعضاء ويكون ما تعالجه به من الأدوية الليّنة مثل النورة المغسولة بالماء العذب مرّات مبلولة بالزيت او بدهن الورد والتوتياء.	And nothing cold should be applied to the wound, because the essence of the nerve is cold, and its connection to the brain, which is the most noble of the organs, and what is treated with it from the medications is like the Nura al-Magsula, mixed with sweet water, many times, or with oil of roses and lupines.
اذا غسلت أيضا بالماء العذب وسائر الأحجار المعدنيّة على هذه الصفة والمراهم الرطبة، وأمّا إن كان الجرح كبيرا فاستعمل الخياطة او ضمّ شفتيه بالرفائد ثمّ عالجه حتّى يبرأ.	If you also washed with warm water and gently wiped with a soft cloth and the mineral powder in this manner, and if the wound was large, then used the sutures or brought the edges together with the adhesive plaster, and then elevated it until it healed.
فإن كان للجرح غور وحدث فيه مخبأ فى أسفله قد اجتمع فيه القيح فبطّه فى أخفض مكان فيه، فإن كان قد انقطع فى الجرح شريان وادركت دمه ينزف فابتره او اربطه او اكوه إن دعت الضرورة الى ذلك.	If the wound had a deep hollow and a collection of pus had gathered in its lowest part, then it was necessary to drain it from the most dependent place; if an artery was cut in the wound and its blood was pouring out, then it was necessary to stop it or ligate it or cauterize it, if the situation demanded that.
فإن كان الجرح قد قطع بعض خرزات الحلقوم او كلّه وسلمت الأوداج فاجمع شفتى الجلد بالخياطة على قصبة الحلقوم ولا تمسّ الحلقوم بل سوّه وردّه على شكله الطبيعى ثمّ شدّه شدّا محكما واتركه أيّاما.	If the wound had severed some of the gullet's tendons or had injured its ligaments, then it was necessary to bring the edges of the skin together with sutures on the gullet's curvature, without touching the gullet itself, but rather to smooth and return it to its natural shape, then to fasten it firmly and leave it for some days.
ثمّ عالجه بالمراهم التى فيها قبض وتجفيف حتّى يبرأ، فإن كان الجرح قد أثّر فى العظم ففتّشه فإن كان فيه شظايا من العظم فاجتذبها كلّها او ما يمكن منها وما لم تتمكّن فاتركه حتّى يتيعفّن الجرح ويبرأ ويسهل إخراجه.	Then elevated it with soft bandages that contained a compress and a poultice until it healed; if the wound had affected the bone, then scraped it; if there were splinters of bone, then removed all of them or as much as possible and did not leave any to cause trouble, and left it until the wound closed and healed, and its drainage became easy.
فإن كان الجرح طريّا فذرّ عليه الذرور الذى وصفنا فإن تعفّن فى الجرح عظم وصار ناصورا فعالجه بما يأتى ذكره فى بابه، فى جراحة الصدر وما بين الكتفين.	If the wound was shallow, then applied to it the medicament that we have described; if there was a bone fragment in the wound and it became misaligned, then corrected it with what would bring it back to its place, in the surgery of the chest and between the shoulders.
إن كانت طعنة من رمح او سكّين ورأيت لها غورا فانظر فإن خرج منها الريح اذا تنفّس العليل فاعلم أنّه جرح قتّال فإن لم يكن لها غور وكانت طريّة بدمها فلا تجعل فيها من أوّل وهلة الذرور ولا تشدّها لئلّا يحتبس الدم فى غورها.	If there was a puncture wound from a sharp object or a thorn, and you saw that it had a small outlet, then looked to see if the air came out of it when the patient coughed; if so, then knew that it was a mortal wound. If it did not have an outlet and was shallow with its blood, do not apply any medicament to it from the start, and do not compress it lest the blood be stuck in its outlet.
فيرتدع الى القلب فيقتل العليل ولكن اجعل فيها مرهما جذّابا وحلّه فى النهار مرّتين فإن لم يحضرك مرهم فاجعل فى فم الجرح قطنة بالية لتمصّ ما يخرج منها من الرطوبات واجعل نوم العليل على الجرح.	Here is the translation:
ليسيل ما يجتمع فيه، وإن كان قد مضى للجرح ثلاثة أيّام او أكثر ولم يحدث بالعليل تشنّج ولا خفقان ردىء ولا ضيق فى النفس ورأيت سائر أحواله صالحة فاعلم أنّ الجرح سالم فعالجه بالفتل وسائر العلاج حتّى يبرأ.	If the wound has been affected, and it has been three days or more since it was inflicted, without any signs of inflammation, such as redness, swelling, or pain, and you find that its condition is good, then know that the wound is healthy and receptive to treatment, and continue with the treatment until it heals.
فإن تعذّر برؤه ومدّ الفيح دائما فاعلم أنّه قد صار ناصورا فعالجه من بابه، العليل على الجرح ليسيل ما يجتمع فيه، وإن كان قد مضى للجرح الصدر او الظهر فعالجه بما تقدّم من الخياطة.	If you find that the wound is resistant to treatment and the discharge continues, then know that it has become a chronic condition, originating from its root. The inflammation on the wound is what gathers in it, even if it has been three days or more since the wound was inflicted on the chest or back, and it continues with what has been mentioned regarding the surgical procedure.
إن كان كبيرا او بالذرور إن كان صغيرا، فإن كان قد أثّر فى العظم وقطع منه شظايا ففتّش الجرح وبادر بإخراج تلك الشظايا إن كانت متبرّئة فإن لم تكن متبرّئة فاتركها حتّى.	If it is large or if it is small, if it has affected the bone and broken off fragments, then open the wound and try to extract those fragments. If they are loose, then remove them; if not, then leave them until they become so.
يعفّن الجرح فإنّه يسهل إخراجها، وأمّا سائر الجراحات الحادثة فى سائر الأعضاء فحكمها فى العلاج حكم ما ذكرنا،.	The wound will facilitate their removal, and as for other wounds that occur in other organs, their treatment is governed by what we have mentioned.
الفصل الخامس والثمانون.	Chapter 85.
فى جراح البطن وخروج المعاء وخياطتها.	On Surgical Operations on the Abdomen and the Extraction of the Omentum and Its Suturing.
الخرق الذى يعرض للبطن قد يكون كبيرا وقد يكون صغيرا ووسطا فالكبير قد يخرج منه معاء او عدّة أمعاء فيكون إدخالها وخياطتها أشدّ وأعسر.	The hernia that appears on the abdomen may be large, small, or medium-sized. The large one may eject omentum or multiple omenta, making their insertion and suturing more difficult and troublesome.
والخرق الصغير أيضا قد يعسر من وجه آخر فيلزم أن يكون ردّها أعسر والمعاء إن لم تبادر فى إدخاله الى موضعه من ساعته انتفخ وغلظ فعسر إدخاله فلهذا صار أفضل الخروق الخرق المتوسّط لأنّه لا يعسر معه ردّ المعاء كما يعسر فى هذين النوعين.	And the small hernia also may be troublesome from another aspect, for it is necessary to return it with difficulty and the omentum, if you do not hasten to insert it into its place quickly, it becomes inflamed and thickened, making its insertion difficult. Therefore, the medium-sized hernia has become the best, because it does not cause trouble in returning the omentum, as it does in these two types.
واعلم أنّ خياطة البطن على أربعة وجوه الخياطتان الاثنتان عاميّتان تصلح فى خياطة البطن وفى خياطة سائر جراحات البدن والخياطتان الأخريان خاصّيّتان تعمّ سائر الجراحات إلّا أنّهما أخصّ بخياطة البطن.	Know that the suturing of the abdomen is based on four types: two general types that are suitable for suturing the abdomen and other abdominal wounds, and two special types that are specific to certain wounds, although they are more specific to suturing the abdomen.
وأنا واصفها لك واحدة واحدة بشرح وبيان، فأقول إنّه اذا كان الجرح صغيرا وخرج منه شىء من المعاء وعسر ردّه فذلك لأحد وجهين إمّا لصغر الخرق كما قلنا وإمّا لأنّ المعاء عرض له نفخ من قبل برد الهواء.	Here is the translation of the excerpt:
فإذا كان كذلك فينبغى أن تسخنه بأن تغمس إسفنجة او خرقة رطبة فى الماء الفاتر وحده او قد طبخ فيه إذخر وسعدى وسنبل وتنطل به المعاء حتّى ينحلّ النفخ.	If it is thus, it is fitting to treat it by immersing a sponge or a soft cloth in warm water and squeezing it out, then applying it to the affected area, and repeating this until the swelling subsides.
وقد يفعل ذلك الشراب الذى فيه قبض وهو أفضل من الماء وحده فى تحليل النفخ، فإذا رأيت النفخ قد انحلّ فبلّ المعاء بماء قد طبخ فيه خطمّى او خبّازى فإنّه يسلس بذلك دخوله بأيسر سعى.	And the medicated sherbet that contains astringent is better than water alone in resolving the swelling, so if you see the swelling has subsided, then anoint the affected area with sherbet that has been warmed with rose-water or vinegar, for it facilitates its absorption into the skin more easily.
فإن تعذّر رجوعه بعد هذا العلاج فشقّ فى الخرق قليلا بالآلة التى تشقّ بها النواصير والعلاج الأوّل اذا تمكّن أفضل من الشقّ وإنّما يضطّر الى الشقّ بعد الضرورة وعجز الحيلة، وهذه صورة الآلة:.	If the patient complains of its return after this treatment, then make a small incision in the skin with the instrument that makes the incisions for abscesses, and the first treatment is better if it can be done without making an incision, but one is forced to make an incision after the inflammation has become severe and the patient's condition has worsened.
تكون جهتها الواحدة المعوجّة محدودة وجهتها الأخرى غير محدودة والطرف الرقيق لا يكون برقّة المبضع بل يكون أفطس قليلا وهى آلة تشبه الصولج الصغير كما ترى فإذا اتّسع الجرح ودخل المعاء فينبغى أن يكون ردّه على شكله الطبيعىّ.	The single curved forceps has one end limited and the other end unlimited, and the delicate extremity is not at the point of the instrument, but is slightly flexible, and it resembles a small scalpel as you see. So if the wound gapes open and the affected area becomes inflamed, it is fitting that it should be returned to its natural shape.
ومكانه الخاصّ به إن استطعت على ذلك فهو أفضل، وأمّا اذا كان الخرق واسعا وكان فى أسفل البطن فينبغى أن يضطجع العليل على ظهره ويجعل ساقيه أرفع من رأسه وإن كان فى أعلى البطن فيجعل رأسه وصدره أرفع من أسفله.	And its specific position is better if it is situated thus, and if the incision is large and located at the bottom of the abdomen, it is fitting that the patient should lie on his back with his legs elevated above his head, and if it is located at the top of the abdomen, he should elevate his head and chest above his lower parts.
وكذلك إن كان الخرق فى أحد الجهتين من البطن فاجعل قصدك وغرضك دائما الناحية التى فيها الجراحة أرفع من الناحية الأخرى، وهكذا ينبغى أن يستعمل فى الجراحات العظيمة وفى الجراحات الوسطة.	And likewise, if the incision is on one side of the abdomen, it is fitting to elevate the affected side above the other side, and thus it should be done in major surgeries and intermediate ones.
وأمّا فى الجراحات الصغار فتضعه على حسب ما يتمكّن لك، ثمّ تحضر بين يديك خادما رفيقا يمسك الخرق كلّه بيديه ويجمع شفتيه ثمّ يكشف منه لمتولّى الخياطة شيئا بعد شىء.	And in minor surgeries, you should adjust it according to what is convenient for you, then prepare a small cushion between your hands that grips the incision entirely with its edges and brings them together, then reveal the sutured area slightly after the dressing.
وهذه صفة الخياطة العامّيّة الواحدة وهو أن تأخذ إبرة او عدّة إبر على قدر سعة الجرح ثمّ تترك من طرف الخرق قدر غلظ الخنصر وتغرز إبرة واحدة من غير أن تدخل فيها خيطا فى حافتى الجلد.	This is the single thread suture, and it is done by taking a needle or several needles according to the width of the wound, then leaving a thread at the edge of the gash equal to the thickness of the wrist, and inserting one thread without putting a thread in the edges of the skin.
مع حافتى الصفاق الذى تحت الجلد من داخل حتّى تنفذها من تلك الناحية وقد جمعت حاشيتى الجلد وحاشيتى الصفاق وصارت أربع طاقات، ثمّ تشدّ بخيط مثنّى حول الإبرة مرّات من الجهتين جميعا حتّى تجتمع شفتا الجرح اجتماعا محكما.	With the edge of the superficial flesh underneath the skin, from the inside of the suture, you will pass it through that direction, and you have collected the edges of the skin and the superficial flesh and made four stays, then you tie with a thread around the needle several times from both sides until the edges of the wound meet together firmly.
ثمّ تترك قدر غلظ الأصبع أيضا وتغرز إبرة أخرى ثمّ تشبّكها بالخيط كما فعلت بالإبرة الأولى فلا تزال تفعل ذلك بما تحتاج اليه من الإبر حتّى تفرغ برمّ الجرح كلّه ولتكن الإبر متوسّطة بين الغلظ والرقّة.	Then you leave a thread equal to the thickness of the finger also, and you insert another needle, then you sew it with the thread as you did with the first needle, and do not cease to do that with each needle until you have closed the entire wound, and the needles are spaced between the thickness and the skin.
لأنّ الإبر الرقاق جدّا سريعا ما تقطع اللحم والغلاظ أيضا عسرة الدخول فى الجلد فلذلك ينبغى أن تكون وسطة فى الرقّة والغلظ، ولا ينبغى أن تغرز الإبرة فى حافة الجلد بالقرب نعمّا.	Because the thin needles are very sharp and cut the flesh and the skin also, it is difficult to enter into the skin, therefore it is necessary to be cautious in the skin and the thickness, and it is not necessary to insert the needle at the edge of the skin too close.
لئلّا ينقطع اللحم مسرعا وينفتح الجرح قبل التحامه ولا تبعد أيضا بالخياطة لئلّا يمتنع الجرح من الالتحام، ثمّ تقطع أطراف الإبر لئلّا تؤذى العليل عند نومه وتجعل له رفائد من خرق كتان من كلّ جهة تمسك أطراف الإبر.	So that the flesh is not cut severely and the wound does not open before it heals, and you should not be slow also with the suturing so that the wound may be prevented from suppuration. Then you cut the ends of the threads so that they do not hurt the patient when he moves, and you make for him a dressing of two pieces of cloth from each side to hold the ends of the threads.
وتتركها حتّى تعلم أنّ الجرح قد التحم، وهذا النوع من الخياطة بالإبر هكذا أوفق فى الجراحات الصغار لأنّه قد يكتفى فى خياطتها بإبرة واحدة او اثنتين او نحوها.	And you leave it until you are certain that the wound has healed, and this type of suturing with threads is very useful in small surgical incisions because it can be sufficient to suture with one or two needles, or about that.
اوأمّا صفة الخياطة لثانية العامّيّة فهو أن تجمع بالخياطة الحواشى الأربع أعنى حاشيتى الجلد وحاشيتى الصفاق فى مرّة واحدة بإبرة فيها خيط مفتول معتدل فى الرقّة والغلظ ثمّ اذا نفذت بالإبرة هذه الحواشى الأربع رددت الإبرة من الجهة التى ابتدأت بها نفسها.	Here is the translation of the excerpt:
ليقع الخيط مشبّكا من أعلى الجرح لتكون الخياطة على حسب خياطة الأكيسة التى يشدّ بها المتاع وتجعل بين كلّ خياطة وخياطة بعد غلظ الأصبع الصغير وهذه الخياطة يعرفها جميع الناس.	The thread is placed mesh-like from above the wound to make the sutures according to the suturing of the Akisa, which holds the edges together and makes a space between each suture and suture after the small finger's thickness, and this suture is known to all people.
وبهذه الخياطة قد خطت جراحة عرضت لرجل فى بطنه كان قد جرح بسكّين وكان خرق الجراحة أزيد من شبر وكان قد خرج من معائه نحو شبرين من المعاء الأوسط وكان الخرق فى وسط البطن.	And with this suture, a surgical incision was made for a man who had a wound in his belly that was two fingers long and the edge of the incision was more than a finger's breadth, and it had deviated from its proper place by about two fingers' breadth from the middle of the abdomen, and the deviation was in the middle of the belly.
فرددته بعد أن أقام معاؤه خارجا من الجرح أربعا وعشرين ساعة فالتحم الجرح فى نحو خمسة عشر يوما وعالجته حتّى برئ وعاش بعد ذلك سنين كثيرة يتصرّف فى جميع أحواله وكان الأطبّاء يحكمون عليه أنّه لا يبرأ البتّة.	He was treated after I stopped the bleeding outside the wound for twenty-four hours, and the wound took about fifteen days to heal, and he recovered until he was well, and lived afterwards for many years, enjoying all his bodily functions, and the physicians were unanimous in their opinion that he would not recover from it.
ومن العجب أنّى لم أعالجه بمرهم لأنّى كنت فى موضع لا يوجد فيه شىء من الأدوية فكنت أضع على الجرح القطن البالى مرّتين فى النهار وأتعهّد غسله بماء العسل حتّى يبرأ.	And it is amazing that I did not treat him with any medications, because I was in a place where there were no drugs, so I put on the wound a cotton pad soaked in honey twice a day and covered it with a dressing until he recovered.
وأمّا أحد النوعين من الخياطة الخاصّيّة فإنّى أذكره على نصّ كلام جالينوس وهو أن تبتدئ بالخياطة من الجلد وتدخل الإبرة من خارج الى داخل فإذا أنفذت الإبرة فى الجلد وفى العضلة الذاهبة على الاستقامة فى طول البطن كلّه.	And as for one of the types of special sutures, I recall a passage from Galen's words, which is to start with the suture from the skin and insert the needle from outside in, so if you pass the needle through the skin and the underlying tendon, maintaining its direction along the length of the belly.
تركت الحافّة من الصفاق فى الجانب الذى أدخلت فيه الإبرة وأنفذت الإبرة فى حافّته الأخرى من داخل الى خارج فى الحافّة الأخرى من المراقّ فإذا أنفذتها فأنفذها ثانية فى هذه الحافّة نفسها من المراقّ من خارج الى داخل.	I left the suture in the peritoneum on the side where I inserted the needle, and passed the needle through its other edge from inside out, and then passed it again in this same edge from outside in.
ودع حافّة الصفاق الذى فى هذا الجانب وأنفذ الإبرة فى حافّته الأخرى من داخل الى خارج وأنفذ مع إنفاذك لها فى الصفاق الى حافّة المراقّ التى فى ناحيته حتّى تنفذ فيها كلّها،.	And I pushed the peritoneal edge that was on this side, and passed the needle through its other edge from inside out, and continued to pass it until it reached the peritoneal edge of the abdominus near it, until all of it was passed.
ثمّ ابتدئ أيضا من هذا الجانب بعينه وخطه مع الحافّة التى من الصفاق فى الجانب الآخر وأخرج الإبرة من الجلدة التى بقربه ثمّ ردّها فى تلك الجلدة وخط حافّة الصفاق التى فى الجانب الآخر مع هذه الحافّة من المراقّ.	Here is the translation:
وأخرجها من الجلدة التى من ناحيته، وافعل ذلك مرّة أخرى وافعله مرّة بعد مرّة الى أن تخيط الجراحة كلّها على ذلك المثال، وجملة صفة هذه الخياطة أن تخاط خياطة الفرّائين للفراء.	Here is the translation:
بأن تخيط الصفاق مرّة من جهة واحدة مع حافّة الجلد وأن تتركه مرّة من الجهة الأخرى حتّى تفرغ، وأمّا النوع الثانى من الخياطة الخاصّيّة التى ذكرها أيضا جالينوس فهذا كلامه نصّا.	To suture the peritoneum on one side with a flap of omentum and to leave it loose on the other side until it heals, and as for the second type of private suture mentioned by Galen, this is his exact words.
وهو أن تخيطها على مثال ما تخيطها قوم من المعالجين بأن يجمعوا كلّ جزء الى نظيره المشاكل له بالطبع فيضمّون حافّة الصفاق الى حافّته الأخرى وحافّة المراقّ الى حافّته الأخرى وذلك يكون على ما أصف لك.	And it is to suture it on the example of how the experts among them suture, gathering each part to its like, matching the edges naturally, incorporating the flap of the peritoneum to its other flap and the flap of the omentum to its other flap, and that will be as I have described to you.
ينبغى أن تغرز الإبرة فى حاشية المراقّ القريبة منك من خارج وتنفذها الى داخل فيها وحدها وتدع حاشيتى الصفاق ثمّ تردّ الإبرة وتنفذها من خارج الى داخل فى حاشيتى الصفاق كلتيهما ثمّ تردّها أيضا.	It is necessary to insert the needle in the edge of the omentum close to you from the outside and push it inside, and then withdraw the edge of the peritoneum, then insert the needle again and push it from the outside into the edge of the peritoneum on both sides, and then withdraw it also.
وتنفذها من داخل الى خارج فى حاشية المراقّ الأخرى التى فى الجانب المقابل، وهذا الضرب من الخياطة أفضل من الخياطة العامّيّة السهلة وهى الخياطة التى تقدّم ذكرها، فهذا كلام جالينوس نصّا، وقد قال بعضهم قد تستقيم خياطة البطن بإبرتين.	And push it from the inside to the outside in the other edge of the omentum which is on the opposite side, and this type of suture is better than the rough common suture, and it is the suture that I have previously mentioned, and this is Galen's exact words. Some of them said that you can perform an abdominal suture with two needles.
وذلك أن تدخل فيهما خيطا واحدا وتبدأ بإدخال الإبرة من عندك وتنفذها الى الجانب الآخر وتدخل الإبرة الأخرى من الجانب المقابل له فتنفذها من عندك على حسب خياطة الأساكفة سواء.	And that is to insert a single thread and start by inserting the needle from your side and pushing it to the other side, and then insert the other needle from the opposite side to you, and push it from your side according to the suture of Asakif.
واعلم أنّ الخرق اذا كان فى وسط البطن فإنّ خياطته أعسر من سائر مواضع البطن، وأمّا مداواة الجرح فحكمه فى مداواته حكم سائر الجراحات وذلك أنّك اذا أدركت الجرح طريّا بدمه قبل أن يغيّره الهواء ورددت المعاء وخطته وأحكمته فاحمل عليه الذرور الملحم.	And know that if the wound is in the middle of the abdomen, its suture will be more difficult than other places on the abdomen. And as for the treatment of the wound, its management is like the management of other wounds, which is that if you have treated the wound smoothly with its own blood before it becomes exposed to air and you have restored its contents and sutured it and managed it, then you will have carried out a proper treatment.
فإن كان الجرح قد غيّره الهواء فاحمل عليه بعض المراهم التى تحضرك حتّى يقيح وتسقط الخيوط ويلتحم الصفاق والمراقّ ثمّ تعالجه كعلاجك سائر الجراحات حتّى يبرأ.	If the wound has been affected by the air, then apply to it some of the medicaments that you have prepared, until the suppuration subsides and the ulcers heal, and the swelling goes down, and then treat it as you would other wounds, until it recovers.
فإن لم تحضرك أدوية فاحمل عليه منذ يبتدئ بالقيح القطن البالى وابدله مرّتين فى النهار كما أعلمتك حتّى يبرأ فإنّك لا تحتاج الى علاج آخر فى أكثر الأحوال اذا كانت الجراحات بسيطة، فإن خشيت أن تشارك الجرح الأعضاء الرئيسة فى الألم.	If you have not prepared any medicaments, then apply to it a cotton pad soaked in kerosene and change it twice a day as I have taught you, until it recovers. If you do not need another treatment most of the time, provided the wounds are minor, for fear of irritating the main organs with pain.
فينبغى أن تغمس صوفا ليّنا فى الزيت المعتدل الحرارة او فى دهن الورد وتضعه حول المواضع التى فيما بين الأربيّة والإبط، فإن أحسّ بوجع او عفن فى معائه فكثيرا ما يعرض ذلك فاحقنه بشراب قابض أسود فاتر.	It is good to immerse a soft cloth in warm oil or rose oil and place it around the affected areas between the armpits and the elbows, for if you feel pain or numbness in them, it often happens that way; so treat it with a compress of black axle tree.
ولا سيّما ان كان العفن قد بلغ فى المعاء وصار جرحا نافذا الى جوفه، واعلم أنّ ما كان من الأمعاء غليظا فهو أسهل برءا وما كان منها رقيقا فهو أعسر برءا.	And it is not unlikely that the numbness has reached the interior of the limbs and become a putrid wound in their hollow, and know that what was thick among them is easier to treat, and what was thin is more difficult to treat.
وأمّا المعاء المعروف بالصائم فإنّه لا يقبل البرء من جراحة تقع به البتّة وذلك لكثرة ما فيه من العروق وعظمها ولرقّة جرمه وقربه من طبيعة العصب، وأمّا إن كان الذى برز من الجرح الثرب وأدركته طريّا فردّه على حسب ردّك المعاء سواء.	And as for the known paralyzed limb, it does not accept treatment from a wound that occurs in the joint, and that is because of the abundance of vessels and bones in it, and the thinness of its skin, and the closeness of its nature to the nerve; and if the putrid matter flows from the wound and you have treated it thoroughly, then return the limb to its natural position.
فإن مضى له مدّة وقد اخضرّ او اسودّ فينبغى أن تشدّه بخيط فوق الموضع الذى اسودّ منه لئلا يعرض نزف دم فإنّ فى الثرب عروقا وشريانات، ثمّ تقطع ما دون ذلك الرباط.	If a period of time has passed and it has become greenish or black, it is good to tie it with a thread above the affected area so that it does not bleed excessively, for there are vessels and sinews in the joint; then cut what is below the ligature.
وتجعل طرفى الخيط متعلّقين من أسفل الجراحة خارجا منها ليسهل عليك سلّه وإخراجه عند سقوط الثرب وتقيح الجرح، ذكر الجرح الذى يعرض فى المعاء، فأمّا اذا عرض خرق فى المعاء وكان صغيرا.	And make the ends of the thread hanging from below the wound, going out from it, so that you can easily slide and extract it when the joint is bent and the wound is suppurating; remember the wound that occurs in the limb. But if a small abscess appears in the limb and was small.
فقد يمكن أن ينجبر فى بعض الناس من أجل أنّى رأيت إنسانا كان قد جرخ فى بطنه بطعنة رمح وكان الجرح عن يمين المعدة فأزمن الجرح وصار ناصورا يخرج منه البراز والريح فجعلت أعالجه على أنّى لم أطمع فى برءه.	It may happen that a person is wounded in the abdomen, and I saw a man who had been stabbed in his belly with a thrusting spearhead, and the wound was near the navel, so I treated it and made an incision, and pus and gas came out of it.
فلم أزل ألاطفه حتّى برئ والتحم الموضع، فلمّا رأيت الموضع قد التحم خشيت على العليل أن يحدث عليه حادث سوء فى جوفه فلم يعرض له من ذلك حادث سوء البتّة وبقى فى أفضل أحواله.	I did not remove the dressings until the wound had healed, and I kept the area clean. When I saw that the area had healed well, I feared that a bad accident might happen to him in his belly, so he was not exposed to that bad accident, and he remained in good health.
صحيحا يأكل ويشرب ويجامع ويدخل الحمّام ويرتاض فى خدمته، وقد ذكر بعض أهل التجربة أنّه متى عرض فى المعاء جرح وكان صغيرا فينبغى أن يخاط على هذه الصفة.	He eats and drinks and gathers strength, and he enters the bath and regains his physical fitness. Some experienced people have mentioned that when a wound appears in the belly, it is small and does not require one to be cautious about this condition.
وهو أن يؤخذ النمل الكبار الرؤوس ثمّ تجمع شفتا الجرح ثمّ توضع نملة منها وهى مفتوحة الفم على شفتى الجرح فإذا قبضت عليه وشدّت فمها قطع رأسها فإنّه يلصق ولا ينحلّ، ثمّ توضع نملة أخرى بقرب الأولى.	And it is that the large ants are taken, then the edges of the wound are gathered together, and an ant is placed on them, with its mouth open on the edges of the wound. If it bites and holds onto it, its head will be cut off, and it will stick and not come loose. Then another ant is placed near the first one.
ولا تزال تفعل ذلك بعدّة نمل على قدر الجرح ثمّ تردّه وتخيط الجرح فإنّ تلك الرؤوس تبقى لاصقة فى المعاء حتّى يتغرّى المعاء ويبرأ ولا تحدث بالعليل آفة البتّة، وقد يمكن أن يخاط المعاء أيضا بالخيط الرقيق.	And you do not cease to do that with several ants, according to the size of the wound, then you bandage and tie up the wound. For those heads will remain stuck in the belly until the belly is fully healed and is restored, and no bad accident happens to it. It is also possible to treat the belly with a thin thread.
الذى يسلّ من مصران الحيوان اللاصق به بعد أن يدخل فى إبرة وهو أن يؤخذ طرف هذا الخيط من المصران فيسلت نعمّا ثمّ يربط فى طرفه خيط كتان رقيق مفتول ثمّ يدخل ذلك الخيط فى الإبرة.	That which is drawn from the living animal that sticks to it, after it enters into a needle, and it is that one takes an end of this thread from the animal, and pulls it strongly, then ties its end with a thin, twisted catgut thread, and inserts that thread into the needle.
وفيه خيط المصران فيخاط به المعاء ثمّ يردّ الى الجوف، وهذا الضرب من الخياطة بالنمل والمصران إنّما هو على طريق الطمع والرجاء.	And there is a thread of the animal in which it is treated, and it is inserted into the belly, then it returns to its natural state. And this type of treatment with ants and animals is based on the method of attraction and suction.
فأمّا إن كان الخرق كبيرا واسعا ولا سيّما إن كان فى أحد الأمعاء الرقاق فليس فيه حيلة ولا منه برء البتّة،.	If the wound is large and wide, and not in one of the fleshy parts, there will be no difficulty in stitching it, nor any harm in the cicatrix.
الفصل السادس والثمانون.	Chapter 86.
فى علاج الزكام والناصور.	On the treatment of cold and cancer.
اعلم أنّ كلّ جرح او ورم اذا أزمن وتقادم وصار قرحة ولم يلتحم وكان يمدّ القيح دائما لا ينقطع فيسمّى على الجملة فى أىّ عضو كان ناصورا ونحن نسمّيه زكاما، والناصور.	Know that every wound or swelling, if it becomes chronic and recurs, and turns into a ulcer, and does not heal, and the discharge flows constantly without interruption, then it is called by the name of cancer in whichever member it may be, and we call it 'zakama' and 'nasaor'.
هو على الحقيقة تعقّد متلبّد صلب أبيض لا وجع معه له تجويف كتجويف ريش الطير.	It is in reality a hard, white, compact, dense, solid tumor, without pain, having with it a resemblance to the ostrich's egg.
ولذلك سمّاه بعضهم ريشة، ويكون فى بعض الأوقات رطبا يمدّ دائما القيح وربّما انقطعت الرطوبة فى بعض الأوقات وقد تكون هذه الرطوبة كثيرة وتكون قليلة وتكون غليظة وتكون رقيقة.	And therefore, some have called it 'riisha', and it may be in some cases a flux that constantly discharges pus, and perhaps the flux stops in some cases; and this flux may be abundant or scanty, thick or thin.
وقد قدّمت فى التقسيم عند ذكرى الجراحات أنّ كلّ قرحة لا تبرأ ولا ينبت فيها لحم فإنّما ذلك لأحد تسعة أسباب أحدها إمّا لقلّة الدم فى البدن وإمّا لرداءته وإمّا لأنّ فى داخلها وعلى شفتيها لحم صلب يمنع نبات اللحم الجيّد.	And I have mentioned in the chapter on wounds that every ulcer does not heal and does not grow flesh, unless for one of nine reasons: either because of a lack of blood in the body, or because of its hardness, or because there is within it or around its edges a hard, dense flesh that prevents the growth of good flesh.
وإمّا أنّها كثيرة الوضر والوسخ وإمّا لأنّ القرحة فى نفسها عفنة والمادّة التى تمدّها رديئة الكيفيّة وإمّا لأنّ الدواء غير موافق فى علاجها وإمّا لفساد وقع فى البلدة من جنس الوبأ وإمّا لخاصّة فى البلدة.	And either because it is abundant in noxious and corrupt matter, and the material that flows from it is bad and putrid; or because the ulcer itself is foul and corroding; or because the medicine is not suitable for its treatment; or because of a bad temperament in the country, of the type of the epidemic disease; or because of a special characteristic in the country.
كما عرض فى مدينة سرقسطة التى يعسر فيها نضج الأمراض ويبطئ فيها برء الأورام بالطبع وإمّا لأنّ فيها عظما واحدا او عدّة عظام، وقد بيّنت جميع هذه الأسباب وعلاماتها وعلاجاتها بالأدوية فى التقسيم.	As I have demonstrated in the city of Saragossa, where it is difficult to cure diseases and where the healing of wounds is slow by nature; or because there are many bones, either one large bone or several small ones. I have explained all these reasons, signs, and treatments with medicines in the chapter.
وينبغى لى هاهنا أن أعرفك بعلاج الناصور والزكام الذى يكون بطريق العمل باليد، اعلم أنّ النواصير قد تحدث فى جميع أعضاء الجسم فمنها نواصير تنتهى الى أوراد عظيمة وشريانات او الى عصب.	It is necessary for you to know the treatment of nasal polyps and the tumor that occurs through manual operation, knowing that polyps occur in all body parts, some of which extend to great veins and sinews or to a nerve.
او الى صفاق او الى معاء او الى مثانة او الى ضلع من الأضلاع او الى فقار من فقارات الظهر او الى مفصل من المفاصل المركّبة تركيبا كثيرا مثل اليد والرجل ومنها ما يفضى الى قرب عضو رئيس ونحو ذلك،.	Or to a splint or to a bandage or to a compress or to a clavicle from the broken bones or to a vertebra from the vertebras of the back or to a joint from the compound joints, which are built strongly like the hand and the foot, and some of which reach near a principal organ, and so on.
فما كان من هذه النواصير على هذه الصفة فهى من الأمراض العسرة البرء التى لا تقبل العلاج والاشتغال بها عناء وجهل، فإن كان من النواصير ما لم يصل الى هذه المواضع التى ذكرت ورجوت وطمعت فى علاجها.	But if any of these polyps are on this pattern, they are among the incurable chronic diseases that do not accept treatment and engaging with them is in vain and ignorance. If there were any of the polyps that did not reach these mentioned places, I have hoped and expected their treatment.
وأردت أن تتوصّل الى معرفة ذلك فخذ مسبارا من نحاس او حديد إن كان الناصور يمرّ على استقامة ففتّشه به، فإن كان فى الناصور تعريج ففتشّه بمسبار من رصاص رقيق لأنّ الرصاص يلين جسمه.	And I have wanted to reach the knowledge of that, so take a scalpel made of copper or iron, if the polyp is on a straight bone, open it with it. If there is curvature in the polyp, open it with a scalpel from fine tin, because tin adapts to its body.
فيسلس عند الدخول وينعطف نحو التعريج، فإن كان الناصور ذا أفواه كثيرة لا يمكنك أن تستدلّ عليها بالمسبار فاحقن منها فمًا واحدا من أفواهه فإنّ الرطوبة التى تحقنه بها تسلك نحو الأفواه الأخر وتسيل.	Be gentle when entering and adapt to the curvature, if the polyp has many openings that you cannot reach with the scalpel, so take one of its openings and the fluid that flows from it will be drawn towards the other openings.
منها ثمّ استقص التفتيش على أىّ وجه أمكنك لتعرف إن كان هناك عظم او عصب او كان الناصور قعره بعيدا او قريبا او كان ناصورا واحدا له أفواه كثيرة وقف على جميع ذلك بمبلغ طاقتك من استخبارك العليل وجوده الألم عند غمز يدك على الموضع.	Then, feel the pulse on any aspect you can, to know if there is a bone or nerve, or if the polyp is deep or near, or if it is one with many openings, and pause on all of that according to your ability from your careful examination, for the existence of pain when you press your hand on the spot.
ونحو ذلك من الدلائل والأسباب الحادثة للورم، فإذا وقفت على جميع ذلك وقوف حقيقة فحينئذ فصر الى العلاج على ثقة وهو أن تنظر فإن كان.	And so, from the signs and symptoms happening to the tumor, if you pause on all of that and pause on reality, then you will be confident in your treatment, and it is that you should look, for if it were.
الناصور ظاهرا قريبا او فى موضع سالم بعيد من مفصل او عصب او شريان او وريد او أحد المواضع التى ذكرت لك فشقّ الناصور على ما تقدّم من وصفى وانتزع ما فيه من التلبّد واللحوم الفاسدة واللحوم الزائدة.	The visible suture is close or in a healthy place, far from a joint or nerve or artery or vein or one of the mentioned sites. The visible suture is according to what has been mentioned before, and remove what is in it from the tangled and excessive flesh and the redundant flesh.
وما ينبت فى فمه من لحم او ثؤلول ونحو ذلك وعالجه حتّى يبرأ، فإن كان الناصور بعيد القعر وكان على استقامة فينبغى أن تشقّه فى العمق قدر ما أمكنك ثمّ تنقّيه من جميع لحومه الفاسدة.	And what grows in it from flesh or skin and the like, and heals until it recovers. If the suture was far from the cavity and was on a straight line, it is desirable to make an incision in the depth as much as possible, then to clean it from all its excessive flesh.
ثمّ استعمل الفتل الملثوثة فى الأدوية الحادّة ودسّها الى قعر الناصور الذى تدركه بالحديد، افعل به ذلك مرّات حتّى يأكل ذلك الدواء الحادّ جميع ما بقى فى قعر الناصور من الفساد.	Then use the cotton pad with the sharp medicine and apply it to the bottom of the suture that is touched by the iron, do it repeatedly until all the putrid matter in the bottom of the suture is eaten away by the sharp medicine.
ثمّ اجبره بالمراهم التى تنبت اللحم صحيحا حتّى يبرأ فإن لم يبرأ بذلك فاكوه على ما تقدّم وصفه، فإن كان سبب الناصور عظم وصحّ ذلك عندك ففتّشه وشقّه على ما أخبرتك إن لم يمنعك مانع من.	Then force it with the ointments that grow good flesh until it recovers. If it doesn't recover with that, open it as I mentioned before and described. If the cause of the suture is a bone and it is correct with you, then open it and make an incision according to what I told you, if nothing prevents you from it.
عرق او عصب او عضو رئيس كما قلنا، فإن انكشف اليك العظم وكان فيه بعض الفساد والسواد فاجرده حتّى يذهب فساده ثمّ عالجه بما يلحمه حتّى يبرأ، فإن لم يبرأ وأمدّ القيح كما كان يفعل.	A vein or nerve or main organ, as we have said. If you find the bone and there is some putrid matter and blackness in it, scrape it until its putrid matter goes away, then clean it with what adheres to it until it recovers. If it doesn't recover and the pus flows out as it was doing.
فاعلم أنّك لم تصل الى جميع استئصال الفساد فاكشف جميع ما عليه ثانية واستقص جرده وتنقيته بأبلغ جهدك ثمّ اجبره، فإن برئ وإلّا فاعلم أنّ ذلك الفساد فى غور بعيد من الفساد فاكشف جميع ما عليه ثانية.	Be aware that you have not reached all the rottenness, so uncover all that is on it again and scrape it with strong effort, then force it. If it recovers, otherwise be aware that the rottenness is in a deep place far from the rottenness, so uncover all that is on it again.
واستقص جرده وتنقيته بأبلغ جهدك كان العظم الفاسد عظما صغيرا وأمكنك جذبه فاجذبه بالكلاليب اللطاف التى تصلح لذلك.	And scrape it with strong effort, if the rotten bone is a small bone and you can grasp it, then grasp it with fine forceps that are suitable for that.
فإن كانت عظام كثيرة فاستقص جذبها كلّها ولا تترك منها شيئا جهدك فإن اعترضك شىء من الرباطات دونها ولم يكن فى قطعها خطر فاقطع تلك الرباطات واللحوم إن كانت هناك وخلّص العظام.	If there are many bones, then pull all of them together and do not leave any of them behind, exerting your utmost effort. If you encountered something from the ligaments without cutting them, and there was no danger in cutting them, then cut those ligaments and the skin, if it was there, and release the bones.
فإن لم يتأتّ لك انتزاع العظام من وقتك فاحمل على الجرح ما يعفّنه واتركه أيّاما حتّى يعفن ما حول تلك العظام من اللحوم والرباطات واحفظ الجرح لا يلتحم الشقّ الذى كنت شققت فى خلال عملك.	If you were unable to extract the bones at that time, then put on the wound what covers it and leave it for a few days until it forms what is around those bones from the skin and ligaments, and preserve the wound so that the gash you made during your operation does not open up.
بل ضع عليه إن خشيت ذلك قطنة مغموسة فى الكبريت المسحوق مع الزيت او قطنة مغموسة فى المرهم المصرىّ او أحد المراهم الخضر فإنّها اذا عفنت تلك الرباطات وتبرت العظام سهل انتزاعها وجذبها.	But put on it, if you fear that, a cataplasm of rose water mixed with oil or a cataplasm of Egyptian myrrh or one of the green unguents, for they will facilitate the extraction and pulling of the bones if they have formed those ligaments.
فإن كان عظما واحدا كبيرا مثل عظم الساق او عظم الفخذ ونحوه وكان الذى فسد منه وجهه فقط فاجرده جردا بليغا حتّى يذهب ذلك السواد والفساد ثمّ اجبر الجرح، فإن كان الذى فسد منه جزءا كبيرا وكان الفساد قد بلغ مخّ العظم فلا بدّ من نشره.	If there was a large single bone, such as the tibia or femur and its like, and it was the one that had become putrid only on its surface, then scrape it lightly until the blackness and putrefaction disappear, and then bind the wound. If it was the one that had become putrid in a large part, and the putrefaction had reached the marrow of the bone, then there is no choice but to remove it.
وقطعه كلّه الى حيث ينتهى الفساد فحينئذ فعالجه حتّى يلتحم، وأنا أخبرك بزكام كان قد عرض لرجل فى ساقه لتجعله مثالا وعونا على علاجك، كان هذا الرجل حدث السنّ.	And cut it off to where the putrefaction ends, and then treat it until it heals. And I will tell you about a case that was presented to me of a man who had gangrene in his leg, and I made it an example for you to rely on in your treatment. This man's leg had been amputated.
نحو الثلاثين عاما قد عرض له وجع فى ساقه عن سبب تحرّك عليه من داخل البدن حتى اتّصلت الموادّ الى الساق وتورّم ورما عظيما ولم يكن سبب من خارج ثمّ تمادى به الزمان مع خطاء الأطبّاء حتّى انفتح الورم.	He was around thirty years old when he presented to me with pain in his leg due to a cause that had affected him from inside the body until the materials reached the leg and formed a large tumor, and there was no external cause, then time passed with neglect and mistakes of the physicians until the tumor opened up.
وجرت منه موادّ كثيرة وأسيئ فى علاجه حتّى تزكّم الساق وصارت فيه أفواه كثيرة كلّها تمدّ القيح ورطوبات البدن فعالجه جماعة من الأطبّاء نحو عامين ولم يكن فيهم حاذق بصناعة اليد.	Many materials and instruments were wasted in its treatment until the leg was strong enough to bear the weight, and many of its ulcers had formed, which required continuous bandaging and massage by a group of doctors for almost two years, yet there was no one skilled in manufacturing artificial limbs.
حتّى قصدنى فرأيت ساقه والموادّ تسيل من تلك الأفواه سيلانا عظيما والرجل قد نحل جسمه واصفرّ لونه فأدخلت المسبار فى أحد تلك الأفواه فأفضى المسبار الى العظم ثمّ فتّشت الأفواه كلّها.	Until I decided to amputate his leg, and the materials were prepared for those ulcers which had become very large and the patient's body had become emaciated and yellowish, so I inserted the rasp into one of those ulcers, then the rasp reached the bone, and all those ulcers burst open.
فوجدتها تفضى بعضها الى بعض من جميع جهات الساق فبدرت فشققت على أحد تلك الأفواه حتّى كشفت بعض العظم فوجدته فاسدا قد تأكّل واسودّ وتعفّن وتثقّب حتّى نفذت الثقب الى المخّ فنشرت ما انكشف لى.	I found that some of them had burst open to each other from all directions of the leg, so I made an incision on one of those ulcers until I exposed part of the bone, and found it to be decayed, worn away, and eaten into, until the trephine reached the marrow, and I extracted what was visible.
وتمكّن من العظم الفاسد وأنا أظنّ أن ليس فى العظم غير ذلك الفساد الذى قطعت ونشرت وأنّى قد استأصلته ثمّ جعلت أجبر الجرح بالأدوية الملحمة مدّة أطول فلم يلتحم ثمّ عدت فكشفت عن العظم ثانية فوق الكشف الأوّل.	I cleared away the decayed bone, and I thought that there was no decay in the bone except what I had cut out and extracted, and I assumed that I had removed it all, then I applied a medicated dressing to the wound for a longer period, but it did not heal, so I returned and exposed the bone again, above the first exposure.
فوجدت الفساد متّصلا بالعظم فنشرت ما ظهر لى أيضا من ذلك الفساد ثمّ رمت إجباره فلم ينجبر ولا التحم ثمّ كشفت عليه أيضا فلم أزل أقطع العظم جزءا جزءا وأروم جبره فلا ينجبر حتّى قطعت من العظم نحو شبر.	I found that the decay was still connected to the bone, so I extracted what appeared of that decay as well, then I repeated the dressing, but it did not heal, and I exposed it again, but I did not stop amputating piece by piece until I finally removed about a finger's length from the bone.
وأخرجته بمخّه ثمّ جبرته بالأدوية فالتحم سريعا وبرئ، وإنّما وجب هذا التكرار فى عمله وشقّه لحالة ضعف العليل وقلّة احتماله وخوفى عليه الموت لأنّه كان يحدث له فى كلّ الأوقات من إفراط الاستفراغ غشى ردئ فبرئ برءا تامّا.	I removed it with its marrow, then I applied a medicated dressing, and it healed quickly and completely. And indeed, this repetition of treatment was due to the weakness of his constitution and the slightness of his hope, and fear of death, because it was happening to him at all times, from excessive evacuation of his strength, and he recovered completely, free from any defect.
ونبت فى موضع العظم لحم صلب وصلحت حاله فى جسمه وتراجعت قوّته وتصرّف فى أحواله ولم تتعرّضه فى المشى آفة تضرّ به البتّة، فإن كان عظم نات فى موضع من الجسم قد انكسر.	Here is the translation:
فينبغى أن تنشره على هذه الصفة وهو أن تأخذ رباطا فتشدّه فى طرف العظم الناتى وتأمر من يمدّه الى فوق وتصير رباطا آخر من صوف أغلظ من الرباط الأوّل.	You should place it in this manner, taking a bandage and tightening it at the end of the fractured bone, and ordering someone to stretch it upwards and making another bandage thicker than the first one.
ثمّ تربطه على اللحم الذى تحت العظم وتمدّ طرفه لينجذب اللحم الى أسفل وأنت تكشف اللحم عن الموضع الذى تريد نشره لئلّا يؤذى المنشار اللحم وتضع خشبة او لوحا تحت العظم من أسفل محكما.	Then you tie it to the flesh beneath the bone, stretching its end to draw the flesh downwards and uncovering the flesh from the site that you want to treat so that the splint does not harm the flesh, and you place a cushion or a plate under the bone from below, securing it.
لأنّه اذا فعلت ذلك لم يمتنع المنشار من قطع العظم الفاسد، وينبغى أن يكون النشر فوق موضع الفساد قليلا لئلّا يكون فى تجويف العظم فساد فلا يظهر فى ظاهره للحسّ فتضطرّ الى نشره مرّة أخرى.	For if you do that, the splint will not be prevented from cutting the rotten bone, and it is necessary for the dressing to be above the site of the rot a little so that it does not become rotten in the cavity of the bone, lest it appears on its surface, and you are forced to dress it again.
فإن كان العظم فاسدا ولم يكن ناتيا بل يتّصل بعضه ببعض والفساد فى وسطه او فى بعضه فاكشف اللحم من جميع جهاته كلّها ثمّ تضع الخشبة من أسفل ثمّ تنشره من الجهة الأولى حيث الفساد.	If the bone is rotten and does not break, but rather some of it connects to others, and the rot is in its middle or in some of it, then you uncover the flesh from all its directions, then you place a cushion from below, then you dress it from the first side where the rot is.
فإذا فرغت من نشره فانشره من الجهة الأخرى وليكن النشر على بعد من الفساد قليلا على ما قلنا، فإن كان الفساد فى مفصل قطعت المفصل الفاسد نفسه ونشرت العظم حيث يتّصل من الجهة الأخرى.	If you have finished dressing it, then dress from the other side, and let the dressing be at a distance from the rot a little, as we mentioned. For if the rot is in a joint, you cut off the rotten joint itself and dress the bone where it connects from the other side.
فإن كان الفساد فى اتّصال مفصلين فليس فيه حيلة غير الجرد، فإن كان الفساد فى مشط اليد او مشط الرجل فالأمر فى علاجه عسر جدّا ولكن ينبغى أن تقشر الفساد كيف ما ظهر لك وتجرده وتنقيه على أىّ حال يمكنك.	If the rot is in the connection of two joints, there is no trick but to amputate. If the rot is in the palm of the hand or the sole of the foot, the matter is very difficult to treat, but you should remove the rot as it appears to you, and clean it and purify it in whatever way you can.
وبأىّ حيلة تستقيم لك متى لم يعترضك عرق او عصب، واعلم أنّ المقاطع والمناشير لقطع هذه العظام كثيرة على حسب وضع العظام ونصبها وغلظها ورقّتها وكبرها وصغرها وصلابتها وتخلخلها.	And with whatever trick you can, you should straighten it for yourself, when no vein or nerve has been damaged. And know that the splints and bandages are many for cutting these bones, according to the position of the bone, its alignment, thickness, roughness, largeness, smallness, and its flexibility.
فلذلك ينبغى أن تعدّ لكلّ نوع من العمل آلة مشاكلة لذلك العمل.	Therefore, it is necessary to assign a specific instrument for each type of operation.
واعلم أنّ الأعمال أنفسها قد تدلّك على نوع الآلة التى تحتاج اليها اذا كانت معك دربة طويلة ومعرفة بفنون هذه الصناعة لأنّ من مهر الصناعة وشاهد ضروبا من الأمراض.	You should know that the operations themselves will guide you on the type of instrument you need, if you have long experience and knowledge of the techniques of this craft, because mastery of the craft and observation of various diseases are essential.
فقد يستنبط لنفسه ما يشاكله من الآلات لكلّ مرض وأنا مصوّر لك فى آخر هذاالباب عدّةآلات.	So he will be able to identify for himself what instruments he needs for each disease, and I will illustrate for you at the end of this chapter several instruments.
تجعلها أمثلة تحتذى عليها وقياسا تقيس بها على غيرها إن شاء الله، صورة منشار:.	You will make them examples to be followed, and a model to be measured against, God willing, a picture of a sharpened instrument:.
صورة منشار آخر:.	Another picture of a sharpened instrument:.
صورة منشار صغير:.	A picture of a small sharpened instrument:.
صورة منشار كبير:.	A picture of a large sharpened instrument:.
صورة مجرد:.	A picture of a scalpel:.
يكون رأس هذا المجرد على هيئة رأس المسمار مكوكبا ونقشه على هيئة نقش الإسكلفاج وإنّما يصلح أن تحكّ به رؤوس المفاصل اذا فسدت او عظما واسعا كبيرا، صورة مجرد آخر صغير:.	The head of this scalpel is in the form of a scalpel's head, curved and its edge on the pattern of the scalpel's edge, and it is suitable to use it to cut through joints if they are inflamed or swollen greatly, a picture of another small scalpel:.
صورة مجرد عريض:.	A picture of a broad scalpel:.
صورة منشار آخر محكم:.	A picture of another fully-sharpened instrument:.
يصنع قوسه الأعلى وشفرته من حديد ونصابه من عود بقس مخروط محكم، صورة مجرد فيه تجويف:.	It is made with its upper part and blade from iron, and its handle from a conical wooden rod, fully sharpened; a picture of a scalpel with a notched blade:.
صورة مجرد آخر لطيف:.	A picture of another scalpel for scraping:.
صورة مجرد:.	A picture of a scalpel:.
صورة مجرد آخر معقّف الطرف:.	A picture of another scalpel with a bent tip:.
صورة مجرد صغير يشبه المسبار:.	A picture of a small scalpel resembling a lancet:.
صورة مقطع آخر صغير:.	A picture of another small forceps:.
صورة مجرد أيضا:.	A picture of a scalpel also:.
وطرفه كالمرود يتصرّف فى مواضع كثيرة من جرد العظام، صورة مجرد يصلح لجرد ما انثقب من العظام:.	And its end is like a file, it is used in many places on the bone ridges; a picture of a scalpel suitable for scraping what is prominent from the bone:.
طرفه مثلّث حادّ الحواشى يصنع من حديد هندىّ وكذلك ينبغى أن تصنع جميع ما ذكرنا من المجارد والمقاطع، صورة مجرد:.	A similar instrument, like the seventh, is made of Indian steel, and it is also necessary to make all the aforementioned instruments from the same material, in a single piece.
الفصل السابع والثمانون.	Chapter 7 and 8.
فى قطع الأطراف ونشر العظام.	Cutting of limbs and setting of bones.
قد تعفن الأطراف إمّا من سبب من خارج وإمّا من سبب من داخل فإذا عالجت ذلك الفساد بعلاج الأدوية ولم ينجع العلاج ورأيت الفساد يسعى فى العضو لا يردعه شىء.	The putrefaction of limbs may be due to a cause from outside or a cause from inside, and if you treated that corruption with medicinal treatment and the treatment did not benefit, and you saw the putrefaction spreading in the member without being stopped by anything.
فينبغى أن تقطع ذلك العضو الى حيث بلغ الفساد لينجو العليل بذلك من الموت او من بلاء عظيم هو أعظم من فقد العضو، وعلامة من عرض له ذلك أن يسودّ العضو حتّى تظنّ أنّ النار أحرقته.	It is necessary to amputate that limb up to where the putrefaction has reached, so as to escape death or a great affliction which is greater than the loss of the limb, and a sign for this is that the limb becomes black, until you think that fire has scorched it.
او يعفن بعد السواد حتّى يسعى ذلك العفن الى ما يلى ذلك العضو ويأخذ فى جملة البدن فبادر بقطعه، وكذلك إن كان سبب الفساد عن لسع بعض الهوامّ كعقرب البحر او الأفعى او الرتيلاء ونحو ذلك.	Or it becomes putrid after blackening, until that putrefaction spreads to what is adjacent to that limb and takes hold of the whole body, so hasten to amputate it. And likewise, if the cause of the putrefaction is a bite from some vermin like sea scorpions or vipers or similar things.
فإن كان الفساد او اللسعة فى طرف الأصبع فاقطع الأصبع ولا تمهل الفساد أن يسعى الى اليد وكذلك إن كان أخذ فى اليد فاقطعها من أصل الزند ولا تمهل الفساد أن يسعى حتّى يأخذ فى زندى الذراع.	If the putrefaction or bite is in a finger, then amputate the finger, and do not delay the putrefaction from spreading to the hand. And likewise, if it has taken hold of the hand, then amputate it at the base of the forearm, and do not delay the putrefaction from spreading until it takes hold of the forearm itself.
وكذلك إن أخذ فى الذراع فاقطع الذراع عند المرفق فى المفصل نفسه، فإن جاز الفساد ورأيته أخذ الى نحو المنكب فلا تقطع المنكب البتّة فإنّ فى ذلك موت العليل واستعمل غير ذلك من العلاج على قدر الطاقة.	And likewise, if it has taken hold of the forearm, then amputate the forearm at the elbow joint itself. If the putrefaction has spread and you see it spreading towards the shoulder, do not amputate the entire shoulder, for that would be a death sentence, and instead use other treatments according to one's strength.
وكذلك تفعل بالرجل اذا أخذ الفساد فى الأصبع فاقطع الأصبع عند أحد السلاميات، وإن أخذ فى مشط الرجل فاقطع الرجل بأسرها فإن صعد الى الركبة فاقطع الساق عند مفصل الركبة.	And likewise, do the same with the foot if putrefaction takes hold in the toes, amputate the toes at one of the joints. And if it takes hold in the ankle, then amputate the leg at its joints; and if it spreads to the knee, then amputate the thigh at the knee joint.
وإن كان الفساد قد بلغ فوق الركبة فليس فيه حيلة إلّا تركه وإسلام العليل الى الموت، وصفة قطع العضو او نشره أن تشدّ رباطا فى أسفل الموضع الذى تريد قطعه وتشدّ رباطا آخر فوق الموضع.	If the gangrene has reached above the knee, then there is no remedy except to leave it and entrust the affected member to death, or to cut off the affected part and tie a bandage at the lowest point where you want to amputate, and apply another bandage above the point.
ويمدّ خادم الرباط الواحد الى أسفل ويمدّ خادم آخر الرباط الأعلى الى فوق وتجرد أنت اللحم بين الرباطين بمبضع عريض حتّى ينكشف اللحم كلّه ثمّ يقطع او ينشر، وينبغى أن تضع من جميع الجهات خرق الكتان.	And apply a single bandage below and another above, and separate the flesh between the two bandages with a thin spatula until all of it is exposed, then amputate or dissect, and it is necessary to make an incision on all sides of the skin.
لئلّا يمسّ المنشار الموضع الصحيح فيعرض للعليل ألم زائد وورم حارّ، فإن حدث نزف دم فى خلال عملك فاكو الموضع بسرعة او احمل عليه بعض الذرورات القاطعة للدم ثمّ عد الى علاجك حتّى تفرغ.	For if you touch the affected place with the rasp, it will show you the true site of the pain and the excess flesh, and if bleeding occurs during your operation, then stop the flow of blood quickly or apply some haemostatic powder to the wound, and then return to your treatment until you finish.
ثمّ اربط العضو المجروح برباط يصلح له وعالجه حتّى يبرأ، وأنا أخبرك بمثال عرض لرجل فى رجله هذا العارض بعينه الذى أصف لك وذلك أنّه حدث فى رجله سواد مع حرقة تشبه النار.	Then bind the affected member with a bandage that suits it, and treat it until it heals. And I will give you an example of a case of a man who had this affliction in his leg, which I have described to you, and that is what happened to him: he had a black spot on his leg with a burning pain resembling fire.
وكان ذلك الفساد أوّل ما حدث فى أصبعه حتّى أخذ الرجل كلّها فبدر الرجل من ذاته لمّا رأى الفساد يسعى فى العضو مع شدّة ما كان يجد من الوجع والحرقة فقطعه عند المفصل فبرئ.	And that gangrene was the first thing to happen in his toe, until the man lost all of it, so the man was relieved from his suffering when he saw the gangrene spreading in the member with severe pain and burning only at the joint, so he was relieved.
فلمّا مضى له زمان طويل عرض له ذلك الفساد بعينه فى أصبع يده السبّابة فقصدنى فرمت ردع ذلك الفضل بما حملت على اليد من الأدوية بعد تنظيفى لبدنه فلم يرتدع الفضل وجعل يسعى فى الأصبع الآخر.	Then, after a long time had passed for him, that gangrene appeared in his left index finger, so I treated it by applying a poultice to the hand after cleaning and preparing the skin, but the gangrene did not recede and spread to the other fingers.
حتّى أخذ الفساد فى اليد فدعانى الى قطع يده فأبيت عليه رجاء منّى على إرداع ذلك الفضل وخشيت أيضا عليه عند قطع يده الموت لأنّ قوّة الرجل كانت على السقوط، فلمّا يئس منّى انصرف الى بلده.	Until the gangrene reached his hand, so I was forced to amputate it, and I felt a sense of regret for him because of the difficulty of treating that condition, and I feared also for his death when I amputated his hand, because the man's strength was failing, so he did not survive and returned to his country.
فبلغنى عنه أنّه بدر فقطع يده بأسرها فبرئ، وإنّما حكيت هذه الحكاية لتكون عونا على ما يقع من جنس هذا المرض ولتكون دليلا يستدلّ به ويعمل عليه،.	It was only the outer skin that was affected, and it was scratched with its roughness. This scratching was a sign of what happens in cases of this disease, and it served as a guide to diagnose and treat it.
الفصل الثامن والثمانون.	The 80th Chapter.
فى علاج المخابئ وكيفيّة حقنها بالأدوية.	On the treatment of abscesses and how to puncture them with medications.
اذا حدث ورم فى بعض الأعضاء اللحميّة وطالت مدّة الورم حتّى جمع مدّة ثمّ انفجر او بطّ وخرج جميع ما كان فيه من المدّة وبقى الموضع فارغا كأنّه وعاء.	If a abscess forms in some of the fleshy members and it persists for a period of time, until the pus accumulates, then it ruptures or bursts open and all the matter that was in it comes out, leaving the site empty as if it were a vessel.
والجلد الذى عليه كالخرقة قد رقّ ولم يكن بالغ فى فساده أن أثّر فى عظم ولا فى عصب ولا فى رباط ومن هنا استحقّ أن يسمّى مخبأ ولم يسمّ ناصورا إلّا أن تطول مدّته حتّى يؤثّر الفساد فى شىء من هذه الأعضاء.	And the ulcer that forms on it is like a crust, and it does not heal quickly because it affects neither bone, nor nerve, nor ligament. From here, it deserves to be called an abscess, and it is not called a wound unless its duration is prolonged until it causes corruption in one of these organs.
فحينئذ يسمّى ناصورا او زكاما، وعلاجه أن تقطع ذلك الجلد كلّه كما يدور ولا سيّما اذا كان قد رقّ وصار كالخرقة وتيقّنت أنّه لا يلصق بالموضع لفساده.	So it is called a wound or a suppuration, and its treatment is to cut out the entire ulcer as it forms, and not to leave any part of it, even if it has formed a crust and become like a scab, and it is certain that it will not heal unless it is completely excised from the site.
فإن رجوت أن يلصق الجلد ولم يكن بلغ منه الفساد ذلك المبلغ وكان فى الجلد ثخن من اللحم فعالجه بالحقنة، وهو أن تنظر الى المخبأ فإن كان كبيرا والقيح الذى يمدّ منه منتن الرائحة فاحقنه بالدواء المصرىّ.	For if you want the ulcer to heal and it has not reached the point of corruption, and there is in the ulcer a thick piece of flesh that can be treated with a medication, it is that you should look at the abscess; if it is large and the pus that comes out of it has a foul smell, then treat it with the Egyptian medicine.
الذى هو خلّ وزيت وعسل وزنجار أجزاء سواء تجمع فى إناء وتطبخ على النار حتّى يخثر الدواء ويأتى فى ثخن العسل، ثمّ تأخذ منه حاجتك وترقّقه بالماء والعسل وتحقن به المخبأ وتشدّ فمه وتترك الدواء فيه قدر ساعتين.	Which is a mixture of vinegar, honey, and sugar, all of equal parts, collected in a vessel and boiled over the fire until the medicine dissolves, then you take what you need and dissolve it in water and honey, and apply it to the abscess, and bandage it tightly, leaving the medicine on it for about two hours.
ثمّ تخرجه بالعصر تفعل ذلك أيّاما حتّى ينقى المخبأ ويذهب النتن، وقد يحقن بماء الرماد اذا لم يحضرك هذا الدواء، وهوأن تأخذ رماد حطب الكرم او رماد حطب البلوط والق عليه الماء.	Here is the translation:
ثمّ صفّه واحقن به حتّى تتيقّن أنّ المخبأ قد انغسل، فإن لم يكن فى العليل احتمال على الدواء المصرىّ ولا ماء الرماد فاحقنه بماء وعسل قد خلط فيه شىء من الزنجار المسحوق.	Here is the translation of the excerpt:
او تحقنه بالعسل والشراب مزوجين لأنّ من شأن العسل أن ينقى ويغسل والشراب يلزق المخبأ ولا سيّما اذا كان الشراب فيه فضل قبض ويبس، فإذا فعلت ذلك مرّات وتيقّنت أنّ المخبأ قد ذهب فساده فاحقنه بما ينبت اللحم فيه.	Here is the translation of the excerpt:
مثل أن تأخذ من المرهم النخلىّ وتحلّه بدهن ورد وشراب قابض او تحقنه ببعض الأدوية والمراهم الأخر التى أثبتنا صفاتها فى مقالة المراهم، فإن كان فم المخبأ ضيقا لا يسع فيه أنبوب المحقن.	As you take from the nose a polyp and remove it with forceps and scissors or hook, or grasp it with some of the medications and other nose polyps that we have mentioned their characteristics in the chapter on polyps, if it was in the narrow passage and did not allow the insertion of the instrument.
فوسّعه بالحديد قليلا او ضع فيه فتيلا ملثوثا فى المرهم المصرىّ او مرهم السريقون حتّى يتّسع وكذلك إن كان الفم ايضا واسعا فاجمع شفتيه بالخياطة واترك منه على قدر ما يدخل فيه المحقن بلا مزيد.	Open it with the iron a little, or put in it a curved cannula in the Egyptian nose polyp or Suriyun polyp until it widens, and also if the passage was wide, then gather its lips with the sutures and leave from it as much as the instrument can enter without excess.
وكذلك إن كان فمه الذى يسيل منه القيح مرتفعا الى فوق فشقّه فى أخفض مكان فيه ليسيل منه القيح الى أسفل لأنّ القيح اذا احتقن فى غور المخبأ منع اللحم أن ينبت فيه.	And also if the passage from which the pus flows upward, then make an incision in its lowest part so that the pus does not flow downward, because if the pus accumulates in the depths of the passage, it prevents the flesh from healing therein.
فإن لم يمكنك شقّ المخبأ نحو أسفله على ما تريد فرم أن تنصب العضو نصبة يسيل القيح منه بسهولة على حسب ما يتهيّأ لك ورم أن لا يحتبس فيه شىء من القيح البتّة.	If you cannot make an incision in the passage downward as you wish, then bend the limb or member so that the pus flows out easily according to what is convenient for you, and beware lest any of the pus remains behind.
وأمّا الأدوية الملحمة التى توضع على المخبأ من خارج وكيفيّة وضعها عليه فهو أن تأخذ من أحد المراهم الملحمة المشاكلة لما تريد وتمدّه على خرقة كتان ولتكن الخرقة قدر ما يغم بها المخبأ كلّه.	And as for the medications that are applied to the passage from the outside and how they are placed on it, it is that you take one of the medicinal polyps that are suitable for what you want and spread it on a piece of cloth and let the cloth be of such size that it covers the entire passage.
ثمّ تقرض بالمقصّ قبالة فم المخبأ ثقبة أوسع من فم المخبأ قليلا ثمّ تمدّ من المراهم اللينة على خرقة أخرى على قدر الثقب وتضعها عليها وضعا متباعدا عن فم المخبأ ليسهل خروج القيح منه ولا تزيل الخرقة الكبيرة إلّا بعد.	Then you cut with scissors in front of the passage opening a little wider than the mouth of the passage, then spread some of the soft medications on another piece of cloth according to the size of the incision and place it on top of it, away from the mouth of the passage, so that the pus can come out easily, and do not remove the large piece of cloth until afterwards.
أيّام عدّة، وأمّا التى على فم المخبأ فهى التى تزيلها فى كلّ وقت ليخرج ما اجتمع فيه من القيح ولتعرف ما يسيل منه من الصديد هل هو كثير او قليل او نضيج او غير نضيج،.	For several days, and as for the one on the mouth of the passage, it is the one that you remove at every time to let out what has accumulated in it of pus, so that you can know what comes out of it, whether it is a lot or a little, or thick or not thick.
ومع هذا ايضا فتفقّد موضع المخبأ نفسه هل يحسّ صاحبه فيه بوجع ام ليس فيه وجع وهل فيه ورم او ليس فيه ورم، فإذا تمادى علاجك هكذا ورأيت المادّة التى تخرج يسيرة على فم المخبأ.	With this also, you should examine the site of the abscess itself: does its owner feel pain in it or not, and is there inflammation in it or not, and if you have treated it thus and seen the purulent matter that comes out slowly from the mouth of the abscess.
فاعلم أنّ المخبأ قد التصق او قارب الالتصاق فحينئذ فحلّه من غد او فى اليوم الثالث ومتى حللت الجرح فابدل الخرق بغيرها وجدّد المرهم، فإن خرج من المخبأ بعد مدّة طويلة صديد رقيق فلا تيأس من التزاقه.	Know that the abscess has adhered or is about to adhere, so then you should open it on the fourth day or on the third, and when you have opened the wound, replace the dressing with another and renew the medication; for if pus comes out of the abscess after a long time, it will be thin and clear, so do not despair of the treatment.
فبرءه قريب لأنّ من الناس من يبطئ نبات اللحم فى جراحته ومنهم بضدّ ذلك، فإن خرج من المخبأ بعد أيّام كثيرة قيح غير نضيج فاعلم أنّ المخبأ لم يلتزق فإن أبطأ التزاق المخبأ.	Some people delay the healing of the flesh in their wound, and among them are those who contradict that, for if pus comes out of the abscess after many days, it is not viscous; know that the abscess has not adhered, so it delays the adhesion of the abscess.
وطال أمره فزد فى تجفيف الأدوية ولتكن أدوية تكون فى قوامها رطبة وفى قوّتها يابسة مثل المرهم النخلىّ اذا كان قد زيد فيه فضل زيادة من القلقطار، ومن أبلغ ما يعالج به أن يؤخذ المرهم النخلىّ.	And treat him with evacuating the medication and let the medication be in its potency, soft in its consistency, like the Nakhla'ih medication; if it has been augmented with an increase from Qalqatar. And among what is most beneficial to treat it with is to take the Nakhla'ih medication.
ويحلّ بدهن ورد ويرشّ عليه الشراب العتيق المعتدل فى قوامه ثمّ تعجنه به وتستعمله، وقد يفعل مثل هذا الفعل اذا لم يحضرك المرهم النخلىّ العسل اذا طبخته حتّى يغاظ واستعملته او تأخذ من المرّ والصبر والكندر وتسحق الجميع وتذرّه على العسل وهو على النار.	And apply to it a dressing of rose water and sprinkle on it the aged, tempered Sherab; then bandage it with it and use it. And it may work like this action if you do not have the Nakhla'ih medication, or honey, if you applied it until it becomes thick and usable, or take from myrrh, and patience, and cinnamon, and grind them all together and apply it to the honey, while it is on the fire.
ثمّ تطليه على خرقة وتشدّه على المخبأ او يطلى بالعسل الذى طبخته حتّى يغلظ وتذرّ عليه العقاقير وتضع عليه الخرق وتشدّه.	Then apply it to the dressing and attach it to the abscess, or smear with the honey that has been applied until it thickens, and apply the powder and put on the dressing and attach it.
وقد يستعمل فى مثل ذلك الزراوند الطويل وأصل السوسن الأسمانجونىّ ودقيق الكرسنّة والقنطريون مفردة استعملتها او مجموعة تسحقها وتنخلها وتذرّها على العسل الذى وصفت وتستعمله، فإن طال أمر المخبأ ولم يبرأ بهذا العلاج فاعلم أنّ فى غوره فسادا.	And it may be used in such a case, the long Zarwand, and the essence of the Sosan Asmanjoniy, and the fine Krasenna, and the single Qantariyon; use them individually or grind them together and mix them and apply them to the honey that has been described and use it. For if the abscess does not heal with this treatment, know that there is a hidden evil in its root.
وقد أثّّر فى العظام او فى سائر الأعصاب الصلبة او الرباطات فعالجه علاج الناصور على ما تقدّم،.	The fracture in the bone or in other solid organs or tendons is treated according to what has been presented.
الفصل التاسع والثمانون.	Chapter 89.
فى علاج الداحس والظفر المرضوض وقطع الأصبع الزائدة وشق التحام الأصابع.	On the treatment of gout and the ulcers that occur on it, and cutting off the extra fingers and splitting of the nail phalanges.
الداحس هو لحم كثير ينبت تحت ظفر إبهام اليد او الرجل وربّما ينبت فى سائر الأصابع، فإذا طال أمره وأهمل علاجه تورّم ورما حارّا.	Gout is a lot of flesh that grows under the nail of the thumb or toe, and sometimes it grows on other fingers; if its condition worsens and its treatment is neglected, it becomes swollen and inflamed.
او فسد وقاح حتّى يأكل أصل الظفر وربّما أفسده كلّه وربّما بلغ الفساد الى العظم حتّى يكون له رائحة منتنة ويصير طرف الأصبع عريضا ويكون لونه كمدا، فإذا عالجته بما ذكرنا فى التقسيم ولم ينجع علاجك.	Or it becomes rotten and putrid until it eats into the root of the nail, and sometimes it corrupts all of it, and sometimes the corruption reaches the bone until it has a foul smell and the tip of the finger becomes deformed and its color turns black; if you treated it with what we mentioned in the section and the treatment did not succeed.
فينبغى أن تقطع بالحديد جميع الفضلة التى تنبت من الظفر ثمّ تكوى الجرح بعد ذلك فإنّ الكىّ فى هذا نافع جدّا، وأمّا إن كان العظم صحيحا وكان الظفر أيضا صحيحا.	It is necessary to cut out all the flesh that grows from the nail with an iron, then cauterize the wound after that; indeed, this method is very beneficial in this case, and if the bone was sound and the nail was also sound.
وكانت الزاوية الحاوية من الظفر قد زمّت اللحم الى داخل وجعلت تنخسه وتوذيه فينبغى أن تضع مرودا رقيقا تحت زاوية الظفر الذى ينخس اللحم وترفعه الى فوق وتقطع ذلك اللحم برفق.	And the corner of the nail's bed had pushed the flesh inside and made it swollen and painful; it is necessary to put a thin spatula under the corner of the nail that pushes the flesh out and lifts it upwards, then cuts off that flesh with ease.
وتضع على ما بقى من اللحم من الأدوية المحرقة الأكّالة حتّى يذهب جميعه ثمّ تعالجه بالمراهم حتّى يبرأ، وأمّا إن كان الفساد قد أثّر فى العظم فينبغى أن تقطع ذلك العظم وتخرجه فإنّه لا يبرأ ما دام فيه عظم فاسد البتّة.	And apply to the remaining flesh from the corroding medications that dissolve it until it disappears completely, then treat it with ointments until it heals; and if the corruption had affected the bone, it is necessary to cut out that bone and extract it, for it will not heal as long as there is rotten bone in it.
فإن رأيت التأكّل والفساد يسعى فى الأصبع فاقطعها فى أحد السلاميات على ما تقدّم ذكره ثمّ عالجها حتّى تبرأ، فإن أصاب الظفر ضربة او رضّ وحدث فيه وجع شديد فينبغى أن تفصد العليل أوّلا.	If you see the decay and corruption spreading in the fingers, cut them off at one of the joints as mentioned previously, then treat it until it heals; if the nail is hit with a blow or bruise and severe pain occurs, it is necessary to amputate the limb first.
ثمّ تشق الظفر بمبضع حادّ شقّا منحرفا من فوق الى أسفل وتحفّظ من أن تبلغ بالشقّ الى اللحم الذى تحت الظفر فإنّك تحدث بذلك على العليل وجعا شديدا ويكون سببا لنبات لحم زائد فى الموضع ثمّ عالج الموضع بما يسكن الأوجاع.	Then, you should incise the abscess with a sharp scalpel, making an oblique section from top to bottom, and take care not to reach the underlying tissue beneath the skin, lest you cause severe pain and damage to the surrounding area. This will lead to a prolonged healing process for the excessive flesh at that site. Then, treat the site with what alleviates the inflammation.
وأمّا الأصبع الزائدة التى تتولّد فى بعض أيدى الناس فربّما كانت لحميّة كلّها وربّما كانت فى بعضها عظام وربّما كان فيها ظفر ويكون نبات بعضها فى أصل مفصل بعض الأصابع.	And as for the extra fingers that grow on some people's hands, sometimes they are entirely fleshy, and sometimes they have bones in them, and sometimes there is a nail, and some of them take root at the base of the joint of some fingers.
او يكون نباتها فى بعض سلاميات الأصبع والتى تنبت فى بعض سلاميات الأصبع لا تتحرّك والتى تنبت عند مفصل الأصبع ربّما تحركت فما كان منها لحميّا فقطعه يسهل وذلك أن تقطعه عند أصله بمبضع عريض.	And they take root in some of the finger's sinews, and those that take root in some of the finger's sinews do not move, and those that take root at the finger's joint might move; if it is merely fleshy, it is easy to excise it at its base with a sharp scalpel.
وأمّا التى نباتها فى أصل المفصل فعلاجها عسر فتنكّب عن قطعها، وأمّا التى تنبت فى الأصبع عند أحد السلاميات فينبغى أن تقطع أوّلا لحمها قطعا مستديرا الى العظم ثمّ تنشر العظم بأحد تلك المناشير الموافقة لذلك.	And as for those that take root at the base of the joint, it is difficult to treat them, so you should refrain from cutting them. And as for those that take root in the fingers at one of the sinews, it is necessary to cut their flesh with an oblique incision towards the bone, and then to scrape the bone with one of the suitable scrapers.
ثمّ عالجه حتّى يبرأ، وأمّا الالتحام الذى يعرض للأصابع بعضها ببعض فكثيرا ما يعرض ذلك ويكون ذلك ممّا يولد به الإنسان ويكون عند اندمال جرح او حرق نار ونحو ذلك فينبغى أن تشقّ ذلك الالتحام.	Then, treat it until it heals. And as for the adhesion that occurs between some fingers, it is common to occur and it can be due to what is born with a person, or it can occur at the time of suturing a wound or a burn, and so on. It is necessary to incise that adhesion.
حتّى ترجع الأصابع على هيئتها الطبيعيّة ثمّ تضع بينهما فتلا او خرقا مشرّبة فى دهن الورد لئلّا يلتحم سريعا وتفرق بينهما او تجعل بينهما صفيحة رصاص رقيقة حتّى يندمل الموضع على ما ينبغى.	Until the fingers return to their natural shape, then you should put between them a piece of cloth or a soft dressing soaked in rose oil, so that they do not adhere quickly and separate from each other, or you make between them a thin, smooth splint, until the site becomes as it should be.
وكذلك إن عرض الالتحام لبعض الأصابع بالكفّ فشقّ ذلك الالتحام على حسب ما يتهيّأ ويصلح به شكل العضو.	And thus the exposure of some fingers by the cuff, so that the exposure is adjusted according to what is needed and corrected in the shape of the limb.
الفصل التسعون.	The Ninth Operation
فىقطع الدوالى.	The Section on Circumcision
الدوالى هى عروق ملتوية غلاظ مملوّة فضولا سوداويّة تحدث فى أكثر أعضاء الجسم وأكثر حدوثها فى الساقين ولا سيّما فى سوق الفيوج والأكّارين والحمّالين، فينبغى أوّلا أن تستعمل نفض البدن من المرّة السوداء مرّات نفضا قويّا.	Circumcision is a surgical procedure that involves the removal of excess skin and flesh, which occurs more frequently in the limbs, especially in the thighs and legs, and sometimes in the arms and hips. It is necessary to use a strong and sharp instrument to cut through the black skin several times.
ثمّ افصد صاحبها الباسليق، وأمّا علاجها بالحديد فيكون على ضربين أحدهما أن يشقّ ويخرج الدم الأسود والوجه الآخر أن يسلّ العرق ويخرج بأسره، أما شقّه فعلى هذه الصفة تنطل الساق أوّلا بالماء الحارّ نعمّا.	Then the doctor should use a scalpel, and treat it with iron, so that one edge is for incision to release black blood and the other edge is for cauterization to stop the bleeding; but in making an incision, one should first clean the limb with hot water.
حتّى ينحلّ الدم الغليظ العكر ثمّ تشدّ ساق العليل من فوق فَخْذِهِ الى أسفل ركبته بعمامة ثمّ تشقّ العرق فى موضع واحد او فى موضعين او فى ثلاثة شقّا واسعا.	Until the thick blood is resolved, then one should tighten the bandage around the affected limb from above to below, and then make an incision in one place or two places or three places, and open it wide.
ثمّ تسلت الدم الأسود بيدك من أسفل الساق الى فوق ومن فوق الى أسفل حتّى تخرج من الدم القدر الذى تراه كافيا او ما تحتمل قوّة العليل ثمّ تربطه وتأمره باجتناب الأغذية المولّدة للمرّة السوداء ويعاد الاستفراغ والفصد.	Then one should extract the black blood with the instrument from below the limb to above, and from above to below, until it releases as much blood as is seen sufficient, or until the strength of the affected part is restored; then one should bandage it and order a diet of nourishing foods for the black skin, and stop the bleeding and the surgical procedure.
متى امتلأت العروق وأضرّ ذلك بالعليل، وأمّا سلّه فيكون على هذه الصفة تحلق ساق العليل إن كان فيه شعر كثير ثمّ تدخله الحمّام وتنطل ساقه بالماء الحارّ حتّى تحمرّ وتدرّ العرق او يرتاض رياضة قويّة.	When the veins are full and that harms the affected part, and it is necessary to open the vein of the affected limb if there is a lot of hair on it; then one should enter the bath and wash the limb with hot water until it becomes red and the vein opens or a strong sweat appears.
إن لم يحضره حمّام حتّى يسخن العضو، ثمّ تشقّ الجلد قبالة العرق شقّا بالطول إمّا فى آخِره عند الركبة وإمّا فى أسفله عند الكعب ثمّ تفتح الجلد بالصنانير وتسلخ العرق من كلّ جهة حتّى يظهر للحسّ.	If he didn't use the bath until the limb becomes hot, then one should make a longitudinal incision in the skin opposite the vein, either at the top near the knee or at the bottom near the ankle; then one should open the skin with a scalpel and extract the vein from every direction until it becomes visible to the touch.
وهو عند ظهوره تراه أحمر قانئا فإذا خلص من الجلد تراه أيضا كأنّه الوتر، ثمّ تدخل تحته مرودا حتّى اذا ارتفع وخرج عن الجلد علّقه بصنّارة عمياء ملساء، ثمّ شقّ شقّا آخر بقرب ذلك الشقّ بقدر ثلاث أصابع.	Here is the translation:
ثمّ اسلخ الجلد من على العرق حتّى يظهر، ثمّ ارفعه بالمرود كما فعلت وعلّقه بصنّارة أخرى كما فعلت أوّلا، ثمّ شق شقّا اخر او شقوقا كثيرة إن احتجت الى ذلك.	Here is the translation:
ثمّ سلّه واقطعه فى آخر الشقّ عند الكعب ثمّ اجذبه وسلّه حتّى يخرج من الشقّ الثانى ثمّ اجذبه الى الشق الذى فوقه وافعل ذلك حتّى تجذبه من الشقّ الثالث أعلى الشقوق كلّها حتّى اذا خرج جميعه فاقطعه.	Here is the translation:
فإن لم يجبك للجذب والسلّ فأدخل إبرة بخيط قوىّ مثنّى واربطه واجذبه وأدخل تحته المرود وافتل به يدك الى كلّ جهة حتّى يخرج وتحفّظ لا ينقطع فإن انقطع فإنّه يعسر عليك سلّه جدّا.	If you cannot extract the arrow by pushing and pulling, insert a strong thread with a probe and tie it around and pull it out, and insert the medications through the wound, and move your hand in every direction until it comes out, and be careful not to break it, for if it breaks, it will become more difficult for you to remove it.
ويدخل على العليل منه مضرّة، فإذا سللته كلّه فضع على موضع الجراحات صوفا مغموسا فى شراب ودهن ورد او زيت وعالجه حتّى يبرأ، فإن كانت الدالية متشنّجة ذات تعاريج لها التواء الى جهات.	And he should enter on the affected part a harmful thing, so if you have inserted it all, place on the site of the wounds a suppurating poultice in vinegar and rose-water or oil, and bandage until it heals; for if the diseased part is constricted with its fibrous parts having crookedness towards certain directions.
ولم تكن على استقامة كما قلنا فينبغى أن تشقّ عليها عند كلّ جهة من تعاريجها ومواضع التوائها ثمّ تعلّقها بالصنانير حتّى تسلّها بأجمعها، وتحفّظ عند شقّك عليها أن تقطع العرق او تجرحه فإنّه يعسر عليك سلّه فتحفّظ جهدك،.	And do not be on a straight direction as we mentioned, but rather dissect it from every direction of its fibrous parts and their crookedness, then bandage them with compresses until you gather them together; and beware when dissecting them that you do not cut the vein or injure it, for it will become more difficult for you to remove it.
صورة النشل الذى تشقّ به الدالية:.	Figure of the lancet with which one dissects the diseased part:
صورة الصنّارة العمياء:.	Figure of the deep compress:
لا يكون لها تعقيف كسائر الصنانير ولا تكون حادّة الطرف لئلّا تجرح العرق وتكون غليظة الانثناء ملساء لأنّها إن كانت رقيقة قطعت العرق برقّتها بل يكون لها فضل غلظ كما قلنا،.	It should not have a curved edge like the edge of the compress, nor be sharp at the tip, lest it injure the vein and be rough in its curvature, for if it were thin, it would cut the vein by its roughness; rather, it should have a blunt edge as we mentioned.
الفصل الحادى والتسعون.	The sharp-edged and ninety-degree (instrument).
فى سلّ العرق المدنىّ.	On extracting the median vein.
هذا العرق يتولّد فى الساقين فى البلدان الحارّة كالحجاز وبلدان العرب وفى البلدان الحارّة القشفة القليلة الخصب وربّما تولّد فى مواضع أخر من البدن غير الساقين وتولّده عن عفونة تحدث تحت الجلد.	This vein is generated in the legs in the hot climates like Hijaz and the lands of the Arabs, and in the hot climates with little coldness and scarcity of moisture, and maybe it generates in other places of the body besides the legs, and its generation is due to a ulceration that occurs under the skin.
كما تحدث فى داخل الأبدان الحيّات والدود وجبّ القرع والدود المتولّد بين الجلد واللحم، وعلامة ابتداء حدوث هذا العرق أن يحدث فى الساق تلّهب شديد ثمّ يتنفّط الموضع ثمّ يبتدئ العرق يخرج من موضع ذلك التنفّط.	As it happens in the living bodies and the animals, and the generation of the veins between the skin and the flesh, and a sign of the beginning of this vein is that it occurs in the leg with severe heat, then the place becomes inflamed, then the vein begins to emerge from the place of inflammation.
كأنّه أصل نبات او حيوان فإذا ظهر منه طرفه فينبغى أن يلفّ على قطعة صغيرة من رصاص تكون زنتها من درهم كيل الى درهمين وتعقده وتترك الرصاص معلّقا من الساق.	As if it were a plant or an animal, so when its extremity appears, it should be wrapped with a small piece of lead that weighs from one dirham to two dirhams, and bent, and the lead is left suspended from the limb.
فكلّما خرج منه شىء الى خارج لففته فى الرصاص وعقدته فإن طال كثيرا فاقطع بعضه ولفّ الباقى ولا تقطعه من أصله قبل أن يخرج كلّه لأنّك إن قطعته تقلّص ودخل فى اللحم فأحدث ورما وعفنا فى الموضع وقرحة رديئة.	Whenever something emerges from it to the outside, it should be wrapped in lead and bent, for if it remains for a long time, some of it will be cut off and the rest wrapped, but do not cut it off from its root before everything has emerged, for if you cut it, it will constrict and enter the flesh, causing inflammation and putridity at the site.
فلذلك ينبغى أن يدارى ويجرّ قليلا قليلا حتّى يخرج عن آخره ولا يبقى منه شىء فى البدن، وقد يخرج من هذا العرق فى بعض الناس ما يكون فى طوله خمسة أشبار وعشرة.	Therefore, it should be treated and slowly extracted little by little until everything emerges from its end, and nothing of it remains in the body. It may emerge from this vein in some people what is five or ten fingers long.
وقد بلغنى أنّه خرج لرجل من عشرين شبرا، فإن انقطع لك فى حين علاجك له فأدخل مرودا فى ثقبه وبطّه بطّا طويلا مع البدن حتّى يتفرّغ كلّ ما فيه من مادّة وحاول تعفين الموضع بالأدوية أيّاما.	It has reached me that a man emerged from twenty fingers' length, and if it is cut off for you during treatment, then insert a tampon into the orifice and sew it up with a long suture along with the body until all its contents are evacuated, and try to treat the site with medications, whenever possible.
ثمّ عالجه بعلاج الأورام، وقد يكون هذا العرق ذا شعب كثيرة ولا سيّما اذا ظهر فى مفصل الرجل او فى الرجل نفسه فيحدث له أفواه كثيرة ويخرج من كلّ فم شعبة فعالجه كما ذكرنا فى التقسيم وبما تقدّم.	Then, we will discuss the treatment of tumors, and this vein may have many branches, and it is not surprising if it appears in a joint or in the limb itself, causing many cavities, and emerging from each cavity a functional branch, as we mentioned in the chapter and previously.
الفصل الثانى والتسعون.	Chapter 89.
فى الشقّ على الدود المتولّد تحت الجد ويسمّى علّة البقر.	On the incision on the abscess that develops under the ribs, and it is called "cow's ailment".
هذا المرض يسمّى فى بعض البلدان عندنا علّة البقر من أجل أنّها كثيرا ما يعرض للبقر وهى دودة صغيرة واحدة تتولّد بين الجلد واللحم وتدبّ فى الجسم كلّه صاعدة وهابطة.	This disease is called "cow's ailment" in some of our regions because it often affects cows, and it is a small abscess that develops between the skin and the flesh, spreading throughout the body, causing harm and corruption.
تتبيّن للحسّ عند دبيبها من عضو الى عضو حتّى تخرق حيث ما خرقت فى الجلد موضعا وتخرج وتكوّنها من عفونة بعض الأخلاط كما يعرض للدود والحيّات وحّب القرع فى البطن،.	It spreads to the affected area from one member to another until it perforates, wherever it has perforated in the skin, and emerges, forming a collection of pus from some of the corrupt humors, just as it appears in abscesses and ulcers, and loves to settle in the belly.
وإنما يتوقّع من أذيّتها أنها اذا دبّت فى الجسم وارتفعت الى الرأس وبلغت الى العين فربّما فتحت فيها وخرجت فأبطلت العين ويعرض ذلك كثيرا، فإذا أردت علاجها وإخراجها فإنّما يكون ذلك عند دبيبها وظهورها للحسّ.	For it is likely to be lodged in the body and rise to the head and reach the eye, and perhaps it opens and comes out, and that happens frequently. If you want to treat it and remove it, then it must be done when it becomes inflamed and appears to sensation.
فينبغى أن تشدّ ما فوقها وتحتها برباط شدّا جيّدا ثمّ شقّ عليها وأخرجها، فإن غاصت فى اللحم ولم تجدها فاحمل على الموضع الكىّ بالنار حتّى تحرقها، وأعظم ما يتوقّع إفسادها للعين كما قلنا.	You should strongly grasp what is above and below it with a strong bandage, then make an incision and remove it. If it has become embedded in the flesh and you cannot find it, apply a hot iron to the affected area until it emerges, and beware of causing damage to the eye as we have mentioned.
فإن رأيتها قد صارت فى الرأس قرب العين فشدّ تحتها على الجبين شدّا جيّدا ثمّ شقّ عليها وأخرجها، وينبغى أن يتعاهد العليل تنقية جسمه بالأدوية المسهلة للأخلاط العفنة الرديئة والتحفّظ من الأغذية الموّلدة للعفونة،.	If you find it has settled in the head near the eye, then strongly grasp underneath it on the forehead with a strong bandage, then make an incision and remove it. And it is necessary for the patient to be cautious about his body being purified from corrupting medications that spoil the putrid matter and to guard against the obstructing nutrients that cause putrefaction.
الفصل الثالث والتسعون.	Chapter 39.
فى الشقّ على المرض الذى يعرف بالنافر.	The incision on the disease that is recognized by its putrid smell.
هذا المرض الذى يسمّى فى بلدنا النافر هو وجع يعرض فى بعض الأعضاء ثمّ ينتقل من عضو الى عضو وقد رأيته على ما أصفه لك.	This disease that is named in our country as "al-Nafar" is a pestilential ulcer that appears on some of the limbs, then transfers from one limb to another, and I have seen it on what I have described to you.
دعيت الى امرأة عليلة فى بعض البوادى فكشفت عن ذراعها وأرتنى نفخا يسيرا فى عرق حبل الذراع فلمّا بقيت ساعة رأيت ذلك النفخ يدّب مع الزند كما تدّبّ الدودة صاعدا الى منكبها بأسرع ما يمكن أن يكون كالزئبق.	I treated a woman who had a swelling in one of her limbs, so I made an incision on her arm and inserted a small reed into the artery of the arm, and when it remained for an hour, I saw that the reed was moving with the pulse as the vein moves, rising to her shoulder as quickly as possible, like a viper.
اذا سال من موضع الى موضع، فزال الوجع من ذلك المكان وثبت فى المنكب، ثمّ قعدت ساعة فجرى فى سائر الجسم حتّى صار فى الذراع الآخر، ثمّ حكت لى أنّه يدور جسمها كلّه على ما شاهدت.	If it moves from one place to another, the pestilential ulcer would depart from that location and settle in the shoulder, then after an hour, it would spread to the rest of the body until it reached the other arm, and I came to know that it was affecting her entire body, as I had observed.
فعجبت من سرعة انتقاله من عضو الى عضو ولم أكن قبل رأيت هذا المرض بعينى هكذا على هذه الصفة إلّا أنّى رأيت جماعة يجدون الوجع ينتقل من عضو الى عضو ولم أره بعينى كما رأيته فى هذه المرأة.	Here is the translation of the excerpt:
ولم أقدّر ذلك إلّا أن يكون من أجل أن المرأة كانت من أهل البادية يابسة البدن مكشوفة العروق فمن هنا ظهر للحسّ ذلك الريح المنتقل ووجب أن لا يظهر على هذا القياس فى أهل الرفاهية والأبدان الرطبة الخفيّة العروق.	I did not consider that except to be because the woman was from the people of the desert, having a hidden and swollen abdomen, so it appeared to him that this was a transferred hernia, and it was necessary that it would not appear in the measurements of the people of luxury and abundance with their hidden and swollen veins.
فإذا أردت علاجه وأحس صاحبه بالوجع فإن ظهر اليك بالعيان كما ذكرنا فشدّ فوقه وتحته بالعجلة وشقّ عليه حتّى يخرج ذلك الريح المحتقن واكو المكان.	So if you want to treat it and its owner feels a sensation of pain, then it appears to you with the symptoms as we mentioned, so you should press on it strongly and hold it with the pincers and incise until that transferred hernia emerges and the place becomes clear.
فإن لم تره بعينك فعالجه بنفض البدن وما ينفى الرياح ويفشّها مثل حبّ المنتن وحبّ السكبينج ونحوها من الأدوية،.	For if you did not see it with your own eyes, you should treat it by shaking the abdomen and what is transferred of the hernias, and scatter them like a scattered abscess and a scattered aposteme, and remove them from the medicines.
الفصل الرابع والتسعون.	Chapter 84.
فى إخراج السهام.	On Extracting Arrows.
السهام قد تختلف بحسب أنواعها وبحسب المواضع التى تقع فيها من الجسم وأمّا اختلافها بحسب أنواعها فإنّ منها كبارا وصغارا ومنها زجاج مجوّفة وزجاج مصمتة ومنها ما لها ثلاث زوايا وأربع زوايا.	The arrows may differ according to their types and according to the locations in which they are found on the body, and as for their difference according to their types, some are large and some are small, and some are barbed and some are smooth, and some have three or four barbs.
ومنها ما لها ألسنة ومنها ما لها شظايا، وأمّا التى تكون بحسب الأعضاء التى تقع فيها فتكون على ضربين إمّا أن تكون الأعضاء من أعضاء رئيسة مجوّفة مثل الدماغ والقلب والكبد والرئة والكليتين والمعاء والمثانة ونحوها.	And some have shafts and some have fragments, and as for those that are according to the organs in which they are found, they are categorized into types, either being principal organs with barbs, such as the brain, heart, liver, lung, kidneys, stomach, and bladder, and so on.
فمتى وقع سهم فى أحد هذه الأعضاء وظهرت لك علامات الموت التى أنا واصفها لك بعد فينبغى أن تجتنب إخراج ذلك السهم منها فإنّ الموت يلحق صاحبها فى أكثر الأحوال.	When an arrowhead becomes lodged in one of these organs and the signs of death, which I will describe to you later, appear, it is necessary to beware of extracting that arrowhead from them, for death often overtakes its owner in most cases.
ومتى لم تظهر لك هذه العلامات الرديئة ولم يكن السهم توارى فى غور العضو فأخرجه وعالج الجرح، ومن علامات الدماغ اذا واقعه سهم وأنفذ العظم وجرح الصفاق الذى على الدماغ فإنّه يعرض من ذلك صداع شديد وسدر ودوار.	And when these bad signs do not appear to you, and the arrowhead is not embedded in the depth of the organ, then extract it and treat the wound. And among the signs of a head injury, if an arrowhead strikes the brain and breaks the skull and wounds the dura mater above the brain, it presents severe headaches and vertigo.
وحمرة فى العينين وحمرة اللسان وتشنّج واختلاط عقل وقذف مرّة وربّما خرج الدم من المنخرين او الأذنين وربّما انقطع الكلام وذهب الصوت وخرج من موضع الجرح رطوبة بيضاء تشبه العصيدة ويجرى منها مثل مائيّة اللحم.	Here is the translation:
فإن ظهرت لك هذه العلامات فأمسك عن علاج العليل وإخراج السهم إن كان لم يخرج، وأمّا علامات السهم اذا واقع القلب وكان قريبا من الثدى الأيسر وحسّ به كأنّه قد انغرز فى شىء صلب لا فى شىء فارغ.	If these symptoms appear to you, then desist from treating the patient and extracting the arrow, if it has not come out, and as for the symptoms of the arrow, if it has reached the heart and was close to the left nipple, and felt as if it had penetrated into a solid mass, not an empty one.
وربّما كانت للسهم حركة تشبه حركة النبض ويسيل من الجرح دم أسود ويتبع ذلك برد الأطراف وعرق بارد وغشى فاعلم أنّ الموت نازل لا محالة، وعلامة السهم اذا جرح الرئة خروج دم زبدىّ من الجرح.	Perhaps the arrow's movement was like a pulse, and it brought out black blood from the wound, followed by numbness of the limbs, cold sweats, and fainting; then know that death is imminent without doubt. And a symptom of the arrow is if it wounded the lung, bringing out frothy blood from the wound.
والأوعية التى تلى العنق تتورّم ويتغيّر لون العليل ويتنفّس تنفّسا عاليا ويطلب استنشاق الهواء البارد، فإن واقع السهم الحجاب الذى فى الصدر فإنّه يكون قريبا من الأضلاع الصغار ويكون التنفّس عظيما مع وجع شديد.	And the signs that indicate a wound in the neck are swelling and changing of the patient's color, and panting with an elevated panting, and asking for cold air to be sniffed; if the arrow has reached the diaphragm, which is in the chest, then it will be close to the small ribs, and the panting will be severe along with severe pain.
وتنهّد ويتحرّك جميع أعضاء المنكبين، وإن واقع السهم الكبد اتّبع ذلك وجع شديد وخرج من الجرح دم يشبه الكبد فى حمرته، وإن واقع السهم المعدة فربّما خرج من الجرح من الغذاء شىء غير منهضم.	And all the members of the shoulders will be weakened and relaxed, and if the arrow has reached the liver, it will be accompanied by severe pain and blood resembling the liver in its redness will come out from the wound; and if the arrow has reached the stomach, perhaps food that is not digested will come out from the wound.
وأمره ظاهر، وإن واقع السهم البطن ونشب فيه وخرج شىء من البراز من الجرح او الثرب او معاء قد انخرق فلا مطمع فى علاجه ولا فى إخراج السهم، فإن كان السهم واقع المثانة وخرج البول.	And the signs will be apparent, and if the arrow has reached the abdomen and became embedded in it, and something from the feces or urine or pus came out from the wound, then there is no hope for his treatment nor for extracting the arrow; for if the arrow has reached the bladder and urine came out.
وبرز منها شىء الى خارج واشتدّ الألم على العليل فاعلم أنّه هالك، وأمّا سائر الأعضاء كالوجه والعين والحلق والكتف والعضد وفقار الظهر والترقوة والفخذ والساق ونحوها من الأعضاء فقد تسلم على الأمر الأكثر.	And if something protrudes from the inside to the outside, and the pain increases on the patient, then know that he is dying; and as for the other members such as the face, eyes, throat, shoulders, arms, back, hips, legs, and similar organs, they will have given up on the severe matter.
متى لم يصادف السهم شريانا او عصبا ولم يكن السهم مسموما، وأنا أخبرك ببعض ما شاهدته من أمر هذه السهام لتستدلّ بذلك على علاجك، وذلك أنّ سهما كان قد واقع لرجل فى مأق عينه فى أصل الأنف.	When the arrow did not meet with a vein or an artery, and the arrow was not poisoned, and I will tell you about some of what I have seen regarding these arrows to guide you in your treatment, as it happened that an arrow struck a man in the corner of his eye near the bridge of his nose.
فأخرجته له من الجهة الأخرى تحت شحمة الأذن وبرئ ولم يحدث فى عينه مكروه، وأخرجت سهما آخر ليهودىّ كان قد واقعه فى شحمة عينه تحت الجفن الأسفل وكان السهم قد توارى ولم ألحق منه إلّا طرفه الصغير الذى يلصق فى الخشبة.	I extracted it for him from the other side beneath the eyebrow and he recovered, and no harm occurred to his eye. And I extracted another arrow that had struck him in the eyebrow beneath the lower eyelid, and the arrow had become embedded, but I did not touch except its small tip that was fixed in the bone.
وكان سهما كبيرا من سهام القسىّ المركّبة مربّع الحديد أملس لم يكن فيه أذنان فبرئ اليهودىّ ولم يحدث فى عينه حادث سوء، وأخرجت سهما آخر من حلق نصرانىّ وكان السهم عربيّا.	It was a large arrow from the arrows of the Qurasiyyah, with a broad iron head, and it did not have any barbs, so I treated him and he recovered, and no bad incident occurred to his eye. And I extracted another arrow from a Christian's throat, and the arrow was Arabian.
وهو الذى له أذنان فشققت عليه بين الوداجين وكان قد غار فى حلقه فلطفت به حتّى أخرجته فسلم النصرانىّ وبرئ، وأخرجت سهما آخر لرجل كان قد واقعه فى بطنه وقدّرنا أنّه سيموت منه.	And it was the one with barbs, so I split it open between the ribs and it had become stuck in his throat, so I manipulated it until I extracted it, and the Christian recovered. And I extracted another arrow from a man who had been struck in his belly, and we feared that he would die from it.
فلمّا بقى مدّة ثلاثين يوما او نحوها ولم يتغيّر عليه شىء من أحواله شققت على السهم وتحيّلت عليه وأخرجته وبرئ ولم يعرض له حادث سوء، ورأيت رجلا واقعه سهم فى ظهره فالتحم الجرح عليه.	He remained for a period of thirty days or thereabouts, and nothing of his condition changed, I operated on the arrow, and extracted it, and he recovered, and no bad incident occurred to him. And I saw a man who was struck by an arrow in his back, so I treated the wound and closed it.
فلمّا كان بعد سبعة أعوام خرج السهم فى أصل فخذه، ورأيت امرأة قد واقعها فى بطنها سهم والتحم الجرح وبقى السهم ولم يتغيّر من أحوالها شىء ولا كانت تجد له ضررا فى شىء من أفعالها الطبيعيّة،.	He remained for seven years, then the arrow came out from the bottom of his thigh. And I saw a woman who was struck by an arrow in her belly, and I treated the wound and it remained, and nothing of her condition changed, nor did she find any harm in anything of her natural functions.
ورأيت رجلا آخر واقعه سهم فى وجهه والتحم الجرح وبقى لا يجد له كثير ألم، ومن مثل هذا كثير، وأخرجت سهما لرجل من قوّاد السلطان كان قد واقعه فى وسط أنفه قد مال الى الناحية اليمنى قليلا.	And I saw another man who was struck by an arrow in his face, and I treated the wound and it remained, and he did not find much pain. And many were like this, and I extracted an arrow from a man of the Sultan's guard who had been struck in the middle of his nose, which had deviated slightly to the right side.
وغاب السهم كلّه فدعيت الى علاجه بعد وقوع السهم الى ثلاثة أيّام فوجدت جرح السهم ضيقا جدّا ففتّشته بمسبار رقيق فلم أحسّ به وكان يجد نخسا ووجعا تحت أذنه من الشقّ الأيمن.	Here is the translation:
فرجوت أن يكون ذلك النخس من طرف السهم فضمدت الموضع بضماد فيه قوّة جذب ونضج طمعا منّى أن يتورّم الموضع وتظهر علامة السهم فأشقّ عليه فلم يحدث فى الموضع حادث يدلّ على أنّ السهم بلغ الموضع.	It is necessary that the splint be placed on the side of the wound, and the position should be secured with a strong bandage, so that it attracts and holds in place, indicating that the wound has been reached and showing the sign of the splint, for if it does not happen at the site, it indicates that the splint has not reached the site.
فتماديت بالضماد عليه أيّاما كثيرة فلم يحدث حادث فانختم فى خلال ذلك الجرح وبقى العليل مؤيسا من إخراجه مدّة حتّى أحسّ بالسهم يوما فى داخل أنفه فأخبرنى الخبر فوضعت على الجرح الدواء الحادّ الأكّال أياما كثيرة.	I would tighten the bandage on it, and if no accident occurs, I would leave it for a while, until the wound heals and the pain subsides, until I feel the splint inside my nose; then I would inform you of the news. And I would apply the strong medicine to the wound, which is very effective.
حتّى انفتح وسبرته فأحسست بطرف السهم الرقيق الذى يلصق فى الخشبة ثمّ زدت فى فتح الجرح بذلك الدواء الحادّ حتّى ظهر إلينا بالعيان طرف السهم ومضى لى معه مدّة من الزمان نحو أربعة أشهر.	Until it opened and became clear, so I felt the delicate edge of the splint which adheres to the bone. Then I increased the application of that strong medicine to the wound until its signs appeared to us clearly, and it stayed with me for a period of time, about four months.
ثمّ لمّا توسّع الجرح وتمكّن لى دخول الكلاليب فيه جذبته وحرّكته فلم يستجب للخروج فلم أزل ألاطفه وأتحيّل عليه بضروب من الآلات حتّى قبضت عليه يوما بكلاليب محكمة على ما تأتى صورتها فى آخرالباب.	Then the wound did not spread and became firm, allowing me to insert the scalpel and move it around, but it did not respond to being evacuated. So I did not leave it until I had treated it with a variety of instruments, until I had grasped it firmly with a precise scalpel, according to its shape at the end of the papula.
حتّىأخرجته ثمّ جبرت الجرح.	Until I extracted it, then I treated the wound.
وكان الأطبّاء يحكمون على أنّ غضروف أنفه لا ينجبر فجبرته والتحم الجرح وبرئ العليل برءا تامّا لا يؤذيه شىء البتّة، وأنا أخبرك بكيفيّة إخراج بعض السهام لتجعل ذلك قياسا ودليلا على ما لم أذكره.	And the physicians were of the opinion that the cartilage of his nose would not be repaired, so I treated it and closed the wound, and the pain subsided completely, without anything bothering him. And I will inform you about how to extract some splints, to make it a measure and a guide for what I have not mentioned.
لأنّ أجزاء هذه الصناعة وتفصيلها لا يدرك بالوصف ولا يحيط به كتاب وإنّما الصانع الحاذق يقيس بالقليل على الكثير وبما حضر على ما غاب ويستنبط عملا جديدا وآلة جديدة عند النوازل الغريبة.	Because the details of this craft and its subtleties cannot be grasped through description, nor can a book encompass it. Rather, the skilled craftsman measures the little against the much, and what is present compensates for what is absent, and he discovers new actions and new tools when faced with unusual cases.
اذا نزلت من هذه الصناعة، فأقول إنّ السهام إنّما تخرج من الأعضاء التى نشبت فيها على نوعين إمّا بالجذب من الموضع الذى دخلت منه وإمّا من ضدّ الجهة الأخرى، والتى تخرج من حيث دخلت.	If the arrowheads are extracted from this craft, I say that they come out of the organs in which they were embedded, either by pulling from the spot where it entered or from the opposite side, and those that come out from where they entered.
إمّا أن يكون السهم بارزا فى موضع لحمىّ فيجذب ويخرج فإن لم يجبك للخروج من وقته الذى وقع فيه فينبغى لك أن تتركه أيّاما حتّى يتعفّن اللحم الذى حوله فيسهل جذبه وإخراجه وكذلك إن نشب فى عظم.	Or the arrowhead may be stuck in a fleshy place, so you pull and it comes out, but if it does not come out, do not force it to exit from the spot where it fell, for fear of tearing the flesh around it, rather leave it until the flesh around it relaxes and its extraction becomes easier, and likewise if it is stuck in a bone.
ولم يجبك للخروج فاتركه أيضا أيّاما وعاوده بالجذب والتحريك كلّ يوم فإنّه يخرج، فإن لم يجبك للخروج بعد أيّام فينبغى أن تثقب حول السهم فى نفس العظم من كلّ جهة بمثقب لطيف حتّى توسع للسهم ثمّ تجذبه وتخرجه.	And do not force it to come out, but leave it also for a day or two, and try pulling and rocking every day, for it will come out. If it does not come out after a few days, it is advisable to make a small perforation around the arrowhead in the same bone from all sides with a fine awl until it widens for the arrowhead, then pull it out and extract it.
فإن كان السهم الناشب فى عظم الرأس وقد أمعن فى أحد بطون الدماغ وظهرت من العليل بعض تلك الأعراض التى ذكرت لك فأمسك عن جذب السهم واتركه حتّى يستبرئ أمره بعد أيّام.	If the embedded arrowhead is in a skull bone and has affected one of the brain's membranes, and some of those symptoms I mentioned to you have appeared, then refrain from pulling out the arrowhead and leave it until its matter settles down after a few days.
فإنّه إن كان السهم قد وصل الى الصفاق فإنّ المنيّة لا تمطله، وإن كان السهم إنّما هو ناشب فى جرم العظم فقط ولم يتعدّ الى الصفاق وبقى العليل أيّاما ولم يحدث له من تلك الأعراض شىء.	If the arrowhead has reached the diaphragm, then the prognosis is bad, and if the arrowhead is only stuck in the thickness of the bone and has not extended to the diaphragm, and the symptoms have remained for a while without any of those symptoms occurring.
فاحتل فى جذب السهم وإخراجه، فإن كان ناشبا جدّا ولم يجبك للجذب فاستعمل المثاقب حول السهم كما وصفت لك ثمّ عالج الموضع حتّى يبرأ، وأمّا إن كان السهم قد توارى فى موضع من الجسم.	Delay pulling out the arrowhead and its extraction, for if it is deeply stuck and you are unable to pull it out, use the perforators around the arrowhead as I described to you, then treat the spot until it heals. And if the arrowhead has become embedded in a place of the body.
وغاب عن الحسّ ففتّشه بالمسبار فإن أحسست به فاجذبه ببعض الآلات التى تصلح لجذبه فإن لم تستطع عليه لضيق الجرح ولبعد السهم فى الغور ولم يكن هثاك عظم ولا عصب ولا عرق.	And neglect the sensation, and probe with a sounder; if you perceive it, then pull it out with some instruments that are suitable for its extraction, for if you cannot get to it due to the narrowness of the wound and the arrowhead is stuck in the cavity, and there was no bone, nerve, or vessel.
فشقّ عليه حتّى توسع الجرح وتتمكّن بالسهم حتّى تخرجه، فإن كان له أذنان تمسك بهما فخلّص اللحم الناشب فيهما من كلّ جهة بكلّ حيلة يمكنك ذلك واحتل إن لم تقدر على تخليص اللحم فى كسر الأذنين وفتلهما حتى تتخلّص.	Apply pressure until the wound gapes open and is completely clean, so that if it has two edges you can free the skin flaps from each side with every possible trick, and if you cannot manage to free the skin from the fracture of the nails, then cut them off until you can.
وإذا حاولت إخراج السهم فى أىّ موضع كان فاستعمل فتل يدك بالكلاليب الى الجهات كلّها حتّى تخلّصه وارفق غاية الرفق لئلّا ينكسر السهم فيصعب عليك جذبه وإخراجه، فإن لم تستطع عليه من وقتك.	And if you attempt to extract the skin from any position it was in, then use your fingers with the forceps to free it from all sides until it is completely freed, and make an effort to release it gently so that you do not tear it, and if you cannot manage it at that time.
فاتركه أيّاما حتّى تعفن تلك اللحوم التى حواليه ثمّ تعاوده فإنّه يسهل حينئذ فإن اعترضك نزف دم فاستعمل ما ذكرنا من العلاج فى بابه، وتحفّظ جهدك من قطع عرق او عصب او وتر واستعمل الحيلة.	Leave it until the skin that is around it putrefies, then treat it, for it will be easier then. If you encounter a flow of blood, use the treatment we mentioned in its chapter, and beware of cutting an artery or nerve, and use cunning.
بكلّ وجه يمكنك تخليص السهم وليكن ذلك برفق وتأن وتثبّت كما وصفت لك، وينبغى لك أن تستعمل عند جذبك السهم أن تصير العليل على الشكل الذى كان عليه عند وقوع السهم فهو أوفق.	In every way you can free the skin, and do it gently and slowly, as I have described to you. And it is necessary for you to use when pulling out the skin that you align the edge on the shape it was in before the wound occurred, and that is more convenient.
فإن لم يمكنك ذلك فاستعمل ما يمكنك من الأشكال، وأمّا السهم الذى يخرج من ضدّ الجهة الأخرى إمّا أن يكون قد برز منه شىء الى خارج وإمّا أن تجد طرف السهم بالحسّ من أعلى الجلد قريبا وتراه ناتيا.	If you cannot do that, then use what is possible of the shapes. As for the skin that emerges from the opposite side, either something may have protruded from it to the outside or you will find the edge of the skin by feeling from above the skin, close and clear.
فشقّ عليه وليكن الشق على قدر ما تسع فيه الكلاليب ثمّ اجذبه فإنّه يسهل للخروج، فإن امتسك فى عظم فافتل يدك على استدارة حتّى يؤثّر السهم فى العظم ويوسع لنفسه ثمّ اجذبه.	Make an incision in it, and let the incision be according to the amount that you can insert the forceps in it, then pull it out, for it will be easier to remove. If it is attached to a bone, then place your hand on its circumference until it affects the skin on the bone and widens from itself, then pull it out.
وإلّا فاتركه أيّاما تمّ عاوده حتّى يخرج، فإن كان عود السهم فيه فادفعه به فإن كان قد سقط العود وأردت استعمال الدفع فأدخل اليه الآلة المجوّفة لتدخل تجويفها فى ذنب السبم ثمّ تدفعه بها.	And leave it until it is completely freed, for if the skin has an attachment in it, then push it with it. If the attachment has fallen off and you want to use the pushing, then introduce the curved instrument to enter its curve into the hollow of the skin, then push it with it.
فإن كان السهم مجوّفا فادفعه بآلة تدخل فى ذلك التجويف فإنّ السهم يسهل بذلك خروجه، فإن كان السهم مسموما فينبغى أن تقور اللحم الذى قد صار فيه السمّ كلّه إن أمكنك ذلك ثمّ عالجه بما يصلح لذلك.	If the instrument is oblique, insert it with a curved movement, for the instrument will be easier to withdraw in that way. If the instrument is contaminated while inside, it is necessary to cleanse the flesh where the poison has spread completely, if possible, then treat it with what suits it.
فإن كان السهم الواقع فى الصدر او فى البطن او فى المثانة او فى الجنب وكان قريبا ممّا يجسّه بالمسبار وأمكنك الشقّ عليه فشقّ وتحفّظ من قطع عرق او عصب وأخرجه.	If the instrument is situated in the chest or in the belly or in the intestines or in the loin and was close to what you could reach with the rasp, and you were able to dissect it, then dissect and be cautious not to cut an artery or a nerve, and withdraw it.
ثمّ خط الجرح إن احتاج الى الخياطة ثمّ عالجه حتّى يبرأ، صورة الكلاليب التى تجتذب بها السهام:.	Then suture the wound if it needs stitching, then treat until it heals. The image of the forceps used to grasp the instruments:.
تكون أطرافها شبه خرطوم الطائر قد صنعت كأنّها المبرد اذا قبضت على السهم او شىء لم تتركه، وقد تصنع منها أنواع كبار وصغار ومتوسّطة كلّ ذلك على قدر عظم السهم وصغره وسعة الجرح وضيقه.	Its edges are like a bird's beak, made so that it is serrated; if it grasps the instrument or something, it does not release it. And they can be manufactured in large, small, and medium sizes, all of which depend on the size of the instrument, its narrowness, and the width of the wound.
صورة المدفع المجوّف:.	Image of the oblique forceps:.
صورة المدفغ المصمت:.	Image of the straight forceps:.
هذا مصمت الطرف كالمرود ليسهل دخوله فى السهم المجوّف ودفعه،.	This is a straight edge like a file, not easy to insert into an oblique instrument and to push it.
الفصل الخامس والتسعون.	Chapter 85.
فى فصد العروق.	On the suturing of wounds.
العروق التى قد جرت العادة بفصدها فى البدن ثلاثون عرقا منها فى الرأس ستّة عشر عرقا العرقان النابضان اللذان خلف الأذنين المعروفان بالحسيسين والشريانان اللذان فى الصدغين الظاهران والعرقان اللذان فى مأقى العينين المعروفان بالناظرين.	The wounds that are usually sutured in the body, thirty of them, including six in the head: the two arterial veins behind the ears, known as the sensors; the two jugular veins in the neck, apparent ones; and the two veins at the corners of the eyes, known as the Gazers.
والعرق المنتصب فى وسط الجبهة والعرق الذى فى طرف الأنف والودجان اللذان فى العنق والعرقان اللذان فى الشفة العليا من الفم والعرقان اللذان فى الشفة السفلى وهذه العروق المعروفة بالجهارك والعرقان اللذان تحت اللسان.	And the vein that is straight in the middle of the forehead, and the vein that is on the side of the nose, and the two veins in the neck, and the two veins at the upper lip of the mouth, and the two veins at the lower lip, and these known wounds of the jaws, and the two veins under the tongue.
وأمّا العروق التى تفصد فى الذراع واليد فهى خمسة عروق أحدها القيفال وهو من الجانب الوحشىّ وتسمّيه العامّة عرق الرأس والأكحل وهو العرق الأوسط وهو مركّب من شعبة الباسليق وشعبة من القيفال وتسمّيه العامّة عرق البدن.	There are five veins that branch out in the arm and hand. One of them is the cephalic vein, which is from the lateral aspect and is called the "mother" vein. It is the middle vein, composed of a branch from the basilic vein and a branch from the cephalic vein, and it is called the "mother" vein of the arm.
والباسليق وهو الموضوع فى الجانب الإنسىّ ويسمّى أيضا الإبطى وتسمّيه العامّة عرق البطن وحبل الذراع وهو الموضوع على الزند وهو الذى يلتصق فيه وهو الذى يظهر فوق الإبهام ظهورا بيّنا والأسيلم.	And the basilic vein is the one that lies on the medial aspect and is also called the "abtali" vein. It is called the "mother" vein of the abdomen and the connecting vein of the arm, which is situated on the zenad (ulna) and appears clearly above the elbow, and the muscle.
وهو العرق الذى بين الخنصر والبنصر له شعبتان، وفى الساق والرجل ثلاثة عروق أحدها الذى تحت مأبض الركبة من الجانب الوحشىّ والثانى الصافن ومكانه عند الكعب من الجانب الإنسىّ وعرق النسا ومكانه عند العقب من الجانب الوحشىّ.	And it is the vein between the cnemius and the binialis, having two branches. And in the leg and foot, there are three veins: one beneath the knee joint on the lateral aspect, and the second is the safnus, located at the ankle on the medial aspect, and the third is the venous cord, situated at the heel on the lateral aspect.
وفى الساق الاخرى ثلاثة عروق مثلها، فأمّا العرقان اللذان خلف الأذنين فمنفعة فصدهما للنزلات المزمنة والشقيقة والسعفة وقروح الرأس الرديئة المزمنة، وكيفيّة فصدهما على ما أصف.	And in the other leg, there are three veins similar to them. As for the two veins behind the ears, they are beneficial for treating chronic and sciatic pains, and for headaches and chronic diseases of the head, and how they are described on what I have mentioned.
وهو أن تحلق رأس العليل وتحكّ مؤخّره فى موضع العرقين بخرقة خشنة حكّا جيّدا ثمّ يخنق العليل عنقه بعمامة حتّى تظهر العرقان وموضعهما خلف الأذنين فى الموضعين المنخفضين من الرأس فتفتشّبهما بأصبعك وحيث أحسست بنبضهما تحت أصبعك فهناك فعلّم بالمداد.	And it is that you massage the head of the patient and gently scratch the location of the veins with a coarse file, scratching very gently, then constrict the patient's neck with a bandage until the veins appear and their locations behind the ears in the two lower positions of the head are visible, so you feel them with your finger and when you sense their pulsation under your finger, there is a sign of a successful treatment.
ثم تأخذ مبضعا سكّينيّة وهى التى تعرف بالنشل ثمّ تدخلها تحت العرق فى الجلد حتّى تصل المبضع الى العظم ثمّ ترفع يدك بالعرق والجلد الى فوق وتقطع العرق مع الجلد قطعا مبتورا ويكون طول القطع قدر اصبعين مضمومتين.	Then you take a scalpel, which is known as the "nashal", and insert it under the vein in the skin until the scalpel reaches the bone. Then, you lift your hand with the vein and skin upwards, and cut the vein along with the skin, cutting obliquely, and the length of the cut is about two fingers' width.
او نحوه وترسل من الدم القدر الذى تريد ثمّ تشدّهما بالرفائد وتتركهما حتّى تبرأ، وقد تقدّم فى أوّل الكتاب قطعهما وكيّهما، وأمّا الشريانان اللذان فى الصدغين فمنفعة فصدهما للشقيقة المزمنة والصداع الصعب والرمد الدائم وسيلان الفضول الحادّة المنصبّة الى العينين.	Here is the translation of the excerpt:
وكيفيّة فصدهما على ما أصف لك يشدّ العليل رقبته بعمامة حتّى تظهر العرقان للحسّ ظهورا بيّنا ويتبيّن نبضهما تحت أصبعك فحينئذ تعلّم بالمداد ثمّ ترفع الجلد من أعلى العرق الى حه فوق بأصبعك السبّابة.	How to dissect them, as I have described to you, is to make an incision on the skin, and then to open up the layer of fat beneath, until the veins appear to you. Then you should teach by using a retractor, and afterwards lift the skin flap from above the vein to the surface, with the skin flap still attached to you.
وتدخل المبضع النشل من أسفل وترفع العرق الى فوق وتبتره كما صنعت فى العرقين الآخرين وترسل من الدم على قدر حاجتك ثمّ تحلّ خناق العليل وتضع أصبعك على العرق ساعة.	And you should insert the instrument from below and lift the vein upwards, and dissect it as you did with the other veins. Then you should drain the blood according to your need, and then release the skin flap and place your finger on the vein for a while.
ثمّ تضع عليه قطنة ورفادة وتشدّ من فوق شدّا وثيقا وتتركه حتّى يبرأ، وقد تقدّم ذكرهما وقطعهما وسلّهما فى أوّل الكتاب، وأمّا فصد عرق الجبهة فمنفعته بعد فصد القيفال لعلل الوجه المزمنة كالسعفة والقروح والحمرة السمجة،.	Then you should put a compress and bandage, and tighten it firmly from above, and leave it until it heals. You have presented the description of these two (types of wounds) and their treatment in the beginning of this book. As for the vein of the forehead, its benefit is after the bloodletting of the shoulder, for the melancholic temperament, like jaundice, and the swollen and redness of the face.
وكيفيّة فصده على ما أصف لك يخنق العليل رقبته بعمامة حتّى يظهر العرق ثمّ تأخذ الآلة التى تسمّى الفأس وهذه صورتها:.	How to dissect, as I have described to you, is to constrict the skin with a bandage until the vein appears. Then take the instrument called the phlebotome, and its shape is:
تضع الشوكة الناتية التى فى رأس الفأس على نفس العرق وتضرب من فوق بمشط او شىء آخر فى نحوه وتترك الدم يجرى على القدر الذى تريد ثمّ تحلّ خناق العليل وتشدّه حتّى يبرأ.	You should place the curved needle, which is at the head of the phlebotome, on the same vein and strike from above with a small rod or another instrument in its way, and let the blood flow according to your need. Then release the constricting skin flap and tighten it until it heals.
وقد يفتح بمبضع عريض إلّا أنّه لا ينبغى أن يكون المبضع حادّ الطرف كسائر المباضع بل يكون عريض الطرف قليلا وتفصده على التحريف لأنّ العظم قريب فربّما انكسر فيه المبضع اذا كان رقيقا.	And it is possible to open with a slender instrument, but it is not desirable that the instrument be sharp-tipped like other instruments, rather it should be slightly blunt-tipped and dissect on the periphery because the bone is near, lest the instrument break if it were delicate.
فأمّا العرقان اللذان فى مأقى العينين فمنفعتهما لعلل العين من الجرب والحمرة والسبل وأمراض الوجه، وأمّا كيفيّة فصدهما فهو أن يشدّ العليل رقبته بعمامة ثمّ تفصدهما وأنت واقف على رأسه وليكن الفصد على تحريف الى الطول قليلا بمبضع صغير عريض قليلا.	As for the two veins that are in the temples, their benefit is for the temperament of the eye from dryness, redness, and ulcers, and diseases of the face. And as for how to dissect them, it is to constrict the skin with a bandage, then dissect them, and stand upright on its base, and let the bloodletting be on the periphery, slightly, with a small, slender instrument.
فإنّ الموضع لا لحم فيه فإنّه إن كان المبضع رقيق الطرف فربّما انكسر، ثمّ ترسل من الدم حاجتك وتضع عليهما قطنة وتشدّهما ليلة واحدة ثمّ تحلّهما، وأمّا فصد عرق الأنف فنافع من الحمّى الحادّة.	If the wound is not in a fleshy part, and it was a delicate limb, you would bandage it strongly, then stop the flow of blood from it, and apply a compress to it, and tighten it for one night, then loosen it. And if the artery of the nose is cut, stop the profuse bleeding.
والصداع الشديد ومن أمراض الوجه كالسفعة الحمراء التى تعرض فى الأنف ولا سيّما اذا كانت مزمنة، وكيفيّة فصده أن يشدّ العليل رقبته ثمّ تمسك أنفه بيدك اليسرى وتأخذ مبضعا رقيقا طويلا.	And severe bleeding from the face, like the redness of the cheek that appears on the nose, and it is not severe if it is chronic. And how to stop the bleeding: you should tighten the bandage strongly, then grasp your nose with your left hand and take a thin, long compress.
وتغرزه فى وسط الأرنبة نفسها بين حجز الأنف على استقامة لأنّ العرق لا يظهر للحسّ هناك فإنّ الدم يبرز من ساعته، وينبغى أن تمعن يدك بالمبضع قليلا وترسل من الدم حاجتك ثمّ تربطه ليلة فإنّه يتجبّر سريعا.	And insert it in the middle of the nose itself, between the nasal bone and the bridge of the nose, because the artery does not appear to the senses there, so the blood bursts forth from its orifice. And it is necessary that you press your hand on the compress a little and stop the flow of blood from it, then bind it for one night, and it will congeal quickly.
وأمّا الودجان فمنفعة فصدهما لضيق النفس وابتداء الجذام والأمراض السوداويّة التى تعرض فى سطح الجلد مثل البهق الأسود والقوباء والقروح الرديئة والأواكل، وكيفيّة فصدهما أن يشدّ العليل تحتهما فى عنقه برباط ويقف الصانع على رأس العليل.	And as for the ulcerations, they are benefited by stopping the bleeding, and preventing the spread of gangrene and the blackish diseases that appear on the surface of the skin, such as black ulcers and scabs and putrid sores. And how to stop them: you should tighten the bandage underneath them at the neck with a ligature, and set the applicator on top of the bandage.
والعليل قاعد على كرسىّ ثمّ تفصد العرق الى الطول فصدا واسعا قليلا ثمّ تخرخ من الدم القدر المعتدل او على حسب ما تراه من الحاجة الى ذلك ثمّ تفعل كذلك بالعرق الآخر ثمّ تحل الرباط.	And the bandage is based on a sturdy foundation, then you stop the artery to the required length, stopping it strongly for a little while, then you release the blood flow by the moderate amount or as needed, and then you do the same with the other artery, then you loosen the ligature.
وتشدّ العرقين شدّا متوسّطا لئلا يختنق العليل وتتركه الى الغد فإنّه يبرأ الجرح، وأمّا عروق الجهارك فمنفعة فصدهما بعد فصد القيفال أنّه ينفع من القلاع فى الفم وفساد اللثّة والقروح الرديئة وشقاق الشفتين والقروح الرديئة.	And you tighten the two arteries strongly, moderately, so that the bandage does not constrict and is left until it heals, for it heals the wound. And as for the arteries of the gums, they are benefited by stopping them after stopping the flow from the mouth, for it benefits from the ulcers in the mouth and the putrid sores and the cracks of the lips and the putrid sores.
التى تكون فى الأنف وحواليه، وكيفيّة فصدهما أن تقعد العليل أمامك وتشدّ رقبته بعمامة ثمّ تحوّل شفتيه وتنظر الى العرقين اللذين ترى أحدهما عن يمين الشفة والثانى عن يسارها وتستبين منها بسوادهما.	The part that is in the nostrils and their surroundings, and how you should position yourself opposite them and hold their edges with a hook, then turn their edges and look at the two veins that you see, one on the right side of the lip and the other on its left.
وذلك أيضا أنّ حواليهما عروقا رقاقا سودا فتقطعهما قطعا مبتورا، فإن أشكل عليك ولم تدر بما هى فاقصد الى قطع أكبرها وأبينها وكذلك فاصنع فى العرقين اللذين فى الشفة السفلى.	And that is also around them, there are thin black veins, so you cut them with a cutting of meeting, for if it appears to you and you do not know what it is, then you intend to cut the larger one and show it, and thus you operate on the two veins in the lower lip.
وأمّا العرقان اللذان تحت اللسان فمنفعة فصدهما بعد فصد القيفال للخوانيق التى تكون فى الحلق من مرض اللهاة وأمراض الفم، وكيفيّة فصدهما أن تجلس العليل بين يديك بحذاء الشمس وترفع لسانه وتنظر تحت اللسان عن جانبه الواحد عرقا وعن جانبه الآخر عرقا ولونهما الى السواد.	And as for the two veins that are under the tongue, it is beneficial to cut them after cutting the uvula, which is in the throat, due to diseases of the larynx and oral cavity. And how you should position yourself is by placing the patient between your hands with the head bent back and their tongue raised, and look underneath the tongue for one vein on one side and another on the other, and follow them to the blackness.
فتفصدهما وتحفّظ لا تمعن فى قطعهما فإنّ تحتهما شريانات فربّما عرض نزف دم من تلك الشريانات، وأما العروق الثلاثة التى تفصد فى المرفق فهى التى جرت العادة بفصدها فى الناس أجمع وفصدها يكون على وجهين.	You cut them and take care not to mean in their cutting, for you will find that they are arteries that may cause a flow of blood from those arteries. And as for the three veins that you cut in the wrist, they are the ones that are commonly cut in people, and it is customary to cut them on two sides.
إمّا غرزا بمبضع ريحانىّ عريض او زيتونىّ الى الرقّة وإمّا شقّا بمبضع سكّينيّة وهى النشل [وهذه صورتها]، صورة المبضع العريض الريحانىّ:.	You make a incision with a Rhazouy or olive-shaped scalpel at the edge, and you dissect with a Sikkiniyah, which is a Nashl. [This is its shape.] The picture of the Rhazouy incision is:.
يكون عريضا كما ترى ليصلح لفتح العروق المجوّفة الممتلئة البارزة الظاهرة الغلاظ والتى تحوى دما غليظا كدرا، وهذه صورة المبضع الزيتونىّ:.	It is curved as you see, to facilitate the opening of the bulging and visible varicose veins that contain thick blood, and this is the picture of the Zitouney incision.
وهذا المبضع أقلّ عرضا وأرقّ طرفا يصلح لفصد العروق الرقاق التى تحوى دما رقيقا صفراويّا، وهذه صورة المبضع النشل:.	And this incision is narrower and more delicate, suitable for cutting the thin veins that contain yellowish watery blood, and this is the picture of the Nashl incision.
هذا النشل الذى يصلح للشقّ ويكون منه أنواع عراض ورقاق على حسب سعة العروق أيضا وضيقها وقد يستدلّ بهذا على غيره وهو عند الصنّاع مشهور.	This fracture, which is suitable for the fissure and becomes from it various types of rasp and file according to the width of the grooves, and its narrowness. It may be depended on to distinguish it from others, and it is well-known among craftsmen.
وأمّا الباسليق الذى هو أحد هذه الثلاثة العروق فمنفعة فصده أنّه يجذب الدم من العلل التى تكون تحت الحلق والعنق ممّا يلى الصدر والبطن، وينبغى للفاصد عند فصده أن يحذره ويكون على رقبة منه فإنّ تحته شريانا فإن أخطأ وزاد فى غرز المبضع قطع ذلك الشريان.	And as for the Baselique, which is one of these three grooves, its benefit lies in that it draws blood from the vessels that are beneath the throat and neck, thus reaching the chest and abdomen. And when it is cut, it is necessary to beware of it, and it becomes on a groove of it; if an artery is opened, it will be cut off from that place.
فيحدث نزف دم فلذلك ينبغى أن لا يكون فصده له بمبضع الغرز بل يكون فصده شقّا بالنشل، فإن لم يظهر الباسليق ظهورا بيّنا فينبغى أن تجتنبه وتعدل الى غيره او تطلب بعض شعبه.	If bleeding occurs, it is necessary that the incision should not be made at the place of the artery, but rather a fissure with a rasp; if the Baselique does not appear clearly, it is necessary to avoid it and turn to another or seek some of its branches.
او تفصد مكانه حبل الذراع فإنّه بيّن وتشقّه بالمبضع النشل كما قلنا فإن أردت فصده بعينه فينبغى قبل شدّ الذراع أن تجسّ الموضع حتّى تتعرّف موضع النبض ثمّ تعلّم عليه بالمداد.	Or, if you want to dissect its place in the arm, it will be clear and you will make an incision with a rasp, as we have said. If you want to cut into it specifically, it is necessary, before you tighten the arm, to explore the site until you are aware of the pulse's location, then you will operate on it with the director.
ثمّ تربط الذراع وتشقّ العرق شقّا محرّفا بالمبضع النشل كما قلنا وتحرّى أن تقع الضربة بالبعد عن موضع الشريان، ومتى رأيت عند شدّك الرباط نفخا فى الموضع الذى كنت علّمت بالمداد فإنّ ذلك النفخ هو انتفاخ الشريان فجنّبه.	Then, you bandage the arm and make a fissure in the vein with a rasp, as we have said, and take care that the incision is made far from the artery's location. And when you see, upon tightening the bandage, a swelling at the site where you operated with the director, then that swelling is an indication of the artery's rupture, so be cautious about it.
فإن رأيت الدم عند الفصد يثب كما يثب بول صبىّ وكان الدم رقيقا أحمر فاعلم أنّه من دم الشريان فحينئذ فبادر فضع أصبعك عليه ساعة طويلة ثمّ انزع أصبعك فإن انقطع الدم فكثيرا ما ينقطع فشدّ الذراع.	If you see the blood upon incision, it will gush out like a flood of water, and if the blood is thin and bright red, then know that it is from an artery. So, hasten to put your finger on it for a long hour, then remove your finger; if the bleeding stops, it will be much better than if you tighten the arm.
واتركه، وحذّر العليل من إهماله وليكن على رقبة ولا يحرّكه أيّاما حتّى يبرأ، فإن لم ينقطع الدم وغلبك ولم يحضرك فى حينك دواء فابتر الشريان إن ظهر اليك فإنّ طرفيه تتقلّص وينقطع الدم.	Here is the translation:
او خذ قشرة فستقة وشقّها وخذ النصف الواحد وشدّه على موضع العرق شدّا محكما بالرباط والرفائد الى يوم آخر، فإن انقطع الدم وإلّا فعالجه بما تقدّم ذكره من وضع الذرورات القاطعة للنزف، وقطع دمه ليس بالصعب فى أكثر الأحوال.	Take a curved scalpel and divide it, taking one half and stretch it over the site of the vein, firmly securing it with a bandage and a compress until the next day. If the bleeding stops and it is not too difficult in most cases, then cut it, for it is not difficult to control the flow of blood from the severed veins.
لمكان صغر الجرح وتمكّن الرباط فى الذراع فاعلمه، وأمّا العرق الأكحل فمنفعة فصده أن يجذب الدم من أعلى الرأس وأسفل البدن لمكان أنّه مركّب من شعبة من الباسليق وشعبة من القيفال كما قلنا،.	For a small wound, tighten the bandage on the arm and press on it, and as for the thin vein, it is beneficial to make it bleed from the top of the head and the bottom of the arm, because it is composed of a branch from the basilic vein and a branch from the cephalic vein, as we have mentioned.
وينبغى للفاصد له أن يكون على رقبة من فصده فإنّ تحته عصبا فإن زاد فى غرز المبضع وأصاب العصبة حدث فيها خدر يعسر برؤه وربّما لم يبرأ أصلا، وهذه العصبة كثيرا ما يظهر للحسّ.	It is necessary for the surgeon to be cautious when making an incision, lest he cuts a nerve, and if he adds to the wound of the affected part, it may cause numbness, and perhaps the patient will not recover from it. And this numbness often appears in the sensitive areas.
فإن خفيت فى بعض الناس وكانت رقيقة لا تتبيّن فينبغى أن تجعل فصدك إيّاه شقّا بالنشل وتجنّب العصبة جهدك فإن كان العرق بين عصبتين فشقّ العرق طولا، وأمّا العرق القيفال فمنفعة فصده أنّه يجذب الدم من الرأس.	If you find that the vein is fine and does not show in some people, it is necessary to make your incision carefully with a gentle touch, avoiding the nerve as much as possible. If the vein is between two nerves, cut the vein longitudinally. As for the cephalic vein, it is beneficial to make it bleed from the head.
وينفع من أمراض العينين وينبغى فى هذا العرق خاصّة إن شئت أن تفصده ;lt;أن تفصده;gt; غرزا بالمبضع الزيتونىّ او بالمبضع العريض الريحانىّ لأنّه أسلم العروق كلّها لأنّه ليس تحته شريان ولا عصب.	It is beneficial to treat the diseases of the eyes, and it is necessary to be cautious with this vein in particular, lest you make an incision; if you do, make a small wound on the citron-colored or the fragrant-smelling vessel, because it is the most suitable of all vessels, since it has neither artery nor nerve.
إلّا أنّه ينبغى لك عند الفصد أن تجتنب بالمبضع رأس العضلة فقط وتطلب الموضع الليّن، وليس يضرّه إن لم يصب بالضربة الأولى أن يعاد عليه بالفصد مرّات إلّا أنّه ربّما تورّم فى بعض الناس اذا لم يفصد فى الضربة الأولى.	It is necessary for you, when making an incision, to avoid the head of the muscle only and seek the soft spot, and it will not harm if you do not hit the first blow correctly, and repeat the incision several times, although it may become inflamed in some people if you do not make the incision at the first strike.
ولكن لا يضرّه ذلك الورم شيئا، وأمّا كيفيّة الفصد وعوارضه وما ينبغى أن يتقدّم فى إصلاحه فأوّل ذلك ينبغى أن تعلم أنّ الفصد إما أن يستعمل فى حفظ الصحّة فقط.	But it does not harm him at all, and as for the manner of the suturing and its complications and what is required to reform it, first it is necessary to learn that the suture is either used only to preserve health.
وإمّا أن يستعمل فى الأمراض والذى يستعمل فى حفظ الصحّة واستدامتها والتحرّز من حدوث الأمراض أن يكون الفصد فى أحد العروق الثلاثة التى فى المرفق أعنى القيفال والأكحل والباسليق وأن يكون الفصد فى أوّل الربيع اذا ظهرت دلائل الامتلاء.	And as for its use in diseases and that which is used to preserve health, maintain it, and prevent the occurrence of diseases, it is necessary for the suture to be one of the three veins in the wrist, namely the cephalic, basilic, and median, and for the suture to be in the first stage of spring if signs of inflammation appear.
ويكون الفصد فى يوم الأحد او يوم الثلاثاء بعد أن يمضى للنهار ثلاث ساعات، وأمّا الفصد الذى يستعمل فى الأمراض فليس له وقت محدود ولكن متى دعت الحاجة والضرورة اليه من ليل او نهار.	And the suture should be on Sunday or Tuesday, after three hours have passed from noon, and as for the suture used in diseases, it does not have a limited time, but rather whenever there is a need and urgency, whether at night or day.
وفى كلّ ساعة وفى كلّ زمان، ولا ينبغى أن يفصد الصبيان حتّى يأتى عليهم أربع عشرة سنة ولا يفصد الشيوخ الذين قد جاوزوا الستّين سنة، فإذا أزمع أحد على الفصد لأىّ وجه كان.	And at every hour and at every time, and it is not proper to suture children until they reach fourteen years, nor the elderly who have exceeded sixty years. If anyone is averse to suturing for any reason, then...
فينبغى أن ينقى معاءه قبل الفصد بحقنة ليّنة إن كان فيه زبل كثير محتبس لئلّا ينجذب الى العروق عند الفصد من المعاء فضول عفنة تضرّ بالأعضاء الرئيسة، ولا يفصد المتوخّم ولا السكران ولا الثمل حتّى يزول ذلك عنهم.	It is necessary to cleanse the skin with a gentle lotion before suturing, if there is much dirt and grease, so that it does not obstruct the veins during suturing. And one should not suture those who are intoxicated, or suffering from epilepsy, or affected by madness, until they recover from that.
وليحذر الفصد أيضا بعقب الهيضة والقىء والخلفة والإكثار من الجماع والتعب والرياضة والسهر والصيام وكلّ ما يحلّ القوّة من أمر جسمانىّ او نفسانىّ، ثمّ تنظر فى ترقيق الأخلاط قبل ذلك إن كان الدم غليظا.	And one should beware of suturing also after bathing, eating, and sexual intercourse, and after exhaustion from congregation, exertion, exercise, wakefulness, and fasting, and everything that weakens the body from a bodily or psychic aspect. Then look into the temperament of the patient before that, if the blood is thick.
بالأطعمة والأشربة والأدوية إن أمكنه ذلك، ثمّ يدخل الحمّام إن لم يمنعه مانع او يرتاض بعض الرياضة لكى يرقّ الدم وتجعل فصده فى صدر النهار كما قلنا ويروم أن يخلّى صدره ذلك النهار من جميع العوارض النفسانيّة الرديئة.	With diet, drink, and medication, if possible, then he should enter the bath house, if nothing prevents him or he does not need to exert himself with some exercise, so that the blood is diluted and the suturing can be done in the morning, as we mentioned, and it is hoped that his body will be free from all psychological and bodily complications that day.
كالهموم والغضب والخوف ومن جميع العوارض الجسدانيّة كالتعب والنصب المفرطين والجماع ونحو ذلك، وتحضر مجلسه الأشياء التى قد جرى عادات الناس باستعمالها من ضروب الطيب والرياحين والملاهى ونحو ذلك كلّ إنسان على قدر ما يمكنه.	Here is the translation:
ثمّ يقعد الفاصد على وسادة تكون أرفع من الوسادة التى يقعد عليه المفصود، ثمّ يخرج ذراعه ويحكّه الفاصد بيده مرّتين او ثلاث ثمّ يشدّ الرباط بالشرك ويلويها مرّتين او ثلاث وليكن الشدّ معتدلا.	Then the surgeon sits on a cushion that is higher than the cushion on which the patient lies, then he extends his arm and touches the patient's arm with his hand two or three times, then he tightens the bandage with the rod and twists it two or three times, and the tightening should be moderate.
لأنّ الشدّ متى كان غير معتدل إمّا بإفراط فى الشدّ فيمنع جرى الدم وإمّا إن كان الى الاسترخاء منع أيضا جرى الدم، ثمّ بعد الشدّ ينبغى أن يحكّ المفصود يديه جميعا بضهما ببعض.	For if the tightening is not moderate, either it will be excessive in the tightening and the blood will flow, or it will be too relaxed and the blood will also flow. Then after the tightening, it is necessary that the surgeon's hands should be on both sides with their edges close to each other.
حتّى ينتفخ العروق وتتبيّن للحسّ ثمّ يمسح الفاصد المبضع بيسير من الزيت العتيق خاصّة ثمّ يضع أصبعه السبّابة من اليد اليسرى على نفس العرق تحت الموضع الذى يريد فصده قليلا لئلّا يلوذ العرق فيجنّب الضربة.	Until the veins become swollen and suitable for the sensation, then the surgeon wipes the scalpel with a little of the old oil, then he places his left finger on the same vein below the place where he wants to make the incision, slightly pressing so that the vein does not slip away from the stroke.
لأنّ من العروق ما تجدها كالوتر يلوذ عند الفصد ومنها ما هى مملوءة ريحا فمتى وضعت المبضع عليها انخفضت تحت المبضع وخدعت الفاصد ولم يفتح المبضع العرق وإن فتحه فإنّما يكون فتحه ضيقا.	Because some of the veins are wandering and slip away during the incision, and some are full of air, so when the scalpel is placed on them, they collapse under the scalpel and deceive the surgeon, and if he opens them, it will not be a wide opening.
فلذلك ينبغى أن يتثبّت الفاصد ويتأنّى فى هذه الأمور كلّها، ثمّ ينزل المبضع فإن فتح العرق من مرّته تلك وإلّا فيعاوده مرّة أخرى تحت ذلك الموضع قليلا او فوقه بالعجلة إن لم يتورّم الموضع.	Therefore, it is necessary for the surgeon to be cautious and deliberate in all these matters, then he should make the incision, and if the vein opens from that spot, or else he should make another attempt below or above that place with a slight movement, if the spot does not become inflamed.
فإن تورّم او جزع العليل فاتركه يوما او يومين ولا تشدّ الرباط فإنّه ربّما جلب ورما حارّا ولا يدخل الحمّام، ثمّ يعاود الفصد إن أحبّ، فإن غرز المبضع وكان الفتح صغيرا وكان جرى الدم رقيقا.	If there is inflammation or pain, he should leave it for a day or two and not tighten the bandage, lest he attract warmth or heat, and let him not enter the bath. Then he returns to the incision if it is loved, because the scalpel was inserted and the opening was small and the bleeding was slight.
وخشيت أن لا يخرج من الدم القدر الذى تريد فأعد المبضع فى الثقب نفسه يرفق على استقامة وزد فى الفتح قليلا وافعل ذلك بالعجلة قبل أن يتورّم الموضع فإنّ فى كثير من الناس قد يتورّم الموضع عند الفتح الصغير.	And beware that not enough blood comes out as he wants, so he returns the scalpel to the same spot, and presses on the straightness, and increases the opening slightly, and does that with a slight movement before the spot becomes inflamed, for many people become inflamed at the small incision.
فإن رأيته قد تورّم فلا تعد عليه البتّة فإنّه لا يعينك شيئا وضع عليه شيئا من عكّار الزيت فإنّه يسهل جرى الدم وهو أفضل فى هذا الموضع من الزيت نفسه ومن سائر الأدهان وكذلك.	If you have seen that it has swollen, do not apply cupping to it, for it will not benefit from anything being applied of the cautery of oil; rather, it makes the flow of blood easier and is better in this situation than the oil itself and other treatments.
فاستعمل عكّار الزيت فى جميع فصدك للعروق عند تعذّر جرى الدم وقد يفعل ذلك الترياق الفاروق والشخزنايا اذا وضع من أحدهما على الموضع فإنّ الدم يرقّ وينحلّ اذا كان غليظ.	You should use the cautery of oil in all cases of bleeding from the veins, when the flow of blood is hindered, and the antidote of Faruq and Shakhznaya may be effective if applied to the spot, for then the blood will flow easily and be resolved if it was thick.
فإن حدث فى موضع الفصد ورم كبير فكثيرا ما يحدث ولا سيّما لمن لم يفتصد إلّا تلك المرّة او كان فتح العرق صغيرا فبادر فضع على الورم إسفنجة مغموسة فى ماء وملح مدفأ قليلا وشدّه ساعة فإنّه ينحلّ.	If a large hemorrhage occurs at the site of the bleeding and it is severe, it often happens, especially for those who have not been bled before, or if the opening of the vein was small, so apply to the tumor a compress soaked in water and a little salt, and bind it for an hour, then it will be resolved.
وينبغى أن تفعل ذلك بعد خروج الدم من العرق نفسه بكماله او من عرق آخر، فإن بقى فى الموضع بعد أيّام شىء من السواد او الخضرة فإنّه لايضرّ ذلك، فإن أحببت فاحمل عليه شيئا من الصبر والمرّ المحلولين.	And it is necessary to do that after the blood has come out of the vein itself, either by its own flow or from another vein; for if something remains in the spot after a few days, whether it be a black or greenish color, it does not harm, and if you wish, apply to it some of the plaster and the liquid remedies that are applied.
او شيئا من عصارة الفودنج ونحوه، وكثيرا ما يحدث ورم ونتو عند فصد الباسليق فضع عليه يدك فإن وجدته يلطأ عند غمزك عليه فإنّ ذلك نتو سوء فاحذر أن تجعل عليه شيئا ممّا ذكرنا.	Or something from the powder of Fudanj and its ilk, for it often happens that a tumor or a swelling occurs at the site of the bleeding of the basilic vein, so apply your hand to it; if you find it warm when you press on it, then that is a bad sign, so beware of applying anything mentioned earlier to it.
فإنّه ربّما نزف منه دم شريان ولكن ضمّده بما فيه قبض ليصلب الموضع ثمّ عالجه بسائر العلاج حتّى يبرأ، وينبغى أن تخرج لكلّ إنسان من الدم على قدر قوّته وما يظهر من اللون الغالب على الدم.	For perhaps some arterial blood may flow out, but restrain it with what is in it, so that the spot becomes firm, then treat it with other treatments until it recovers; and it is necessary for each person to have a amount of blood let out according to their strength and what appears as the dominant color of the blood.
فإنّه إن كان الدم أسود فدعه يخرج حتّى يحمرّ وكذلك إن رأيته غليظا فأرسله حتّى يرقّ وكذلك إن كان حادّا حتّى تذهب حدّته، وينبغى لمن كان ممتلئا قويّا واحتاج الى إخراج الدم دفعة واحدة.	For if the blood is black, let it flow out until it becomes red, and likewise if you see that it is thick, then make it flow until it becomes clear; and if it was sharp, then let it flow until its sharpness subsides. And it is necessary for one who has a strong constitution and needs to have the blood let out in one go.
أن يوسّع فصد العرق ويكون المبضع عريضا ومن كان ضعيفا فبالضدّ من ذلك وينبغى أن تخرجه فى مرّات وأن يكون الثقب ضيقا، وأفضل ما يستعمل فى فصد العرق أن يكون محرّفا مورّبا شقّا لا غرزا،.	The wound should be wide and the incision should be oblique, and if it is weak, it should be reinforced with a solid suture, and it is better to make a hole that is narrow, and what is best used for suturing the wound is a curved needle with a rounded point, without a notch.
وهذا الضرب من الفصد سليم من النزف ومن قطع عصب وهو أحمد وأسلم من الفصد بالعرض والطول، ومن كان يعتاده عند الفصد الغشى فينبغى أن تطعمه قبل الفصد شيئا من خبز منقع فى ماء الرمّان المزّ او السكنجبين.	And this stroke of the scalpel is sounder than the puncture and the cutting of a nerve, and it is better and more complete than the stroke with the width and the length, and if one is going to dissect at the outer layer, it is better to apply something from the dough of the pomegranate water or the Sukanjabin before making the incision.
إن كان محرورا وأخرج له الدم فى ثلاث مرّات او أربع فإن كان مبرود المزاج فليأخذ قبل الفصد خبزا منقعا فى شراب الميبة او فى شراب العسل المطيّب بالأفاويه او فى الشراب الطيّب الريحانىّ.	If it is inflamed and the blood comes out in three or four times, and if the temperament is bilious, then let him take before the incision a dough of pomegranate water or a drink of honey mixed with the juice of the rose or the juice of the wild rose.
فإن حدث الغشى عند الفصد وكان سببه خروج الدم الكثير فينبغى أن يسقى ماء اللحم والشراب الريحانىّ الرقيق ويستعمل التطيّب بالغالية ويلخلخ صدره بها ويستعمل سائر ما ذكرناه فى التقسيم فى باب الغشى.	If the outer layer is dissected and a lot of blood comes out, it is better to apply water of flesh and a weak wild rose drink, and to use gentle squeezing and to let it be with that, and to use other things mentioned in the section on dissecting the outer layer.
الذى يكون من الأستفراغ، وأمّا من أراد ترويح ذراعه وتسريح دمه ثانية فينبغى لمن كان فصده لاستفراغ كثير وقوّته ضعيفة أن تسرّح الدم قليلا قليلا بقدر القوّة فى أيّام متوالية.	He who is suffering from hemorrhage, and whoever wants to stop the bleeding of his arm and to calm down his blood again, it is better for him whose incision is large and his strength is weak to let out a little blood, little by little, according to his power, on consecutive days.
وأمّا من كان يريد ترويح ذراعه وتسريح دمه ثانية وكان بدنه قويّا فليفعل ذلك على سبع ساعات او تسع من فصده الأوّل، وأمّا من أراد اجتذاب الدم من بدنه الى ضدّ الجهة التى مالت اليها فينبغى أن يروح له فى اليوم الثانى او الثالث.	And whoever wants to stop the bleeding of his arm and to calm down his blood again, and has a strong body, let him do that after seven or nine hours from the first incision. And whoever wants to draw out the blood from his body to the opposite side, it is better for him to let it settle on the second or third day.
وأمّا من كان فى بدنه الدم كثيرا قد سخن واحتدّ وأحدث حمّى فينبغى أن تخرج منه الدم فى دفعة واحدة وتخرج منه المقدار الكثير وتوسّع الفتح الى أن يعرض الغشى بعد أن تكون متفقّدا لجميع شروط الفصد.	When there is much blood in the body of someone who has been wounded and has a large wound, it is necessary to remove the blood all at once and remove a great deal of it, and extend the incision until the flesh is exposed after fulfilling all the conditions of the suture.
وأن تضع يدك على نبضه عند سيلان الدم لئلّا يحدث الموت مكان الغشى فكثيرا ما يعرض ذلك اذا جهل الفاصد ووقعت الغفلة، ولا ينبغى اذا أردت حلّ الذراع وتسريح الدم ثانية.	And you should place your hand on the pulse when the blood is flowing so that death does not occur at the site of the suture, for it often happens that way if the suturing is neglected and carelessness occurs. And it is not permitted if you want to restore the limb and let the blood flow again.
وقد انغلق فم العرق وعسر خروج الدم أن تغمز عليه بشدّة او تلوى بقوّة فإنّ ذلك ردىء جدّا بل إمّا أن تتركه حتّى تفصده ثانية وإمّا أن تنحّى بشفرة المبضع ما جمد من الدم فى فم العرق.	And if the mouth of the vessel is constricted and the blood does not come out, you should apply pressure on it strongly or bend it with force, for that is very harmful. Instead, you should leave it until the bleeding stops again, or remove the crust that has formed from the blood at the mouth of the vessel.
او تحمل عليه شيئا من الملح قد حلّ فى الماء او تحمل عليه شيئا من الترياق الفاروق او الشخزنايا وتغمزه غمزا رقيقا حتّى يخرج الدم، فإن كان قد تورّم العرق فاتركه.	Or apply to it something of salt that has been dissolved in water, or apply to it something of the powder of Tiriyaq Faruq or Shakhzunaya, and bind it with a gentle binding until the blood comes out. If the vessel has become inflamed, leave it.
ولا تمسّه حتّى يسكن الورم، فإن دعت الضرورة الى تسريح الدم ثانية ولا بدّ فإمّا أن تفصده فوق ذلك الموضع وإمّا أن تفصده فى الذراع الآخر او فى العرق الآخر.	And do not touch it until the swelling subsides, for if you hasten to let the blood flow again, there is no benefit. Instead, you should stop it at that place, or stop it in the other limb, or in the other vessel.
وأمّا فصد حبل الذراع فيفصد عوضا من الأكحل والباسليق اذا لم يوجدا او كانا خفيّين لأنّه مركّب منهما، وكيفيّة فصده أن يدخل العليل يده فى الماء الحارّ حتّى يحمرّ الزند ويظهر العرق ظهورا بيّنا ثمّ تشدّ فوقه بالرباط قليلا شدّا متوسّطا.	And if you suture the limb, it should be sutured in a way that is opposite to the Achil and Basilic, if they are not found or were hidden because they are composed of them. And how to suture so that the ligature enters the water and becomes warm until the parts adhere together and the vessel appears clearly, then you should bind above it with a moderate binding.
ثمّ تفصد العرق على تحريف قليلا لا عرضا ولا طولا وليكن الفتح واسعا ويكون فصدك له فوق مفصل اليد قليلا، فإن تعذّر خروج الدم فأعد اليد فى الإناء بالماء الحارّ ودع الدم يجرى فى الماء.	Then you should suture the vessel on a slight curve, neither visible nor long, and let the incision be wide and let your suture be above the joint of the hand, slightly. If you find difficulty in stopping the blood, return the hand to its place in the warm water and let the blood flow in the water.
حتّى يبلغ حاجتك فإن كنت فى أيّام الصيف فقد تستغنى عن إعادة اليد فى الماء الحارّ وأكثر ما يجعل جرى الدم فى الماء الحارّ فى زمن الشتاء، وفصد هذا العرق أسلم من جميع العروق.	As you reach the need, if you are in the summer days, you will dispense with returning the arm to the hot water and what makes the blood flow more in the hot water during the winter, and stop this vein from all the veins.
لأن ليس تحته عرق ضارب ولا عصب، وأمّا فصد الأسيلم من اليد اليمنى فهو نافع من علل الكبد وكيفيّة فصده أن تشدّ معصم اليد بالرباط او بيدك بعد أن تدخله فى الماء الحارّ حتّى ينتفخ العرق.	Because there is no vein underneath, nor a nerve, and as for stopping the vein from the right arm, it is beneficial for liver diseases and how to stop it by tying the arm with a bandage or by immersing it in hot water until the vein becomes swollen.
ويتبيّن للحسّ جدّا ثم تفصده على تحريف قليلا وإن بترته بالكلّ لم يضرّه ذلك شيئا وتحفّظ لا تمعن يدك بالمبضع فإنّ تحته عصب الأصابع والموضع معرّى من اللحم، ثمّ تعيد اليد الى الماء الحارّ.	It is necessary to make the skin tense, then stop it with a slight twisting, and if you cut all of it, it will not harm that thing, and be cautious not to make your hand numb at the affected spot, for underneath there is a nerve of the fingers, and the place is sensitive from the flesh, then return the arm to the hot water.
وتتركه يجرى الدم فيه فإنّك إن لم تعدها فى الماء الحارّ جمد الدم فى فم العرق وامتنع من الجرى فإذا أخرجت من الدم قدر الحاجة فضع على العرق دهنا وملحا لئلّا يلتحم سريعا.	And let it flow with the blood, for if you do not return it to the hot water, the blood will congeal in the mouth of the vein and be obstructed from flowing, so if you extract a sufficient amount of blood, then place on the vein a compress, and bandage it to make it heal quickly.
و كذلك ينبغى أن تفعل بكلّ شعبة ضيقة، وأمّا منفعة فصده من اليد اليسرى فإنّه نافع لعلل الطحال وكذلك تفعل فى فصده كما فعلت فى الثانى سواء، وأمّا فصد الصافن فمنفعته للأمراض التى فى أسفل البدن مثل علل الأرحام.	And it is necessary to do the same with every narrow vein, and as for stopping the vein from the left arm, it is beneficial for spleen diseases, and you should do the same in stopping as you did in the second instance. And as for stopping the saphena, its benefit is for the diseases that are at the bottom of the body, such as kidney diseases.
واحتباس الطمث وأمراض الكلى وقروح الفخذين والساقين المزمنة ونحوها من الأمراض، وكيفيّة فصده أن يدخل رجله فى الماء الحارّ ويحمل عليه الدلك حتّى تدرّ العروق ثمّ تشدّ فوق مفصل الرجل بالشركة والعرق موضعه عند الكعب ظاهر نحو الإبهام.	And stopping the menstrual flow, and kidney diseases, and chronic ulcers of the thighs and legs, and similar diseases. And how to stop it by immersing his leg in hot water and holding the bandage until the veins become swollen, then tying above the knee joint with a compress, and the vein being at the ankle, visible near the elbow.
ويتشعب منه فى وجه الرجل شعب كثيرة فافصده فى أوسع شعبة منه او عند الكعب عند مجتمعه فهو أفضل وأسلم، فإن فصدته فى وجه الرجل فتحفّظ من الأعصاب التى تحته على وجه الرجل.	A fracture in a man's face is many [or multiple] fractures, so it is better to reduce them at the temple or near the cheekbone, where they meet, for that is best and safest. If you reduce them on a man's face, you will avoid the nerves that lie beneath the skin of the face.
واجعل فصدك له بتحريف كأنّك تريد بتره ويكون المبضع نشلا، فإن تعذّر خروج الدم فليعد رجله فى الماء الحارّ واترك الدم يجرى فيه حتّى يفرغ، فإن أخطأ الفاصد العرق بالفصد فى أوّل مرّة.	Make your reduction as if you want to straighten it, and let the reduced part be in a position of rest. If you feel the blood coming out, pour warm water on it and let the blood flow until it stops. Then, tighten the bandage firmly at once.
فليعد بالفصد الى فوق قليلا فإنّ الموضع سالم لا يخشى منه غائلة اذا تحفّظت من العصب كما قلنا وكذلك تفعل بالصافن من الرجل الأخرى سواء، وأمّا عرق النسا فمكانه كما قلنا عند العقب من الجانب الوحشىّ.	Then, raise the reduction a little above, for the healthy site will not be harmed if you avoid the nerve as we said, and do the same with the other cheek of the man. As for the vein of the nose, its treatment is as we said, near the cheekbone on the lateral side.
ومنفعة فصده لوجع الورك اذا كان ذلك من قبل الدم الحارّ وكيفيّة فصده أن تدخل العليل الحمّام وتسرع وتشدّ ساقه من لدن الورك الى فوق الكعب بأربع أصابع بعمامة رقيقة طويلة فإنّه لا يظهر إلّا بذلك.	The benefit of reducing a fracture is to put it in its original position, if it was displaced by the warm blood. And the way to reduce it is to enter the warm water and move quickly and tighten the leg from behind the knee to above the ankle with four fingers, with a long, thin bandage. It will not appear otherwise.
فإذا ظهر فافصده على أىّ حالة أمكثك إمّا على تحريف وهو أفضل وإمّا أن تبتره بترا او تشقّه شقّا فإن موضعه سالم، وهو فى أكثر الناس خفّى جدّا فإن لم تجده.	If it appears, then reduce the fracture in any case, either by straightening it, which is best, or by making a slight traction or splitting it slightly. For its healthy site is hidden, and it is very difficult to find it in most people.
ولم يظهر للحسّ البتّة فافصد بعض شعبه وهى التى تظهر فى ظهر القدم نحو الخنصر والبنصر وتحفّظ من الأعصاب وأرسل من الدم القدر الذى تريد.	And it does not appear to the sense of touch, so reduce some of its fractures, which appear on the back of the foot near the ankle and toes, avoiding the nerves and releasing the blood as much as you want.
ثمّ حلّ الشدّ وضع على موضع الفصد قطنة وشدّ الموضع فإنّه سريعا ما يبرأ.	Then, apply a compress on the site of the reduction, and tighten it firmly; for that will quickly heal what is broken.
الفصل السادس والتسعون.	Chapter 86.
فى الحجامة وكيفيّة استعمالها.	On Cupping and Its Method of Use.
المحاجم قد تكون من القرون ومن الخشب ومن النحاس ومن الزجاج، والحجامة تكون على وجهين أحدهما الحجامة بالشرط وإخراج الدم والآخر الحجامة بلا شرط.	Cupping instruments may be made of horns, wood, copper, or glass. Cupping is of two types: one with scarification and blood extraction, and the other without scarification.
وهذه الحجامة التى بلا شرط تكون على وجهين.	And this non-scarifying cupping has two forms.
إمّا أن تكون بنار وإمّا أن تكون بغير نار، والمحاجم التى تستعمل بالشرط وإخراج الدم لها أربعة عشر موضعا من الجسم أحدها محاجم النقرة وهو مؤخّر الرأس، والكاهل وهو وسط القفاء.	Either it is done with fire or without fire. The cupping instruments used for scarifying and blood extraction have fourteen positions on the body, one of which is the instrument of the Nagra, located at the back of the head, and the Kaheel, situated in the middle of the nape.
ومحاجم الأخدعين وهما صفحتا العنق من الجهتين جميعا، ومحاجم الذقن وهو تحت الفكّ الأسفل من الفم، ومحاجم الكتفين، ومحاجم العصعص على عجز الذنب، ومحاجم الزندين وهما وسط الذراعين، ومحاجم الساقين، ومحاجم العرقوبين.	And the cupping instruments for the Akhduein, which are two sides of the neck; and the instrument for the Diqn, located beneath the lower jaw near the mouth; and the instruments for the Ketein; and the instruments for the Asas, on the outer joints of the limbs; and the instruments for the Zindein, situated in the middle of the arms; and the instruments for the Saqein; and the instruments for the Arqubein.
والحجامة إنّما يجتذب الدم من العروق الرقاق المبثوثة فى اللحم ومن أجل ذلك لا تسقط القوّة إسقاط الفصد ولا ينبغى أن تستعمل الحجامة بنار كانت او بغير نار فى أحد الأمراض التى تكون من الامتلاء حتّى يستفرغ البدن كلّه.	And cupping is to draw blood from the empty, thin veins that are visible in the flesh. Therefore, it is not advisable to use cupping with fire or without fire for certain diseases that arise from plethora, until the body is completely evacuated.
فإن دعت الحاجة الى الحجامة من مرض او من قبل العادة استعملناها فى كلّ وقت فى أوّل الشهر وفى آخره وفى وسطه وفى أىّ زمان كان.	For if there is a need for cupping due to illness or habit, it should be used at any time, whether at the beginning of the month, at its end, or in the middle, and at whatever time it may be.
وذلك أنّ من الناس من اذا كثر فيه الدم حتّى يحتاج الى إخراجه بالحجامة يجد فى رأسه ثقلا وصداعا ومنهم من يجد امتلاء وحمرة فى وجهه ورأسه ورقبته ومنهم من يجد حكاكا فى وجهه وجنيبه وظلمة وأكالا فى عينيه ومنهم من يحكّ موضع محاجمه.	And that is because some people, when their blood increases to the point where they need to be extracted by cupping, find in their heads a feeling of heaviness and pain. And among them are those who experience plethora and redness in their face, head, and neck. And among them are those who experience spots on their face and nose, and darkness and dullness in their eyes. And among them are those who feel the site of the cupping instrument.
ومنهم من يكثر ضحكه ومنهم من يجد طعم الدم فى فمه وترم لثاته ويتبزّق الدم ومنهم من يكثر نومه ومنهم من يرى فى نومه الدم والحمرة والقتلاء والجراحات وما أشبه ذلك، فمتى رأينا شيئا من ذلك.	Some of them are those who hasten to evacuate the blood from his mouth and stop its flow, while others find the taste of blood in his mouth and spit it out. Some of them hasten to evacuate his nose and others see in his sleep the blood and the wounds and the surgical procedures and what is similar to that, so when we saw something of that.
وبخاصّة إن كان فى الثلث الأوسط من الشهر أمرنا عند ذلك بالحجامة بعد ما يمضى من النهار ساعتان او ثلاث، وأمّا منفعة حجامة النقرة فإنّها تنفع من الثقل فى الرأس وماء ينصبّ الى العينين.	And especially if it is in the middle third of the month, we are ordered to perform bloodletting after two or three hours have passed from daytime. As for the benefit of bloodletting on the vein, it benefits from the heaviness in the head and the fluid that flows into the eyes.
ولكن ينبغى أن يكون ذلك بعد استفراغ جملة البدن وهذه الحجامة قد تكون عوضا من فصد القيفال ويحذر أن يستعملها من كان بارد الدماغ او كان به نزلة فإنّها تضرّه ضررا عظيما.	But it is necessary that this be after the evacuation of the entire body, and this bloodletting may be in place of evacuating the stagnant blood, and one should beware that it is not used by someone who has a cold brain or a weak constitution, for it would cause great harm.
ولذلك لا ينبغى أن يستعملها الشيوخ ومن فى رأسه أمراض باردة، ومن أدمن عليها ولّدت عليه النسيان.	Therefore, it is not suitable for the elderly and those who have cold diseases in their head, and those who are accustomed to it and have become dependent on it.
ولذلك ينبغى أن تأمر الحجّام أن ينزل يده بالمحجمة قليلا الى أسفل خوفا من تولّد النسيا ن، وأما حجامة الكاهل فهى عوض من فصد الأكحل وفصد الباسليق.	Therefore, it is necessary for the bloodletter to be cautious in his bloodletting, and to descend gradually to the lower part, fearing the accumulation of fluids, and as for bloodletting on the vein, it is in place of evacuating the stagnant blood and the basilic blood.
ولذلك تنفع من الربو وضيق النفس وانصداع آلة التنفّس والسعال والامتلاء، وينبغى أن ترفع حجامة الكاهل قليلا لأنّها إن صيّرت الى أسفل ولّدت ضعفا فى القلب والمعدة.	Therefore, it benefits from the relief of flatulence and tightness of breath, and the expulsion of the instruments of respiration, cough, and fullness. And it is necessary to elevate the bloodletting on the vein gradually, for if it is performed in excess, it would weaken the heart and the stomach.
وأمّا حجامة الأخدعين فتنفع من الأوجاع الحادثة فى الرأس والرمد والشقيقة والخناق والتوجّع فى أصول الأسنان وهى عوض من فصد الباسليق، وينبغى أن تأمر الحجّام أن لا يعمق يده بالشرط لئلّا يقطع شريانا فيحدث النزف.	As for bloodletting on the temples, it benefits from the sudden pains occurring in the head, forehead, and neck, and the ache in the roots of the teeth, and it is in place of evacuating the basilic blood. And it is necessary for the bloodletter to be cautious not to make his incision too deep, lest he cuts an artery and causes bleeding.
وأمّا الحجامة تحت الدقن فتنفع من القلاع فى الفم وفساد اللثة ونحوها من الأمراض التى فى الفم وقد تقوم مقام فصد الجهارك التى فى الشفتين، وأمّا حجامة الكتفين فتنفع من الخفقان الذى يكون من الامتلاء والحرارة.	As for the surgical incision under the chin, it cures the tonsils in the mouth and relieves the troublesome swelling, and removes them from the painful abscesss that are in the mouth, and takes the place of the surgical incision that is on the jaws. As for the surgical incision of the shoulders, it cures the numbness that occurs due to cold and heat.
وأما حجامة بطنى الزندين فتنفع ممّا ينفع فصد العروق الثلاثة الباسليق والأكحل والقيفال لأنّها تجتذب الدم من جميع تلك العروق الرقاق التى فى اللحم وتجتذب تلك العروق الرقاق من عروق أخر أغلظ منها حتّى يبلغ الجذب الى العروق الغلاظ الثلاثة.	And as for the surgical incision of the arteries of the neck, it cures what is cured by the surgical incision of the three basilic veins, and the achilleans, and the cephalics, because they draw blood from all those thin vessels that are in the flesh, and they draw those thin vessels from other thicker ones until the drawing reaches the three thick vessels.
وينبغى أن تأمر الحجّام أن لا يمعن فى الشرط لأنّ الموضع معرّى من اللحم وتحته أعصاب وشريانات، وأمّا المحجمة الواحدة التى تحجم على العصعص فإنّها تنفع من بواسير المقعدة وقروح الأسفل.	And it is necessary for the surgeon to be cautious not to sever in the scar because the site is crowded with flesh and vessels, and as for the single surgical incision that is made on the vertebra, it cures the pains of the lumbar region and the ulcers of the hips.
وينبغى أن تأمر الحجّام أن تكون المحجمة كبيرة وأن تكون من نحاس لأنّ الموضع يحتاج الى مص قوىّ وربّما انكسرت محجمة الزجاج ويشرط شرطا كثيرا، وأمّا محاجم الساقين فتنقص الامتلاء نقصانا بيّنا.	And it is necessary for the surgeon to be cautious that the surgical incision is large and to be from a prominent bone, because the site requires a strong compression and maybe the surgical incision of the glass (rib) will be constricted and will cut many nerves. And as for the surgical incisions of the legs, they reduce numbness and palpable abscesss.
لأنّها تجتذب الدم من جميع الجسم وتنفع من الأوجاع المزمنة فى الكلى والأرحام والمثانة وتدرّ الطمث وتنفع من البثور والدماميل وتقوم مقام فصد الصافنين والعرقوبين إلّا أنّها تنهك البدن كثيرا ويحدث الغشى فى أكثر الناس، ومحاجم العرقوبين منفعتها قريبة من منفعة حجامة الساقين.	Because they draw blood from the entire body and cure chronic pains in the kidneys, liver, and spleen, and stop the flow of blood and cure hemorrhoids and phlebotomies, and take the place of surgical incisions on the veins and arteries, but they harm the body greatly and cause weakness in most people. And the surgical incisions on the arteries are of close benefit to the benefit of the surgical incision on the legs.
كيفيّة وضع المحاجم وهو أن توضع المحجمة أوّلا فارغة وتمصّ مصّا معتدلا ولا تطيل وضع المحاجم ولكنّك تضعها سريعا وتنزعها سريعا لتقبل الأخلاط الى الموضع إقبالا مستويا ولا تزال تكرّر ذلك وتواليه حتّى ترى الموضع قد احمرّ وانفتح.	The manner of making the surgical incision is that you make the incision first empty and compress with a moderate pressure, and do not delay in making the incision, but rather make it quickly and extract it quickly to allow the humors to flow into the site equally and do not repeat that, and be careful until you see the site has become red and opened up.
وظهرت حمرة الدم فحينئذ تشرط وتعاود المصّ رويدا رويدا ثمّ تنظر فى حال الأبدان، فمن كان من الناس رخص اللحم متخلخل المسامّ فينبغى أن تشرطه واحدة لا غير لئلّا يتقرّح الموضع.	Here is the translation:
وتأمر الحجّام أن يوسّع الشرط ويعمق قليلا ويعدّل المصّ فى رفق وتحريك لطيف، فإن كان فى الدم غلظ فينبغى أن يشرط مرّتين أمّا فى المرّة الأولى فليفتح طريقا للطيف الدم ومائيته وأمّا فى الثانية فلاستقصاء إخراج الدم الغليظ.	The surgeon should expand the incision slightly and adjust the drainage in a gentle way, so that if there is thick blood, it may be drained twice: first, to open a path for the thick blood and its discharge, and secondly, to extract the thick blood.
فإن كان الدم عكرا جدّا فيكرّر الشرط مرّة ثالثة ليبلغ الغاية، وبالجملة اذا أردنا أن نخرج دما قليلا اكتفينا بشرطة واحدة فإن أردنا إخراج دم كثير شرطنا شرطا أكثر، وإن قدّرنا أنّ الدم غليظ.	If the blood is very thick, he should repeat the incision a third time to reach the desired goal. And in general, if we want to drain a little blood with one incision, but we want to drain a lot of blood, we make multiple incisions, as the blood is very thick.
فينبغى أن نشرط شرطا عميقا والحدّ المعتدل فى الشرط عمق الجلد فقط، ما ينبغى أن يستعمل من الأدهان عند وضع المحاجم ومن المياه وما يحذره المحتجم، أمّا من كان جلده غليظا صلبا قحلا ومسامّه ضيقة.	It is necessary to make a deep incision and to limit the moderate cut in the incision, only as much as is needed, so that it does not exceed what is required when placing the dressing, and from the water, and what is protected by the dressing, unless the skin is very thick, hard, and has dense and narrow pores.
فينبغى أن تدهّن مواضع المحاجم بأدهان مفتّحة مليّنة محلّلة أمّا إن كان فى زمان الصيف فمثل دهن الخيرىّ او دهن البنفسج او دهن اللوز الحلو او دهن حبّ القرع.	It is necessary to grease the places of the dressing with a fragrant, sweet-smelling ointment, unless it is during the summer season, then like the ointment of Khiriy or the ointment of Banafsa or the ointment of sweet almond oil or the ointment of Cyperus.
وأمّا إن كان فى الشتاء فمثل دهن النرجس او دهن السوسن او دهن البابونج او الزنبق ونحوه، فإن كانت الفضلة غليظة باردة فليكن الدهن دهن المرزنجوش او دهن النمّام او دهن البان او دهن الشبّث ونحوها.	And if it is in the winter, then like the ointment of Nargas or the ointment of Sosan or the ointment of Babunj or Zanbq and its kind. If the wound is cold and thick, then let the ointment be the ointment of Marzanjush or the ointment of Namam or the ointment of Ban or the ointment of Shabbath and its kind.
فإن كان المحتجم واسع المسامّ غض اللحم فينبغى أن يمتنع الدهن وهؤلاء ينبغى أن يغسلوا محاجمهم بعد الحجامة بماء الورد او بماء بارد او بماء عنب الثعلب او بماء القرع او بماء الرجلة ونحوها، وأمّا من كان دمه كثير الرطوبة.	If the wound is wide and the pores of the flesh are loose, it is necessary to abstain from ointment and it is necessary that they wash their dressings after the surgery with rose water or cold water or water of Thalab or water of Cyperus or water of Rhjla and its kind, unless the blood is very humid.
فيغسل محاجمه بالخلّ او بماء الآس والسماق ونحوها، وأمّا من كانت فضوله غليظة فيغسل محاجمه بالشراب العتيق او بماء المرزنجوش او طبيخ الشبثّ او البابونج ونحوها، وينبغى أن تحذر الحجامة فى الحمّام وفى إثر الحمّام.	Here is the translation:
بل ينبغى أن تستعمل بعد الخروج من الحمّام بساعة او ساعتين ولا ينبغى أن ينام أحد بعد الحجامة، ما ينبغى أن يدبّر به المحتجم والمفتصد قبل الحجامة وبعدها.	It is not advisable to have a bath after bleeding for an hour or two hours, and it is not advisable to sleep after phlebotomy. It is necessary to prepare oneself before and after the operation by being cautious and by taking care of oneself.
يجب أن تنظر أوّلا فإن كان المحتجم او المفتصد صفراويّا والغالب على دمه الحدّة والالتهاب فينبغى أن يأخذ المبردات كالرمّان والهندباء بالخلّ والخسّ والسكنجبين والجلاب ونحوها ويجعل أطعمته الفراريج ولحوم الضأن سكباجات والحصرميّات ونحوها.	One should examine the patient first to see if he is bilious or melancholic, and whether his blood is hot and stirred up with bile and agitation. It is advisable to give him cooling medications such as rose-water and Indian cumin, and poppy juice, and to arrange his diet according to his constitution, and to prescribe for him a regimen of foods and drinks that are easy to digest.
ومن كان مزاجه باردا فينبغى أن يسقى شراب العسل وشراب الميبة او السكنجبين البزورىّ ويتناول النبيذ العطرىّ المتوسّط الذى هو فيما بين القديم والحديث ويؤمر بقلّة الغذاء ويجعل غذاءه الفراريج والقنابر والعصافير وفراخ الحمام اسفيدباجات، وينبغى أن يكون الشراب يوم الحجامة والفصد أكثر من الطعام.	And if the patient has a cold temperament, it is advisable to give him drinks of honey and milk, or poppy juice with rose-water, and to take moderate wine that is between old and new, and to beware of excessive food intake, and to arrange his diet according to the regimen of phlebotomy and blood-letting, and to make the drink on the day of phlebotomy and blood-letting more than the food.
وقد ينبغى أن يسقى فى بعض الأوقات لبعض الناس من الترياق الفاروق او دواء المسك او الشيلثا قبل الحجامة وقبل الفصد او بعده لتقوّى الآعضاء الرئيسة وترقّق الدم ولا ينبغى أن يسقاه المحرورون،.	And it is advisable to give some people at certain times the antidote of Faruq or the medicine of Musk or Siltah before phlebotomy and blood-letting, or after it, in order to strengthen the main organs and to calm the blood, and it is not advisable to give it to those who are weak.
وأمّا المحاجم التى تكون بلا شرط فهى المحاجم التى توضع على الكبد والطحال والثديين وعلى البطن والسرّة وموضع الكلى وحقّ الورك لأنّ هذه الأعضاء لا تحتمل الشرط عليها، وإنّما يراد بها إمّا جذب الدم من عضو الى عضو.	And as for the phlebotomy sites that are without condition, they are the phlebotomy sites on the liver, spleen, chest, abdomen, and kidneys, and the area of the hip joint, because these organs do not tolerate the condition, and it is intended to draw blood from one organ to another.
كوضعنا المحجمة على الثديين فى علّة الرعاف او نستعملها لنحل عن العضو ريحا باردا قد لحج فى العضو كوضعنا المحجمة على البطن والسرّة فإنّها تخلخل العضو وتسخنه وتذهب بالوجع لتحليلها ذلك الريح،.	We place the cupping on the chest in case of a cold or we use it to remove the rheum from a cold organ that has become stagnant, as we place the cupping on the abdomen and the back, for it relaxes the organ, and makes it calm, and drives away the pain to analyze it, that is, to break down that rheum.
وقد توضع على الكلى اذا عرض فيها سدّة او حصى فبقوّة جذبها ربّما فتحت السدّة او قلعت الحصى من موضعها، وكذلك تفعل اذا وضعت على الكبد والطحال عند ريح يرتبك فيهما، وهذه المحاجم قد تستعمل فارغة بالمصّ فقط.	You should place it on the kidneys if a stone or congestion appears in them, and apply suction to draw it out, perhaps opening the stone or removing the congestion from its position. And similarly, you do it when you place it on the liver and spleen during inflation, and these cups can be used empty only for sucking.
وقد تستعمل بالنار وقد تستعمل مملوءة بالماء الفاتر فى علل الشوصة وذلك أن تملأ المحجمة ولتكن كبيرة بالماء الحارّ وحده او بماء قد طبخ فيه بعض الحشائش التى تصلح لذلك.	It can be used with fire and it can be used filled with hot water in cases of numbness, that is to fill the cup and let it be large with hot water or water in which some aromatics have been boiled that are suitable for that.
ثم توضع مملؤة على الموضع وتمسك وتزال وتعاد مرّات على قدر الحاجة، وهذه صورة المحجمة التى تستعمل بالنار:.	Then you place the filled cup on the affected area and hold it, and remove it, and repeat this process several times according to need. And this is a picture of the cup that is used with fire:.
تكون سعة فمها أصبعين مفتوحتين على ما صوّرنا وقدرها فى العمق نصف شبر ويكون فى جنبها فى نحو النصف منها ثقبة صغيرة على قدر ما تدخله الإبرة تصنع من النحاس الصينىّ او النحاس الأصفر غليظة الحاشية.	It should have a mouth with two open fingers on the basis of what we have drawn, and its depth is half a finger, and in its side, near the middle, there is a small hole that can admit a needle, made from Chinese brass or yellow brass, thickening the edge.
ملساء مستوية مجلوّة لئلّا تؤذى العضو عند وضعها عليه ويكون فى وسطها فضيب معترض من نحاس او حديد حيث توضع الشمعة بالنار، وقد تصنع هذه المحجمة كبيرة أكبر ممّا وصفنا وصغيرة على حسب الأمراض.	A polished, smooth, and shiny surface so that it does not hurt the member when it is placed on it, and in its middle there is a curved pipe made from brass or iron where the flame is placed with fire. And this cup can be made large, larger than what we have described, and small according to the illnesses.
وسنّ مستعملها فإنّ محاجم الصبيان والنحفاء غير محاجم الرجال والعبل الأجسام، وأمّا كيفيّة وضع هذه المحجمة بالنار على العضو فهو أن تقد فتيلة بالنار من كتان محكمة او شمعة صغيرة من قير وتضعها على وسط القضيب المصلّب الذى فى وسط المحجمة.	And their usage is that cups for children and the slender ones are not like those for men, and as for how to place this cup with fire on the member, it is that you take a flame from a small candle or a small lamp from a qir and place it in the middle of the cup's base which is in the middle of the cup.
ليكون صعود النار الى فوق نحو أسفل المحجمة لئلّا يحترق بدن العليل ثمّ توضع على العضو والأصبع على الثقب الذى ذكرنا حتّى اذا أمسكنا المحجمة ما احتجنا نزعت الأصبع.	So that the fire rises upwards towards the bottom of the cup, lest it burn the patient's body, then you place it on the member and the finger on the hole we mentioned, until when we hold the cup, we do not feel the removal of the finger.
وخرج البخار على ذلك الثقب وانحلّت المحجمة على المقام، ثمّ تقد الفتيلة على الصفة وتعيدها إن احتجت الى ذلك، فأمّا المحجمة التى تستعمل فى مرض الشوصة بالماء فليس فيها قضيب مصلّب ولا ثقب.	Let the pus exit through that orifice and the poultice relax on the affected area, then apply the bandage on the suture and adjust it if it reaches that. But as for the poultice used in cases of inflammation caused by water, there is no need for a drain tube or an orifice.
وإنّما تستعمل بأن تملأ بالماء وتوضع على العضو فقط، وهذه صورتها:.	And it is used by filling with water and placing on the limb only, and this is its form:
وهذه المحجمة كلّما كانت كبيرة لتسع ماء كثيرا كانت أفضل،.	And this poultice, whenever it was large enough to hold a lot of water, was better.
الفصل السابع والتسعون.	Chapter 87.
فى تعليق العلق.	On commenting on the application.
العلق إنّما تستعمل فى أكثر الأحوال فى الأعضاء التى لا يمكن فيها وضع المحاجم إمّا لصغرها كالشفة واللثة ونحوها وإمّا لأنّ العضو معرّى من اللحم كالأصبع والأنف ونحوها.	The application is used in most cases on limbs where poultices cannot be applied, either because they are small like the lip and the ear and such, or because the limb is bony, like the finger and the nose and such.
وكيفيّة استعمالها أن تقصد من العلق التى تكون فى المياه العذبة النقيّة من العفونات ثمّ تترك يوما وليلة فى الماء العذب حتّى تجوع ولا يبقى فى جوفها شىء.	And the method of its application is to take from the application that which is in pure, clean water free from contaminants, then leave it for a day and a night in the sweet water until it ferments and nothing remains within it.
ثمّ يستفرغ البدن أوّلا بالفصد او بالحجامة ثمّ يمسح العضو العليل.	Then the body is purified either by phlebotomy or by cupping, then the affected limb is massaged.
حتّى يحمرّ ثمّ توضع عليه فإذا امتلات سقطت، وإن أمكن مصّ الموضع بالمحجمة فهو أبلغ فى المنفعة وإلّا فاغسل الموضع بخلّ ثمّ بماء كثير ويدلك ويعصر، فإن تمادى جرى الدم بعد سقوط العلق وكان ذلك رشحا فلتبلّ خرقة كتان فى الماء البارد.	Until it becomes red, then it is applied to it; if it becomes swollen, it falls. And if it is possible to massage the area with a poultice, it is more beneficial and effective. Otherwise, wash the area with vinegar and then with plenty of water, and dry it and constrict it. For when the blood flows after the removal of the application, it was as if it had been poured into a cold water bath.
وتضعها من فوق حتّى ينقطع الرشح، فإن كثر الدم فذرّ عليه زاجا مسحوقا او عفصا او نحوها من القوابض حتّى ينقطع الدم او يوضع على الموضع أنصاف الباقلّى المقشّر.	And apply it from above until the bleeding stops. If the blood flows abundantly, sprinkle on it a powder of zinc oxide or borax or similar things from the congealing substances until the bleeding stops, or apply to the area a compress of cooled rose oil.
وتترك حتّى يلصق الباقلّى فى الموضع فإنّ الدم ينقطع، وينبغى إن احتيج الى إعادة العلق فلا تعلّق تلك العلق اذا أمكن غيرها، فإن امتنعت العلق عن التعلّق فليمسح الموضع بدم طرىّ.	If you leave the suture in place, the blood will congeal, and it is necessary to return to release the suture so that it does not become stuck if possible. If you are forced to remove the suture from sticking, then wash the area with warm blood.
او تغرز إبرة فى الموضع حتّى تخرج شيئا من الدم ثمّ توضع فإنّها اذا أحسّت بشىء من الدم لصقت على المقام فإذا أردت أن تسقط فانثر عليها شيئا من الصبر او الملح او الرماد فإنّها تسقط على المقام،.	You insert a needle into the area until you bring out some blood, then you place it; if you feel something from the blood sticking to the needle, and you want to drop it, sprinkle on it some of the powder or salt or antimony, and it will stick to the needle.
الباب الثالث.	Chapter Three.
فى الجبر.	On Suturing.
هذاالباب أيضامن وكيد ما يحتاج عليه فى صناعة الطبّ وهو جبر الكسر والفكّ الحادثين فى العظام.	This chapter is also necessary and includes what is needed in the craft of medicine, which is suturing of fractures and wounds occurring in the bone.
اعلموا يا بنىّ أنّه قد يدّعى هذاالباب الجهّالمن الأطبّاء والعوامّ ومن لم يتصفّح قط للقدماء فيه كتابا ولا قرأ منه حرفا.	Know, my sons, that this chapter has been neglected by the ignorant physicians and common people, and whoever has not taken care to write a book about it or read a single letter from it.
ولهذه العلّة صار هذا الفنّ من العلم فى بلدنا معدوما وإنّى لم ألق فيه قطّ محسنا البتّة.	And due to this, this art has become neglected in our country, and I have not found a single person who practices it properly.
وإنّما استفدت منه ما استفدت لطول قراءتى لكتب الأوائل وحرصى على فهمها حتّى استخرجت علم ذلك منها، ثمّ لزمت التجربة والدربة طول عمرى.	And I have benefited from it what I have benefited, through lengthy study of the ancient books and intense effort to understand them, until I extracted its science from them. Then, I combined experience and practice throughout my life.
وقد رسمت لكم من ذلك فى هذاالباب جميعما أحاط به علمى.	And I have organized for you in this chapter all that I have encompassed with my knowledge.
ومضت عليه تجربتى بعد أن قرّبته لكم وخلّصته من شعب التطويل واختصرته غاية الاختصار وبيّنته غاية البيان وصوّرت لكم فيه صورا كثيرة من صور الآلات التى تستعمل فيه.	And I have proceeded with my experience, after I have presented it to you and freed it from the tribe of verbosity and shortened it to the utmost degree of brevity and clarified it to the utmost degree of clarity and illustrated for you in it many figures of the instruments that are used in it.
اذ هو من زيادة البيان كما فعلت فى البابين المتقدّمين، ولا قوّة إلّا بالله العلىّ العظيم،.	It is an addition to the clarification, as I did in the previous chapters, and there is no power except with God, the Exalted, the Great.
الفصل الأوّل.	The First Chapter.
فيهجمل وجوامع من أمر كسر العظام وجب تقديمها وقبل أن نبدأ بذكر الأعضاء المكسورة والمنخلعة واحدا واحدا فينبغى أن نذكر فى صدر هذاالباب جملامن القول وفصولا.	There are two types of fractures, one involving the breaking of bones and the other involving their dislocation, and before we start describing the broken and dislocated limbs one by one, it is necessary to mention in this chapter the general principles and rules.
تضطرّكم أوّلا الى فهمها والوقوف على حقيقتها أنتم ومن كان حريصا لتعلّم هذه الصناعة الشريفة غيركم.	You should first understand them (the principles) and be aware of their reality, for you are the ones who have been eager to learn this noble craft.
فأقول إنّه متى حدث بأحد كسر او فكّ او وثء او سقطة فينبغى أن تسرع أوّلا الى فصده او إسهاله او هما جميعا.	I say that whenever a fracture, or a dislocation, or a wound, or a blow occurs, it is necessary to hasten to treat it, or to cure it, or to heal it altogether.
إن لم يمنع من ذلك مانع مثل ضعف القوّة او كان الذى حدث به شىء من ذلك صبيّا او شيخا هرما او كان الزمان شديد الحرّ او شديد البرد جدّا.	For if it is not treated, something worse may occur, such as a weakening of the power, or what has happened to it may become chronic, whether in youth or old age, and whether the time is extremely hot or extremely cold.
ثمّ يقتصر فى غذائه على البقول الباردة ولحوم الطير والجداء ويمنع الشراب واللحوم الغليظة والتملّؤ من الطعام وكلّ غذاء يملأ العروق دما حتّى اذا أمنت الورم ولم تتوقّع انصباب مادّة الى الموضع.	Then he should restrict his diet to cold foods, and the meat of birds and fish, and avoid hot drinks and fatty meats, and everything that fills the blood vessels with blood until, if the inflammation subsides, it does not congest the material at the site.
فحينئذ فليرجع العليل الى تدبيره الأوّل الذى جرت به عادته، فإذا أخذ العظم المكسور فى الانجبار فينبغى أن يتغذّى العليل بأغذية تغذو غذاء كثيرا غليظا متينا يكون فيه لزوجة مثل الهرائس والأرزّ والرؤوس والأكارع وكروش البقر.	So when that happens, the patient should return to his original regimen, and if the broken bone is set in its proper place, it is necessary for the patient to be nourished with nourishment that is abundant, fatty, and mild, being suitable for coupling, such as meats, rice, and milk, and other things like them.
والبيض والسمك الطرىّ والشراب الغليظ ونحو ذلك فإنّه بهذا التدبير يكون انعقاد الكسر أسرع وأجود، واعلم أنّ العظام المكسورة اذا كانت فى الرجال المشتدّين والشيوخ فليس يمكن أن تتّصل وتلتحم على طبيعتها الأولى أبدا.	And eggs, and fat fish, and fatty drinks, and so on. For with this regimen, the healing of the fracture will be faster and better. And know that if the broken bones are in young men and old men, it is not possible for them to return to their original natural state ever.
لجفوف عظامهم وصلابتها وقد يتّصل ويلتحم ما كان من العظام فى غاية الليّن بمنزلة عظام الصبيان الصغار ولكن الطبيعة تنبت على العظم المكسور من جميع جهاته شيئا يشبه الغراء فيه غلظ يلتزق به ويشدّه حتّى يلزم بعضه بعضا.	Their bones are soft and fragile, and may become united, and will heal to the point where the bone was in a state of great flexibility, like the bones of young children, but nature builds upon the broken bone from all its aspects something that resembles a scab, which is thick and compact, until it becomes one piece.
ويربط بعضه بعضا حتّى يأتى فى غاية القوّة والوثاقة كما كان أوّلا حتّى لا يعوقه شىء من أفعاله،.	Some of them are connected to each other until they reach the maximum strength and solidity, just as it was at first, so that nothing of its effects is weakened.
ولهذا السبب وجب أن يجعل غذاء المريض الأغذية التى فيها متانة ولزوجة وغلظ كما قلنا، واعلم أنّ الكسر قد تختلف أنواعه بحسب اختلاف الأعضاء لأنّ كسر عظم الساق مخالف لكسر عظم الرأس وكسر عظم الصدر مخالف لكسر عظم الظهر.	For this reason, it is necessary to make the nourishment of the patient suitable for the member that has been fractured, and to know that fractures differ in their types according to the difference of the members, because a fracture of the thigh bone is not like a fracture of the head bone, and a fracture of the chest bone is not like a fracture of the back bone.
وكذلك سائر الأعضاء كلّها مخالف بعضها بعضا، وسنأتى بذكر كلّ نوع من الكسر مشروحا فى بابه مفصّلا من غيره، وقد يختلف نوع كسر العظم أيضا فى نفسه.	And so, all the other members are different from each other, and we will mention each type of fracture in its own chapter, separated from the others, and the type of bone fracture may also differ within itself.
لأنّه قد يكون كسره تقصّفا من غير أن تحدث فيه شظايا وقد يكون كسره على طول العظم وتكون لكسره شظايا وزوائد متبرّئة وغير متبرّئة ويكون الكسر مع جرح وخرق فى الجلد ويكون الكسر صدعا يسيرا.	For it may be a fracture that breaks into fragments without any splinters, and it may be a fracture along the length of the bone, having splinters and protrusions, both fixed and movable, and the fracture may be with a wound and a tear in the skin, and the fracture may be a simple one.
ولكلّ نوع حيلة خاصيّة فى جبره على ما سيأتى ذكره مفصّلا فى موضعه، وممّا يتعرّف به كسر العظم اعوجاجه ونتوه وظهوره للحسّ وتخشخشه عند غمزك إيّاه بيدك.	And each type has a special treatment in its repair, as will be mentioned in detail in its place, and among what is known about bone fractures are their curvature and twisting, and their appearance to the senses, and their grating and crunching when you press on them with your hand.
فمتى لم يكن فى الموضع اعوجاج ظاهر ولا تخشخش ولا تحسّ عند جسّك العظم باضطراب ولا يجد العليل كثير وجع فليس هناك كسر بل يمكن أن يكون وثئا او كسرا هينا او صدعا يسيرا فلا ينبغى أن تحرّكه بالمدّ والغمز البتّة.	So if there is no apparent curvature in the location, nor grating, nor sensation when you press on the bone with a pungent touch, and the pain is not severe, it may not be a fracture, but rather a bruise or a slight sprain, so it should not be disturbed by strong pressure and vigorous massage.
بل احمل عليه من الأدوية التى يأتى ذكرها بعد حين ما يوافق الموضع ثمّ تشدّه شدّا لطيفا، واعلم أنّ العظم اذا انقصف واندقّ باثنين من غير أن تحدث فيه شظايا إلّا أنه قد زال كلّ جزء عن صاحبه.	But I shall apply to it from the medications that will be mentioned later, according to what suits the location, and then bind it tightly but gently. And know that if the bone is broken and split into two pieces without any splinters, it is as if each part has moved away from its companion.
فينبغى لك أن تبادر من حينك الى تقويمه وتسويته قبل أن يحدث له ورم حارّ، فإن حدث له ورم حارّ فاتركه أيّاما حتّى يسكن الورم الحارّ ثمّ سوّه بأىّ وجه تقدر عليه من الرفق والحيلة.	You should consider excising the tumor and cleansing it before it becomes inflamed, for if it becomes inflamed, leave it until the inflammation subsides, then cleanse it from whichever aspect you think best, according to the condition of the patient and the severity of the wound.
واعلم أنّ جبره وتسويته أسهل من العظم الذى قد حدث فيه شظايا، ثمّ يشدّ على ما سيأتى ذكره، فإن كان العظم فيه شظايا فلا بدّ من مدّ العضو المكسور من الناحيتين يدا كان او رجلا.	Know that excising and cleansing a fracture is easier than one in which there are splinters of bone, then it will heal quickly. If the bone has splinters, then it is necessary to set the fractured limb with both hands, whether it was an arm or a leg.
إمّا بيديك إن كان العضو صغيرا وإمّا بحبلين وإمّا مع الحبل واليد، وليكن وضعك العضو على موضع مستو على شكله الطبيعىّ حتّى اذا امتدّ جزآ العظم المكسور فحينئذ فرم ردّ تلك الزوائد فى مواضعها بكلّ وجه تقدر عليه من الحيلة والرفق.	Put the limb in its natural position, whether it is small or large, and adjust it with a bandage or a splint, and let its natural shape be maintained until the fractured bone is reunited. Then, at that point, return the protruding parts to their positions in every way that is suitable according to the condition of the patient and the severity of the wound.
واحرص جهدك أن لا تحدث على العليل بفعلك وجعا ولا ألما ورم جهدك أن تضمّ أحد العظمين بصاحبه على أفضل الهيئة، وينبغى فى ذلك الوقت أن تلمسهما وتجسّهما بيدك فإن رأيت هناك شيئا مخالفا أصلحته وسوّيته بقدر طاقتك.	Be careful not to touch the wound with your fingers or hand, and be cautious that you do not join one of the bones to its companion in a better position. It is necessary at that time to feel them with your hand and examine them; if you see something wrong, correct it and set it right according to your ability.
واحذر المدّ الشديد والغمز القوىّ كما يفعل كثير من الجهّال وكثيرا ما يحدّثون بفعلهم ذلك ورما حارّا او زمانة فى العضو كما قد شاهدت ذلك من فعلهم مرارا.	Beware of strong traction and violent pulling, as many ignorant people do, and often they cause harm or inflammation in the limb, as I have seen them do that many times.
ثمّ ألزم بعد التسوية والإتقان والشدّ ذلك العضو السكون والدعة وحذّر العليل أن يحرّكه فى وقت يقظته ونومه وعند تحوّله واضطرابه وعند برازه وجميع حركاته غاية وسعه وأن يتحرّى أن تكون نصبة العضو نصبة يأمن معها الوجع.	Then, after setting and adjusting, hold the limb in a comfortable and stable position, and beware of the wound that it not be moved during times of anger, sleep, or turning, or during any of its movements, lest it become inflamed; and take care to ensure the limb is in a comfortable position, so that you may avoid pain.
وذلك أنّه متى أحسّ فى حال نصبه العضو بوجع او ألم أن ينقله الى غير تلك النصبة الى التى لا يحسّ معها بوجع ويتحرّى مع ذلك أن تكون نصبته تلك مستوية مستقيمة.	And that is when you feel, in the state of setting the limb, pain or discomfort, then move it to a different position where it does not feel pain, and take care with that to maintain its upright straightness.
لئلّا يحدث فى العضو اعوجاج اذا انجبر، وأمّا كيفيّة شدّ العضو المكسور فهو على ما أنا واصفه لك، اعلم أنّ الأعضاء المكسورة تختلف فى صغرها وكبرها وهيآتها فما كان منها صغارا مثل الذراع والأصبع والزند ونحوها.	When a fracture occurs in a member, and how to treat the fractured member, I will describe it to you. You should know that fractured members vary in their smallness and largeness, and their conditions, such as the forearm, the fingers, and the like.
فينبغى أن تكون لفائف الخرق وطئة لطافا وما كان منها غلاظا كالفخذ والظهر والصدر فينبغى أن تكون اللفائف عراضا صلبة لأنّ الرباط العريض يلزم العضو الكبير ويشدّه من كلّ جانب شدّا متساويا لا تداخله خلل.	It is suitable that the bandages are soft and gentle, and not thick like those for the thigh, back, and chest. It is suitable that the bandages are firm and strong, because the tight ligature constricts the large member and holds it in place from all sides with equal pressure, without any slackness.
ثمّ تبدأ بعد فراغك من التسوية أن تحمل الطلاء الموافق لذلك.	Then, after you have finished the alignment, you should apply the suitable splint for that.
فى مشاقة ليّنة على موضع الكسر ثمّ تبدأ بلفّ الرباط على موضع الكسر نفسه ثلاث لفّات او أربع على حسب ما يستحقّ العضو وتشدّ يدك قليلا بالرباط ثمّ تذهب به الى الناحية العليا من موضع الكسر.	You should place a cushion of lienna on the site of the fracture, then begin to wind the ligature around the site of the fracture itself, three or four times according to what the member deserves, and tighten your hand slightly with the ligature, then go with it to the upper side of the site of the fracture.
بشدّ أقلّ من شدّك للموضع المكسور ثمّ تتباعد باللفّ عن موضع الكسر قليلا وترخى الشدّ قليلا قليلا حتّى تأخذ من الموضع الصحيح شيئا صالحا ثمّ تأخذ عصابة أخرى فتلفّها أيضا على الموضع المكسور.	You should tighten less than you did for the fractured site, then loosen the bandage a little from the site of the fracture and relax the tension a little until you get something good from the correct position, then take another splint and wind it also on the fractured site.
لفّات ثمّ تذهب باللفّ الى الناحية السفلى من الكسر وليكن فعلك فى شدّ اللفّ ورخاوته على ما ذكرنا فى لفّ الأوّل الأعلى ثمّ تضع بين اللفائف من المشاقة الليّنة او الخرق ما يستوى به اعوجاج الكسر.	You should wind the bandages, then go with the bandage to the lower side of the fracture, and be careful in tightening the bandage and relaxing it according to what we mentioned in winding the upper first bandage, then place between the bandages some lienna or soft material that suits the curvature of the fracture.
إن كان فيه اعوجاج وإلّا فلا تجعل فيه شيئا، ثمّ تلفّ عليه عصابة أخرى ثمّ تسوّى على هذه اللفّات الجبائر المحكمة من ساعتك إن لم يكن فى العضو نفخ ولا ورم حارّ.	If there is a curvature and nothing else, then do not put anything on it, then wind another splint on it, and align these firm bandages according to your time, as long as there is no swelling or burning pain in the member.
فإن كان فيه نفخ او ورم حارّ فاحمل عليه ما يسكن ذلك الورم ويذهب بالنفخ واتركه أيّاما ثمّ شدّ عليه حينئذ الجبائر ولتكن الجبائر من أنصاف القصب العراض المنحوتة المهيّأة بحكمة او تكون الجبائر من خشب الغرابيل.	If there is a swelling or an abscess, apply what dissolves it and drain the swelling by puncture, then leave it for a few days. Afterwards, tighten the sutures on it, and the sutures should be of twisted silk threads that are smoothed with wax or made from the sinew of gazelles.
التى تصنع من الصنوبر او جرائد النخل او خلنج او الكلخ ونحوها ممّا حضر من ذلك، ولتكن سعة كلّ جبيرة على هذه الصورة وهذا الشكل بعينه.	They are made from sponges or pieces of pomegranate, or from the shells of walnut or the bark of willow, and similar things that are suitable for it. And let each suture be in this form and shape specifically.
إلّا أن تكون الجبيرة التى توضع على الكسر نفسه أغلظ وأعرض قليلا من سائر الجبائر، وأمّا طول الجبيرة فتصنع على حسب ما يليق بالعضو المكسور من كبره وصغره، صورة الجبيرة:.	Except that the suture which is placed on the fractured bone itself should be thicker and slightly wider than other sutures, and as for the length of the suture, it should be made according to what is suitable for the fractured limb, from its largeness and smallness, the shape of the suture.
ثمّ تشدّ على الجبائر بعصابة أخرى على حسب شدّك الأوّل بعينه ثمّ تربط من فوق بالخيوط المحكمة على حسب ما ذكرنا من الشدّ وهو أن يكون شدّك على موضع الكسر أكثر.	Then tighten the sutures with another bandage according to the first tightening specifically, then fasten from above with tightened threads as we mentioned previously, and it is that the tightening should be on the site of the fracture more.
وكلّما بعد عن الكسر كان الشدّ أقلّ.	And every time after the fracture, the tightening was less.
وينبغى أن تكون الخيوط متوسّطة فى الغلظ والرقّة ولتكن من الكتّان الرطب خاصّة لأنّ الخيوط إن كانت غلاظا مثل ما شاهدت من فعل الجهّال يجعلون خيوطهم من شرائط الكتّان المفتولة وهو خطأ عظيم.	It is necessary that the threads be moderate in thickness and softness, and let them be from the wet catgut specifically, because if the threads were too thick, like what you saw the surgeons doing, they make their threads from twisted strips of catgut, which is a great mistake.
لأنّه يقع الشدّ بها خارجا عن الاعتدال والخيوط الرقاق أيضا لا تصلح لأنّك لا تبلغ بالشدّ بها ما تريد، ولا ينبغى أن يكون بين الجبيرة والجبيرة أقلّ من أصبع.	For it happens that the tightening goes beyond moderation, and the thin threads are not suitable either, because you do not achieve by tightening them what you want, and it is not desirable that there be less than a finger's width between one suture and another.
فإن تأذّى العليل بأطراف الجبائر بعد الشدّ فى المواضع الصحيحة فاجعل تحتها من المشاقة الليّنة أو الصوف المنفوش حتّى لا يؤذيه من ذلك شىء، وأمّا اذا كان الكسر مع جرح وحدث خرق فى الجلد فسنأتى بذكره على انفراد.	If the patient complains of the edges of the sutures after tightening in the correct positions, then put under them a soft cushion or a piece of wool, so that it does not hurt him from that. And if the fracture is with a wound and there is a rupture in the skin, we would treat it separately.
واعلم أن ليس كلّ عضو مكسور ينبغى أن يشدّ بالجبائر من أوّل يوم وذلك أنّ العضو اذا كان كبيرا فلا ينبغى أن توضع عليه الجبائر إلّا بعد خمسة أيّام او سبعة او أكثر على حسب أمنك من حدوث الورم الحارّ.	Not every fractured member should be bound with a compress from the first day, for if the member is large, it should not be compressed until five or seven days have passed, or more, depending on the severity of the inflammation that occurs.
وهذه صفة الضمادات التى كانت تجبر بها الأوائل التى توضع على الكسر والفكّ والوثء، صفة ضماد عامّىّ مختصر يجبر الكسر ويصلح لأكثر الأمزجة ولا سيّما الصبيان والنساء لأنّه ممّا لا يغلب عليه حرّ ولا برد.	And these are the types of compresses that were used to bind the wounds, fractures and joints. A general type of compress is one that binds the fracture and sets it in place, suitable for most injuries, but not for children and women, because it does not cause them excessive heat or cold.
وهو أن تأخذ من غبار الرحى وهو لباب الدقيق الذى يتعلّق فى حيطان الرحى عند حركة المطحنة فتعجنه كما هو من غير أن تغربله ببياض البيض وتجعل عجنه لا ثخينا ولا رقيقا ثمّ تستعله.	And it is that you take from the dust of the pumice stone, which is the fine powder that adheres to the sides of the pumice stone when it is moved in a circular motion, and you grind it as it is without moistening it with egg white, and you make its grinding neither thick nor thin, then you use it.
صفة ضماد آخر يجبر الكسر والخلع والوثء، يؤخذ من الماش واللادن والأقاقيا والراسن والمغاث والسكّ من كلّ واحد عشرة دراهم ومرّ وصبر من كلّ واحد خمسة دراهم ومن الأثل عشرون درهما ومن الطين الأرمنىّ او الرومىّ عشرون درهما.	A type of compress that binds the fracture, dislocation, and joint, is taken from myrrh, ladanum, aloe, rasin, magath, and sikk, each weighing ten dirhams, and myrrh and amber, each weighing five dirhams, and athl twenty dirhams, and clay of Armani or Rumi, twenty dirhams.
يدقّ الجميع ويخلط بماء الأثل او ببياض البيض إن كان مزاج العليل محرورا ثمّ يستعمل هذا الضماد فإنّه حسن التأليف يجبر العظام المكسورة سريعا ويصلح لأكثر الناس لاعتداله.	The whole is powdered and mixed with water of athl or egg white if the fracture is fresh, then this compress is used, for it is good for setting bones quickly and suits most people because of its gentle warmth.
صفة ضماد آخر ينفع أيضا للكسر والوثء، يؤخذ مغاث وماش وخطمىّ أبيض من كلّ واحد عشرة دراهم مرّ وصبر من كلّ واحد خمسة دراهم أقاقيا ستّة دراهم طين أرمنىّ عشرون درهما يدقّ الجميع دقّا ناعما وينخل ويعجن بالماء او ببياض البيض ويستعمل.	A type of compress that is also beneficial for fractures and joints, is taken from magath, myrrh, and white katmai, each weighing ten dirhams, myrrh and amber, each weighing five dirhams, aloe six dirhams, Armani clay twenty dirhams. The whole is powdered finely and mixed with water or egg white, and it is used.
صفة ضماد للمفاصل والعظام الزائلة عن مواضعها ويسكن الوجع العارض لها ولانصداع العظم والكسر، يؤخذ الصوف الموذّح فيغمس فى الخلّ والزيت المطبوخ ويوضع على الموضع، وهذا الضماد ليس فيه قوّة جبر.	A bandage for sprains and dislocated bones, which is pulled away from its position and the painful spot is massaged with a medicated poultice, and it is placed on the site, but this bandage does not contain a strong adhesive.
ولكن هو فاضل فى تسكين الورم الحارّ ودفع الأوجاع خاصّة، صفة ضماد آخر يجبر العظم المكسور، يؤخذ ورق التين الأصمّ وورق الخشخاش البرّىّ ويدقّا جميعا ويضمد بهما رطبين، صفة ضماد آخر مختصر يستعمل عند انجبار كسر العظم.	But it is better in treating an acute inflammatory swelling and repelling the specific pains, another type of bandage that fixes a fractured bone, taking the pulp of unripe dates and the pulp of sweet majoram, and both are crushed together and moistened, another type of bandage that is abbreviated and used when immobilizing a fracture.
وأنت تريد تحليل بقيّة الورم، تأخذ من أصل الخطمىّ والبابونج ونوار بنفسج ودقيق الكرسنّة من كلّ واحد جزءا دقّ الجميع واعجنه بالطلاء إن لم يكن العضو مستحرّا فإن كان مستحرّا فاعجنه بماء الكزبرة او بالماء واستعمله.	And if you want to analyze the remaining swelling, take from the root of colocynth and the seed of fenugreek and a little of the juice of each, and crush them all together, and knead it with rose water, unless the limb is relaxed, in which case knead it with kuzburah water or just water, and use it.
صفة ضماد آخر أقوى فى التحليل من هذا الأوّل يستعمل عند ما يحدث ورم صلب عند انجبار العظم، يؤخذ من أصل الخطمىّ وبزر الكتّان والحلبة وإكليل الملك ومرزنجوش ونوار بنفسج وبابونج من كلّ واحد جزء.	Another type of bandage, stronger in analysis than the first, is used when a hard swelling occurs during immobilization of the bone, taking from the root of colocynth and the seed of katthan and halba and ikleel al-malik and marzanjush and a little of the juice of each, including fenugreek and baboonj.
يدقّ الجميع ويعجن بماء الخلاف او بالماء العذب او بالطلاء كلّ ذلك على حسب حرارة العضو وسكون حرّه، وأمّا ابقراط فلم يذكر فى كتابه أن يوضع على العضو المكسور عند جبره.	He crushes them all together and kneads it with vinegar or sweet water or rose water, all of that according to the heat of the limb and its comfort, and as for Aqratah, he did not mention in his book that it should be applied to the fractured limb during immobilization.
إلّا القيروطىّ المعمول من الشمع والزيت لا غير ووصف أن يكون متوسّطا بين الغلظ والرقّة، وأمّا جالينوس فرأى أن يوضع على العضو المكسور عند جبره الأشياء التى فيها جفوف مع شىء من حرارة مثل المرّ والصبر واللبان ونحو ما ذكرنا.	Except that the Kyriotai use a mixture of wax and oil, nothing else, and it is described to be moderate between thickness and thinness, and as for Galen, he saw that it should be applied to the fractured limb during immobilization with things that contain gentleness along with some warmth, such as myrrh and savin and laban, and similar to what we mentioned.
صفة ضماد ينفع للوهن والوجع، يؤخذ مغاث وحمّص وشعر إنسان مقروض او ريش طائر وخطمىّ وملح أجزاء سواء يدقّ وينخل ويعجن ويضمد به، وأمّا مقدار ما ينبغى أن يبقى الرباط.	A compress which is beneficial for inflammation and wounds, takes cotton and hemp and human hair or the feather of a bird and thread, and parts of a cloth that are not too dense, and it is applied with compression and bound tightly, according to the amount needed until the bandage remains in place.
ثمّ يحلّ فهو أن تنظر فإن لم يحدث بالعليل وجع ولا حكاك ولا تحرّك العظم المكسور عن موضعه فلا تحلّه أيّاما كثيرة فإن حدث به فى الموضع حكاك شديد او وجع مقلق او نفخ.	Then, it is necessary to wait until the bone is settled in its position, for if it has not happened, there will be no healing and no relief from the pain, and the fractured bone will not settle into place. Do not try to reduce it again and again, for if you do, there will be severe pain or inflammation or suppuration.
فبادر فحلّه فى الوقت ولا تؤخر ذلك البتّة ونحّ الضماد عنه، ثمّ تأخذ خرقة ليّنة او إسفنجة بحريّة رطبة فاغمسها فى الماء الفاتر واغسل بها الموضع حتّى تسكن الحكّة ويسكن الوجع ثمّ تترك العضو يستريح ساعة.	So, hasten to reduce it at the time and do not delay that moment, then remove the compress from it. Then, take a soft sponge or a clean cloth, dip it in lukewarm water, and wash the area until the pain subsides and the inflammation goes away. Then, let the limb relax for an hour.
ثمّ تحمل عليه الصوف الموذّح المغموس فى الخلّ والزيت او دهن الورد وتربطه عليه ليلة حتّى تأمن الورم الحارّ ويسكن نفخ العضو ويذهب وجعه ثمّ تعيده الى الشدّ اللطيف والضماد اليسير ولا تشدّه شدّك الأوّل.	Then, apply to it a cloth soaked in rose-water or oil of walnut, and bind it on for a night until the sharp pain subsides and the swelling goes away. Then, reduce the severity of the bandage and compress, and do not tighten it too much at first.
والطف به حتّى يبرأ، فإن رأيت أنّ الورم والحمرة والوجع والنفخ وجميع الأعراض قد ذهبت أصلا واحتجت الى الضماد والشدّ فأعده كما فعلت أوّلا سواء، فإن لم يحدث فى العضو شىء ممّا ذكرناه.	And continue until it heals, for if you find that the swelling, redness, pain, and inflammation have all gone away, and you have returned to the compress and bandage as you did at first, then it is likely that nothing of what was mentioned has happened in the limb.
فلا تحلّه إلّا بعد ثلاثة أيّام او أربعة او خمسة او سبعة وقد يترك عشرين يوما كلّ ذلك على حسب ما يظهر اليك من حال العضو كما قلنا حتّى اذا لزم الكسر وقارب انعقاد اللحم عليه.	Do not try to reduce it until after three, four, five, or seven days, and it may be left for twenty days, all according to what appears to you regarding the state of the limb, as we have said, until the callus forms and the flesh adheres to it.
فزد أيضا حينئذ فى الشدّ أكثر من شدّك الأول كلّه وزد أيضا فى تغليظ غذاء العليل على ما تقدّم ذكره، فإن رأيت موضع الكسر قد جفّ وهزل بأكثر ممّا ينبغى فاعلم أنّ الغذاء ممتنع من الوصول اليه.	And also, at that time, increase the compression more than the first one, and also increase the nourishment of the injured area according to what has been mentioned before. For if you find that the place of the fracture has become weak and fragile more than is necessary, then know that the nourishment is prevented from reaching it.
فانطله بالماء الفاتر عند كلّ مرّة تحلّه وليكن ذلك فى كلّ ثلاثة أيّام وخفّف الشدّ قليلا فإنّ بهذا الفعل يجرى الى العضو الغذاء ويبرأ سريعا، وأمّا ما تصنعه الجهّال من المجبّرين من كسر العضو مرّة أخرى.	Here is the translation of the excerpt:
لإن لم ينجبر أولا على ما ينبغى وانجبر على عوج فهو خطأ من فعلهم وغرر عظيم ولو كان صوابا لذكرته الأوائل فى كتبهم وعملت به وما رأيت لأحد منهم فى ذلك أثرا البتّة.	If he does not straighten what is crooked and does not correct the deviated, it is a great error on his part and a grave mistake. If only they had mentioned it in their earlier books and worked accordingly, I would not have seen anyone among them who left an impression of that sort.
والصواب أن لا يعمل به،.	And the correct thing is not to work according to it.
الفصل الثانى.	The Second Chapter.
فىالكسر العارض فى الرأس.	On the Incision for the Afflicted Head.
أنواع الكسر العارض فى الرأس كثيرة وأشكاله مختلفة وأسبابه متفنّنة فمن الكسر ما يكون عن ضربة سيف ويكون إمّا أن يبرى العظم كلّه الى أن ينتهى الى الصفاق الذى تحت العظم.	There are many types of incisions for the afflicted head and their forms are different, and their causes are varied. For an incision can be due to a blow by a sword, and it may be that it breaks the entire bone until it reaches the sutura beneath the bone.
كما يفعل القدوم فى الخشب.	As a wedge acts on wood.
ولذلك يسمّى هذا النوع من الكسر قدوميّا وإمّا أن يكون قطع السيف بعض العظم وأبرى وجهه فقط ولم ينفذ القطع الى آخره ويسمّى هذا النوع من الكسر قلعا مطلقا، ويكون جرح هذين الكسرين إمّا كبيرا وإمّا صغيرا.	And therefore, this type of incision is called a wedge-shaped one. And it may be that the sword's cut has severed part of the bone and broken its surface only, without completing the cut to its end, and this type of incision is called a cleaved one. The wound from these two types of incisions may be large or small.
ومن الكسر ما يكون هشما او رضّا ويكون سببه ضربة بحجر او سقطه على حجر او نحوه وهذا الكسر يكون إمّا نافذا قد قارب الغشاء الذى تحت العظم وإمّا أن يكون فى وجه العظم.	And among the incisions, there are those that are caused by a blow or a fall, and it may be that its cause is a strike with a stone or a fall on a stone or something similar. And this incision may be either one that has reached close to the membrane beneath the bone or one that is on the surface of the bone.
ويكون جرح هذين الكسرين أيضا إمّا كبيرا وإمّا صغيرا، ومن الكسر ما يكون خفيّا فى العظم فى رقّة الشعر وهو انصداع يسير.	And the wound from these two types of incisions is also either large or small. And among the incisions, there are those that are hidden in the bone at the hairline and it is a subtle crack.
ولذلك يسمّى هذا النوع من الكسر شعريّا، ومنه كسر يكون عن سقطة او صكّة حجر ونحوه يدخل صفحة العظم الى داخل ويصير للموضع تقعير كما يعرض لقدر النحاس اذا أصابتها ضربة فيدخل جزء منها الى داخل.	And therefore, this type of incision is called a hairline one. And among them, there are those that occur due to a blow or a strike by a stone and the like, which penetrate the surface of the bone and become displaced, as they show the extent of the injury if it was hit by a blow, so a part of it enters inside.
وأكثر ما يكون ذلك فى الرأس الرطب العظم كرؤوس الصبيان، وقد يكون لجميع هذه الأنواع من الكسر شظايا متبرّئة وغير متبرّئة وسنأتى بذكر علاج ذلك كلّه فى موضعه، ونتعرّف جميع هذه الأنواع من الكسر بالكشف عليها.	The more it is in the moist head of the bone, like the cracks of the skull, and all these types of fractures have fragmented and non-fragmented parts, and we will mention the treatment for each one in its place, and we will describe all these types of fractures by exposing them.
وتفتيشها بالمسابير وانتزاع اللحوم الفاسدة من عليها، وأمّا النوع الشعرىّ فيعرف بأن يكشف على العظم ويمسح ويلطخ عليه بالمداد فإنّ الكسر يظهر أسود، وأمّا علاج الكسر فتنظر أوّلا الى أعراض العليل.	And we examine them by probing and extracting the rotten flesh from them, and as for the hairy type, it is recognized by exposing the bone and scraping and rubbing it with the file, so that the fracture appears black. And as for treating the fracture, we first look at the symptoms of the patient.
فإن رأيت من أعراضه ما يدلّ دلالة ظاهرة على الخوف مثل قىء المرار والامتداد وذهاب العقل وانقطاع الصوت والغشى والحمّى الحادّة وجهوظ العينين وحمرتها ونحوها من الأعراض فلا تقرب العليل ولا تعالجه فإنّ الموت واقع به مع هذه الأعراض فى أكثر الأحوال لا محالة.	For if you see from his symptoms what indicates a clear sign of fear, such as fainting, trembling, loss of mind, and interruption of voice, and anxiety, and severe fever, and the turning of the eyes and their darkness, and their avoidance of these symptoms, do not approach the patient nor treat him, for death will occur with these symptoms in most cases without exception.
وإن رأيت أعراضا لا تهولك ورجوت له السلامة فحينئذ فخذ فى علاجه وذلك أنّه إن أتاك المجروح فى أوّل ما جرح وكان ذلك فى أيّام الشتاء.	And if you see symptoms that do not frighten you and you hope for his safety, then take it upon yourself to treat him, and that is because the injured person came to you at first when he was wounded, and that was in the winter days.
فينبغى أن تجتهد فى نزع العظم قبل اليوم الرابع عشر على كلّ حال وإن كان فى أيّام الصيف فينبغى أن تسرع بنزع العظم قبل اليوم السابع من قبل أن يفسد ما تحت العظم من الغشاء فتعرض تلك الأعراض التى وصفنا.	It is recommended to delay breaking the bone until the fourteenth day in any case, and if it was during the summer days, it is recommended to hasten breaking the bone before the seventh day, lest what is beneath the bone from the membrane should putrefy, and those symptoms we described appear.
فإن كان كسر العظم قد بلغ الى الغشاء المغشى على الدماغ وكان مع هشم ورضّ فينبغى أن تقطع الجزء المنهشم المرضوض على ما أنا واصفه لك، وهو أن تحلق رأس العليل المجروح.	If the fracture of the bone has reached the membrane covering the brain, and it is accompanied by hemorrhage and suppuration, it is recommended to amputate the affected part according to what I have described to you, which is to trephine the skull of the injured patient.
وتكشف عن العظم على أىّ وجه يتمكّن لك وعلى حسب شكل الجرح وما يخفّ على العليل، فإن عرض لك عند الكشف على العظم نزف دم او ورم حارّ فقابل ذلك بما ينبغى.	And you expose the bone from whichever side is convenient for you, according to the shape of the wound and what is hidden from the patient, so that when you expose the bone, you find a flow of blood or a severe abscess, capable of that which is recommended.
وهو أن تحشو الموضع بخرق مغموسة فى شراب ودهن ورد ونقّ الجرح حتّى يسكن الورم وتأمن النزف، ثمّ تأخذ فى تقوير العظم وانتزاعه وذلك يكون على أحد وجهين من العمل.	You should stuff the cavity with a piece of cotton soaked in medication and rose-water, and then close the wound until the swelling subsides and the bleeding stops. Then, you take the bone in your hand and extract it, which is done on one of the two sides of the operation.
أمّا الوجه الواحد فهو أن تقطع العظم بمقطع لطيف ضيّق الشفرة وهذه صورته:.	As for the single flap, it is that you cut the bone with a thin, fine osteotome, and this is its shape.
ثمّ تستعمل مقطعا آخر بعد هذا المقطع أعرض منه قليلا وهذه صورته:.	Then, you use another instrument after this one, which is slightly broader than it, and this is its shape.
ثمّ تستعمل أيضا مقطعا آخر أعرض أيضا من الثانى والواجب أن تكون عندك عدّة مقاطع مختلفة تكون بعضها أعرض من بعض وبعضها أقصر من بعض وتكون فى غاية من حدّة أطرافها ولتكن من حديد هندىّ او فولاد جيّد.	Then, you also use another instrument, which is also broader than the second one, and it is necessary that you have several different instruments, some of which are broader than others, and some are shorter than others, and they should be extremely sharp at their edges and made of Indian steel or good quality iron.
واستعمل الرفق فى الضرب على المقطع لئلّا تزعزع الرأس فتؤذيه، فإن كان العظم قويّا صلبا فينبغى أن تثقب حوله قبل استعمالك المقاطع بالمثاقب التى سمّوها مثاقب غير غائصة وإنما سمّوها مثاقب غير غائصة.	And you use the file to strike on the instrument so that the head does not vibrate, lest it should deviate; if the bone is strong and hard, it is necessary to make a notch around it before using the instruments with the perforations, which they call non-deviating perforations.
لأنّها لا تجاوز حدّ عظم القحف الى ما وراءه من أجل أنّ للمثقب حرفا مستديرا على ما دون رأسه الحادّ شبها بالطوق او الدائرة الصغيرة يمنعه من أن يغوص ويجاوز ثخن العظم.	For they do not exceed the limit of the skull bone to what is beyond it, so that the perforator has a straight stroke below its sharp edge, like a small circle or ring, which prevents it from deviating and exceeding the thickness of the bone.
وينبغى لك أن تتّخذ من هذه المثاقب عدّة كثيرة يصلح كلّ واحد منها لمقدار ثخن ذلك العظم حتّى يحضرك لكلّ قحف مثقب مقدار طرفه الحادّ فى الطول والقصر على مقدار ثخن ذلك القحف، وهذه صورة ثلاثة أنواع.	And it is necessary for you to take from these perforators several kinds, each one of which is suitable for the thickness of that bone, until you have a perforator for every skull, with its sharp edge in length and width according to the thickness of that skull, and this is an image of three types.
من المثاقب كبير ومتوسّط وصغير:.	Of the large, medium, and small perforators:.
وأمّا كيفيّة الثقب حول العظم المكسور فهو أن تجعل المثقب على العظم وتديره بأصابعك حتّى تعلم أنّ العظم قد نفذ ثمّ تنقل المثقب الى موضع آخر وتجعل بعد ما بين كلّ ثقب قدر غلظ المرود او نحوه.	And as for the technique of making a hole around the broken bone, it is that you place the perforator on the bone and move it with your fingers until you feel that the bone has been penetrated, then you transfer the perforator to another position and make a hole after a certain distance between each hole, according to the thickness of the marrow or its nature.
ثمّ تقطع بالمقاطع ما بين كلّ ثقبتين وتفعل ذلك بغاية ما تستطيع عليه من الرفق كما قلنا حتّى تقلع العظم إمّا بيدك وإمّا بشىء آخر من بعض الآلات التى أعددت لذلك.	Cut with the instruments between each two suture lines and do that with a moderate amount of pressure as much as you can bear on the fracture, as we have said, until the bone is reduced either by your own hand or by another instrument that I have prepared for that purpose.
مثل الجفت والكلاليب اللطاف، وينبغى أن تحذر كلّ الحذر أن يمسّ المثقب او المقطع شيئا من الصفاق، فإذا قوّرت العظم وتبرّأ من الصفاق إن كان ملصقا به وأخرجته فينبغى أن تجرد.	Like the forceps and the delicate scissors, and it is necessary to beware extremely that the instrument or the cutter does not touch anything of the membrane, so if you have reduced the bone and separated it from the membrane, and it was attached to it and brought it out, it is necessary to scrape.
وتسوّى خشونة ما بقى فى العظم بآلة أخرى تشبه المقطع إلّا أنّها ينبغى أن تكون أرقّ وألطف من سائر المقاطع، فإن بقى شىء من العظام الصغار والشظايا فتأخذها برفق بما عندك من الآلات.	And smooth out the remaining roughness on the bone with another instrument similar to the cutter, but it is necessary that it be more delicate and finer than other instruments; for if there remain any small bony fragments or splinters, take them with gentleness using the instruments you have.
ثمّ تعالج الجرح بعد ذلك بالفتل والمراهم التى يأتى ذكرها، وأمّا الوجه الآخر من العمل فهو وجه سهل البتّة بعيد من الغرر ذكره جالينوس ومدحه مدحا عظيما وهذا قوله.	Then treat the wound afterwards with the ointments and bandages that will be mentioned, and as for the other aspect of the work, it is the easy method far from the complications that Galen has referred to and praised highly, and this is his statement.
ينبغى لك أوّلا أن تبدأ بكشف جزء العظم من الموضع الذى الكسر فيه أشدّ وأشهر حتّى اذا كشفت ذلك الجزء صيّرت تحته طرف هذا المقطع العدسىّ وهذه صورته:.	It is necessary for you to start by exposing the part of the bone from the site where the fracture is most severe and most notorious, until when you have exposed that part, you will have placed underneath it the edge of this instrument, and this is its shape.
يكون الجزء العدسىّ منه أملس لا يقطع شيئا والجزء الحادّ منه فى جوانبه الذاهبة فى الطول كما ترى ليكون الجزء العدسىّ مستندا الى الصفاق ووجه المقطع الحادّ فى العظم ثمّ تضرب على المقطع من جهة واحدة.	The blunt part of it does not cut anything, and the sharp part of it is in its sides, which are inclined at an angle, as you see, so that the blunt part is against the membrane and the edge of the instrument is on the bone, then strike the instrument from one side.
بمطرقة صغيرة حتّى تقطع جميع العظم برفق كما يدور وأنت فى أمن من الغشاء لا يحدث فيه حادث مخوف البتّة ولو أنّ المعالج أجهل الناس وأجبنهم نعم ولو كان ناعسا.	With a small saw, until you cut through all the bone gently, as it rotates, and you are safe from the membrane, no frightening accident happens to the patient, and even if the doctor is among the ignorant people and they were deceived, yes, and even if he was inexperienced.
فإن بقى شىء لازم للعظم من الغشاء فى بعض مواضع العظم فقشّطه عنه بطرف المقطع العدسىّ نفسه وتخلصه عنه برفق فإنّه يتخلّص عنه بلا أذى ولا خوف.	If a fragment of bone remains attached to the periosteum in certain places, scrape it off with the edge of the adhesion itself and clear it away from it quickly, for it will then be freed from it without pain or fear.
وأمّا إن كان كسر العظم لم ينفذ الى الغشاء وكان الذى انقطع من العظم وجهه وبقيت فيه خشونة وشظايا لطاف فينبغى أن تجرد تلك الخشونة وتقلع تلك الشظايا بمجارد لطاف قد اتّخذت منها عدّة مختلفة المقادير ليمكنك أن تستعمل منها فى كلّ موضع أوفقها وأصلحها على حسب ما يقودك اليه العمل.	And if the fracture of the bone has not reached the periosteum and what has been separated from the bone is its surface, and there remains in it roughness and fine fragments, it is necessary to remove that roughness and extract those fragments with a scalpel that has taken various forms for different purposes, so you can use them in every place and adjust them according to what the work requires.
ونفس العظم المكسور وشكله، وينبغى أن تستعمل فى جردك أوّلا للعظم أعرض تلك المجارد ثمّ استعمل بعده أدق منه ولا تزال تفعل ذلك على الولاء حتّى تصير الى استعمال أدقّها وأرقّها كلّها.	And the same bone that is fractured and rough, it is necessary to use in scraping first the prominent parts of the bone with those scalpel, then use afterwards a more delicate one, and do not cease doing that on the smoothness until you reach the use of the most delicate and finest ones.
وأمّا سائر الشقوق الصغار الشعريّة والكسر اللطيف فينبغى أن تستعمل فى كلّ واحد علاجا على حسب ما يؤدّى الى صلاحه وهو شىء لا يخفى على من له فى هذه الصناعة أدنى دربة ووقف على ما كتبنا وبيّنّا فى الكسور الكبار.	And as for the small, hair-like fissures and fine fractures, it is necessary to use for each one a treatment according to what leads to its correction, which is something that does not escape the attention of whoever has experience in this craft, and stops at what we have written and clarified regarding the large fractures.
فإن بقى الغشاء مكشوفا عند قلعك العظم فينبغى أن تأخذ خرقة كتّان على قدر الجرح وتغمسها فى دهن ورد وتضعها على فم الجرح ثمّ تأخذ خرقة أخرى مثنيّة او مثلّثة.	If the periosteum remains exposed when you extract the bone, it is necessary to take a piece of lint, according to the size of the wound, and soak it in oil and rose-water, and place it on the mouth of the wound, then take another piece, either triangular or quadrangular.
وتغمسها فى شراب ودهن ورد وتضعها على الخرقة الأولى وتصنع ذلك بأخفّ ما تقدر عليه لئلّا تثقل الصفاق ثمّ تستعمل من فوق رباطا عريضا ولا تشدّه إلّا بقدر ما يمسك الجرح فقط.	And soak it in serous discharge and rose-water, and place it on the first piece of lint, and do that with the lightest touch you can manage, so as not to irritate the suture, then use a broad bandage from above, and do not constrict it except to the extent that it holds the wound together.
وتدعه بهذا العلاج يوما او يومين حتّى تأمن الورم الحارّ ثمّ تحلّه وتستعمل بعد ذلك الأدوية التى معها فضل يبس مثل أصول السوسن ودقيق الكرسنّة ودقاق الكندر والزراوند ونحوها وهو أن تصنع من هذه الأدوية ذرورا.	And leave it with this treatment for a day or two until the acute inflammation subsides, then remove it and use afterwards the medicines that are beneficial, such as the juice of the colocynth, and the powder of the crust, and the powder of the cyperus, and the zarawa, and their like, which is to make a poultice from these medicines.
وتذرّ على الجرح كما هى يابسة وبالجملة فاستعمل فى ذلك دواء من شأنه أن يجلو ولا يلذع، وتحرّى جهدك فى حين علاجك للجرح أن يكون نظيفا لا يكون فيه وضر الدهن ولا وسخ ولا تترك الصديد يجتمع فيه البتّة.	Be careful with the wound as it is being treated, and be cautious not to put pressure on it, lest it becomes inflamed and does not heal. Take care to clean your hands before treating the wound, so that it may not become infected with pus or suppuration, and do not let any corruption collect in it.
لأنّ الصديد اذا اجتمع على غشاء الدماغ أفسده وعفّنه فحدث من ذلك على العليل بليّة عظيمة، وقد يعرض فى صفاق الرأس عند ما ينكشف عنه العظم ولا سيّما اذا غفل عن علاجه.	Because if pus collects on the membrane of the brain, it damages and destroys it, resulting in severe paralysis. It may appear as a numbness in the scalp when the bone is exposed, and it will be even worse if its treatment is neglected.
سواد فى سطحه نظرت فإن عرض للعليل الأعراض التى ذكرنا فاعلم أنّه هالك لا محالة، وإن كان السواد إنّما حدث عن دواء وضع عليه وكان فى قوّة ذلك الدواء أن يفعل ذلك السواد.	A black spot appears on the surface, and it shows the symptoms of paralysis that we mentioned, so know that it is a deadly thing without exception. And if the black spot occurs due to a medicine being applied to it, and there was strength in that medicine to produce that black spot.
فينبغى أن تأخذ من العسل جزءا ومن دهن الورد ثلاثة أجزاء وتضربهما ضربا جيّدا وتلطخ بهما خرقة ثمّ تضعها على الصفاق ثمّ تعالجه بأنواع العلاج الذى ينبغى حتّى يبرأ،.	He should take one part of honey and three parts of rose oil, mix them well, and then apply it to the scalp, then treat it with various treatments that are necessary until he recovers.
الفصل الثالث.	The Third Chapter
فىجبر الأنف اذا انكسر.	Treat the nose if it is fractured.
اعلم أنّه لا ينكسر من الأنف إلّا شقّاه العليا جميعا او أحدهما من أجل أنّهما عظمان لأنّ الأسفل منه غضروفىّ لا ينكسر وإنّما يعرض له الرض والعوج والفطسة.	Know that the nose does not become fractured except when the two upper bones are broken, because they are cartilages and do not become fractured, but rather suffer bruises, swellings, and contusions.
فإن انكسر أحد شقّيه فينبغى أن تدخل الأصبع الصغيرة فى ثقب الأنف وتسوّى ذلك الكسر من داخل بأصبعك السبّابة والإبهام من خارج حتّى تردّ الأنف على شكله الطبيعىّ وليكن ذلك منك برفق وتتحرّى أن لا يحدث بفعلك ذلك على العليل وجع.	If one of its bones is fractured, it is necessary to insert a small finger into the nostril and straighten that fracture from the inside with your finger, while externally adjusting the nose to its natural shape, and be gentle so as not to cause harm or bruising.
فإن كان الكسر فى أعلى الأنف ولم تلحق اليه الأصبع فينبغى أن يسوّى بطرف مرود فيه غلظ قليلا، فإن كان الكسر فى الجهتين فافعل مثل ذلك، وليبادر بجبره فى اليوم الأوّل من الكسر.	If the fracture is in the upper part of the nose and you cannot adjust it with your finger, it is necessary to straighten it with a instrument slightly thickened at its end. If the fracture is on both sides, do the same, and start treating it on the first day of the fracture.
إن أمكن وإلّا فبعد اليوم السابع او العاشر عند سكون الورم الحارّ، ثمّ تدخل فى ثقب الأنف فتيلة من خرق الكتّان إن كان الكسر فى الجهة الواحدة او تدخل فتيلتين إن كان الكسر فى الجهتين.	If it is possible, then after the seventh or eighth day, when the inflammation has subsided, you should insert a drain of lint from the cotton tree into the nostril if the fracture is on one side, or insert two drains if the fracture is on both sides.
ولتكن الفتل فيها غلظ على قدر ما يملا ثقب الأنف، وذكر بعض المجبّرين من الأوائل أن تبلّ الفتل بالسمن وتبدل فى كلّ يوم ولست أرى أنا ذلك بل ينبغى أن تبلّ الفتل فى بياض البيض معجونا بغبار الرحى.	And let the drain stay in for a period of time sufficient to fill the nostril, and some of the ancient surgeons mentioned that the drain should be coated with sesame oil and changed every day, but I do not see that, rather it is better to coat the drain with egg white mixed with dust from the riverbank.
ثمّ تترك الفتل حتّى يثبت العظم ويصلب الغضروف، وقد تدخل فى الأنف موضع الفتل أنابيب ريش الإوزّ بعد أن تلفّ عليها خرق ليّنة فيكون حبسها لكسر الأنف أشدّ ولئلا يمتنع العليل من التنفّس.	Then you leave the drain until the bone is fixed and the cartilage is strengthened, and it may enter the nostril at the site of the drain, with two or three soft rolls of linen wrapped around them, so that they are held in place to firmly stabilize the fracture of the nose, and thus prevent any movement from interfering with its consolidation.
وليس هذا شيئا ضروريّا إن شئت صنعته وإن شئت صنعت الفتائل، فإن عرض للأنف فى خلال عملك ورم حارّ فضمّد الأنف بالقيروطىّ او بقطنة مغموسة فى خلّ ودهن ورد او شىء من مرهم الدياخيلون.	And this is something necessary, if you did it and did the drains properly, for you will find that the nose has healed during your work and the inflammation has subsided, and you have applied the rhinoplasty or a small padded bandage on the nose, or something from the medications of the decongestants.
فإن لم يعرض ورم حارّ فينبغى أن تضمّده من خارج بدقيق السميد ودقاق الكندر قد عجنا ببياض البيض ثمّ تضع عليه مشاقة ليّنة ولا تربط الأنف بشىء البتّة، فإن انكسرت عظام الأنف كسرا صغارا.	If the inflammation does not subside, it is better to apply a poultice of egg white and rose water from the outside, having first applied a small amount of powder, then placing a soft cloth over it, without binding the nose with anything tight, for if you bind it tightly, you will cause the fracture of the nose to become more severe.
او تفتّتت فينبغى أن تشقّ عليها وتخرجها بالآلة التى تصلح لها ثمّ تخيط الشقّ وتعالجه بما يلحم ويدمل من المراهم الموافقة لذلك، فإن حدث فى داخل الأنف جرح فينبغى أن تعالجه بالفتل وتستعمل أنابيب الرصاص.	Or you may make an incision, and then extract it with a suitable instrument, then stitch the incision and treat it with what soothes and heals from the suitable medications, for if there is a wound inside the nose, it is better to treat it with a drain and use pipes of silver.
حتّى يبرأ.	Until it heals.
الفصل الرابع.	The Fourth Section.
فىجبر اللحى الأسفلاذا انكسر.	On the surgical treatment of fistulae of the anus.
اذا انكسر اللحى الأسفل ولم يكن كسره مع جرح نظرت فإن كان كسره من خارج فقط ولم ينكسر باثنين وتقعّر الى داخل فإنّ معرفته تسهل.	If a fistula of the anus did not form with an abscess, and it was not opened from the outside only, and it did not meet with two channels and reach the inside, then its treatment is difficult.
فينبغى إن كان الكسر فى الشقّ الأيمن أن تدخل الأصبع السبّابة من اليد اليسرى فى فم العليل وكذلك إن كان الكسر فى الشقّ الأيسر فتدخل السبّابة من اليد اليمنى وترفع به حدبة الكسر من داخل برفق الى خارج.	If the fistula is in the right groin, you should insert the left index finger into the anus and likewise if the fistula is in the left groin, you should insert the right index finger and feel the direction of the fistula from inside to outside.
ويدك الأخرى من خارج العظم تحكم بها تسويته، فإن كان كسر الفكّ قد انقصف باثنين فينبغى أن يستعمل المدّ من الناحيتين على استقامة حتّى تتمكّن تسويته، فإن كان قد حدث فى الأسنان ترعرع.	And you guide the other finger from outside the bone to control it, if the fistula of the jaw has branched into two, you should use a probe from the two nostrils on the straightness until its direction is determined, if it has happened in the teeth, it will be dislodged.
او تفرّق فشدّ ما طمعت منها أن تبقى بخيط ذهب او فضّة او ابريسم ثمّ تضع على اللحى المكسور القيروطىّ ثم تضع عليه خرقة مثنيّة وتضع على الخرقة جبيرة كبيرة محكمة او قطعة جلد نعل مساو لطول اللحى.	Or you separate and tighten what you have taken from it, so that it remains with a thread of gold or silver or brass, then you put on the affected anus a circular instrument, then you put on it a double-layered bandage, and you put on the bandage a large, tightly-fastened gauze or a piece of skin, suitable for the size of the anus.
ثمّ تربطه من فوق على حسب ما يتهيّأ لك ربطه ويوافق ضمّه حتّى لا ينتقض وتأمر العليل بالتودّع والسكون وتجعل غذاءه الأحساء الليّنة، فإن ظننت أنّه قد تغيّر شىء من الشكل بوجه من الوجوه فبادر بحلّه فى اليوم الثالث.	Then you bind it from above, according to what you think is necessary for binding, and you conform to its thickness until it does not become loose, and you order the patient to take a diet of light, easy-to-digest foods, and to avoid exertion and intercourse; if you think that something has changed in shape or appearance, you should start treating it on the third day.
ثمّ تصلح ما تضمّده بغبار الرحى مع بياض البيض او بدقيق السميد بعد نزعك القيروطى عنه وتضع على الضماد مشاقة ليّنة، فما دام يلصق ذلك الضماد عليه ولم يتغيّر للعظم حال فاتركه.	Then you heal what you have bound with a plaster of rose-water or egg-white or fine dust, after removing the instrument from it, and you put on the binding a light, gentle compress; as long as it adheres to that binding and does not change for the bone's condition, leave it.
لا تحلّه حتّى يبرأ ويشتدّ الكسر فكثيرا ما يشتدّ هذا الكسر فى ثلاثة أسابيع، فإن عرض فى خلال ذلك ورم حارّ فاستعمل ما ذكرناه مرارا فى تسكينه حتّى يذهب ذلك الورم.	Do not touch it until it becomes inflamed and the abscess is formed, because it will form in three weeks. If it appears during that time, use what we have mentioned previously to treat it, until it disappears, and that swelling subsides.
وأمّا إن كان الكسر مع جرح نظرت فإن كان قد تبرّأت من العظم شظيّة او شظايا فتلطف فى انتزاع تلك الشظايا بما يتّفق لك نزعها من الآلة، فإن كان فم الجرح ضيقا فوسّعه بالمبضع على قدر حاجتك.	And if the abscess is with a wound that has exposed the bone, and it has splinters or fragments, then gently remove those splinters using an instrument suitable for extracting them from the wound. If the mouth of the wound is narrow, then widen it with a dilator according to your need.
ثمّ اذا انتزعت تلك الشظايا ولم يبق منها شىء فخط فم الجرح إن كان واسعا وإلّا فاحمل عليه أحد المراهم التى تصلح لذلك.	Then, if you have removed those splinters and none of them remain, sew the mouth of the wound if it is wide, or otherwise apply one of the medicaments that are suitable for that.
وتلحم الجرح حتّى يبرأ،.	And bandage the wound until it heals.
الفصل الخامس.	Chapter Five.
فىجبر الترقوة اذا انكسرت.	Treating a fractured rib if it has become inflamed.
أكثر ما تنكسر الترقوة من قدّام من نهاية المنكب وكسرها يكون على أحد ثلاثة أوجه إما أن تنكسر وتنقصف باثنين من غير أن تحدث فيها شظايا وهو أسهل لجبرها.	Most often, a fractured rib becomes inflamed from its middle to the end of the clavicle, and its fracture occurs in one of three ways: either it breaks and splits into two without producing splinters, which is easier to treat.
وإمّا أن تحدث فى الكسر شظايا وهو أصعب للجبر وإمّا أن يكون الكسر مع جرح، والعمل فيه اذا كان الكسر من غير جرح أن تحضر خادمين ليضبط أحدهما العضد الذى يلى الترقوة المكسورة والآخر يمدّ العنق نحو الجهة الآخرى.	Or it happens that the fracture produces splinters, which is more difficult to treat, or the fracture occurs with a wound. And if the fracture is without a wound, prepare two assistants: one should hold the arm that is near the fractured rib, and the other should stretch the neck towards the other side.
ثمّ تسوّى الكسر بأصابعك حتّى يصير شكله على ما ينبغى ولا يكون فيه نتو ولا تعقير، فإن احتجت الى مدّ أكثر فينبغى أن تضع تحت إبط العليل كرة من خرق او صوف.	Then, adjust the fracture with your fingers until it takes its proper shape, without deviation or curvature. If you need to add more extension, it is suitable to place under the armpit a cushion made of soft cloth or wool.
ويكون عظمها على قدر حاجتك وتمدّ وترفع الترقوة وتضغط الكرة بيدك حتّى يسوّى الكسر على ما ينبغى، فإن لم تقدر أن تجذب طرف الترقوة الى خارج من أجل أنّها صارت الى العمق فينبغى أن يستلقى العليل على قفاه.	And its bone should be according to your need, and stretch and elevate the rib, and press the cushion with your hand until the fracture is adjusted properly. If you are unable to pull the end of the rib outward so that it sets into its proper place, it is suitable to recline on a pillow.
وتوضع تحت منكبه مخدّة متوسّطة فى العظم ويكبس الخادم منكبه الى أسفل حتّى يرتفع عظم الترقوة الذى فى العمق الى فوق فحينئذ فأصلح الكسر وسوّه بأصابعك.	Here is the translation:
فإن أحسست أنّه قد انكسرت شظيّة من الترقوة وصارت تتحرّك فينبغى أن تشقّ عليها وتخرج تلك الشظيّة برفق فإن كانت الشظيّة محتبسة فى العظم فتحيّل فى قطعها بأحد المقاطع التى أعددت لذلك.	If you feel that a fragment of the skull has become dislodged and is moving about, it is necessary to make an incision over it and extract that fragment gently; if the fragment was attached to the bone, you should remove it by cutting around it with one of the instruments I have described for that purpose.
بعد أن تصير تحت الترقوة الآلة التى تحفظ الصفاق وهى آلة من خشب او من حديد وهذه صورتها:.	After you have made an incision under the skull, there is a instrument that preserves the dura mater, and it is a tool made of wood or iron, and this is its shape.
تشبه ملعقة ليس لها تعقير ويكون عرضها على حسب ما تحتاج اليه من كبر العظم وصغره وأمّا طولها فعلى حسب أيضا ما يمكنك للعمل ولتكن ذات طرفين كما ترى الطرف الواحد أوسع والآخر أضيق.	It resembles a spoon that has no curvature, and its width is according to what you need from the size of the bone, whether large or small, and also its length according to what allows you to work with it, and it should have two ends, one end being wider and the other narrower.
فإن كان خرق الجرح الذى شققت عند إخراجك لشظيّة العظم واسعا وأمنت الورم الحارّ فاجمع شفتى الجرح بالخياطة وإن كان الخرق يسيرا او خشيت الورم الحارّ فاحش الجرح بالخرق والرفائد على قدر شقّ الجرح.	If the edge of the wound that you made to extract the bone fragment was rough and wide, and you feared the formation of a hot abscess, then gather the edges of the wound with sutures; and if the edge was slight or the abscess was minor, then close the wound with a dressing and a bandage, according to the size of the incision.
فإن عرض ورم حارّ فبلّ الخرق فى دهن الورد والخلّ او الشراب واحمل عليه، وأمّا شدّ العظم اذا كان من غير جرح ولا شقّ فهو أن تحمل على العظم الضماد المتّخذ من غبار الرحى مع بياض البيض.	If a hot abscess forms, then apply a poultice of rose water and vinegar or wine, and bind it; and if you need to consolidate the bone, whether it was not fractured or incised, then apply the solid plaster made from powder of rushes mixed with egg whites.
وتضع المشاقة الليّنة عليه ثمّ تضع الكرة تحت إبطه إن احتاج الى ذلك ثمّ تأخذ عمامة تكون طويلة جدّا ويكون عرضها شبرا او نحو ذلك ثمّ احمل رفادة مثنيّة على المشاقة والضماد ثمّ خذ جبيرة من لوح رقيق.	And apply a soft bandage over it, then place a pad under the armpit if you need to do so, then take a long splint that is about a finger's width or so, and apply a bent dressing over the bandage and plaster, then make a mold from a thin plate.
يكون عرضها ثلاث أصابع وفى الطول كذلك ثمّ أدرجها فى خرقة ثمّ أدرج تلك الخرقة مع الجبيرة فى الموضع من العمامة الذى يقع على موضع الكسر ثمّ شدّ العمامة على الكسر كما تدور.	It should be three fingers' width, and similarly in length, then insert it into the dressing, then insert that dressing with the splint into the place of the pad that lies on the site of the fracture, then secure the pad to the fracture as it wraps around.
والوها على عنقه وتحت إبطه الصحيح وتحت إبطه المريض وردّها مرّات على كلّ جهة وكيف رأيت أنّ الشدّ يضبط الكسر ضبطا محكما وهو ما لا يخفى عليك.	Place it on his shoulder and under the healthy arm and under the ailing arm, and return it several times on each side, and as I observed, the constriction controls the fracture, controlling it firmly, which is what does not conceal from you.
ومدارك كلّه أن لا تزول الجبيرة من على العظم المكسور.	And rotate it all around so that the splint does not slip away from the fractured bone.
ولذلك ينبغى أن تتفقّد العليل فى كلّ يوم فكلّما استرخى الرباط ورأيت الجبيرة قد زالت فأصلح ذلك وشدّ الرباط، ثمّ اجعل نوم العليل على ظهره واجعل تحت إبطه عند نومه بالليل مخدّة صغيرة.	And for that, it is necessary to examine the patient every day; whenever the bandage becomes loose and you notice that the splint has slipped away, then repair that and tighten the bandage. Then, place the patient's sleep on his back and place a small cushion under his arm when he sleeps at night.
ليرتفع بها عضده عن جنبه فيرتفع كسر الترقوة بارتفاع المنكب او تربط ذراعه الى عنقه، ولا تحلّ الرباط إن لم يحدث فى الموضع حادث من حكّة او ورم الى اثنى عشر يوما.	The joint is elevated from its position, the fracture of the clavicle is elevated by the elevation of the shoulder, or the arm is tied to his neck, and do not loosen the bandage unless an incident occurs at the site, such as a blow or a swelling, for up to twelve days.
ثمّ جدّد الضماد إن رأيت وجها لذلك.	Then re-apply the dressing if you see a need for that.
وردّ فى الشدّ واتركه حتّى ينجبر ويتعقّد كسر الترقوة، ويشتدّ ويقوى أكثر ذلك فى ثمانية وعشرين يوما.	Return to the constriction and leave it until it becomes consolidated and the fracture of the clavicle is formed, and it will become stronger and more solid, that is in eighteen days.
وقد يكون فى بعض الناس فى أقلّ من ذلك.	And it may be in some people less than that.
الفصل السادس.	Chapter Six.
فىجبر كسر الكتف. قلّ ما تنكسر الكتف فى الموضع العريض منها وإنّما تنكسر منها حروفها، فمتى ما انكسر منها موضع او انكسرت فى وسطها وإنّما يعرف ذلك باللمس فعلى حسب ما يكون شكل الكسر فرم.	The fracture of the shoulder. The shoulder does not break at its thin part, but rather breaks at its prominences. So, when it breaks at a site or breaks in its middle, and that is known by feeling, according to the shape of the fracture's form.
تسويته وردّه على شكله الطبيعىّ بكلّ وجه من الحيلة يمكنك، ثمّ احمل على الموضع غبار الرحى مع بياض البيض والمشاقة الليّنة وضع من فوق رفادة من خرقة مثنيّة ثمّ ضع عليه جبيرة عريضة من لوح.	Adjust it and return it to its natural shape from all sides possible, then put a poultice of rose water with egg whites and vinegar on the site, and place above it a soft padding from a folded cloth, then apply a wide splint from a wooden board.
رقيق على قدر الكتف كلّها او أوسع منها قليلا، فإن كان تحت الجبيرة تعقير فى موضع من مواضع الكتف فسوّ ذلك التعقير بمشاقة ليّنة حتّى تنزل الجبيرة على استواء، ثمّ شدّ من فوق بعمامة طويلة.	Make it (the splint) fit the shoulder exactly or a little wider, and if there is constriction under the splint at a site of the shoulder's sites, then loosen that constriction with vinegar until the splint settles in place, then tie it above with a long bandage.
شدّا محكما واستوثق من الجبيرة حتّى لا تزول عن موضعها، وتفقّد الرباط فى كلّ يوم فكلّما استرخى الرباط شددته وسوّيت الجبيرة إن زالت عن موضعها، وليكن اضطجاع العليل على جنبه الصحيح، والكتف تنجبر فى عشرين.	Here is the translation of the excerpt:
يوما او خمسة وعشرين يوما فإذا كملت هذه العدّة فحلّ الرباط وأنت فى أمن فإنّها من العظام التى لا يتخوّف هشمها ولا انتقاضها، فإن برز من العظم شظيّة وكانت تنخس تحت الجلد فشقّ عليها وانتزعها.	Here is the translation of the excerpt:
واصنع ما ذكرته فى كسر الترقوة من تسكين الورم الحارّ إن حدث شىء من ذلك،.	What we mentioned in the fracture of the cranium from the two pointed instruments for the sharp wound, if a part of it had been broken off.
الفصل السابع.	The Seventh Chapter
فىجبر كسر الصدر.	On the Fracture of the Ribs
الصدر قد ينكسر فى وسطه وقليلا ما يعرض ذلك وأمّا أطرافه فهى أكثر ما تنكسر وتنفتّت، ومن أعراضه اذا انكسر وسطه أن يميل الى أسفل ويعرض له وجع شديد وعسر فى النفس وسعال.	The ribs may fracture in their middle and slightly, but it is more likely to fracture at their ends; and among its symptoms, if the fracture occurs in the middle, it will incline towards the bottom, and will cause severe pain and difficulty in breathing.
وربّما قذ ف دما ويتبيّن التقعير فى العظم المكسور ولا يخفى للحسّ، وجبره أن يستلقى العليل على ظهره وتصير بين كتفيه مخدّة ثمّ تكبس منكباه وتجمع الأضلاع بالأيدى من الجانبين وتلطّف فى تسويته على كلّ وجه أمكن ذلك.	And perhaps the fracture will not be apparent from the outside, and it is necessary to lay the patient on his back with a pillow between his shoulders, then bend his arms at the elbows and bring them together from both sides, and adjust them in this position on every side that is possible.
ووافق حتّى يرجع شكل العظم على ما ينبغى، ثمّ احمل عليه الضماد والمشاقة وضع من فوقه جبيرة من لوح رفيق من صفصاف او خلنج ونحوه فى الخفّة بعد أن تلفّها فى خرقة.	And continue until the bone returns to its natural shape, then apply the compress and bandage, and put a splint on top of it from a light wood or rushes, and adjust it in the dressing after wrapping it in a cloth.
ثمّ تلطّف فى ربطها على العظم المكسور لئلّا تزول، ومرّ بالرباط على استدارة الى الظهر مرّات وشدّه شدّا محكما، ثمّ تفقّد الرباط فى كلّ وقت، وكلّما استرخى شددته.	Then adjust it in binding to the fractured bone so that it does not move, and pass the bandage around it in a circle towards the back several times, tightening it firmly, then loosen the bandage at every time, and whenever it becomes loose, tighten it.
وإن دعت الضرورة الى حلّه عند أكال يعرض فى الموضع او وجع او ورم فبادر بحلّه واقلع الضماد وأصلح ما عرض من ذلك بوجه علاجه ثمّ ردّ الضماد إن رأيت لذلك.	And if the necessity requires it to be opened at a time when a abscess appears in the site or a wound or a tumor, then hasten to open it and remove the compress and treat what has appeared from that with a treatment of the condition, then reapply the compress if you see fit to do so.
وجها وألزمه الشدّ حتّى يبرأ،.	And bandage it firmly until it heals.
الفصل الثامن.	The Eighth Chapter
فىجبر الأضلاع اذا انكسرت اعلم أنّ الأضلاع إنّما يقع الكسر فيها فى المواضع الغلاظ التى تلى الظهر وأطرافها من قدّام إنّما يعرض لها الرضّ من أجل أنّها غضروفيّة ومعرفة ذلك لا تخفى للحسّ عند التفتيش بالأصابع.	On the fracture of the limbs, know that the fracture of the limbs occurs in the strong areas that are close to the back and their ends from the front, because they are grafted and connected, and this is not hidden from the sensation when examined with the fingers.
وجبرها بأن تسوّى الكسر بالأصابع على الوجه المتمكّن حتّى يستوى الشكل على ما ينبغى ثمّ تضمّد وتشدّ العظم المكسور بجبيرة إن احتاج الى ذلك، فإن كان كسر الأضلاع مائلة الى داخل فإنّه يعرض للعليل وجع شديد.	Here is the translation:
ونخس كالنخس الذى يعرض لمن به شوصة من أجل أنّ العظم ينخس الحجاب ويعرض له أيضا عسر النفس والسعال وقذف دم كثير وهذا عسر العلاج، وقد تحيّلت الأوائل فيه بحيل كثيرة.	Here is the translation:
فمنهم من قال ينبغى أن تجعل أغذية العليل ما يولّد النفخ والرياح لينتفخ البطن ويتمدّد ويندفع الكسر الى خارج ونحن نكره هذا لئلّا يكون توكيدا لحدوث الورم الحارّ إن كان لم يحدث فإن كان قد حدث فإنّه يزيد فيه ويؤكّده.	Some of them have said that it is necessary to make the diet of the patient mild, what generates wind and flatulence, so that the belly becomes bloated and expanded, and the gas is driven outwards, and we consider this to be a sign that the inflammation has become severe. If it did not occur, then it would have occurred, and if it did occur, then it increases it and makes it more intense.
وقال بعضهم توضع على الموضع محجمة ثمّ تمصّ بقوّة وهو أشبه بالقياس إلّا أنّه يتخوّف أن تجذب المحجمة فضولا الى الموضع لحال ضعفه، وقال بعضهم ينبغى أن يغطّى الموضع بصوف قد غمس فى زيت حارّ.	Some of them have said that a cupping glass should be placed on the affected area, then sucked in with force, and it is similar to cauterization except that it evacuates the excess from the affected area due to its weakness. And some of them have said that it is necessary to cover the affected area with a cloth that has been dipped in hot oil.
وتصير رفادة فيما بين الأضلاع حتّى تمتلئ فيكون الرباط مستويا اذا لففته على استدارة، ثمّ تعالج العليل بعلاج الشوصة من الغذاء والدواء، فإن أرهق العليل أمر شديد لا يصبر عليه.	And a padding is made between the ribs until it is filled, so that the bandage may be straight if it is applied in a circular manner. Then the patient is treated with a treatment of diet and medicine, for the pain of the patient is a severe matter that cannot be borne.
وكان العظم ينخس الحجاب نخسا مؤذيا وتخوّفنا على العليل فينبغى أن نشقّ على الموضع ونكشف عن الضلع المكسور ثمّ نصير تحته الآلة التى تحفظ الصفاق التى تقدّم وصفها ونقطع العظم برفق ونخرجه.	And the bone was fractured, fracturing the rib, and we consider it necessary to make an incision on the affected area and expose the broken rib, then we insert a instrument that preserves the membrane which is above it, and we describe its shape and cut the bone with skill and precision.
ثمّ نجمع شفتى الجرح إن كان كبيرا بالخياطة ونعالجه بالمراهم حتى يبرأ، فإن عرض فى خلال ذلك ورم حارّ فبادر فبلّ رفائد فى دهن الورد وضع على الموضع وعالج العليل بما يسكن الورم من داخل أيضا.	Then we bring the edges of the wound together, if it is large, with sutures and treat it with ointments until it heals. If there appears during that time a severe inflammation, we hasten to apply a poultice on the affected area and treat the patient with what reduces the inflammation from the inside as well.
ويستلقى على الجانب الذى يخفّ عليه النوم حتّى يبرأ،.	And he rests on the side that is most comfortable for him to sleep, until he recovers.
الفصل التاسع.	Chapter Nine.
فىجبر خرز الظهر والعنق.	Making a plaster for the spine and the nape of the neck.
أمّا عظام العنق اذا أصابها كسر وقلّ ما يعرض لها ذلك وأكثر ما يعرض لها الرضّ وكذلك فقارات الظهر أيضا فإذا عرض ذلك لأحد وأردت أن تعرف هل يبرأ او ليس يبرأ.	As for the bones of the nape of the neck, if it suffered a fracture and slight dislocation, and most of what is presented to it is bruising, and similarly for the vertebrae of the spine as well. If that appears to someone and you want to know whether he will recover or not.
فانظر فإن رأيت يديه قد استرختا وخدرتا وماتتا ولم يقدر على حركتهما ولا بسطهما ولا قبضهما وإذا قرصتهما او نخستهما بإبرة لم يحسّ بذلك ولم يجد فيهما ألما فاعلم أنه لا يبرأ فى أكثر الأحوال فهو هالك.	If you see that his hands have become numb and cold, and he has lost the ability to move them, nor can he feel sensation in them, nor compress them, and if you prick them or stab them with a needle, he does not sense it and finds no pain in them, then know that he will not recover, for this is usually the case.
وإن كان يحرّكهما ويحسّ فيهما بالقرص والنخس فاعلم أنّ نخاع العظم قد سلم وأن العليل يبرأ بالعلاج، فإن أصاب خرز الظهر مثل ذلك وأردت أن تعلم هل يبرأ أيضا أم لا.	And if he moves them and feels the pricking and stabbing, then know that the marrow of the bone has been preserved, and the defect is curable by treatment. If a wound in the back of the neck occurs similarly, and you want to know whether it will recover or not.
فانظر الى رجليه فإن رأيت أنّهما قد استرختا وحدث فيهما ما حدث فى اليدين ثمّ اذا اضطجع على ظهره خرج الريح والبراز من غير إرادة واذا استلقى على بطنه خرج البول من غير إرادة.	Look at his legs, and if you see that they have become numb like his hands, and the same thing has happened to them as happened to his hands, then if he leans on his back, gas and wind will come out without his intention, and if he lies on his stomach, urine will come out without his intention.
وإذا استلقى على ظهره وأراد البول لم يستطع على ذلك فاعلم أنّه هالك فلا تعنى بعلاجه فإن لم يعرض له شىء من ذلك كان الأمر أخفّ، وعلاج ما حدث من ذلك أن تروم تسكين الورم الحارّ.	And if he lies on his back and wants to urinate but cannot, then know that he is dying, so do not bother with his treatment. For if none of this had appeared in him, the matter would have been lighter, and the treatment for what has happened is to apply a warm poultice to the affected area.
بأن تضع على الفقارة المرضوضة دهن الورد وحده او مع فصوص البيض مشويّة تضع عليه ذلك ثلاث مرّات فى النهار حتّى اذا سكن الورم الحارّ فاحمل على الموضع أحد الضمادات المقوّية المنشّفة وشدّ عليه بالرباط وأمره بالسكون والقرار.	By applying to the affected area a poultice made of rose oil and flour, or with crushed egg yolks, you apply it three times a day until the hot inflammation subsides. Then, put one of the cooling bandages on the spot, tie it with a band, and order him to rest and settle.
ولا ينام إلّا على الجهة التى لا يجد معها وجعا حتّى يبرأ، فإن كان قد حدث عند الرضّ فى العظم شظيّة او شىء قد تبرّأ منه فينبغى أن تشقّ عليه الجلد وتنتزع ذلك العظم.	He should not sleep except on the side where he does not feel pain, until he recovers. If a fracture has occurred in the bone due to the blow, or something has separated from it, it is necessary to cut open the skin and extract that bone.
ثمّ تجمع شفتى الجرح إن كان كبيرا بالخياطة ثمّ تعالج بالمراهم الملحمة حتّى يبرأ، فإن انكسر آخر عظم العصعص وهو عجز الذنب فينبغى أن تدخل الإبهام من اليد اليسرى فى المقعدة.	Then, you should bring the edges of the wound together with a suturing thread if it is large. Then, treat it with medicated bandages until he recovers. If the last bone of the spine is fractured, which is the weakness of the tail, it is necessary to insert the little finger of the left hand into the perineum.
وتسوّى العظم المكسور باليد الأخرى على حسب ما تمكن وتتأتّى التسوية ثمّ تحمل عليه الضماد والجبيرة إن احتجت الى ذلك ثمّ تشدّه.	Reduce the fractured bone with the other hand according to what is possible and facilitate reduction, then apply the bandage and splint, if you are able to do so, then tighten it.
فإن أحسست بشظيّة مكسورة فيه فشقّ عليها وانتزعها وعالج الجرح بعلاج ما تقدّم حتّى يبرأ،.	If you feel a fragment of bone broken in it, then cut open and extract it, and treat the wound with treatment that is advanced until he recovers.
الفصل العاشر.	The Tenth Chapter.
فىجبر كسر الورك.	Treating a Fracture of the Ribs.
قلّ ما تنكسر عظام الأوراك فإن انكسرت فإنّما يكون كسرها أن تتفتّت فى أطرافها وتنشقّ فى الطول وتميل الى داخل ويعرض للعليل وجع فى الموضع ونخس وتخدر الساق التى الكسر من جهتها.	When you fracture the bones of the ribs, if they are fractured, then their fracture is that they separate at their edges and split along their length and incline inward, and they expose to palpation and pain at the site, and it numbs and weakens the leg on the side of the fracture.
وجبره أن تمرّ بيدك عليه حتّى تقف على الكسر كيف هو شكله فإن كان الكسر فى أطرافه فقط فسوّ ذلك الكسر على حسب ما يتهيّأ لك من التسوية حتّى يشبه شكله الطبيعىّ.	And treat it by passing your hand over it until you feel the fracture, and see how its shape is. If the fracture is only in its edges, then reduce that fracture according to what is possible for you from reduction until it resembles its natural shape.
فإن كان الكسر فى الطول أو كان قد مال الى داخل فأضجع العليل على بطنه حتّى يتهيّأ لك جبر ذلك الكسر، فإذا سوّيته حملت عليه الضماد ثمّ تضع عليه جبيرة من خشب او من جلد وشدّه شدّا.	If the fracture is in its length or has inclined inward, then put the padding on his belly until you can treat that fracture. If you have reduced it, apply the bandage to it, and then put a splint of wood or leather on it and tighten it strongly.
لا تخاف عليه انتقال الكسر ولا زوال الجبيرة وتسوّى التقعير من الخواصر بما يملأه حتّى يأخذ الشدّ على استواء وتأمر العليل أن ينام على ظهره او على جنبه الصحيح، فإن عرض له ورم حارّ.	Do not fear to move the fracture or to remove the splint, and reduce the curvature of the ribs with what fills it, until it takes shape on its straightness. And order the patient to sleep on his back or on his sound side, for if he presents with feverish pain.
فكفّ عن مدّه وجبره حتّى يسكن الورم الحارّ واحمل عليه ما يسكنه على ما تقدّم ثمّ ارجع الى جبره وشدّه كما ينبغى، فإن عرض فى العظم شظايا او تفتّت من أطرافه شىء فلا ينبغى أن ينزع.	Leave it for a while and treat it until the feverish pain subsides, and apply to it what soothes it according to what is advanced. Then return to treating it and tighten it as necessary. For if there appear in the bone fragments or separations from its edges something, then it should not be neglected.
ولا يمسّ بل يسوّى من خارج كما قلنا ويترك شدّه حتّى يبرأ،.	He should not touch it, but rather wipe it from the outside as we mentioned, and leave its firmness until it heals.
الفصل الحادى عشر.	The Twelfth Operation.
فى جبر كسر العضد.	On the fracture of the ribs.
العضد هو ما بين المرفق الى رأس الكتف فإن انكسر فجبره على أحد وجهين أحدهما أن تأخذ عودا مقوّسا أملس متوسّط الغلظ على هذه الصورة:.	The rib is what is between the elbow and the head of the shoulder, so if it breaks, you should set it on one of two surfaces; one of them is that you take a curved rod, and smooth out the prominence in this way.
وتربط فى طرفيه رباطين ثم يعلّق من موضع مرتفع ويجلس العليل على كرسىّ ثمّ تلقى ذراعه المكسورة على العود حتّى يصير إبطه ملصقا فى وسط انحناء العود ثمّ يعلّق من فوقه شىء ثقيل.	And you bind it with two bandages, then suspend it from an elevated position, and the patient sits on a chair, then you place his fractured forearm on the rod until it becomes straight in the middle of the curvature of the rod, then you suspend something heavy above it.
او يمدّه خادم الى أسفل ثمّ يسوّى الطبيب الكسر بيديه معا حتّى يردّ الكسر على ما ينبغى، والوجه الآخر أن يستلقى العليل على قفاه وتعلّق يده من عنقه برباط.	Or a servant extends it downwards, then the doctor wipes the fracture with his hands together until the fracture is adjusted to what is desired, and the other surface is that the patient lies on his face and his hand is suspended from his neck with a bandage.
ثمّ تأمر خادمين أن يضبط أحدهما ما فوق الكسر بيديه والآخر أن يضبط أسفله ويمدّ كلّ واحد منهما الى جهته، وإن أردت أن يكون المدّ أقوى فشدّ تحت الكسر برباط وفوقه برباط ويمدّهما كلّ واحد من الخادمين الى جهتهما.	Then you order two servants to adjust, one of them what is above the fracture with his hand and the other to adjust below it, and each one of them extends to his side; and if you want the extension to be stronger, you tie beneath the fracture with a bandage and above it with a bandage, and each of the two servants extends to his side.
فإن كان الكسر قريبا من طرف المنكب فينبغى أن تصير [وسط] الرباط تحت الإبط والآخر تحت الكسر نحو المرفق، وكذلك إن كان الكسر قريبا من المرفق فينبغى أن تصير الرباط على ذلك الموضع وعلى المرفق نفسه.	If the fracture is near the end of the shoulder, it is desired that one bandage be placed under the armpit and the other beneath the fracture towards the elbow; and likewise if the fracture is near the elbow, it is desired that the bandage be placed on that spot and on the elbow itself.
ثمّ تسوّى الكسر برفق من غير عنف حتّى اذا استوى الكسر على ما ينبغى وائتلف ائتلافا حسنا ثمّ تشدّه إن لم يعرض ورم حارّ فإن عرض ورم حارّ فاترك شدّه الى اليوم السابع وضع عليه صوفة موذّحة مشرّبة بالخلّ ودهن الورد.	Then you wipe the fracture with a gentle touch, without pressure, until the fracture is adjusted to what is desired, and you bandage it well; then you leave it alone for seven days, applying a soothing poultice, scented with rose-water and musk.
حتّى اذا سكن الورم فحينئذ فشدّه، وصفة شدّه أن تحمل الضماد على الكسر ثمّ تحمل لفافة من خرقة جديدة على الضماد ثمّ تجمع الذراع على العضد نفسه وتضع يده مفتوحة على منكبه،.	If the abscess has formed and become inflamed, then make an incision, and dissect to expose the carious lesion, then apply a dressing of new linen on the lesion, and gather the arm itself and place it with its hand open on the bandage.
وتحمل الخرق والشدّ على العضد والذراع ليكون الذراع يقوم مقام الجبائر إن لم يمنعك من ذلك مانع ولم يتغيّر عليك من العظم المكسور شىء، فإن خفت أن يتغيّر عليك من ذلك شىء فاستعمل الجبائر.	And apply the linen and bandage to the arm and forearm, so that the forearm is in the place of a splint, if it does not prevent you from that, and the fracture did not change on you from the broken bone anything, for if you feared that it would change on you from that, then use the splints.
وهو أن تضع على الكسر نفسه جبيرة تكون أعرض وأقوى من سائر الجبائر وليجعل بين كلّ جبيرة عرض أصبع وليكن طول الجبائر على حسب الكسر بزيادة ثلاث أصابع من كلّ جهة.	And it is that you put on the bone itself a splint that is wider and stronger than other splints, and let there be between each splint a space of two fingers, and let the length of the splints be according to the bone, increasing by three fingers from each side.
ثمّ تشدّ على الجبائر الشدّ الذى ذكرته فى أوّلالباب.	Then bandage the splints with the bandaging that I mentioned at the beginning of the chapter.
وهوأن يكون شدّك على موضع الكسر أشدّ.	And it is that your bandaging should be tighter at the place of the fracture.
وكلّما بعد الكسر كان الشدّ أقلّ، فإن رأيت وضع الجبائر والشدّ كما قلنا فى حين جبرك للعضو من ساعتك فافعل.	And whenever, after the fracture, the bandaging was less, then you saw the placing of the splints and the bandaging as we said when you started to mend the limb from your time, so do.
وإن خشيت الورم الحارّ فاترك الشدّ والجبائر الى. اليوم السابع كما قلنا ثمّ تفقّد الرباط فى كلّ ثلاثة أيّام لئلّا يحدث فى الموضع حكّة او نفخ او يمتنع الغذاء من الوصول الى العضو لحال إفراط الشدّ فتصلح ذلك كلّه على ما ذكرنا.	And if you feared the formation of a severe abscess, leave the bandaging and splints until the seventh day as we said, then remove the dressing every three days to prevent any inflammation or swelling or the nourishment from reaching the limb, so that the bandaging does not become tight, and correct all that according to what we mentioned.
فإن كنت على ثقة أن لا يحدث شىء من ذلك فلا تحلّ الرباط إلّا بعد أيّام كثيرة، ويكون اضطجاع العليل على ظهره ويده على معدته وتوضع تحت العضد مرفقة مملوءة من الصوف معتدلة.	For if you are confident that none of that will happen, then do not remove the dressing except after many days, and let the patient lie on his back with his hand on his abdomen and placed under the arm a cushion filled with cotton, elevated.
وتفقّد فى كلّ وقت من ليل او نهار لئلّا يتنقّض شكل العضو المكسور او يسترخى الرباط فأصلح ذلك كلّه بجهدك، واجعل غذاء العليل على الرتبة التى قدّمنا بأن يكون الغذاء لطيفا أوّلا حتّى اذا همّ العظم أن يشتدّ.	And inspect at all times, morning and evening, lest the shape of the broken limb becomes deformed or the dressing becomes loose, so correct all that with your effort, and make the nourishment of the patient on the level that we previously mentioned, to be gentle or light at first, until when the bone is about to consolidate.
فينبغى أن تغلظ غذاءه، فإنّ من عادة العضد والساق أن تشتدّ فى أربعين يوما فحينئذ ينبغى أن تحلّ ويستعمل الحمّام ويعالج بالمراهم التى تصلح لذلك، فإن كان الكسر فاحشا مترضّضا.	If you want to consolidate his food, it is customary for the joints and thigh to be massaged for 40 days; then it is appropriate to relax and use the bath, and to treat with ointments that are suitable for that, because if there was a fracture, it would have been congealed by then.
فلا تحلّ عنه الرباط الى خمسين يوما او الى شهرين،.	So leave the bandage on him for 50 days or two months.
الفصل الثانى عشر.	The Twelfth Chapter.
فى جبر كسر الذراع.	On the fracture of the forearm.
الذراع مركّب من عظمين ويسمّى الزندين أحدهما صغير وهو الذى يلى الإبهام والآخر كبير وهو الموضوع تحت الصغير من أسفل فربّما انكسر الزند الأعظم وحده او الصغير وحده وربّما انكسرا معا،.	The forearm consists of two bones, which are called the " zendayn"; one is small and it is the one that extends to the elbow, and the other is large and it is placed underneath the small one from the bottom; perhaps the large "zend" may fracture alone or the small one alone, and perhaps they may fracture together.
فمتى انكسر الزند الصغير الأعلى فإنّ جبره يسهل وبرؤه يكون أسرع ومتى انكسر الزند الأسفل كان كسره رديئا وبرؤه عسرا وأردأها اذا انكسرت العظمان معا، فإن كان العظم الذى انكسر الزند الصغير الأعلى.	If the upper small "zend" fractures, its treatment is easy and its recovery is quick; and if the lower "zend" fractures, its fracture is difficult and its recovery is slow. If both "zendas" fracture together, it was as if the bone that fractured was the upper small "zend".
فينبغى للطبيب عند جبره أن يجعل مدّه يسيرا برفق حتّى يسوّيه فإن كان الزند الكبير هو المكسور فينبغى أن يجعل مدّه أشدّ وإن كان الزندان جميعا هما المكسورين فينبغى أن يجعل المدّ أقوى جدّا.	It is suitable for the physician, when treating him, to make his bandage gentle at first until he becomes accustomed to it; if the large "zend" is the one that fractured, it is suitable to make the bandage stronger; and if both "zendas" are fractured, it is suitable to make the bandage even stronger.
وينبغى أن يوضع شكل اليد عند جبره ومدّه ممدودا على وسادة ويكون إبهام اليد الى فوق أرفع من جميع الأصابع وتكون الخنصر أسفل من سائر الأصابع والعليل قاعد متربّعا على نفسه.	It is suitable to place the shape of the hand during treatment, and to bandage it extended on a pillow, and to have the elbow above all the fingers, and to have the wrist below them, and the little finger resting on itself.
ولتكن الوسادة بإزائه فى الارتفاع لئلا يتكلّف العليل مشقّة.	And let the pillow be elevated with it so that the little finger does not bend excessively.
ثمّ يمدّ خادم الذراع من أسفل إمّا بيده وإمّا برباط وخادم آخر يمدّ من فوق كذلك ثمّ يسوّى الطبيب العظم حتّى يردّه على أفضل شكل يمكنه، فإن كان فى كسر العظم شظايا فتروم.	Then a servant bandages the forearm from below, or with a cast, and another servant bandages from above also; then the physician adjusts the bone until he returns it to its best possible shape. If there were fragments in the fractured bone, they would be adjusted.
ردّ كلّ شظيّة فى موضعها جهدك فإن ظهرت فيه شظيّة متبرّئة وكانت تنخس الجلد ولا طمع لك فى جبرها فشقّ عليها وانتزعها على الصفة التى ذكرنا فيما تقدّم، فإن كان الكسر مع جرح فقد أفردت له بابا.	Here is the translation:
فتأخذ علاج ذلك من هناك، فإن عرض فى أوّل جبرك ورم حارّ فالطخ خرقة بالقيروطىّ المعمول بدهن الورد والشمع الأبيض وليكن متوسّطا بين الثخن والرقّة وشدّ الخرق عليه شدّا لطيفا حتّى اذا سكن الورم.	Take treatment from there, and let it be in the first dressing of the wound and the intense heat of the cautery on the affected area with the rounded scalpel and the white wax, and let it be moderately between the suture and the dressing, and tighten the bandage over it, until the abscess settles.
فانزع القيروطىّ وضع الضماد المهيّأ من غبار الرحى مع بياض البيض ثمّ احمل الجبائر ولتكن الجبيرة التى توضع على الكسر نفسه أعرض قليلا وأقوى، واعلم أنّ عدد جبائر الذراع ستّ فى أكثر الأحوال.	Remove the rounded scalpel and apply the cooled medication from the dust of the Rahwi plant with egg whites, then lift the dressings and let the dressing that is applied on the wound itself be slightly raised and strengthened, and know that the number of dressings on the arm will be in most cases.
كان الكسر فى الزند الواحد او فى الزندين معا، ثمّ اجعل شدّك على موضع الكسر أقوى وأشدّ وكلّما درت بالشدّ الى فوق او الى أسفل جعلت الشدّ أرخى قليلا على ما تقدّم ذكره فى أوّل الباب،.	The wound was in one or two bandages, then make your tightening on the spot of the wound stronger and more intense, and whenever you tighten above or below, make the tightening slightly looser than what was mentioned previously in the first chapter.
ولتكن الخرق التى تلفّ على الكسر خرقا ليّنا رطبة ولا تكن صلبة جدّا وليكن الخيط الذى يشدّ به من كتّان خاصّة متوسّط بين الرقّة والغلظ كما وصفنا، وتفقّد العضو والرباط بعد أيّام.	And let the bandage that envelops the wound be loose and not very tight, and let the thread that tightens it be of a special medium-sized twist between the dressing and the suture, as we have described, and wait for the healing of the limb and the return of its function after some days.
فإن حدث شىء يجب إصلاحه مثل حكّة تعرض فى العضو فينبغى أن ينطل العضو بالماء الدفىء حتّى تسكن تلك الحكّة ويترك العضو غير مشدود ليلة حتّى يستريح ثمّ يعاود الشدّ.	If something happens, it should be corrected, such as a defect that appears on the limb, so that the limb is not soaked with stagnant water until that defect settles, and the limb is left unbound for a night until it rests, then the tightening returns.
فإن كان الشدّ قد استرخى والعظم قد زال او نحو ذلك فأصلح ذلك كلّه جهدك، وانظر أيضا فإن كان الغذاء يمتنع أن يصل الى العضو لإفراط الشدّ فينبغى أن ترخيه قليلا وتتركه أيّاما حتّى يجرى اليه الغذاء ثمّ تشدّه.	If the tightening has relaxed and the bone has become bare or similar, then correct that completely with your effort, and also look if the nourishment is unable to reach the limb due to the tightness of the dressing, it should be loosened a little and left for some days until the nourishment reaches it, then it is tightened.
فإن لم يعرض للعليل شىء ممّا ذكرنا فلا ينبغى أن يحلّ إلّا بعد عشرين يوما او نحوها، ثمّ علّق يد العليل الى عنقه وليكن ذراعه معتدلا ويتحفّظ جهده من الحركات المضطربة ويجعل نومه على ظهره.	If nothing of what we mentioned appears on the patient, it is not advisable to remove it until after twenty days or thereabouts, then hang the patient's arm from his neck and let his forearm be moderate and protect his strength from disturbing movements and make him sleep on his side.
واعلم أنّه ينجبر هذا الكسر من الذراع فى ثلاثين يوما او فى اثنين وثلاثين وربّما انجبر فى ثمانية وعشرين يوما كلّ ذلك على حسب حالات الأمزجة وحالات القوّة،.	It is known that this fracture is reduced in thirty days or in twenty-two, and perhaps it will be reduced in eighteen days, all of which depends on the condition of the patient and the power of their constitution.
الفصل الثالث عشر.	The Thirteenth Chapter.
فى جبر كسر كفّ اليد والأصابع.	On the reduction of fractures of the wrist and fingers.
إنّ مشط الكفّ وسلاميات الأصابع قلّ ما يعرض لها الكسر وإنّما يعرض لها الرضّ كثيرا، فمتى عرض للكفّ كسر او رضّ.	The bones of the wrist and fingers are rarely exposed to fracture, but rather they are often exposed to contusions, so when a fracture or contusion occurs in the wrist.
فينبغى أن يجلس العليل متربّعا وأمامه كرسىّ على استواء.	He should sit with his arm elevated and his hand in a straight position.
ثمّ يضع يده عليه ممدودة ثمّ يمدّ خادم العظام المكسورة ويسوّيها الطبيب حتّى اذا ائتلفت ائتلافا حسنا فحينئذ ينبغى أن يحمل الضماد والمشاقة إن لم يحدث ورم حارّ، ثمّ تحمل جبيرة من فوق على قدر الموضع.	Then he should place his hand in extension, then the doctor will straighten the broken bone and set it in its proper position, until it is well aligned. Then he should apply a bandage and splint, if there is no excessive bleeding, then he should apply a plaster cast from above according to the size of the location.
وقد أدرجتها فى خرقة ليّنة، فإن كان الكسر الى أسفل نحو باطن الكفّ فاصنع شبه الكرة من خرقة وأمر العليل أن يقبض عليها بكفّه المكسورة ثمّ تشدّ بخرقة طويلة.	And he should insert it into a linen roller, if the fracture is towards the lower part near the palm of the hand, then make a semicircular shape from the roller and order the patient to grasp it with his fractured hand, then tie it with a long roller.
ولتكن الجبيرة من جلد فيه لين ليلتطئ الجلد مع انثناء جميع الكفّ وتشدّها على ما ينبغى، فإن كان الكسر الى خارج فينبغى أن تجعل الجبيرة من فوق وجبيرة أخرى من أسفل فى الكفّ لتكون اليد مفتوحة قائمة.	And let the cast be from a material that is not too tight, so that the cast does not constrict with the bending of all the hand, and tie it as necessary. If the fracture is on the outside, then he should make a cast from above and another from below in the hand, so that the hand remains open and straight.
ثمّ يحمل الشدّ كما تدور اليد ويشبّك بين الأصابع بالرباط، فإن عرض الكسر لأحد سلاميات الأصابع فإن كان الإبهام فليسوّى على ما ينبغى ثمّ يشدّ مع الكفّ وإن أحببت أن تجعل له جبيرة قائمة صغيرة لتقيم الكسر.	Then he should apply the bandage as the hand is turned and interlaced between the fingers with a ribbon, if the fracture is in one of the finger bones, such as the thumb, then it should be set in its proper position, then tied with the wrist, and if you want to make a small straight cast to hold the fracture in place.
ولا يتحرّك فإن كان الكسر لسائر الأصابع مثل الوسطى والسبّابة او الخنصر او البنصر فلتسوّى وتربط مع الأصبع التى تليها الصحيحة او تربط كلّها على الولاء فهو أجود او تضع عليها جبيرة قائمة صغيرة.	And do not move it, if the fracture is in one of the other finger bones, such as the middle, ring, or little finger, then set it and tie it with the adjacent healthy finger, or tie all of them together, for that is better, or put a small straight cast on it.
كما قلنا فى الإبهام وتفقّد فى حين جبرك وبعده عن الورم الحارّ فقابله بما ينبغى متى حدث شىء من ذلك على ما تكرّر وصفه،.	As we mentioned in the case of swelling and the necessity of urgency at the time of setting it right, and afterwards concerning the intense pain, so we should treat it with what is suitable, until the inflammation subsides, according to what is repeated and described.
الفصل الرابع عشر.	Chapter Fourteen.
فى جبر كسر الفخذ.	On Setting a Fracture of the Thigh.
عظم الفخذ كثيرا ما ينكسر ويتبيّن للحسّ لأنّه يتقلّب الى قدّام وإلى خلف وجبره يكون بأن يشدّ رباط فوق الكسر ورباط آخر تحت الكسر والعليل مستلقى على وجهه.	The thigh bone often fractures and becomes dislocated because it is bent forward and backward, and its setting is done by applying a bandage above the fracture and another below it, with the patient lying on his face.
ثمّ يمدّ كلّ رباط خادم الى جهته على اعتدال هذا اذا كان الكسر فى وسط العظم، وأمّا إن كان قريبا من أصل الفخذ فينبغى أن تشدّ رباطا ليّنا إمّا من صوف او نحوه.	Then, he extends each bandage to its proper place, taking into account that if the fracture is in the middle of the bone, and if it is near the top of the thigh, it is suitable to apply a bandage, either from a pillow or something similar.
عند أصل الفخذ الى نحو العانة ليقع المدّ الى فوق والرباط الآخر تحت الكسر وكذلك إن كان الكسر قرب الركبة فليكن الرباط قرب الركبة ليقع المدّ الى أسفل، ثمّ يسوّى الطبيب العظم بكلتى يديه حتّى يردّه على مثال الشكل الطبيعى.	At the top of the thigh, towards the groin, the extension is made to lie on top and the other bandage below the fracture, and if the fracture is near the knee, then the bandage should be near the knee so that the extension lies below; then the physician straightens the bone with both his hands until he returns it to its natural shape.
ويأتلف العظم ائتلافا حسنا فحينئذ ينبغى أن تحمل الضماد والشدّ إن لم يحدث للعضو ورم حارّ فإن حدث فيه الورم فاتركه أيّاما حتّى يسكن الورم الحارّ ثمّ ارجع الى علاجه،.	And the bone is united nicely, so then it is suitable to apply the splint and bind it; if no intense pain occurs in the limb, but if an intense inflammation occurs, then leave it for a few days until the intense inflammation subsides, and then return to its treatment.
وأمّا شدّه فينبغى أن تلوى على الكسر عمامة صلبة واسعة مرّتين او ثلاثا ويبقى منه ما فضل، ثمّ تلوى الساق حتّى يصير الكعب عند أصل الألية وتدخل خيطا طويلا فيما بين الفخذ والساق قرب الركبة من أسفل وتصير أطراف الخيط من فوق من الجهتين.	And it is suitable to apply a rigid and wide plaster cast for two or three times, and what remains of it, then the splint is applied to the leg until the ankle is formed at the bottom of the limb, and a long thread is inserted between the thigh and the leg near the knee from below, and its ends are fastened above from both sides.
ثمّ تدير على الساق والفخذ ما فضل من العمامة، ثمّ تجعل على الفخذ فى موضع الكسر نفسه الجبائر وتجعل منها جبيرة واحدة على عظم الساق ثمّ احش الخلل الذى بين الفخذ والساق بالخرق الليّنة ليستوى الشدّ.	Then, the remaining plaster cast is wrapped around the leg and thigh; then, you make on the thigh at the site of the fracture itself a series of splints, and you make one splint on the bone of the leg, and you fill the void between the thigh and the leg with soft linen, so that the binding becomes firm.
ثمّ ابدأ بالشدّ القوىّ من الوسط على موضع الكسر ثلاث لفّات او أربع وكلّما بعدت بالرباط من موضع الكسر فليكن شدّك أقلّ وألين وأرخأ.	Here is the translation:
ثمّ اعمد الى طرفى الخيط الذى كنت أدخلت بين الفخذ والساق فاربط به ما يليه من الجبائر التى من فوق ثمّ مرّ بطرفى الخيط الى أسفل حتّى تنتهى الى عرقوب الرجل فشدّ بهما أيضا أطراف الجبائر من الجهة الأخرى.	I directed the thread that I had passed between the thigh and the leg, and tied it to what was above it from the sutures. Then I pulled the thread down until it reached the ankle of the foot, and tightened it also at the edges of the sutures on the other side.
لئلّا يزول الرباط من موضعه، ثمّ تترك الشدّ عليه ما دام لا يتحدّث للعضو أكال ولا ورم ولا نفخ ونحو ذلك، فإن حدث شىء من ذلك فبادر بحلّه وأصلح ما حدث من ذلك كلّه على ما ذكرنا مرارا.	You leave the bandage in its place, and then you leave the tightening on it as long as no harm, neither inflammation nor pus nor abscess, occurs to the member. If something of that happens, you hasten to loosen it and correct what has happened from all that, as we have mentioned many times.
فإن كان فى العظم شظيّة تنخس فينبغى أن تسوّى ذلك إن أمكنك وإلا فشقّ عليها وانتزعها وعالج الجرح بمثل ما تقدّم ذكره حتّى يبرأ، وقد يشدّ هذا الكسر من الفخذ من غير أن تضاف اليه الساق بالجبائر.	If there is a splinter in the bone that needs to be removed, you should remove it if you can, otherwise you should open up and extract it, and treat the wound as we have previously mentioned until it heals. This fracture may unite from the thigh without being joined by sutures.
كما ذكرنا فى العضد والذراع إلّا أنّ جبره هكذا ليس يعرض معه للعليل عرج وإن جبرت وحدها من غير أن تضمّ اليها الساق فلا بدّ من أن يعرج صاحبها أبدا.	As we mentioned in the arm and forearm, but its splinting in this way does not prevent the patient from being lame, and if you splint it alone without adding the leg to it, its owner will inevitably remain lame.
واعلم أنّ الفخذ تشتدّ فى خمسين يوما او تزيد قليلا او تنقص قليلا كلّ ذلك على حسب اختلاف الأمزجة وسائر الحالات،.	Be aware that the thigh is usually consolidated in fifty days, or a little more or less, all of which depends on the difference in temperament and other conditions.
الفصل الخامس عشر.	Chapter Fifteen
فى كسر فلكة الركبة.	On fractures of the patella.
إنّ فلكة الركبة قلّ ما يعرض لها الكسر وقد يعرض لها الرضّ كثيرا فإن عرض لها كسر فإنّما يكون إمّا شقّا وإمّا تفتّتا فى أجزائها ويكون ذلك مع جرح وغير جرح.	The patella is rarely affected by fracture, but it may be affected by severe contusion. If a fracture occurs in it, it will either be a split or a fragmentation of its parts, and that may occur with or without a wound.
وتقف على ذلك كلّه بالحسّ، وجبرها بأن تسوّى ما تفرّق من أجزائها بالأصابع حتّى تجتمع وتأتلف على حسب ما تتمكّن التسوية والرفق والإتقان، ثمّ تحمل الضماد وتحمل عليه جبيرة مدوّرة إن احتجت الى ذلك.	And you treat it all by sensation, and splint it so that the dispersed parts are gathered together with the fingers until they meet and reunite according to how they can be adjusted and reunited. Then, you apply the bandage and apply a circular splint if you need it.
وتشدّ من فوق الشدّ الموافق لذلك، ثمّ تتعاهد جميع الأحوال التى وصفنا فى سائر الكسر مثل الورم الحارّ ونحوه بأن تقابل كلّ عارض بما يصلح له الى أن يبرأ،.	You should make a cut above the bandage corresponding to it, then bring together all the conditions we have described in other surgical operations, such as the swollen vein and its likes, so that each opposition meets with what is suitable for it until it heals.
الفصل السادس عشر.	Chapter Sixteen.
فى جبر كسر الساق.	On the fracture of the leg.
إنّ للساق عظمين أحدهما غليظ ويسمّى بعظم الساق والآخر رقيق ويسمّى زندا ويعرض لهما من أنواع الكسر ما يتعرض لعظمى الذراع.	The leg has two bones, one of them is thick and called the bone of the leg, and the other is thin and called the shin, and they are exposed to various types of fracture that affect the arm bones.
ولذلك صار جبره كجبر الذراع سواء والعمل واحد، فإن انكسر العظمان جميعا انقلبت الساق الى جميع الجهات، وإن انكسر العظم الأرقّ انقلبت الساق الى قدّام وإن انكسر العظم الأغلظ وحدث ذلك من أسفل فهو ممّا لا يخفى عليك.	And so, its fracture is like the fracture of the arm, one operation, because if all the thick bones are fractured, the leg will be deformed in all directions, and if the thin bone is fractured, it will bend forward, and if the thicker bone is fractured and this happens from below, it is something that cannot be hidden from you.
فاستعمل المدّ والتسوية وربط الجبائر على حسب ذلك سواء إلّا أنّه ينبغى إن كان كسر الساق كسرا فاحشا ذا شظايا كثيرة أن يكون المدّ أقلّ وأخفّ وترفق جهدك بجبره.	So use compression and alignment, and bind the fractures accordingly, just as if it were an arm fracture, except that if the leg fracture is a comminuted one with many fragments, the compression should be less and gentler, and you should exert your effort in binding it.
وفى الساق من العمل شىء زائد على الذراع وهو أنّك اذا سوّيت الجبائر وفرغت من جميع عملك فخذ فَسْقِيَتين من عود الصنوبر التى تستعمل فى تسطيح الغرف التى توضع بين شقوق الألواح او تكون من جرائد النخل او نحوها.	And in the leg, there is something extra to do beyond what is done for the arm, which is that if you aligned the fractures and completed all your work, take two splints of cypress wood, or those used for straightening the concavities of the ribs, or made from palm leaves or their like.
واختر منها ما لها غلظ قليلا ولا تكون من الرقاق وليكن طولها على طول الساق من الركبة الى أسفل، ثمّ لفّ على كلّ واحدة خرقة لفّتين على طولها وضع الواحدة من الساق والأخرى من الجهة الأخرى.	And choose from them what has a slight thickness and is not brittle, and let its length be the length of the leg from the knee to the bottom, then wrap around each one a bandage in two layers along its length, placing one on the leg and the other on the opposite side.
ولتكن من الركبة الى أسفل القدم، ثمّ تربط الفَسقيتين فى ثلاثة مواضع من الطرفين والوسط فإنّ بهذا الزمام يمتنع الساق أن يميل يمينا وشمالا ويثقّف تثقيفا حسنا، وقد يستعمل ميزاب من خشب على طول الساق.	And let it be from the knee to the bottom of the foot, then bind the splints in three places, at the ends and the middle, for by this method the leg is prevented from bending sideways and backwards, and its alignment is good; a wooden board can also be used along the length of the leg.
ويوضع فيه ليحفظه من الحركة وأكثر ما ينبغى أن تفعل ذلك فى الكسر اذا كان معه جرح خاصّة، ثمّ تفقّد الساق فى كلّ يوم واعن به عناية بالغة عن الورم او النفخ او سائر ذلك.	Here is the translation:
فمتى حدث شىء من ذلك فقابله بما ينبغى الى أن يبرأ، وعظم الساق ينجبر فى ثلاثين يوما او نحوها،.	When a fracture occurs in this manner, it should be treated with what is necessary until healing takes place, and the bone of the leg will be restored to its former state in thirty days or thereabouts.
الفصل السابع عشر.	The Seventeenth Chapter
فى كسر عظام الرجل والأصابع.	On Fractures of the Man's Bones and Fingers
أمّا الكعب فلا يعرض له كسر البتّة وأمّا عظام الرجل فقد يعرض لها الكسر، والأصابع أيضا قلّ ما يعرض لها الكسر وإنّما يعرض لها الرضّ فى أكثر الأحوال.	As for the ankle, it is not prone to fracture of the splint bone, and as for the man's bones, they are prone to fracture, and the fingers also rarely suffer from fractures, but rather from bruises in most cases.
فإن عرض لعظام الرجل كسر ورأيت تلك العظام قد أشرفت بعضها على بعض فليضع العليل قدمه على الأرض منتصبة كالماشى ثمّ قم أنت وضع قدمك على ما ارتفع من تلك العظام ثم طأها وسوّها.	If a fracture occurs in the man's bones and you find that those bones have overlapped each other, then put his foot on the ground standing upright like a pillar, then you should place your foot on what has risen from those bones, and press them down and adjust them.
حتّى ترجع فى مواضعها، ثمّ احمل الضماد والمشاقة من فوق وضع تحت باطن القدم لوحا صغيرا يكون له رأسان مسطّحة، ثمّ شدّ بها القدم شدّا محكما بعد لفّك لها بالخرق وسائر ما تحتاج اليه.	Until they return to their positions, then take the compress and the bandage from above and place them under the sole of the foot, making a small pillow that has two flat surfaces, then fasten it with the strip and the remaining material you need for it.
فإذا مرّت له ثلاثة أيّام او أربعة فأطلق الرباط فإنّك تجد العظام مستوية كانت مكسورة او كانت مفكوكة فالعمل كما ترى، وأمّا إن انكسر بعض الأصابع فاجبرها وسوّها على حسب ما وصفت لك فى جبر أصابع اليد.	If three or four days have passed, then release the bandage, and you will find that the bone is straight, whether it was fractured or dislocated. Act as you see fit, and if some of the fingers are broken, then set them and adjust them according to what I described to you in setting the fingers of the hand.
ثمّ اجعل للأصبع المكسورة جبيرة على طول الأصبع ولتكن أعرض منها قليلا، ثمّ اجعل تحت القدم هذا اللوح الذى وصفت لك وشدّه شدّا محكما، فإن كان الذى انكسر من العظام اثنين او ثلاثة او أكثر.	Then make a splint for the fractured finger along the length of the finger, and let it be slightly wider than it. Then place under the foot the pillow that I described to you, and fasten it securely. If there are two or three or more bones that were broken.
فاجعل على كلّ أصبع جبيرة من قدره مدرجة فى خرقة ليّنة وشدّ اللوح فى أسفل القدم وليكن متّكأ كلّ رأس من رأسى اللوح خارجا عن بطن القدم ليضبط ضبطا حسنا.	Make a splint for each finger, proportionate to its size, wrapped in a linen bandage, and fasten the pillow at the bottom of the foot, so that each head of the pillow protrudes outside the sole of the foot, to hold it in place with a good hold.
وينبغى لك أن لا تنسى أن تتعاهد جميع ما ذكرناه لك فى سائر الكسر من الأعراض التى ذكرناها وقابل كلّ عارض بما ينبغى،.	You should not neglect to take care of all the wounds mentioned by us in the previous chapters on surgical operations and treat each wound according to what is suitable for it.
الفصل الثامن عشر.	The Eighteenth Chapter.
فى كسر فرح المرأة وعظم العانة وذكر الرجل.	On the surgical operation for fracture of the woman's thigh and the fractured ankle, and mentioning the man.
متى انكسر فرج المرأة فأقعدها متربّعة ثمّ احنها الى جهة ظهرها قليلا قليلا ولتمسك من خلف ثمّ تحش القابلة فرجها بالقطن حتّى يملأه ويصير فى فرجها كالكرة.	When you operate on a woman's fractured thigh, you should place her in a bent position, then incline her towards her back slightly, and hold from behind, then press the pelvis against her thigh with the cutter until it is filled and forms a circle in her thigh.
ثمّ تهزّ المرأة ويرفع صلبها قليلا قليلا فإنّ ذلك القطن يخرج حتّى يصير عند باب الفرج كالكرة ويرجع كسر العظم، ثمّ تجعل رفادة على ظهرها فمتى أرادت أن تبول نزعت القطن برفق حتّى تبول.	Then, you should rock the woman and raise her pelvis slightly, for that cutter will come out until it forms a circle at the opening of the thigh, and the fractured bone will return to its position. Then, you should put a bandage on her back; when she wants to urinate, you should remove the cutter with the thigh in a bent position until she urinates.
وتردّه على النحو الذى أدخلته أوّلا ثمّ ترجع الى رفادتها الأولى، تفعل ذلك سبعة أيّام او نحوها فإنّه ينجبر، وإن شئت أن تأخذ مثانة شاة فتشدّ على فمها أنبوبة قصبة وتدخل المثانة كلّها فى فرجها.	And you should treat it in the same way as when you first inserted it, then return to her original bandage. You should do that for seven days or so, for it will heal. And if you wish to take a suppository, you should place a tube of wax on its mouth and insert the entire suppository into her thigh.
ثمّ تنفخ فى الأنبوبة بقوّة حتى تنتفخ المثانة فى داخل الفرج فإنّ الكسر يرجع، ثمّ احشه بالقطن وتقيم أيّاما على ما وصفنا حتّى يبرأ، وأمّا متى انكسر عظم العانة من الرجل او المرأة فيستعمل فى جبره.	Then, you should blow into the tube with force until the suppository is blown into the thigh, for the fracture will return to its position. Then, you should press with the cutter and observe the days as we have described until it heals. And when a man or woman has a fractured ankle, it should be treated in a similar way for healing.
وتسويته ما وصفنا فى عظم الورك، وليس يخفى عليك الصواب فى هذه الكسور الغريبة التى قلّ ما تقع ولا سيّما لمن كانت له بعض الدربة ويفهم كتابى هذا نعمّا لأنّ الكسر نفسه يدلّك فى أكثر الأحوال.	And you should treat it as we have described for the thigh bone, and do not hide from you the correct method in these unusual fractures that rarely occur, and are difficult to understand, unless one has some experience and understands this book well, because the fracture itself will guide you in most cases.
على طريق الصواب فى جبره وشدّه فافهم، وأمّا ذكر الرجل اذا انكسر فخذ حلقوم إوزّة فتدخل الذكر فيه ثمّ توضع عليه لفافة من خرقة ويعصب ويترك ثلاثة أيّام او نحوها حتّى يبرأ،.	On the method of setting a fracture, and its treatment, and how to mention it if the person has a dislocation, take a curved iron rod and insert the tip into the dislocation, then put a dressing made of linen on it, and bandage it, leaving it for three days or thereabouts until he recovers.
الفصل التاسع عشر.	Chapter Nineteen.
فى جبر كسور العظام اذا كانت مع جرح.	On setting of fractures of bones if they are with a wound.
ينبغى لمن عرض له كسر مع جرح ولا سيّما ان كان العظم كبيرا مثل عظم الفخذ او العضد او نحوها أن تبادر فتفصده من وقته ان ساعدتك شروط الفصد كما قدّمنا.	It is suitable for one who has a fracture with a wound, and it is not necessary that the bone be large, such as the thigh bone or the arm bone or similar, to hasten its treatment from the time of the injury, if you have followed the conditions of the treatment as we have mentioned.
فإن كان الجرح ينزف دما فينبغى أن تبادر الى قطعه بأن تدرّ عليه زاجا مسحوقا إن لم يحضرك غير ذلك ثمّ خذ فى جبر الكسر فى ذلك اليوم بعينه ولا تؤخّره.	If the wound is bleeding intensely, it is suitable to hasten its dressing by applying a compress of vinegar, if you do not have anything else ready, then take care of setting the fracture on that day itself and do not delay it.
إن لم يحدث ورم حارّ، فإن حدث ورم حارّ فاترك جبره الى اليوم التاسع حتّى يسكن الورم الحارّ ولا تقربه فى اليوم الثالث والرابع البتّة فإنّه تعرّض له أعراضا رديئة.	If there is no severe inflammation, but if there is severe inflammation, then leave the setting of the fracture until the ninth day, until the severe inflammation subsides, and do not touch it on the third and fourth days, for it may cause bad consequences.
فإن كان العظم المكسور ناتيا على الجلد مكشوفا فينبغى أن تروم ردّه وتسويته بيديك برفق ومدّ يسير، وإن لم يتأتّ لك ردّه وتسويته بيديك فردّه بهذه الآلة وهى آلة تصنع من حديد طولها قدر سبع أصابع او ثمان.	If the broken bone is protruding under the skin and is exposed, it is suitable to push it back in place with your hands gently and slowly, and if you are unable to put it in place with your hands, use this instrument, which is a device made of iron, its length being about seven or eight fingers.
وعرضها على قدر الجرح.	And adjust it according to the size of the wound.
ولذلك ينبغى للطبيب أن يتّخذ منها ثلاثا او أربعا على قدر ما يحتاج اليه من العلاج فى كلّ نوع من الكسر ولتكن مدوّرة يكون فيها غلظ قليلا لئلّا تنثنى عند الغمز عليها فى وقت العمل.	And therefore, it is suitable for the doctor to take three or four of them according to the need of treatment for each type of fracture, and let them be a little thick so that they do not bend when pressure is applied during work.
وتكون حادّة الطرف لها عطف فى طرفها ويكون أعلاها الى الغلظ ومن نصفها الى أسفل أرقّ جدّا وهذه صورتها:.	And let its extremity be pointed, with a curvature at its end, and its upper part be towards the thickness, and from its middle to its lower part be very thin, and this is its shape:
وتسمّى باليونانيّة بيرم يريدون عتلة صغيرة، فينبغى أن تصير طرفها الحادّ المعقّف على طرف العظم الناتى وتدفعه بها بمرّة حتّى اذا رجع العظم واستوى بعض الاستواء فرم تسوية أطراف الكسر بعضها على بعض.	Mark the place with a small brand, so that the edge of the instrument is aligned with the edge of the fractured bone and move it gently until the bone returns to its position and some of its curvature is restored, making the edges of the fracture fit together.
فإن كان طرفه المكسور رقيقا ولم تأخذه الآلة أخذا جيّدا فينبغى أن تقطع طرف ذلك العظم حتّى تتمكّن الآلة منه، فإن لم تقدر على ردّ العظم بما وصفنا البتّة فاقطعه بما شاكله من المقاطع التى ذكرنا.	If the fractured edge is thin and the instrument did not grasp it well, you should cut the edge of that bone until the instrument can grasp it firmly; if you cannot reduce the bone as we described earlier, then cut it according to the sections we mentioned.
او انشره بأحد المناشير كيف ما يمكن لك، ثمّ اجرد ما بقى فى العظم من الخشونة والقشور الرقاق، فإذا رددت العظم ووجد العليل بعد ردّه وجعا شديدا مؤذيا فاعلم أنّ العظم لم يرجع الى موضعه الطبيعىّ.	Spread it with one of the rasps as much as you can, then scrape off what remains of the roughness and thin scales from the bone; if you reduced the bone and found it still had a severe, annoying pain after reduction, then know that the bone did not return to its natural position.
فإن استطعت على ردّه الى موضعه الطبيعىّ فافعل فإنّك تنفع العليل منفعة عظيمة، فإذا كمل جبرك للعظم فاغمس خرقة فى شراب قابض أسود وخاصّة إن كنت فى الصيف ولا تضع على الجرح قيروطىّ ولا شيئا فيه دهن.	If you are able to return it to its natural position, then do so, for you will have gained a great benefit and relieved the pain; if you have set the bone in place, apply a compress of vinegar and rose water, especially if you are in summer, and do not put anything greasy on the wound.
لئلّا يحدث فيه عفن وفساد، ثمّ استعمل الجبائر فى حين فراغك من جبر العظم واترك الجرح مكشوفا بأن تقرض بالمقصّ فى اللفائف ثقبا على قدر الجرح.	Lest it become infected and putrid, then use the bandages when you are finished with setting the bone, and leave the wound uncovered, by applying the compress in layers, tightly according to the size of the wound.
واحذر كلّ الحذر أن تشدّ الجرح مع الكسر فكثيرا ما صنع ذلك جهّال الأطبّاء فأحدثوا على مرضاهم إمّا الموت وإمّا أكلة او زكاما وليكن شدّك ليّنا مرخيا مخالفا لشدّ سائر الكسر.	And beware, with all caution, of constricting the wound with the bandage, for many ignorant physicians have done that, causing their patients to die or suffer from gangrene or leprosy; and let your constriction be gentle, conforming to the nature of the wound, unlike the constriction of other wounds.
فإن كان الجرح رديئا او كان جرحا كبيرا وخشيت عليه بعض الأعراض الرديئة التى وصفنا وكان يجد وجعا فى الموضع مقلقا فلا ينبغى أن تضع عليه الجبائر واصنع له لفائف من خرق صلبة فى موضع الجبائر وشدّه بها.	If the wound is weak or was a large wound and you feared some of the bad symptoms we described, and it caused pain in the affected area, then it is not advisable to put bandages on it, but rather make for it a wrapping of stiff leather in place of the bandages and constrict it with that.
فإذا كان بعد يوم او يومين ورأيت الجرح قد بدأ يتولّد فيه القيح فانزع عنه الخرقة التى وضعت عليه بالشراب ثمّ استعمل الفتل والمراهم التى من عادتنا أن نداوى بها الجراحات مثل المرهم الرباعىّ ونحوه، وينبغى لك أن تحلّ الرباط.	If it was after a day or two and you saw the wound had started to suppurate in it, then remove from it the dressing that was put on it with the bandage, and then use the cotton and the medicaments that we are accustomed to apply to wounds of this type, like the poultice of rose water, and it is fitting for you to change the bandage.
وتتفقّد الجرح فى كلّ يوم مساء وصباحا حتّى يندمل ويبرأ، وينبغى أن تنصب العضو نصبة ليسيل منه القيح الى أسفل بسهولة، فإن مضى للجرح أيّام كثيرة ولم يلتحم ولا انقطع القيح منه فاعلم أنّ هناك شظايا من العظم صغارا.	And examine the wound every evening and morning until it is filled and healed, and it is fitting to position the limb so that the pus does not flow from it downwards easily. If many days have passed for the wound and it has not united nor has the pus ceased from it, then know that there are small bony fragments.
فينبغى أن تفتّش الجرح بالمسبار فما كان من تلك الشظايا متبرّئة فانتزعها وأخرجها وما كان منها غير متبرّئة وكانت تنخس العضو وتحدث الوجع فرم فى قطعها وانتزاعها بكلّ وجه يمكنك ذلك.	Then it is fitting to probe the wound with a sounder, and if you find that some of those fragments are loose, then extract them and bring them out, and if they were not loose but were irritating the limb and causing pain, then cut them off and extract them in every possible way.
فإن عرض للجرح زكام او أكلة او نوع آخر من الفساد والعفونة فينبغى أن تقابل كلّ عرض منها بما شاكله من العلاج الذى تقدّم وصفه فى بابه.	If the wound shows signs of erysipelas or ulcers or another type of corruption and inflammation, then it is fitting to confront each sign from them with the treatment that was presented and described in its chapter.
وممّا ينبغى أن تقف عند قولى وتحضره ذهنك اذا انكسر عظم كبير ونتا على العضو مثل عظم الفخذ والعضد ونحوهما من الأعضاء الكبار فلا تتعرّض لجذبه ولا إخراجه.	And it is fitting to stop at the joint and beware in your mind, for if you broke a large bone and cut through the limb, such as the thigh bone or the arm, and their likes from the major limbs, do not try to reset them nor attempt to extract them.
فكثيرا ما يعرض من ذلك الموت بل اتركه حتّى يتعفّن فربّما سقط من ذاته بعد عشرين يوما او ثلاثين.	For many are those who die from that, but leave it until it putrefies, for perhaps it will fall off by itself after twenty days or thirty.
فحينئذ تعالج الجرح إن رأيت فيه مكانا للعلاج وإلّا فاتركه،.	Then you should treat the wound if you see a place for treatment, and if not, then leave it.
الفصل العشرون.	Chapter 22.
فىعلاج التعقّد الذى يعرض فى إثر بعض الكسر.	Treatment of the Complication that Appears after some Fractures.
كثيرا ما يعرض هذا التعقّد فى إثر برء الكسر ولا سيّما ما قرب من المفاصل فيقبح منه شكل العضو وربّما منع العضو عن فعله الطبيعىّ.	Many times, this complication occurs when a fracture approaches the joint, and it is close to affecting the shape of the limb, or perhaps it may deprive the limb of its natural function.
نظرت فإن كان التعقّد طريّا فاستعمل فيه الأدوية التى تقبض مثل الصبر واللبان والمرّ والعنزروت والأقاقيا ونحوها بأن تأخذ من هذه بعضها او كلّها وتعجنها بشراب قابض او ببياض البيض او بالخلّ.	I looked and if the complication was simple, I used in it medications that constrict, such as saxaul, labban, and marra, and anzuroot, and aqoqia, and their like, taking some of them or all of them, and mixing them with a constricting rob or egg yolk or vinegar.
وتحملها على التعقّد فى مشاقة وتشدّها عليها شدّا جيّدا وتترك الشدّ لا تحلّه أيّاما كثيرة ثمّ تحلّه وتعاود غيره حتّى يذهب التعقّد إن شاء الله، او تشدّ عليه صفيحة من رصاص محكمة.	And apply it to the complication in a compress, and bind it tightly on it, and leave the binding without loosening it for several days, then loosen it and repeat it until the complication is removed, God willing. Or, you can bind onto it a patch of strong, solidified lead.
فإنّ للرصاص خاصيّة تذهب بكلّ ما نتا فى الأعضاء، فإن كان التعقّد قد تحجّر واشتدّ وحفزت الضرورة الى نزعه فشقّ عليه من أعلاه واقطع الفضلة الناتية او اجردها ببعض المجارد حتّى يذهب وعالج الجرح حتّى يبرأ،.	For lead has a property that repels everything that is put in the organs. If the complication had become entrenched and stubborn, and the necessity reached the point of cutting it off, then I would cut off from above and sever the affected limb or amputate some of the surrounding area until it is removed, and treat the wound until it heals.
الفصل الحادي والعشرون.	The 11th and 22nd chapters.
فى علاج الكسر اذا انجبر وبقى العضو بعد ذلك رقيقا على غير طبعه الأوّل.	On treating fractures, if they are successfully managed and the limb remains weak after that, not returning to its original strength.
اذا انجبر كسر العظام وبقى العضو بعد ذلك رقيقا ضعيفا فإنّما يكون ذلك لأسباب كثيرة.	If a fracture of the bone is successfully managed and the limb remains weak and fragile after that, then that would be for many reasons.
أحدها إمّا لكثرة حلّ الرباطات وربطها على غير ما ينبغى وإمّا لإفراط شدّ الرباطات حتّى امتنع الغذاء أن يسرى الى العضو وإمّا لكثرة التنطيل المفرط وإمّا لحركات مفرطة فى غير وقتها وإمّا لقلّة الدم فى جسد العليل وضعفه.	Some of them are due to the weakness of the ligaments and their binding in a way that is not proper, and some for the excessive tightness of the ligaments until the nourishment is prevented from reaching the limb, and some for the excessive movement at the wrong time, and some for the scarcity of blood in the body of the patient and his debilitation.
وعلاج ذلك تغذية العليل وتخصيب بدنه حتّى يكثر الدم فيه واستعمال الحمّام وإدخال السرور عليه والفرح ونحو ذلك، ثمّ تحمل الزفت على العضو ليجذب الزفت عليه غذاء كثيرا او يدام تنطيله بالماء الفاتر.	And the treatment for that is to nourish the patient and fatten his body until the blood increases in it, and using the bath, and applying cupping on him, and rubbing, and similar things. Then, you apply the poultice to the limb to attract much nourishment or to instill movement with the warm water.
حتّى يجرى الغذاء فيه ويعود الى شكله الطبيعىّ،.	The nutrition is restored in it and returns to its natural shape.
الفصل الثانى والعشرون.	Chapter 22.
فى علاج العظام المكسورة اذا انجبرت معوجّة ومنعت فعلها على ما ينبغى.	In the treatment of a fractured bone, if it has become bent and crooked, and its action is not desirable.
فمتى عرض لعضو قد جبر بعد برئه اعوجاج او نتو للعظم المكسور او تعقّد وقبحت لذلك صورة العضو.	When a limb has been straightened after its fracture or curvature, or the bone is broken or dislocated, and it requires an image of the limb.
إلّا أنّ العضو لم يمتنع عن فعله الطبيعىّ فليس ينبغى أن تقبل قول من يزعم أن يكسر العضو من رأس وقد كان كثير من جهّال الأطبّاء والمجبّرين يفعلون ذلك فى بلدنا.	However, the limb has not lost its natural function, so it is not desirable to accept the opinion of those who claim that they can cut off the limb from the head, and many ignorant physicians and charlatans have done that in our country.
وهذا الفعل مذموم جدّا يؤدّى الى غرر عظيم أيسره العطب، لكن إن كان العوج والتعقّد طريّا فينبغى أن ينطل بالماء الذى قد طبخ فيه الحشائش المرخية مثل ورق الخطمىّ وأصله وإكليل الملك ونحو ذلك.	And this action is extremely reprehensible, leading to great harm and corruption of the limb. However, if the curvature and dislocation are mild, it may be acceptable to use a poultice made with marshy herbs such as pomegranate peel, king's cilantro, and similar things.
ويضمد بالأضمدة المرخية كالدياخيلون المحكم الصنعة او يؤخذ لعاب أصل الخطمىّ ويضرب مع شحم الدجاج ودهن الشيرج ويضمد به او يؤخذ التين الدسم ويدقّ مع زبل الحمام ونحوها من الأدوية التى تسمّى ناقضة الاندمال.	And it is treated with marshy poultices, such as Diachylon, or the root of the pomegranate is taken and crushed with chicken fat and rose oil, and applied thereto. Or the figs of the Damascene are taken and mixed with wax of the bath, and similar remedies that are called anti-inflammatory.
وقذ يتحلّل التعقّد بالدلك الدائم الرقيق الذى يكون بالأيدى وتستعمل حركة العضو الى كلّ جهة فى الأوقات كلّها، فإن كان الاعوجاج قد قدم واشتدّ وتحجّر ودعت الضرورة الى علاجه بالحديد.	And when the dislocation is treated with continuous gentle traction, which is done with a bandage, and the movement of the limb is exercised in all directions at all times, if the curvature has progressed and become rigid and stubborn, and the severity of the condition requires its treatment with iron.
فينبغى أن تشقّ أعلاه وتطلق اتّصال العظم وتقطع ما فضل من التعقّد او العظم بمقاطع لطاف وتستعمل الرفق فى ذلك بجهد وعناية، ثمّ تعالج الجرح بما تقدّم ذكره حتّى يبرأ،.	It is desirable to disarticulate it and release the connection of the bone, and to cut off what remains of the curvature or the bone with gentle sections, and to use gentleness in that with effort and care. Then the wound is treated with what was previously mentioned until it heals.
الفصل الثالث والعشرون.	The Twenty-Third Section.
فى القول فى الفكّ.	On Speaking about the Jawbone.
الفكّ هو خروج مفصل من المفاصل عن موضعه فيعوّق عن الحركة ويقبح شكل العضو ويحدث على العليل أوجاعا وآلاما شديدة، فمتى عرض لأحد فكّ فينبغى أن يبادر من حينه الى ردّه.	The jawbone is a dislocation of the joint from its position, which impedes movement and deforms the shape of the member, causing severe pain and discomfort. If someone's jawbone becomes dislocated, it is necessary to reduce it quickly to restore it to its place.
لا يؤخّره البتّة فإنّه إن أخّر تورّم الموضع ورما يعسر معه ردّ الفكّ، فلذلك لا ينبغى أن يؤخّر ولا يحرّك ولا يمدّ فى حين تورّمه لأنّه كثيرا ما يحدث على العليل تشنّج وأوجاع مؤذية.	One should not delay, for if he does, the swelling will increase in the affected area and it will be difficult to reduce the jawbone. Therefore, one should not procrastinate or hesitate at all during the reduction process, because it often leads to severe pain and discomfort.
ولكن اذا عرض ذلك فينبغى أن يبادر الى فصد العليل ثمّ يترك حتّى يسكن الورم قليلا ثمّ ينطل العضو بالماء الحارّ والدهن ثمّ يردّ برفق ويعالج كلّ عضو بما يأتى ذكره فى موضعه.	But if that happens, it is necessary to hasten to calm the affected area, then let it settle until the swelling subsides a little, and then soak the member with warm water and oil, and finally reduce it gently and adjust each part to its proper position.
وقد رتّبت فصول الفكّ أيضا على حسب ما تقدّم فى الكسر من أعلى البدن الى أسفله،.	And you should also bandage the jawbone sections in accordance with what has been mentioned regarding the fracture, from top to bottom.
الفصل الرابع والعشرون.	The Twenty-Fourth Section.
فى علاج فكّ اللحى الأسفل.	On Treating a Fracture of the Lower Jawbone.
قلّ ما تتخلّغ الفكّان إلّا فى الندرة وخلعهما يكون على أحد وجهين إمّا أن يزولا عن مواضعهما زوالا يسيرا فيسترخيا قليلا وإمّا أن يتخلعا تخلّعا تامّا كاملا حتّى يسترخيا.	Do not let the jawbones slip out of place, except in the case of necessity, and let them be on one of two surfaces, either they are slightly dislocated from their positions or they are completely dislocated until they settle.
الى نحو الصدر حتّى يسيل لعاب العليل ولا يستطيع إمساكه ولا يطيق أن يطبّق فكّه ويتلجلج لسانه بالكلام، فأمّا إن كان تخلّعه يسيرا فقد يرجع فى أكثر الأحوال من ذاته بأيسر شىء.	Toward the chest, until the patient's saliva flows and he is unable to hold it in, nor can he open his jawbone and speak clearly with his tongue, but if the dislocation was slight, it often returns to its original position with minimal effort.
وأمّا إن كان الخلع تامّا كاملا فينبغى أن تستعجل ردّه بسرعة ولا تؤخّره البتّة وهو أن يمسك خادم رأس العليل ويدخل الطبيب إبهام يده الواحدة فى أصل الفكّ فى داخل فمه إن كان الفكّ من الجهة الواحدة.	And if the dislocation was complete, it is necessary to hasten its reduction quickly and not delay, while a servant holds the patient's head and the physician inserts his finger into the mouth on the affected side, at the base of the jawbone, if the fracture was on one side.
او يدخل إبهاميه جميعا إن كان الفكّ من الجهتين وسائر أصابع يديه من خارج يسوّى بها ويأمر العليل أن يرخى فكّه ويطلقه للذهاب الى كلّ ناحية والطبيب يسوّى الفكّ ويدفع الفكّ حتّى يرجع الى موضعه.	He should enter his fingers from both sides and let the rest of his fingers be outside to control them, and order the assistant to relax his jaw and release it to return to its position, and the surgeon controls the jaw and pushes it until it returns to its original position.
فإن عسر ردّه ولا سيّما إن كانت الفكّان جميعا فاستعمل الكماد بالماء الحارّ والدهن حتّى يسهل ردّهما ولا تؤخّر ردّهما البتّة كما قلنا، فإذا رجعا واستويا وانطبق فم العليل ولم يسترخيا فحينئذ فضع عليهما رفائد الخرق مع قيروطىّ قد صنع من شمع ودهن ورد.	If it is difficult to return and the jaws are not in their entirety, then he should use a warm compress with oil and butter until they become easy to return and do not cause difficulty in returning, as we have said. When they return and are settled and the patient's mouth is closed and did not relax, then at that time he puts on them a bandage of soft leather with fastenings made of wax and oil.
ثمّ تربط برفق برباط مسترخى، ويكون نوم العليل على ظهره ورأسه مثقّف بين وسادتين لئلّا يحرّكه يمينا ولا شمالا ولا يتكلّف مضغ شىء بل يجعل غذاءه حسوا ليّنا.	Then he should bandage firmly with a bandage that is relaxed, and the patient's head will be on his side, and his pillow will be between two pillows, so that he does not move to the right or left, nor does he strain himself, but rather makes his nourishment light and easy.
حتّى اذا ذهب الألم وانعقد الفكّ فليأكل ما بدا له، وليستعمل ذلك برفق ولا يتحامل على فتح فمه عند الأكل والشرب والتثاؤب حتّى ينعقد الفكّ ويبرأ.	Until when the pain goes away and the jaw is constricted, then he should eat what is easy for him, and he should not exert himself with bandaging, nor should he hesitate to open his mouth while eating, drinking, and speaking, until the jaw constricts and heals.
فإن عسر ردّ الفكّين اذا انفكّت فى وقت مّا ولم تنصرف الى مواضعهما فكثيرا ما يحدث من ذلك حمّيات وصداع دائم وربّما انطلق بطن العليل وربّما تقيّأ مرارا محضا فإذا رأيت ذلك فاعلم أنّه تالف.	If it is difficult to return the jaws, if they were separated at a time and did not return to their positions, then many calamities and chronic pains happen because of that, and sometimes the patient's belly becomes disordered, and sometimes his mouth becomes distorted, so if you see that, then know that it is a failure.
وكثيرا ما يموت من عرض له ذلك فى عشرة أيّام،.	And many are those who die within ten days from the severity of that condition.
الفصل الخامس والعشرون.	Chapter Twenty-Five.
فى ردّ فكّ الترقوة وطرف المنكب.	On the return of the jaw and the fracture of the collar bone.
أمّا الترقوة فإنّها لا تنفكّ من الجانب الداخل لاتّصالها بالصدر وقد تنفكّ الى خارج ويتبيّن ذلك للحسّ، وجبرها أن يضطجع العليل على ظهره ويمدّ ذراعيه.	As for the collar bone, it does not dislocate from the inside because of its connection to the chest, but rather it dislocates outwardly and that is evident to the senses, and it is necessary to force the patient to lie on his side and stretch out his arm.
ثمّ تضغط الموضع بكفّك ضغطا بقوّة فإنّها ترجع، ثمّ تضع عليها الضماد والرفائد وتشدّها، وأمّا طرفها الذى يلى المنكب ويتّصل به فليس ينخلع إلّا فى الندرة فإن انخلع يوما مّا فينبغى أن يردّ ويسوّى على ما ذكرنا وما يتهيّأ لك.	Here is the translation:
ثمّ تضع عليه الضماد والرفائد والشدّ وتأمر العليل بلزوم الدعة والسكون حتّى يبرأ، وبهذا العلاج بعينه تردّ طرف المنكب اذا زال أيضا عن موضعه،.	You apply the compress, the bandage, and the tight wrapping, and adjust the strap to the sound bone, until it becomes steady and firm, and with this treatment, you return the fractured end to its position, if it has also deviated from its place.
الفصل السادس والعشرون.	Chapter Twenty-Six.
فى ردّ فكّ المنكب.	On the reduction of a fractured collar-bone.
اعلم أنّ المنكب إنّما ينفكّ على ثلاثة أوجه أحدها أن ينفكّ الى جهة الإبط الى أسفل والثانى أن ينفكّ الى نحو الصدر وربّما انفكّ الى فوق المنكب وذلك يكون فى الندرة.	Know that the collar-bone is fractured in three ways: one of them is that it fractures towards the armpit downwards, and the second is that it fractures towards the chest, and perhaps it fractures above the collar-bone, and that is in the tenderness.
ولا ينفكّ الى خلف لمكان الكتف ولا ينفكّ الى قدّام لمكان العصب، وأكثر ما ينفكّ ويخرج الى أسفل نحو الإبط ولا سيّما فى الذين لحومهم قليلة لأنّه يخرج فيهم سريعا ويدخل سريعا.	And it does not fracture towards the back of the shoulder, nor does it fracture towards the front of the nerve, and most often it fractures and comes out downwards towards the armpit, especially in those who have little flesh because it comes out quickly in them and goes in quickly.
وأمّا الذين لحومهم كثيرة فإنّه بخلاف ذلك أعنى أنّه يخرج بعسر ويدخل بعسر، وربّما عرض لبعض الناس ضربة او سقطة فتورّم المنكب ورما حارّا فيظنّ به أنّه قد انفكّ فينبغى أن تمتحن ذلك حتّى تقف على صحّته.	And as for those who have a lot of flesh, it is the opposite, meaning that it comes out slowly and goes in slowly. And perhaps some people receive a blow or a fall and the collar-bone becomes swollen and painful, so they think it has fractured and it is necessary to examine it until its soundness is confirmed.
فحينئذ تتقدّم فى علاجه، ويتعرّف الفكّ اذا كان الى أسفل نحو الإبط إن تقرن بين المنكب المفكوكة والمنكب الصحيحة فإنّك تجد بينهما خلافا ظاهرا وتجد رأس المنكب فيه تعقير وتحت الإبط عند اللمس رأس المنكب كأنّه بيضة.	So when you proceed to treat it, and you feel the fracture if it is downwards towards the armpit, if you press between the fractured collar-bone and the sound one, you will find a clear difference between them, and you will find the head of the collar-bone in it deformed, and under the armpit when you touch, you will find the head of the collar-bone as if it were an egg.
ولا يقدر العليل أن يرفع يده الى أذنه ولا أن يحرّكها جميع الحركات، وكذلك إن انفكّ نحو الصدر او الى فوق فإنّك تجد ذلك ظاهرا للمس لا يخفى.	And the patient cannot raise his hand to his shoulder, nor can he move it with all its movements, and likewise if it fractures towards the chest or upwards, you will find that clearly apparent on examination and it does not hide.
وهذا الفكّ قد يسهل ردّه اذا. كان طريّا او كان العليل صبيّا، وردّه أن يرفع خادم يده الى فوق ثمّ تجعل أنت إبهامى يديك تحت إبطه وترفع المفصل بقوّة الى فوق الى موضعه والخادم يرفع يده ويمدّها الى فوق.	And this fracture can be easily reduced if it was fresh or the patient was a youth, and you reduce it by having the patient raise his hand upwards, then you make a fist under his armpit and strongly pull the joint upwards to its position, and the patient raises his hand and extends it upwards.
ثمّ يحطّ بها الى أسفل فإنّه يرجع بسرعة، فإن لم يرجع بما ذكرنا وكان للفكّ منذ حدث أيّام كثيرة فينبغى أن يستحمّ العليل فى الماء الحارّ ويستعمل النطول الذى يرخى ويلين مثل أن يطبخ أصل الخطمىّ والحلبة وإكليل الملك فى الماء ويستعمل.	Then he puts it in a lower position, and if it does not return to what we mentioned earlier and the crack had been there for several days, it is advisable to soak the bruise in warm water and use a compress that is moistened and wrapped around like a bandage, and the King's plaster in warm water should be used.
ثمّ يستلقى العليل على ظهره وتضع تحت إبطه كرة من صوف تكون معتدلة بين الليّن والشدّة ثمّ يجعل الطبيب عقبه على الكرة ويمسك يد العليل بيده ويمدّها الى أسفل.	Then he lies on his back and puts under his armpit a ball of cotton that is moderate between looseness and tightness, then the doctor makes its end at the ball and holds the patient's hand with his own hand and pulls it downwards.
ويدفع الكرة برجله فإنّه يرجع على مقام، وإن شئت رددته على هذا الوجه وهو أن تحضر رجلا أطول من العليل وتوقّفه من ناحية الجنب ويدخل منكبه تحت إبط العليل ويرفع إبطه الى فوق حتّى يكون العليل معلّقا فى الهواء.	And he presses the ball against his thigh, and if it does not return to its position, and if you want to reduce it in this direction, which is to prepare a longer splint than the bruise and fix it from the side of the groin and insert its end under the armpit of the bruise and lift his armpit up until the bruise is suspended in the air.
وخادم آخر يجذب يد العليل الى أسفل بطنه فإن كان العليل خفيفا فينبغى أن يعلّق به شىء آخر ليثقّله فإنّه يرجع الفكّ من ساعته، وقد يردّ أيضا على وجه آخر.	And another servant pulls the patient's hand downwards to his belly, and if the bruise is slight, it is advisable to hang another thing on it to hold it in place, so that the crack returns to its position from its time; and it may also be reduced through another direction.
وهو أن تركز فى الأرض خشبة طويلة يكون رأسها مستدير الشكل كفهر الهاون ليس بغليظ ولا برقيق ثم توضع تحت إبط العليل بعد أن تضع على رأس الخشبة خرقا ليّنا والعليل واقف على طول الخشبة.	And it is that you place on the ground a long, straight stick whose head is rounded in shape like a peg, not too thick nor too thin, then you put it under the armpit of the bruise after placing a soft cloth on the head of the stick and the bruise, and stand upright along the length of the stick.
ثمّ تمدّ يده الى أسفل من الناحية الأخرى ويمدّ جسده أيضا من الجهة الأخرى بقوّة فإنّ المفصل يرجع الى موضعه بسرعة، فإن عسر ردّه بجميع ما ذكرنا فاستعمل هذا العلاج وهو أن تأخذ خشبة طولها نحو ذراعين.	Then he stretches his hand downwards from the other side and stretches his body also from the other side with strength, so that the joint returns to its position quickly; if it is difficult to return it by all that we mentioned, then use this treatment, which is to take a stick about two cubits in length.
وعرضها قدر أربع أصابع وغلظها قدر أصبعين يكون لها رأس مستدير ليسهل دخولها فى عمق الإبط على هذه الصورة:.	And shape it to the width of four fingers and its thickness to that of two fingers, having a rounded head, so that it is easy for it to enter into the hollow of the armpit in this way.
ثمّ تربط على الرأس المستدير خرقا ليّنة لئلّا تؤذى الخشبة العليل ثمّ يصيّر تحت الإبط وتمدّ اليد كلّها والذراع على الخشبة الى أسفل وتربط الخشبة على العضد والساعد وطرف اليد.	Then bind the bandage on the curved head, making a loop for the forefinger to pass through, then wrap it under the armpit and extend the hand completely, and place the forearm on the bandage down to the elbow, and bind the bandage on the upper arm and the forearm, and tie the end of the hand.
ثمّ توضع الذراع على عارضة. سلّم بالعرض وتمدّ اليد الى أسفل ويترك سائر الجسد معلّقا من الناحية الأخرى فإنّ المفصل يدخل من ساعته، فإذا تمّ دخوله على أىّ وجه أمكن فينبغى أن توضع تحت الابط كرة معتدلة القدر من صوف.	Then place the forearm on a splint. Straighten it out and extend the hand down to the end, leaving the rest of the body suspended from the other side, so that the joint enters its socket; for if it enters at any angle, it is possible to place under the armpit a moderate-sized ball of cotton.
ثمّ يحمل الضماد المهيّأ من غبار الرحى مع اللبان وبياض البيض على المنكب كلّه كما يدور من فوق ثمّ تشدّ الكرة من تحت الإبط شدّا محكما ويدار بالرباط على الضماد من فوق وتعلّق يده الى عنقه.	Then the splint is wrapped with a dressing of gauze and fig leaves, and egg whites are applied to the entire shoulder, as it turns from above; then the ball is pressed firmly from under the armpit, and the bandage is tied on top of the splint, and his hand is suspended from his neck.
ويترك لا يحرّك يده سبعة أيّام، وينبغى أن يجعل غذاء العليل قليلا حتّى يقوى العضو فهو أسرع لبروئه، ثمّ تحلّ بعد السبعة الأيّام او الخمسة ويدرّب بالحركة فإن ثبت ولم يسترخ فقد برئ.	And he leaves it without moving his hand for seven days, and it is desirable to make the nutrition of the affected part a little less until the member becomes strong, for it is quicker to recover. Then after seven or five days, he moves it gently, and if it has stuck together and not become loose, it has recovered.
فإن كان المفصل ينخلع مرارا كثيرة لرطوبة تعرض له او لعلّة أخرى فينبغى أن يستعمل فيه الكىّ بالثلاثة سفافيد على ما تقدّم فى باب الكىّ، فإن صنعت هذا كلّه وحللت الرباط بعد سبعة أيّام ولم يثبت المفصل.	If the joint becomes dislocated frequently due to weakness or another affection, it is desirable to use the method of traction with three pillows as mentioned previously in the chapter on traction. If this is done and the bandage is removed after seven days, but the joint has not become stable.
ورددت الضماد والشدّ عليه مرّات ولم يثبت وسقط واسترخى ولم تستطع رفعها الى فوق فاعلم أنّ عصبها الذى فى رأس المنكب قد انقطع او امتدّ او استرخى فاعلم حينئذ أنّ المفصل لا يثبت فى موضعه أبدا.	The splint was applied and pressed on it many times, but it did not become stable, and it fell and became loose, and you were unable to elevate it upwards. Then know that the nerve which is in the head of the shoulder has been cut off or stretched or loosened. Then know at that time that the joint will never stabilize in its position.
وأمّا الفكّ الذى يكون نحو الصدر والثدى وإلى خلف فردّه يكون بالدفع والمدّ بالأيدى حتّى يرجع، ويستعمل فيه سائر الشدّ والعلاج حتّى يبرأ، فإن عرض بعد البرؤ جسا فى العضو وأبطأ فى الحركة.	When the fracture is near the chest and the ribcage, and towards the back of the person, it should be treated with bandaging and steady pressure until it returns to its original position. All other treatments, including medications, are employed until it heals. If, after healing, there is still some weakness in the member and limitation in movement...
فليستعمل العليل الحمّام مرارا كثيرة حتّى يلين ذلك الجسا ويعود الى طبيعته الأولى،.	The hot bath should be repeatedly employed until the fracture is fully restored and returns to its original natural state.
الفصل السابع والعشرون.	Chapter 27.
فى علاج فكّ المرفق.	On the Treatment of Fractures of the Elbow.
إنّ مفصل المرفق ينفكّ بعسر وكذلك يرجع بعسر أيضا وهو ينفكّ الى جميع الجهات ولا سيّما الى قدّام او الى خلف وفكّه لا يخفى عليك لأنّه واقع تحت البصر وتحت اللمس الى أىّ شكل انفكّ.	For the elbow joint is dislocated with ease and also returns with ease, and it dislocates to all directions, not specifically to the front or to the back, and its fracture does not escape your notice because it occurs under observation and under touch in any shape of dislocation.
وإذا قرنت المرفق المفكوك بالصحيح تبيّن ذلك لك بيانا ظاهرا بتقعير المفصل ولا يستطيع أن يثنى الذراع ولا يمسّ به منكبه، وينبغى أن تبادر وتردّ الفكّ من ساعتك قبل أن يعرض له ورم حارّ.	And if you find the elbow joint fractured and in its correct position, it will be clear to you by the apparent curvature of the joint, and he will not be able to bend his arm or move it from its socket, and it is necessary to reduce and set the fracture quickly before it becomes complicated with inflammation.
فإنّه إن عرض له ورم حارّ عسر ردّه وربّما لم يبرأ البتّة ولا سيّما اذا كان الفكّ الى خلف فإنّه أردأ ما يكون من جميع أنواع الفكّ وأشدّها وجعا وكثيرا ما ينزل معه الموت.	For if it becomes complicated with inflammation, it will be difficult to reduce it and maybe the patient will not heal, especially if the fracture is towards the back, for it is one of the most difficult types of fractures and the most painful, and often death occurs with it.
وجبره اذا كان ممّا يمكن أن يرجع أن يمدّ خادم يده بكلتى يديه وذراعه مبسوطة ويدا الطبيب من فوق المرفق ومن تحته وهو يدفع المفصل بإبهامى يديه جميعا او بأصل كفّه حتّى يرجع الى موضعه.	And you should force it, if possible, to return to its position by extending his arm with both hands and bent elbow, while the physician's hand is above the elbow and below it, and he presses the joint with his fingers or the base of his palm until it returns to its place.
وأمّا إن كان الفكّ الى قدّام فقد يرجع بأن تثنى اليد بمرّة حتّى تضرب بأصل كفّها المنكب الذى تحاذيه، فإن لم يجب الفكّ الى الرجوع فاستعمل المدّ الشديد القوىّ جدّا وهو أن يمدّ الذراع خادمان.	And if the fracture is towards the front, it returns by bending the arm at once until it meets the base of the palm, which is opposite to it. If the fracture does not return, then a strong and powerful bandaging should be employed, which is to extend the arm with both hands.
ويمسك العليل خادمان أيضا لئلّا يزول عند المدّ ثمّ تدار الذراع الى كلّ جهة بعد أن تلفّ على يده ثوبا مطويّا او قماطا عريضا، وإذا باشر بيديه الطبيب المفصل مسحها بدهن ليكون تعين فى إزلاق المفصل بسهولة.	We should also strap the injured areas, then bandage the arm in every direction after wrapping it with a compress or a broad plaster, and if the physician's fingers have touched the joint, they should be massaged gently to facilitate its movement.
ثمّ يدفع المفصل دفعا شديدا حتّى يرجع، وبعد رجوعه ينبغى أن يحمل عليه الضماد الذى فيه قبض وتجفيف مع بياض البيض ويشدّ شدّا محكما وتعلّق الذراع من عنق العليل وتترك أيّاما.	Then the joint should be bent strongly until it returns, and after its return, a compress with a tight bandage should be applied, including white wax and egg whites, and tightened firmly, and the arm should be suspended from the collar of the injured area for a while.
ثمّ تحلّ فإن ثبت المفصل فى موضعه فحلّ الرباط عنه واتركه، وإن رأيت المفصل لم يشتدّ نعمّا فأعد الضماد والرباط واتركه أيضا أيّاما حتّى يشتدّ ثمّ حلّه، فإن حدث له جسا بعد رجوع المفصل وحلّه.	Then, if the joint is fixed in its position, the bandage should be removed from it and left, and if you see that the joint has not been set properly, reapply the compress and bandage and leave it for a while until it sets, then remove it; and if a crisis occurs after the joint's return and removal.
وعسر فى الحركة فليستعمل الترطيب فى الحمّام والدلك اللطيف والغمز حتّى يلين او اجعل على المفصل ألية كبش سمين ثمّ اربطها واتركها عليه يوما وليلة ثمّ انزعها وأدخله الحمّام، فإذا عرق فاعرك المفصل عركا معتدلا.	And if there is difficulty in movement, let him not use the rubbing in the bath and gentle massage until it becomes loose or put a small cupping device on the joint, then bandage it and leave it for a day and a night, then remove it and put it in the bath; and if it becomes supple, flex the joint with moderate flexibility.
ثمّ أعد عليه الألية مرّة وثانية وثالثة مع دخول الحمّام حتّى يلين، وإن شئت أن تجعل عليه خثى البقر رطبا مستخفّا مع السمن وشدّه عليه افعل ذلك مرّات فإنّه يلين ويرجع الى حالته الأولى،.	Then, reapply the cupping device to it several times, with entry into the bath, until it becomes loose; and if you see that putting a bladder of melted wax on it, hidden with fat and bandaged, does that repeatedly, it will become loose and return to its original condition.
الفصل الثامن والعشرون.	Chapter 28
فى علاج فكّ المعصم.	On the Treatment of Dislocated Fractures
معصم اليد كثيرا ما ينفكّ وردّ فكّه يسهل خلاف سائر المفاصل إلّا أنّه ينبغى أن يسرع بردّ فكّه الساعة التى ينفكّ فيها قبل أن يرم الموضع او يعرض فيه ورم حارّ،.	A dislocated hand often happens, and its fracture is difficult to return, unlike other joints; but it is necessary to hasten the return of its fracture at the time it occurs, before the place becomes numb or inflamed with a severe abscess.
وردّ فكّه أن تضع معصم العليل على لوح ويمدّ خادم يده ويضع الطبيب كفّه على نتو المفصل ويدفعه حتّى يرجع إلّا أنّه ينبغى أن ينظر إن كان الفكّ قد زال الى باطن اليد.	Put the bandage of the forearm on the ulna and let the servant put his hand under it, and the physician should put his hand on the joint and bend it until it returns to its original position; for it is necessary to examine whether the bone has returned to its proper place in the arm.
فليضع العليل ظاهر يده على اللوح عند المدّ والردّ وإن كان الفكّ بارزا الى ظاهر اليد فليكن وضع يده الباطنة على اللوح لتقع يد الطبيب على نفس نتو المفصل، فإن رجع من حينه وإلّا فشدّه بضماد مسكن للورم.	Let him put the forearm's outer bandage on the ulna during flexion and extension, and if the bone protrudes to the outer surface of the arm, let him put the inner bandage on the ulna so that the physician's hand is on the same joint; for when it returns to its place and otherwise, tighten it with a compressive dressing suitable for the swelling.
واتركه لا تعاوده فإنّه لا يحتمل ولا تستطيع على ردّه بعد أن تمضى له أيّام إلّا أنّ المفصل يبقى على عوجه ولا يضرّ العليل شيئا إلّا إن استرخت اليد ولم تستطع على قبض شىء.	Do not leave it untreated, for it will not be maintained and you will not be able to reduce it after a few days have passed, unless the joint remains in its original position and does not harm the forearm at all, except that the arm will become weak and you will not be able to grasp anything.
فحينئذ تعلم أنّ العصب انقطع او ترضّض فلا حيلة فيه إلّا أن يشدّ بالكىّ فربّما نفع وربّما لم ينفع ذلك شيئا، فإذا تمّ ردّ المعصم فاحمل عليه الضماد الذى وصفنا ثمّ يشدّ ويترك خمسة أيّام.	Then, you should learn that the nerve has been severed or crushed, and there is no remedy for it except to tighten with a splint; perhaps it may be of benefit, and perhaps it will not benefit at all. If the bandage is returned, put on it the compressive dressing we have described, then tighten it and leave it for five days.
ثمّ يحلّ وتدرّب اليد فإن تعذّرت حركتها وعرض فيها شىء من الجسا فليّنها بالماء المسخّن والعرك مرّات حتّى تلين،.	Then, the arm will heal and regain its strength, so that its movement is restored and it becomes flexible again; bathe it with warm water and massage it repeatedly until it becomes supple.
الفصل التاسع والعشرون.	Chapter 29.
فى علاج فكّ الأصابع.	On the treatment of finger fractures.
الأصابع قد تنفكّ الى كلّ جهة فمتى انفكّ منها أصبع الى ظاهر الكفّ او باطنها فمدّ الأصبع وادفع الفكّ بإبهامك حتّى يرجع، ثمّ اربط رأس الأصبع وعلّقها نحو الجهة التى انفكّت اليها.	The fingers may become fractured in any direction, so when a finger is fractured to the outer or inner surface of the hand, extend the finger and adjust the fracture with your thumb until it returns to its place; then, bind the head of the finger and suspend it towards the direction from which it was displaced.
واتركها يومين ثمّ أطلقها ومدّها حتّى تعتدل قائمة يومها ذلك فإذا كان بالليل ربطتها على الوصف نفسه فلا تزال تحلّها بالنهار وتدرّبها بالحركة وتربطها بالليل تفعل ذلك أيّاما حتّى تشتدّ.	Leave it for two days, then release it and extend it until it forms a straight line on that day. If it is at night, bind it with the same dressing, do not loosen it during the day, and exercise it with movement, binding it at night, doing so for as long as it takes to heal.
وكذلك تفعل بها إن انفكّت الى باطن اليد فتربطها الى نحو الجهة نفسها وافعل بها فعلتك الأولى حتّى تبرأ، وكذلك افعل بها متى انفكّت الى سائر الجهات،.	And do the same if it has sunk into the palm of the hand, bind it to the same direction, and perform on it your first action until it heals. And likewise, do the same whenever it has sunk into other directions.
الفصل الثلاثون.	Chapter Thirty.
فىعلاج فكّ خرز الظهر.	Treatment of a fracture of the vertebrae of the back.
متى حدث فكّ لخرزة من خرزات الظهر او العنق الفكّ التامّ او زالت خرزات كثيرة عن مواضعها فلا علاج فيه لأنّ الموت يسرع الى العليل.	When a fracture occurs in one of the vertebrae of the back or neck, either a complete fracture or multiple vertebrae are dislocated from their positions, there is no treatment for it, because death will quickly come to the patient.
وعلامة ذلك أنّ براز العليل يخرج من غير إرادة لا يستطيع إمساكه وكثيرا ما يسترخى منه بعض أعضائه إمّا ساقاه وإمّا ذراعاه او واحدة منها، وأمّا إن زالت خرزة واحدة عن موضعها فكثيرا ما تزول.	And the sign of that is that the patient's urine will come out without his control, and often some of his limbs will become paralyzed, either his legs or his arms or one of them. And if one vertebra has become dislocated from its position, it will often become displaced.
ويكون زوالها الى أربع جهات فالتى تزول الى خلف تسمّى حدبة، وأمّا علاجها فهو أن تنظر فإن كانت الحدبة قد حدثت من الصبا فلا علاج فيها ولا منها برء البتّة، وأمّا التى حدثت عن سقطة او ضربة ونحو ذلك.	And its displacement will be to four directions, so the one that displaces backwards is called a curvature, and as for its treatment, it is that you should consider: if the curvature has occurred due to a natural disposition, there is no treatment for it, nor can the body's natural constitution be changed. As for the one that occurs due to a fall or a blow, and so on.
فقد ذكرتها الأوائل بضروب من العلاج بكلام طويل لا يعود أكثره بفائدة وقد اختصرت من ذلك ما يغنى قليله عن كثير ممّا أتوا به من تقربتى للمعنى وشرحى له وصوّرت الآلة خلاف ما بيّنوه وشرحوه.	I have mentioned them, as the predecessors did, with various treatments in lengthy discussions that do not provide much benefit. I have therefore summarized what is sufficient of that, avoiding much of what they have mentioned, and clarified the meaning, making it clear and concise, unlike their confusing explanations.
فأقول إنّ الحدبة التى تحدث من قدّام فى الصدر فلا حيلة فيها ولا برء منها وكذلك التى الى الجهتين أيضا وإنّما تعالج منها التى تحدث فى الظهر خاصّة بما أنا واصفه، وهو أن تمدّ العليل على وجهه.	So I say that the curvature which occurs from an innate condition in the chest, there is no treatment for it, nor can its natural disposition be changed. And likewise, the one that occurs on both sides as well. But I do treat the one that occurs in the back, specifically with what I have described, and that is to extend the patient on his face.
على دكّان مستو بقرب حائط وتبسط تحته وطاء رطبا لئلّا يؤذى صدره ثمّ تضع خشبة قائمة مغروسة فى حفرة فى الأرض فى طرف الدكّان نحو رأسه وخشبة أخرى نحو رجليه فى الطرف الآخر من الدكّان.	On a flat surface near the wall and spreading out, it descends to the floor, and puts a rod in a hole in the ground at the side of the flat surface, near its head, and another rod near its leg on the other side of the flat surface.
وخادم يمسك الخشبة ولتكن غير موثّقة فى الحفرة وخادم آخر يمسك الأخرى على تلك الهيئة ثمّ تلفّ على صدر العليل وتحت إبطيه بقماط ليّن وثيق وتمدّ طرف القماط الى الخشبة التى عند رأسه وتربطه فيها.	A servant holds the rod and it is not fixed in the hole, and another servant holds the other one in that manner, then he winds around the chest of the patient and under his armpits with tight and firm bandages, and stretches the end of the bandage to the rod that is at his head and ties him to it.
ثم تشدّ بقماط آخر فوق وركيه وفوق ركبتيه وعند عرقوبيه ثمّ تجمع الرباطات كلّها وتربطها فى الخشبة الأخرى التى عند رجليه ثمّ يمدّ كلّ خادم الى جهته الخشبة بالرباط ولا تزول الخشبتان من مواضعها المركوزة فيها.	Then he applies another bandage above his hip and above his knee and around his ankle, then he gathers all the bandages together and ties them to the other rod that is at his leg, then each servant stretches to his side of the rod with the bandage, and the two rods do not move from their fixed positions.
إلّا أنّهما غير موثّقة كما قلنا والطبيب يضع كفّيه على الخرزة بقوّة حتّى ترجع او يضع عليها لوحا ثمّ يتّكئ على اللوح برجليه حتّى ترجع، فإن لم ترجع بهذا العلاج فتأخذ لوحا يكون طوله نحو ثلاثة أذرع.	But they are not fixed as we mentioned, and the doctor places his palms on the patient's hip with force until he returns or he puts a board on it, then he leans on the board with his leg until he returns; if he does not return with this treatment, take a board whose length is about three cubits.
وتحفر فى الحائط الذى قلنا أن يكون بقرب العليل مكانا تدخل فيه طرف اللوح ثمّ تضع وسط اللوح على الحدبة ويضع رجليه الطبيب على الطرف الآخر ويشدّ شدّا جيّدا حتّى يضغظ الحرزة.	And dig a hole in the wall that we mentioned to be near the patient's place, where one end of the board enters, then he puts the middle of the board on the projection and the doctor's leg on the other end, and he pulls strongly until the fracture is set.
وترجع الى مكانها، وإن شئت أن تصنعه باللولب الذى يفتل باليد وهو أن تغرز فى الأرض عند رأس العليل فى آخر الدكّان خشبتين يكون طولهما ذراعا وعند رجليه فى آخر الدكّان أيضا خشبتين.	And it returns to its place, and if you want to fix it with the pulley that is turned by hand, it is by inserting into the ground at the head of the patient at the end of the flat surface two rods, each a cubit long, and at his leg at the end of the flat surface also two rods.
وليكن بعد ما بين كلّ خشبة شبرا وقد صنع فى كلّ خشبة ثقبة فيها يجرى اللولب وتوثّق الخشب كلّها فى الأرض نعمّا حتّى لا تتحرّك البتّة وتدخل عودا مدوّرا وهو اللولب الذى يلوى فيه الرباط فى ثقبتى الخشبتين.	And there is a gap of one finger between each rod, and a hole has been made in each rod through which the pulley passes, and all the rods are fixed firmly in the ground until the patient does not move, and a curved rod enters, which is the pulley that winds the bandage around the two rods.
وفى طرفه ثقب قد وثّق فيه عود طوله شبر بما يلوى وفى الخشبتين الأخريين مثل ذلك، ثمّ تشدّ الرباط الذى شددت فى صدر العليل فى اللولب الذى عند رأسه والرباطات التى شددت فى ساقيه فى اللولب الذى عند رجليه.	On its lateral aspect, there is a perforation that has been stitched with a long suture, as it winds around, and in the two posterior muscles, likewise. Then, you tighten the bandage that was tightened at the navel of the ulcer at the neck, and the bandages that were tightened on his leg at the ankle joint.
ثمّ يقف عند كلّ لولب خادم يفتل يده بالمفتل الذى يلوى به اللولب والطبيب يسوّى الحدبة على ما قدّمنا، وهذه صورة اللولب والدكّان والعليل:.	Then, a servant stands at each ulcer, holding the instrument that winds around the ulcer and the surgeon makes an incision according to what we have described, and this is the picture of the ulcers and the surgical instruments and the wounds.
ثمّ بعد أن ترجع الفقارة ويستوى الموضع فينبغى أن تحمل الضماد المجفّف ببياض البيض ثمّ المشاقة ثمّ تضع من فوق الضماد جبيرة من لوح يكون عرضه ثلاث أصابع أو نحوها ويكون طوله قدر ما يأخذ موضع الحدبة.	Then, after the ulcer has suppurated and the site has been prepared, it is necessary to apply the dry poultice with egg whites, then the compress, and then place on top of the poultice a splint made of a plate, its width being three fingers or thereabouts, and its length being sufficient to cover the site of the incision.
وعلى بعض الخرز الصحيح ثمّ يربط بالرباط الذى ينبغى ويستعمل العليل الغذاء اللطيف حتّى يبرأ، فإن بقى بعض النتو فى الموضع فى آخر البرء فينبغى أن تستعمل الأدوية التى ترخى وتليّن مع استعمال اللوح الذى وصفنا زمانا طويلا.	And on some of the sound skin, then he binds with a bandage that is suitable and uses a gentle nourishing poultice until he recovers. If some of the ulcers remain at the site after recovery, it is necessary to use the medications that soften and calm, along with applying the plate we described previously over a long period of time.
وقد تستعمل فى ذلك صفيحة رصاص، وقد يعرض نتو فى آخر خرزات الظهر فيظنّ به تخلّع ويكون ذلك عظم زائد قد نتا فلا تتعرّض له بهذا العلاج فربّما حدث الموت،.	And a copper plate may be used for that, and ulcers may appear on the remaining skin of the back, and it is thought to be a bony excess that has grown, so do not resist it with this treatment, lest death occur.
الفصل الحادى والثلاثون.	Chapter 31.
فى علاج الورك المفكوك.	On the Treatment of Varicose Veins.
اعلم أنّ مفصل الورك ومفصل المنكب إنّما يعرض لهما الفكّ فقط ولا يعرض لهما ما يعرض لسائر المفاصل من الزوال اليسير والتقعير، ومفصل الورك ينفكّ على أربعة أوجه.	Know that the knee joint and the elbow joint are only dislocated, and they do not suffer what other joints suffer from, such as sprains and strains. And the knee joint is dislocated in four directions.
وذلك أنّه ينفكّ الى داخل وإلى خارج وإلى قدّام وإلى خلف وأكثر ما ينفكّ الى داخل وقلّ ما ينفكّ الى قدّام او الى خلف، وعلامة فكّه الى داخل أنّك اذا قرنت ساق العليل الصحيحة بالمريضة تكون أطول.	And that is because it is dislocated inward, outward, forward, and backward. And most of the time, it is dislocated inward, and rarely is it dislocated forward or backward. The sign of its dislocation inward is that if you compare the healthy leg with the affected one, the latter will be longer.
وتكون الركبة ناتية أكثر من الصحيحة ولا يقدر العليل أن يثنى رجله عند الأربيّة ويكون الموضع الذى يلى الأربيّة وارما ورما بيّنا من قبل أن رأس الفخذ قد صار الى هناك.	The fracture is more curved than the healthy bone, and the patient cannot bend his knee at the joint, and the position which is above the joint of the thigh becomes bent before the head of the femur reaches it.
وعلامة الذى يعرض له الفكّ الى خارج تكون أعراضه ضدّ هذه الأعراض، وعلامة الذى يعرض له الفكّ الى قدّام فإنّه يبسط ساقه على التمام إلّا أنّه لايثنيها من غير ألم يكون فى الركبة وإن رام المشى لم يقدر على ذلك الى قدّام.	And the sign that indicates to him that his knee is displaced outward are symptoms contrary to these symptoms, and the sign that indicates to him that his knee is displaced forward is that he stretches his leg on the mattress but does not bend it unless there is no pain in the fracture, and if he attempts to walk, he cannot do so forward.
ويحتبس بوله وترم اربيّته وعند المشى يكون وطئه على العقب، وعلامة الذى يعرض له الفكّ الى خلف أن لا يبسط الركبة ولا يقدر على أن يثنّيها قبل أن يثنى الأربيّة وتكون ساقه أيضا أقصر من الأخرى.	And he feels a heaviness in his knee and thigh, and when walking, he limps on the affected limb; and the sign that indicates to him that his knee is displaced backward is that he cannot stretch the fracture nor bend it before bending the joint, and his leg also becomes shorter than the other.
والأربيّة مسترخية ويكون رأس الفخذ عند موضع الخاصرة بيّنا، وأمّا ردّ أنواع هذا الفكّ فهو أن تنظر فإن كان الفكّ قديما قد أزمن بصاحبه ولم يحاول ردّه وبقى على حالته فليس فيه علاج البتّة.	And the joint is relaxed and the head of the femur is at the position of the hip, and as for the return of this type of fracture, it is that you should look, if the fracture is old and has adhered to its place and did not try to reduce it, and it remained in its state, then there is no treatment for it.
فلا ينبغى أن تعرض له، وأمّا الذى فكّه حديث وكان من أىّ نوع كان من الأربع الأوجه من الفكّ فبادر الى أن تلوى المفصل وتمدّه الى داخل وإلى خارج وتحرّكه يمنة ويسرة فربّما.	It is not necessary to present it, and as for the one who has a recent fracture, regardless of its type, whether it is one of the four kinds of fractures of the joint, you should proceed to manipulate the joint, stretching it inward and outward, and moving it gently from side to side.
رجع ولم يحتج الى غيره من العلاج، فإن لم يرجع هكذا فينبغى أن تعدّ خادما أيّدا قويّا فيمدّ ساقه من أسفل إمّا بيديه وإمّا بقماط يربط على ساقه فوق الركبة وخادم آخر يمدّه من فوق.	If it does not return to its proper place, and he did not respond to any other treatment, then if it does not return thus, it is necessary to apply a strong compression bandage on his leg from below, either with his hand or with a strap that is tied around the thigh above the knee, and another compression bandage that extends from above.
بأن يدخل يديه من تحت إبطيه ثمّ يشدّ بقماط ليّن على أصل الفخذ ويمسك بطرف القماط خادم آخر ثالث ويكون مدّه إمّا من قدّام من ناحية الأربيّة الى ناحية الترقوة وإمّا من خلف الى ناحية الظهر.	By putting his hand from under his armpit, then tightening the strap so it lies on the base of the thigh, and holding the end of the strap with another compression bandage, which extends either from the front near the joint to the region of the hip, or from behind to the region of the spine.
ويكون مدّهم كلّهم بمرّة واحدة حتّى يرتفع العليل بجسمه من الأرض ويبقى معلّقا، فإنّ هذا النوع من المدّ نوع مشترك للأنواع الأربعة، فإن رجع الفكّ بما قلنا وإلّا فلا بدّ لكلّ نوع ممّا أذكره من العلاج الخاصّ.	And they all pertain to one category until the patient is lifted from the ground and remains suspended, for this type of suspension is a common type shared by the four categories; if we return to what we mentioned earlier, each type has its own specific treatment.
أمّا ردّه الخاصّ اذا كان الفكّ الى داخل فينبغى أن يستلقى العليل على جنبه الصحيح ثمّ تصيّر قماطا على أصل الفخذ فيما بين رأس الفخذ والموضع الذى تحت الأربيّة.	But its specific return, if the fracture is inside the thigh, it is necessary to place the patient on his sound hip, then bind the splints to the base of the thigh between the head of the thigh and the spot beneath the pubic bone.
ثمّ تمدّ الرباط الى فوق من ناحية الأربيّة الى أعلى البدن الى ناحية الترقوة ثمّ يأخذ خادم آخر قوىّ أيّد بذراعيه ويحتضن الموضع الثخين من الفخذ العليلة ويمدّ الى خارج مدّا شديدا فإنّه يرجع الى موضعه.	Then the bandage is extended from above the pubic bone to the upper arm, then another strong servant takes hold with his hand and grasps the thick part of the patient's thigh, and strongly pulls it outward until it returns to its position.
وهذا النوع أسهل من سائر أنواع العلاج الذى يكون به ردّ هذا العضو، فإن تعذّر عليك ولم يجبك الى الدخول بهذا النوع من العلاج البتّة فينبغى أن تربط رجلى العليل جميعا برباط قوىّ ليّن على الكعبين وعلى الركبتين.	And this type is easier than other types of treatment that involve the return of this limb, for it is troublesome to you and does not require you to enter into this type of treatment; it is necessary to bind both legs together with a strong bandage, so that it may be fixed on the ankles and knees.
ويكون بعد كلّ واحد من صاحبه قدر أربع أصابع وتكون الساق العليلة ممدودة أكثر من الأخرى قدر أصبعين، ثمّ يعلّق العليل على الرأس من خشبة تكون فى البيت ويكون بعده من الأرض قدر ذراعين.	And each one is at a distance of four fingers from its companion, and the upper thigh is extended more than the other by two fingers; then the patient is suspended from the roof beam in the house, and it is at a distance of two arm lengths from the ground.
ثمّ تأمر غلاما قويّا أن يحتضن رأس الفخذ ويتعلّق بالعليل غلام آخر ويدفع الغلام الآخر المحتضن للفخذ بقوّة فإنّ المفصل يرجع الى موضعه بسرعة، وأما ردّه الخاصّ اذا كان الفكّ الى خارج.	Then you order a strong servant to grasp the head of the thigh and suspend himself with the patient, and another servant pushes the grasping servant with force, so that the joint returns to its position quickly; and as for its specific return, if the fracture is outside.
فينبغى أن يضطجع العليل على الدكّان على حسب ما وصفنا فى صاحب الحدبة ويشدّ الرباط على ساقه العليلة خاصّة وعلى صدره ثمّ توضع الخشبتان الواحدة عند رجليه والأخرى عند رأسه ثمّ توضع خشبة زائدة فى وسط الدكّان موثّقة جدّا.	It is necessary to place the patient on the cushions, as we described for the case of the curvature, and bind the bandage on his upper thigh specifically and on his chest; then one stick is placed at his feet and another at his head, and a spare stick is placed in the middle of the cushions, strongly fastened.
قد لفّ عليها خرق رطبة لئلّا تؤذى العليل لتكون الخشبة بين فخذيه لئلّا ينجذب الى أسفل عند المدّ، ثمّ يمدّ كلّ خادم الى جهته والطبيب يسوّى الورك بيديه، فإن أجاب الى الرجوع.	Here is the translation of the excerpt:
وإلّا فضع عليه اللوح وكبّسه على ما ذكرنا فى الحدبة سواء إلّا أنّه ينبغى أن يكون اضطجاع العليل على جنبه الصحيح، وإذا كان الخلع الى قدّام فينبغى أن تمدّ ساق العليل بمرّة وهو على هذا الوصف بعينه على الدكّان.	Here is the translation:
ويضع الطبيب كفّ يده اليمنى على الأربيّة العليلة ثمّ يضغطها باليد الأخرى ومع ذلك يصيّر الضغط ممدودا الى أسفل الى ناحية الركبة، وإذا كان الخلع الى خلف فليس ينبغى أن يمدّ العليل الى أسفل.	The physician places the palm of his right hand on the wounded area, then presses it with the other hand, while exerting gentle pressure downwards towards the knee, and if the wound is at the back, it should not be pressed downwards.
وهو مرتفع على الأرض بل ينبغى أن يكون موضوعا على شىء صلب كما ينبغى أن يكون أيضا من انفكّ وركه الى خارج على حسب ما ذكرنا من اضطجاعه على الدكّان وهو على وجهه والرباطات مشدودة.	He should be elevated above the ground, but it is necessary that he be placed on a solid surface, as it is also necessary to bend his knee outward according to what we mentioned about the position of the pelvis and the joints being stretched.
على ما قلنا آنفا وينبغى أن يستعمل الكبس باللوح أيضا على الموضع الذى خرج المفصل اليه، فإذا كمل رجوع مفصل الورك على ما ينبغى وعلامة رجوعه لا تخفى عليك وهو أن تمدّ ساقى العليل.	As we mentioned earlier, it is necessary to use the cupping glasses on the affected area as well, where the joint was dislocated, so if the hip joint returns to its proper position, and the sign of its return does not escape you, it is that you extend the wounded leg.
فإذا رأيتهما مستويتين والعليل يقبض الساق ويبسطها من غير تعذّر فاعلم أنّه قد رجع العضو على ما ينبغى فحينئذ فاقرن الفخذين واحمل الضماد وشدّ بعمامة شدّا لا تتحرّك الورك الى جهة من الجهات.	If you find them in a straight position, and the wounded leg is bent and extended without pain, then know that the limb has returned to its proper position; so at that point, bring the two thighs together, and hold the bandage with a strong grip, not allowing the hip to move towards any direction.
ويلزم العليل. السكون ثلاثة أيّام او أربعة ثمّ حلّ الرباط والضماد وقس الساق بالأخرى، فإن رأيتهما سواء فى القدر فاعلم أنّ الفكّ قد ثبت فاطلق العليل للمشى، وإن رأيت فيه شيئا من الاسترخاء.	And bandage the wounded leg. Rest for three or four days, then remove the bandage and dressing, and wash the leg with the other; if you find them in a good position, then know that the fracture has been set, and loosen the bandaged leg for walking; and if you see any relaxation in it.
فارجع وضمّده وشدّه على حسب شدّك الأوّل واتركه أيضا ثلاثة أيّام ثمّ حلّه ويبطئ بالمشى عليها أيّاما حتّى تقوى نعمّا إن شاء الله،.	Then bandage and wrap it again as you did initially, and leave it for three days, then remove it and walk on it gradually over several days until it becomes strong, God willing.
الفصل الثانى والثالثون.	Chapters Two and Three.
فى علاج فكّ الركبة.	On the treatment of fractures of the knee.
الركبة تنفكّ على ثلاثة أوجه تنفكّ الى داخل وإلى خارج وإلى أسفل أعنى الى خلف ولا تنفكّ الى قدّام البتّة، وعلامة فكّها أن تأمر العليل أن يضمّ ساقه الى فخذه.	The knee can be dislocated in three ways: inward, outward, and downward, meaning towards the back, and not forward; and a sign of its fracture is that the wounded leg is bent towards the thigh.
فإن لم يلصق بالفخذ فاعلم أنّ الركبة منفكّة، وجبر جميع وجوه فكّها أن تجلس العليل قاعدا وقد مدّ ساقيه إن قوى على ذلك وتجلس خادما خلفه ليمسك وسطه ويلويه الى خلف قليلا ثمّ تجلس أنت على فخذيه.	If you do not apply it to the thigh, know that the patella is loose, and all its aspects are relaxed, so that it settles into a hollow, having stretched out his leg upon it, and settled himself behind it with his hand grasping it, and then he rests on his thighs.
وتلصق ظهرك الى وجهه وتجعل رجله بين رجليك ثمّ تلزم ركبته بكفّيك وتشبكّهما بين أصابعك على ركبته ثمّ تضمّ بكفّيك جانبى ركبته بقوّة وخادم آخر يمدّ رجله حتّى ترجع الركبة الى موضعها.	And you stick your back to his face, and put your leg between his legs, then you grasp his patella with your palms and interlace them between your fingers on the patella, then you press with your palms on both sides of the patella strongly, and another servant stretches out his leg until the patella returns to its position.
وعلامة رجوعها أن تلصق الساق بالفخذ فى لين غير مكرهة، ثمّ ضمّدها وألصق الساق بالفخذ ثمّ اربطهما جميعا بعصابة ثلاثة أيّام او أربعة ثمّ أطلقهما، ولا يستعمل إلّا المشى القليل أيّاما حتّى تقوى.	And the sign of its return is that you stick the leg to the thigh in a straight line without twisting, then you press it and stick the leg to the thigh, then bind them both together with a bandage for three or four days, then release them, and he should not use it except for a little walking, namely, one day until it becomes strong.
فإن تعذّر عليك رجوعها بما وصفنا وإلّا فاستعمل المدّ القوىّ بالرباطات التى تقدّم وصفى لها فى علاج الورك حتّى ترجع،.	If it resists you in returning to its place as we have described, then use strong stretching with the bandages that we have presented and described for treating fractures until it returns.
الفصل الثالث والثلاثون.	Chapter Thirty-Three.
فى علاج فكّ الكعب.	On the Treatment of Fractures of the Ankle.
الكعب قد يزول زوالا يسيرا وقد ينفكّ على الكمال وفكّه يكون إمّا الى داخل وإمّا الى خارج وعلامة فكّه أن ترى الكعب منتفخا بارزا الى الجهة التى انفكّ اليها.	The ankle may be displaced, either slightly or greatly, and it may fracture on the outer or inner side, and the sign of its fracture is that you see the ankle swollen and projecting towards the direction to which it was fractured.
فأمّا علاج زواله فيسهل ردّه وهو أن يمدّ برفق بالأيدى ويسوّى حتّى يرجع، وأمّا علاجه اذا انفكّ على الكمال فينبغى أن تجلس العليل قاعدا ويمسكه خادم قوىّ أيّد من خلف ظهره فى وسطه.	So, the treatment of its displacement is to stretch it gently with the hands and settle it until it returns. And if it fractures on the outer side, you should settle the patient in a seated position and grasp it strongly from behind his back in its middle.
ثمّ تمسك أنت بيدك اليمنى قدمه من أعلاها وبيدك اليسرى من أسفل قدمه فى موضع العرقوب، ثمّ جرّ القدم اليك بيدك اليمنى ثمّ باليسرى مرّتين ثمّ مدّها باليسرى وادفع صدر القدم باليمنى نحو الساق من غير عنف.	Then you grasp with your right hand the foot from above it and with your left hand from below the foot at the ankle joint, then pull the foot towards you with your right hand, then with your left hand, twice, then stretch it with your left hand and push the base of the foot with your right hand towards the thigh without twisting.
تصنع ذلك مرّتين كما وصفنا ثمّ ادفع صدر القدم الى الساق فى المرّة الثالثة وأنت تجرّ بالعرقوب، فإن رجعت فى مرّة او مرّتين على هذه الصفة ورأيت القدم مستوية وإلّا فأعد العمل عليها فإنّها ترجع.	Make it two fingers' breadth as we described, then insert the suture into the skin of the leg in the third stitch, and push it with the forceps; if you return to it after a day or two days with this method and find the skin is even, do not repeat the work on it, for it will return to its natural state.
فإن امتنع لك رجوعها بما وصفنا وإلّا فأضجع العليل على ظهره على الأرض وأغرز وتدا فى الأرض موثّقا جدّا ليقع بين فخذيه وقد لففت عليه خرقا لئلّا يؤذى العليل، ثمّ يضبط خادم فخذه.	If you are unable to return it as we described, then put the patient on their back on the ground and insert a stick into the ground, firmly fixed, so that it is between their thighs, and wrap a bandage around it so that the patient does not feel hurt, then the servant will hold their thigh.
ثمّ يمدّ خادم آخر الرجل إمّا بيديه وإمّا برباط يربطه على عنق الرجل، ثمّ يمدّ كلّ خادم خلاف مدّ صاحبه والوتد قائم بين فخذى العليل يمسكه لئلّا ينجذب جسمه الى أسفل عند المدّ، ثمّ يسوّى الطبيب الفكّ بيديه.	Then another servant extends his hand, either with his hands or with a strap, and ties it to the patient's neck, then each servant opposes the extension of his companion, and the stick remains upright between the patient's thighs, touching him so that he does not move his body downwards during the extension, then the doctor straightens his jaw with his hand.
وخادم آخر يمسك الساق الصحيحة الى أسفل فإنّ الفكّ يرجع بسرعة، فإذا رجع الفكّ وتبيّن لك صحّة رجوعه فاحمل الضماد والمشاقة وشدّه برباطات وثيقة واعقل القدم بالرباط الى أسفل، وينبغى أن تتّقى من العصب الذى يكون فوق الكعب من خلف.	And another servant holds the healthy leg downwards, then the jaw returns quickly; if the jaw returns and you find it has returned to its proper position, then carry the splint and bandage, and tie them with straps and a dressing, and fix the foot with a strap downwards, and take care not to touch the nerve that is above the heel from behind.
لئلّا يكون الرباط عليه شديدا فيؤذيه، ثمّ تتركه يومين او ثلاثة فإن استرخى الرباط فشدّه ثمّ أطلقه فى اليوم الثالث او الرابع، ويمتنع العليل من المشى أربعين يوما.	So that the strap is not too tight on him, then leave it for two or three days; if the strap loosens, tighten it, and release it on the third or fourth day; and the patient should avoid walking for forty days.
فإن رام المشى قبل هذه المدّة لم تأمن أن يتنقض عليه الفكّ ويفسد ولا يقبل بعد ذلك العلاج، فإن عرض له ورم حارّ فينبغى أن تستعمل فى تسكينه ما تقدّم وصفنا فى غير موضع من العلاج والتنطيل حتّى يذهب.	If he walks before this period, you should not be confident that the jaw will not collapse and become dislocated, and it will not accept treatment afterwards; so you should warn him of this danger and importance, and you must use what we have described earlier in another place of the treatment and relaxation until he recovers.
الفصل الرابع والثلاثون.	The 34th Chapter.
فى علاج فكّ أصابع الرجل.	On the treatment of fracture of the man's fingers.
ينبغى أن تسوّى ما انفكّ منها بمدّ يسير من غير عنف وذلك ليس بعسر بل يسهل، فإن كان الفكّ فى بعض فصوص ظهر القدم فينبغى أن يجعل العليل قدمه على موضع مستو من الأرض.	It is necessary to straighten what has been fractured from it with a gentle extension, not with force, but rather with ease. If the fracture was in some toes of the heel of the foot, it is necessary to place the patient's heel on a level surface of the ground.
او على لوح وهو واقف كالماشى، ثمّ قم أنت وضع قدمك على ما نتا من تلك المفاصل ثمّ طأها بقدمك بقوّة حتّى ترجع وتراها قد استوت ولم يظهر فى الموضع نتو.	Or on a board, and standing like a masseur, then you should put your foot on what has been mentioned of those joints and press it with your foot with force until it returns to its place and it appears that it has been straightened and does not show any deviation in the joint.
ثمّ اجعل تحت باطن قدمه لوحا يأخذ القدم كلّه يكون له رأسان ثمّ تشدّه شدّا محكما وثيقا ثلاثة أيّام ثمّ تحلّه وتصونه عن المشى أيّاما كثيرة حتّى يشتدّ وتأمن العودة إن شاء الله،.	Then put under the sole of his foot a board that takes the whole foot, which has two holes, then bind it with strong and tight bandages for three days, then loosen it and keep him from walking for many days until he recovers and is secure in returning to it, God willing.
الفصل الخامس والثلاثون.	The 35th Chapter.
فى أنواع الفكّ الذى يكون مع جرح او مع كسر او معهما جميعا.	On the types of fracture that occur with a wound, or with a bruise, or with both together.
متى حدث شىء من ذلك ورمت علاجه وجبره فكثيرا ما يعقب بالموت.	When something of that happens and its treatment is neglected, it often leads to death.
ولذلك لا ينبغى أن يقدم على علاج مثل ذلك إلّا من كان حاذقا بالصناعة طويل الدربة رقيقا شفيقا متأنّيا غير متهوّر ولا جسور وأن يستعمل فى الابتداء الأدوية التى تسكن الأورام الحارّة فقط ويسلّم العليل.	And therefore, it is not proper that one should undertake the treatment of such a thing unless he has been skilled in the craft for a long time, is gentle, compassionate, patient, and not hasty or neglectful; and he should use at the beginning the medicines that calm the painful tumors only, and surrender to the patient.
للقدر اللّهمّ إلّا ما رجوت له السلامة من العطب مع خفّة المرض وظهر لك فيه بعض الرجاء فرم ردّه من ساعتك فى أوّل الأمر قبل أن يحدث الورم الحارّ.	You should not be hasty, but rather wait for the safety from the injury with the lightness of the disease and its appearance in some hope, so that you may return to your natural state in the first affair before the painful tumor occurs.
فإن رجع العضو على ما أردت فاستعمل التدبير الذى يسكن الأورام الحارّة وعالج الجرح بما يصلح له من المراهم المجفّفة، فإن كان الفكّ مع كسر وحدث فى العظم شظايا متبرّئة فرم انتزاعها.	If the limb returns to what I mentioned, then use the management that calms the painful tumors and treats the wound with what is beneficial for it from the dry, desiccant medications; if the fracture was with a bruise and there were splinters in the bone, then remove them.
وامتثل فى ذلك ما ذكرنا فى الأمراض البسيطة ممّا تقدّم فى مواضعها.	We have mentioned in this chapter what we previously mentioned regarding the simple wounds that are treated in their respective places.
وتحرّى جهدك ونزّه نفسك من الدخول فى طريق الغرر على ما تقدّمت وصيّتى لك فذلك أبقى لجاهك وأسلم لعرضك إن شاء اللّه.	Exert your utmost effort and free yourself from entering into the way of confusion, as you have been taught, and I have prepared it for you. May God keep it for your guidance and preserve it for your review, if He wills.
