And the author of this book completed it for you, O sons, when he finished writing this book which is a part of science in medicine in its entirety and reached the pinnacle of clarity and explanation. Then I saw that I would complete it with this statement which is a part of the work by hand.
Because the art of surgery does not exist in our land and in our time, to such an extent that it is almost as if its knowledge would be studied and forgotten. And only a few sketches of it remain in the books of the early authors, whose hands have copied and preserved them, although errors and inaccuracies crept in, causing their meanings to be distorted and their usefulness to fade.
So I revived it and composed this treatise in a clear and detailed manner, summarizing the main points, and bringing forth illustrations of the instruments and tools used, as an increase in explanation and a means to what is required.
And the reason why there is no skilled surgeon in our time is that the art of medicine is long and requires one to be familiar with anatomy beforehand, as described by Galen. Until he stands on the functions of the organs, their properties and dispositions, their connections and separations, and his knowledge of the bones, nerves, muscles, their numbers, exits, and arteries.
Therefore Galen said that there are many physicians in name, but few in deed, and especially in the art of surgery, as we have mentioned earlier in the introduction to this book.
Because whoever is not knowledgeable about what we have mentioned from anatomy will inevitably fall into errors that can kill people, as I have seen many times with those who pretend to know this science without knowledge or understanding.
And I have seen an ignorant doctor who cut open a pork tumor in a woman's neck, and then severed some of the neck's ligaments, causing the woman's blood to flow until she fell dead at his feet.
I saw a doctor who had successfully removed a calculus from a man who was elderly and had been suffering for many years. The calculus was large and causing trouble, so he extracted it with a piece of membrane from the bladder. The man died about three days later, and I was summoned to extract the calculus. On seeing the size of the calculus and the condition of the patient, I considered it necessary.
I saw another doctor who was earning his living by practising medicine in our countryside among some of its notables.
Then there was a young black boy who had a fracture in his leg near the ankle with an open wound. The doctor, not knowing what he was doing, applied the splint and bandages tightly, without leaving any room for the wound to breathe.
Then he left him to his desires and let him be for some days, ordering him not to loosen the bandage until his leg and foot had become swollen and it was approaching death.
I was summoned to him and I quickly loosened the bandage. He obtained relief from his pain and got up from his distress, but the damage had already become severe in the limb and I was unable to restore it.
And so the gangrene continued to spread in the limb until he died.
I saw another doctor who applied a poultice to a cancerous sore. It festered after some days until his patient's swelling was immense, and this was because if the black abscess is not treated with iron at all.
Unless it is in a limb that can be removed entirely.
And so, my sons, you should learn that the work of a doctor is divided into two parts: the work that accompanies safety and the work that is accompanied by harm in most cases.
And I have warned you wherever this book is taken to come from, the work that contains pitfalls and fears, so it is necessary for you to avoid them and reject them.
Unless the ignorant finds a way to speaking and cutting, take hold of yourselves with firmness and self-restraint, and treat your patients with kindness and attention.
And use the best route leading to safety and praise, and overcome serious and difficult diseases.
And purify yourselves from what you fear may lead to doubt in your faith and worldly affairs, for it is better for you and will raise your status both in this world and the next according to your destinies.
For Galen said in one of his sayings: Do not cure a bad disease, lest you be called a bad doctor.
And this book has been divided into three parts.
The First Part.
On the cautery with fire and on the sharp medicine, a well-ordered arrangement from head to foot, showing the instruments, their cases, and all that is needed in hand surgery.
The Second Part.
On the incision, the excision, the venesection, and the bloodletting, and all that is needed in surgery, well-ordered and showing the instruments.
The Third Part.
On the setting, the amputation, and the treatment of ulcers, and all that is needed in surgery, well-ordered from head to foot and showing the instruments.
The First Part.
On the Knife.
And before we mention how to use it, it is necessary to know its advantages and disadvantages, and in what mood it should be used.
For I say that the discourse on the benefits and drawbacks of the knife is a long one, requiring great learning and subtle insight, and many wise men have spoken about it.
And they disagreed, and I have only extracted a little from what they said, fearing to be too lengthy.
I say that the remedy is beneficial for all bad temper, whether it is with a substance or without one, except for two temperaments: one of heat without a substance and one of dryness without a substance.
As for the dry temperament with a substance, they have disagreed about it. Some said that the remedy is beneficial in it, while others contradicted them saying that the remedy does not suit in a disease caused by heat and dryness because the nature of fire is heat and dryness.
And it is likely that one should be treated for a hot and dry disease with a hot and dry remedy, and he who contradicts this says that the remedy with fire can benefit from a hot and dry disease occurring in human bodies. Because when you add the moistness of the human body to the temperament of fire, it makes the human body cool.
And I say as he says, because experience has revealed this to me many times; except that one should not imagine such a thing unless they have agreed and learned thoroughly in the science of medicine. And he stopped on the difference of temperaments of people, and the state of diseases within themselves, and their causes, symptoms, and duration.
And as for the other temperaments, there is no fear of them for you, especially not the cold and moist diseases, upon which all physicians have agreed and have not disagreed about the benefit of treating with the remedy in them.
And know, my sons, that whoever prefers the treatment with fire and considers it better than the treatment with the burning remedy is because fire is a single substance whose action does not exceed the part to which it is applied, nor does it harm another connected part except for a slight harm.
And the remedy with the burning substance may exceed its action to other parts and perhaps cause a disease in one part that makes it difficult to treat, or even kills, whereas fire, due to its honor and noble essence, does not do so except when it is excessive.
Our experience has shown that to the length of service and attention paid to the craft and standing firm on the facts of the matter.
And therefore I have spared you lengthy discourse, except that it would not be fitting for this book of mine to conceal from you in secret a mysterious way and how to perform it on the bodies and to repel diseases with philosophical and demonstrative speech.
And know, my sons, that they have disagreed about the time in which it is suitable to perform the circumcision, and they have agreed that the best time is spring.
And I say that the circumcision can be suitable at any time, for the harm caused by previous times is absorbed in the benefit that is brought about by the circumcision. And especially if the circumcision is from a necessary and serious pain that cannot be delayed, for fear of what may follow is greater than the internal harm caused by previous times.
And do not think, my sons, as the common people and foolish doctors may imagine, that the circumcision which cures a certain disease will never return again and make it a habit.
And do not think, my sons, that the circumcision is only for the purpose of removing a disease, it is like a medicine which corrects the temperament and dries up the humors which are the cause of the pains.
Except that the circumcision is preferred over medicine in speed of its effect, strength of its action, and intensity of its dominion.
And it is possible that the disease may return at a certain time according to the constitution of the patient, the power of his disease, and what accumulates in his body from the concurrence of humors, and neglect of himself in acquiring them from food and other such causes.
Please God, unless the disease for which the circumcision is used be a trivial one and in a limb of little humor and moisture. Like when the abscess is away from the pain and so on, it may not return to that pain, and this will be in any case.
And as for the saying of the masses, that the abscess is the last remedy, it is a correct statement, not in what they go astray, because they think that no treatment is beneficial with medicine or without it after the abscess appears, and this is unlike the case.
And the meaning of "the abscess is the last remedy" is that whenever we use various treatments in a disease and they do not benefit, then we use the abscess as a last resort, and it benefits. Not according to the meaning that the masses and many ignorant doctors have gone astray with.
And the ancients have mentioned that gold is better than iron for the abscess, and they said that because of the moderation of gold and the nobility of its substance, and they said that it does not corrupt the location of the abscess, and this is not at all.
Because I have tried that and found it to be true, that is, it does affect some bodies more than others, and the abscess with gold is better and superior to iron as they said; except that if you cover the container in fire made of gold, you will not know when to stop for the redness of the gold.
And because it hastens to cold, and if you increase it further in heat, it will melt in the fire, and the craftsman falls into trouble because of that; therefore, iron abscess is faster and closer to the truth for the work, if God wills.
And I have divided this book on abscesses into chapters, organized from head to foot, so that it may be easy for the student to find what he wants, if God wills.
The first chapter.
On the abscess of the head in one kind.
This treatment is effective against the oppression of humidity and cold on the brain, which are the cause of headache, frequent yawning from the head to the sides of the eyes and ears, excessive sleepiness, toothache, and sore throat. And in general, every disease that is caused by cold, such as apoplexy, epilepsy, and paralysis, and similar diseases.
The picture of this treatment is that the patient should first be ordered to vomit with the gentle and refined medicine for the head, three nights or four, according to what the patient's strength, age, and habit demand.
Then order him to shave his head with a razor, and sit before you, reclining, with his hands placed on his chest.
Then place the tip of your finger on the tip of his nose between his eyes, and where your middle finger ends, apply some medicine to that spot.
Then bring forth the oil poultice as depicted here.
Reveal as much of the bone as is equal to the breadth of a thumb or the size of a chickpea, then lift your hand and if not, prepare it with the same or another razor. Until you see the bone as mentioned, then take something from salt, dissolve it in water, and add a cotton swab to it. Put it on that spot and leave it for three days.
Then apply a soaked cotton swab to it with oil and leave it until the scab from the fire disappears. Then treat it with the quadruple ointment until it is healed, if Allah wills.
And they say that an open wound, as long as it remains open, absorbs pus and is better and more effective.
And some have said that one should cauterize the skin to the bone and keep the poultice until some of the thickened bone is burned, then remove what has been burned after that, and then treat it.
Others say that it is necessary to exert oneself heavily until a strong impact is made on the bone, so that it falls like a small piece of gravel or a tiny pebble. They claim that air from the head escapes from that location and leaves the wound open for a long time.
Then it is treated until it heals, and I do not see these two types of force at all except in some people and through a channel, and leaving it with me is better. If that is the case, then the head will dry up when its natural connection is severed, as we have seen in other organs.
And especially when the patient's head is weak by nature, and I prefer the first type of force and it is better with me and I use it as needed, if God wills.
The Second Section.
In the Head Also.
If a chronic pain occurs in the entire head and persists in the patient, and he has used applications, poultices, rubbings, and compresses, but it did not benefit him from that, then look. If the patient's head is naturally strong in structure and was not weak, and he found a very hot fire, then apply another force above that slightly. Then apply a force to each bone of his head until the skin thins and the condition we described is revealed. And apply a force to the back of his head in the place known as the "axe", and relax your hand in this one, not revealing the bone because the patient will find it very painful unlike the pain of all other head forces. I will mention this force in its place.
And the force with which he strikes the horns and back of his head should be softer than the force with which he strikes the middle of his head. This is its form.
The Third Chapter.
In unbroken fractures that are not comminuted.
If the injury occurs in the head, accompanied by headache and dizziness, which extends to the eye, then the patient should be treated with purgatives for the head, and use all other treatments mentioned in the divisions of diseases. If this does not succeed, the treatment is on two grounds. Either with hot medicine or with iron.
Or, if the treatment is with hot medicine, it is that you take one clove of garlic and peel it, then cut off its edges from both sides. Then, split the spot of the pain on the forehead with a broad knife until there is space beneath the skin to fit the clove.
Then, insert it beneath the skin until it disappears, then tie it on firmly and leave it for a period of fifteen hours. Then, remove it and take out the garlic, and let the wound be for two or three days before bandaging.
Then, anoint it with a thread soaked in fat until the place is cleansed. Then, treat it with an ointment until it heals, if Allah wills. And if you wish, you can do this by some hot medicines that I mentioned in chapter 18 of the hot medicines.
And as for the treatment with iron, it is on this form: to cover the wound which has this shape:.
And it is called the "mismari" bandage because its head has a shape like a peg, and in it there is some wrapping, and in the middle, a small knot.
Then, place it on the spot of the pain and hold your hand and turn the iron a little, a little, until the part that burns through the skin is like half. And lift your hand so that the artery underneath does not get burned and bleeding occurs, then take a thread soaked in saltwater and place it on the spot and leave it for three days. Then wrap the wound with fat and treat it with ointment until it heals if God wills.
And if you wish, cut off this ligament at the sharp edge of the cloth and preserve it from cutting into the non-ulcerated part of the vein in particular.
The Fourth Section.
In chronic ulcers.
If you treated the ulcer with what we mentioned earlier and what we mentioned in the division of diseases, but the treatment did not succeed and you saw something that cannot be treated as we mentioned in the first remedy or by fire. Then the linen cloth should be applied until it whitens, after which you should learn the location of the pain by drawing a line along its length about half an inch or so, and then leave your hand once and pull it tight until the vein is cut and reaches towards the bone.
Unless you take care to avoid the attachment of the jaw which moves when chewing, and burn the muscle or nerve controlling it, causing spasms.
And be on guard against bleeding from the vein which you cut, for in its cutting there is danger. Nor especially for one who is ignorant of what he is doing and has not been trained or practiced his craft first.
And the treatment of bleeding from the vein will be mentioned in its place in this book, if God wills. If you see something that cannot be treated by this remedy.
And if you find the patient's body thickened, apply a poultice on the crown of the head as we described and treat the wound until it heals if God wills.
And if you wish, use the remedy we mentioned in the chapter on ligating the vein with the cloth having two sharp edges, for it is a better and more effective remedy.
The Fifth Chapter.
In diseases of the ears.
If a pain occurs in the ear due to cold and it is treated with poultices and all the treatments mentioned in the classification, but the pain does not go away, then be careful of the spot which is called the point that resembles this.
Then anoint it with it after warming it all around the ear, or all around both of them if the pain is in both. And it is removed with a small amount of kohl from the base of the ear, after the spot has been learned by means of medicine and the kohl is about ten points in each ear or so, then the spots are treated until they heal if God wills.
The Sixth Chapter.
In diseases of the elbow.
The elbow that is treated with kohl is only the one that occurs due to phlegm as mentioned in the classification of diseases.
And it is avoided for the type that occurs from membranes and tension of the nerve.
Whenever you have treated this type of elbow with ointments and poultices and cataplasms, but the treatment has not been effective, then the patient should be given three applications of kohl. One at the base of the ear, the second slightly below the eyebrow, and the third at the junction of the lips.
And make your kohl from against the diseased side, because relaxation only occurs on the side that appears healthy.
And the shape of the kohl is to draw it as a streak facing the top of the ear, under the temple, slightly and another on the eyebrow, with its length being equal to the length of the eyebrow.
You put your hand down with the kohl until it burns as far as half of the skin thickness, and this is the shape of the poultice, which is a type of cicatricial scar that resembles its shape slightly, but is softer than it, as you see. The knife should be thicker by a little, then the wound is treated as previously mentioned until it heals if Allah wills.
Chapter Seven.
In cases of chronic wounds.
If the wound is chronic and you have treated it as we mentioned, but your treatment has not been effective and there is no apparent cause of fever, then apply four poultices. On each horn of his head, a poultice and in the middle of the head as we mentioned, and another poultice on the back of the head according to what has been said.
The recipe for camphor as previously mentioned, and it can also be applied with a poultice on the mouth of the stomach to make it more effective, then treat as previously mentioned.
Chapter Eight.
In cases of forgetfulness.
What is caused by phlegm should be treated first with the big calmerates and the purifying grains for the brain.
Then he should shave his entire head and apply to the back of his neck a poultice made from mustard as written in the chapter on dropsy, and he should wear it repeatedly because it is a remedy for dropsy.
And do the same on the corresponding spot that I mentioned there, and he will be cured by doing so; otherwise, apply three poultices to the back of his head, arranged from the top of the head down to the neck.
And make a thickness of an onion between each poultice and the next, then treat the poultice as previously mentioned; if you want to increase it and the patient is capable of that, apply the middle poultice.
If you want to increase it, apply on the horns then treat him until he is healed, and the poultice will be ointment-like as previously mentioned.
Chapter Nine.
About the fracture and relaxation of all the body.
It is necessary to proceed in cleaning the head with balms and what we mentioned earlier. Then, shave the patient's head, then apply a poultice in the middle of the head, on each horn of the head, and on its occiput.
And three poultices on the vertebrae of the neck. If needed, for a disease causing relaxation of the body to require more than that and the patient is likely to need it and the disease is strong and severe, apply four poultices on the vertebrae of his back. And apply the poultice until it burns most of the skin, then lift your hand and treat him as previously mentioned until he recovers, God willing, and the poultice will be olive oil.
The Tenth Chapter.
About epilepsy.
For the epileptic patient who has epilepsy due to phlegm, it is necessary that his brain be cleaned first with large balms and all other treatments mentioned in the classification if the patient is severe and likely to take medicines.
And as for a child who cannot take medicines, the poultice of sweet flags and the manna-like substance should be used to clean his brain several days beforehand with improvement in his diet.
Then, shave his head and apply a single poultice in the middle of the head as previously mentioned for the epilepsy, and another poultice on its occiput. And on each horn of his head, a poultice. If the patient is strong and likely to need it, apply the poultices mentioned for the patient with fracture and relaxation of the body on the vertebrae of the neck and back, and the poultice will be olive oil as previously mentioned.
If the patient is a child, make the poultice soft in this shape.
The Tenth Chapter.
On the Malancholia of the Brain.
If the cause of malancholia is bad humors and thick phlegm, apply the poultices that we mentioned earlier for one suffering from apoplexy.
If the cause of malancholia is leaning towards black bile and the patient's body is moist and corrupted, do not purify his brain as mentioned earlier.
Then shave the patient's head, then make a tight compress from flax cloth in the shape of a circle and place it on his head. The patient should sit upright, holding the compress from all sides, then take one strand of old goat fat.
Then heat it on the fire to a moderate warmth, as much as the finger can tolerate if inserted into it. Then place it in the middle of his head in the circle and leave it until it cools. Do this with the patient every week, along with all other good treatment, until he recovers, if Allah wills.
And if you wish to cool it, sprinkle many small dots of water without grasping the cloth with your hand but rather as a mist. For this type of cooling soothes the brain mildly.
Then anoint it with well-mixed camphor in goat fat or chicken fat.
The Twelfth Chapter.
On the Running Water in the Eye.
If you find that the running water in the eye appears with the signs mentioned earlier, begin purifying the patient's head and body from all moistures and bathe them in a warm bath for several days.
Then shave his head and apply a poultice in the middle of the head, then apply two poultices on the temples if the running water begins in both eyes or in one eye alone.
Then cut with the scalpel all the veins and arteries underneath the skin, making sure the cuts are as long as the width of a thumb and preserved from bleeding.
If you see something of it, cut it at the spot with any treatment possible and we will come to the wisdom in ligating the arteries and cutting them and preserving from bleeding.
And it may be that under the shoulder blades, two prominent veins are found.
The thirteenth chapter.
In chronic bleeding.
If the bleeding of the eyes is chronic and permanent, and it has been previously determined that it comes from the veins and arteries inside the head outside the skull, and I have certified by touch that it is due to a tumor as thick as an eggplant, then cut the vein I described at the beginning of the bleeding. A vein in the middle of the head, two veins on the temples, and two veins under the shoulder blades. If needed, cut a vein in each side of the eye socket as far as the eyebrow with a small scalpel.
The fourteenth chapter.
In bleeding from the nose.
If he has been treated as we mentioned in the section and the treatment did not succeed, then begin by applying a poultice of the juice of the quince tree for three nights, then shave his head and cut the central vein with an oil-soaked scalpel. Then cut with the mustard-hilted scalpel two veins above the eyebrows under the hair a little and preserve from the artery, do not cut it, and this is the image of the mustard-hilt.
The fifteenth chapter.
In bleeding from the eyelid relaxation.
If the eyelid relaxes due to a disease or moisture, cut the eyelid once with this scalpel of the crescent shape.
And if you wish, draw it above the eyebrows a little on each side and distance it from the cheekbones, with the length of each stroke being the length of the eyebrow.
And do not exaggerate your strokes, but to the extent that a third of the skin is consumed, and the appearance of the cicatrix will be like this.
The 16th chapter.
In the crease of the eye.
If the lashes turn inward then we remove the eyelashes from that eye, and the stroke is of two kinds there. Either the stroke is done with fire or the stroke is done with a caustic remedy, so if it is done with fire then the patient should be instructed before that to remove his eyelashes if he plucks them until they grow long and even.
If we take them out when they are growing, his eyelids will stick together with a scab lest they move until it grows out; then if it has grown out and evened, place the patient's head on your stone then learn to draw on the eye lid with ink an imprint of the shape of a leaf.
And the mark will begin near the eyelashes then place a thread soaked in egg white or in vinegar under the eyelid, then preserve this cicatrix in its form.
Then gradually, little by little, over many times, work on the shape which you learned a little at a time until the surface of the skin is consumed which is in the shape of a leaf's entirety; its particular appearance and proof of your good work that you see the eyelid has thickened and the hair has risen above the eye socket.
Then raise your hand at that time and leave it for three days, then put a thread with fat on it until the scab falls off, then treat it with ointment until it clears up if God wills; if anything of the hair returns after a while and the eyelid relaxes.
So apply the caustic substance to that position as I did at first, if there is hair in the lower eyelid; remove it until it returns to its natural place and does not harm the eye. And as for the caustic treatment, it is to order the patient to leave the scabs alone until they dry up and even out.
Then make a paper sheet resembling a leaf of aspen. Take from the accustomed soap and from unslaked lime, each one weighing about a dirham or so, and crush them together thoroughly with a mortar, lest it dry up. Then spread it on the paper sheet resembling a leaf of aspen and place it on one or both eyelids. Place a soaked swab under the eye in white chalk, and have the patient's head resting on a stone.
And place your ring finger on top of the medicine and press it lightly as you move it whenever the patient feels a burning sensation from the medicine, for he finds it pleasant like fire. As long as he finds it pleasant, leave the medicine and move it with your finger. If he becomes calm, remove the medicine and wash the eye with water.
And look, if you see the eyelid has risen like it rises with burning or cutting; otherwise, reapply the medicine to the place where the medicine did not take effect and has not spread until you complete your task and the eye becomes inflamed. Then put a swab on it with fat until the blister of burning breaks.
Then treat it with the ointment of aloes or another, until it heals. And it is necessary for you to be extremely cautious when working, so that nothing from the medicine falls into the eye; because if the eyelid relaxes after some days and something from the hair falls into the eye.
So apply the medicine to that part of the eyelid which has relaxed, especially as I did at first. Then treat it until it heals. And this is a paper leaf like an aspen.
Know that the eyes of people can differ in smallness and largeness, so according to that, be your prescription, and do not be misled by a wrong path with regard to this craft.
The Seventeenth Chapter.
In the corner of the eye which is exposed in the socket of the eye.
If you have treated the nictitating membrane as we mentioned in the classification of diseases and your treatment has not been successful, then it is necessary to consider this characteristic.
The patient should place his head in your lap and let a servant hold his head firmly between your hands, so that it does not move or shake.
Then you put a moistened thread in the white of the eye or on the gums, and then cover the compress which is in this shape.
It should be shaped like the neck of a bird's tube, from one end where there is an aperture, and if you wish, it can be at the other end, or even closed like a pipe, but this shape is better for your work, God willing.
Then you should cut the nictitating membrane if it is open, and remove the discharge and shape it, or if it is not open, then you should open it and extract the pus, and then put the compress on it when that time comes, it being very protective, so grasp it firmly with your hand until you reach the bone.
And keep your hand a little away from the eye towards the nose, so that your hand does not err or disturb the patient, and the compress falls into the socket of the eye and ruins it; if you reach to the bone in the first place, and otherwise, prepare the compress again once more if needed.
And leave it for three days, then put a thread soaked in oil on it and treat it with the dried ointment until it heals, if it takes him forty days and does not heal, then put the sharp remedy on it until the bone is exposed, and refer to what will be mentioned about it in its place, God willing.
The final stage of the nasal passages, which some of the earliest ones mentioned, is to go to the position of the nasal passages and make a cut then place in the same cut a thin compress like this.
You pour in the amount of a lead drachma that has been melted and firmly grasp the compress with your hand, gripping it well and not allowing it to move at all lest the molten lead should flow into his eye; you should put a wet thread on his eye, either in white of egg or in water.
If the lead should burn and cure the nasal passages in a wonderful way, then the nasal passages will be cured as described above; otherwise, it is necessary to use piercing of the nose and redirecting the nasal passages to their natural flow, as will be mentioned in its special place.
The 18th Chapter.
In the treatment of the cracks of the lip.
Many times cracks occur in the lip, known as "sh'ara", and especially in children's lips, for it often occurs; if you treated this crack with what was mentioned earlier in the division but the treatment did not take effect then place a small bronze grater on it like this.
Its blade will be on the rough side of the grater, then put it as a covering on the wheel in the same crack until the treatment reaches the depth of the crack, then treat it with cauterization until it is cured if God wills.
The 19th Chapter.
In the treatment of nasal passages that occur in the mouth.
If a boil appears in the gums or on the tonsils or at the roots of the teeth and becomes inflamed, suppurates and bursts, and then nasal passages appear, and you treated it but the treatment did not take effect, then one must cover with a compress as much as can be accommodated in the nasal passages.
Then you insert a protector into the nasal opening and hold your hand until the forceps reaches its beginning and end. Then do that once or twice, then treat it as we mentioned earlier in treatment, until it heals if God wills.
If the material is broken and it has healed, or else there is no choice but to expose the place and remove the dead bone as will be mentioned in its chapter if God wills.
The Twentieth Chapter.
In cases of fissures and loose gums.
If the gums have become loose due to moisture and the fissures have moved and you treated them with medicine, but it did not work, then place the patient's head on a stone and put a poultice over the tooth.
And you put the poultice into it with a protector on the wheel and hold your hand lightly until the patient feels the heat of the fire has reached the root of the tooth, then lift your hand, then repeat the poultice several times as desired, then the patient will fill his mouth with salt water.
And you hold it for an hour and then spit him out, because the loose tooth is set and the gums are strengthened and the bad moisture dries.
The Twenty-First Chapter.
In cases of toothache.
If the toothache is due to cold or there are worms in it, and medicine did not work, then the remedy is in two ways: either by fat or by fire.
Or by fat, which is to take cow's tallow, boil it in an iron pot or a bronze one, then take a cord and wrap it around the end of the stick, then dip it into the hot tallow and put it on the aching tooth with a protector and hold it until it cools.
Then repeat the process until the power of the fire reaches the root of the tooth, and if you wish, put a wool or cotton cloth in cold grease and place it on the affected tooth, then put the protected blade above it until the fire reaches the bottom of the tooth.
And as for burning it with fire, it is that you go to a copper or iron tube and there is some thickness in its mouth so that the heat of the fire does not reach the patient's mouth, then take the emery that comes in this shape and put it on the same tooth and hold your hand until the emery cools, do that repeatedly.
If the pain goes away either that very day or the next, and it is necessary after that to make the patient fill his mouth with good fat and hold it for an hour then spit it out, and this is the appearance of the emery.
To file it on whichever side you wish and as much as possible, and this is the appearance of the tube.
The 22nd Chapter.
In the cauterization of pigs.
If the pigs are full of phlegm and cold secretions and have not been cured with medicines and you want to cauterize them quickly, then take the hollow emery that has this appearance and is perforated on both sides.
So that the smoke may exit when cauterizing from the other side, and put it protected on the same tumor once or twice if needed until you reach the depth of the tumor; and if the tumor is small, make the emery equal to the size of the tumor.
Then leave it for three days and place a soaked cotton cloth in fat on it until what was burned by the fire goes away, then treat it with ointment and poultices until it is cured if God wills.
The Third Twenty-Fourth Chapter.
In the swelling of the voice and constriction of the breath.
If the humors prevail over the bronchial tube, and especially if that is accompanied by a cold temperament, it is necessary for the surgeon to administer first soothing medicines, then to make an incision in the notch of the epiglottis at the base of the glottis.
Be cautious not to reach the glottis with the swelling, and do not burn except a small portion of skin, then make another incision at the joint of the neck, in the last vertebra, gentle and on the side that preceded.
Then treat him with what has been mentioned earlier until he recovers, God willing.
The Twenty-Fourth Chapter.
In the swelling of the disease of the lung and cough.
If the cough and disease of the lung are due to cold humors, and there is no fever or pus, and the disease is chronic, make two incisions above the clavicles in the lower hollowed-out places, and another incision in the middle of the chest between the breasts.
And the incision should be on the same side as what has been mentioned earlier, and if you wish, make it a puncture with the point that is called the puncture, whose form has been described in the puncturing of earache and the points will be thirty to approximately so.
Then treat him with what has been mentioned earlier until he recovers, and you can make a three-branch incision in this form and use it to cut through all the swellings at once, and this is the shape of the incision.
The Twenty-Fifth Chapter.
In the swelling of the abdomen.
If the head of the humerus is dislocated due to a sudden blow or did not settle when it was returned, until it becomes accustomed and then dislocates with the slightest movement, as we have seen, then it is necessary to return the joint first. Then the patient lies on his back or on the correct side, and then raise the skin inside the abdomen to above with your left hand fingers if the joint has been dislocated to the inside.
Then secure the bandage with two swaddles, as shown in this picture.
Then press the skin with this bandage until it reaches the other side and the appearance of the fold will be four folds, or it may be pressed with a bandage having three swaddles, in which case the appearance of the fold will be six folds, and the swaddles will be on the surface of the wound.
And this is a picture of the bandage with three swaddles.
And sometimes an additional one is added, making the folds eight, then place the crushed garlic with salt on top of the fold and bind the patient tightly so that he does not move for a time until he recovers, and if it is dislocated upwards, rarely is that the case.
Then place a single good splint or multiple small ones above the shoulder, so that the joint stiffens and the moisture disappears, and the patient recovers.
The Twenty-Sixth Section.
In the fold of the intestines.
If it occurs in the intestines that they become cold and wet, and she becomes disordered and has many stools, and was treated with various treatments but did not benefit, then the patient should lie on his back, stretch out his legs and arms, and then be bound with three folds. A fold under the shoulder blade as long as a finger with a good bandage, and two folds below it from the sides of the single fold until the shape of the folds is triangular, and keep them apart so that they do not meet if compressed, and the depth of the fold will be one-third the thickness of the skin.
On this picture and on this vase without further addition.
And if you wish, make a single incision large in the middle of the meat on this picture.
And the cauterization made with this single incision will be circular in shape as shown on this picture.
And if the meat is torn from this incision, it means that you should learn to make dots on the meat on the vase with ink, then cauterize it with a dot-shaped cauterizer, and then treat it with the treatment that will be mentioned until it heals.
The Twenty-Seventh Chapter.
In a cold liver incision.
If an abscess appears in the liver due to cold, wetness or excessive wind, until it departs from its natural temperament excessively and the patient was not cured with what we mentioned earlier. The patient should lie on his back and make three incisions with ink in this shape and this size exactly on the liver below the ribs where a human arm ends.
And each incision should be as thick as a finger, and the incision should be straight along the body, without your hand being stuck to the cauterizer at all.
And let it burn as much of the skin thickness, half at most, and the patient should be standing on his feet; if he cannot stand, then he should lie down with his legs stretched out and his arms raised, and this is the cauterizer's appearance.
And you can cauterize these incisions with the dot-shaped cauterizer, if you have a steady hand and skill in the craft, and take care not to gaze into the incision lest you burn all the skin, burn the belly, and reach the intestines; for the skin is thin there so beware.
The Twentieth Chapter.
On the Excision of a Tumor in the Liver by Caustic Medicines.
If a swelling appears in the liver and you wish to know whether it is in the liver's substance or in its veins, then if it is in the liver's substance the patient will feel heaviness and pain without sharpness.
And if it is in the veins of the liver, then with the pain there will be great sharpness; and I have seen that doctors have failed to treat it, so it is necessary for the patient to lie on his back and then learn the location of the swelling by cauterization.
Then heat the cautery in the fire, which is the one that resembles a mill, and this is its shape. And use it to cauterize once, until the skin is completely burned and it reaches the vein until all the pus comes out, then treat it with the treatment of abscesses until it heals.
And this type of cauterization should not be practiced by anyone except one who has had a long experience in the art of medicine and has tried it many times, then he can attempt such an operation and leave it with me.
The Twenty-Ninth Chapter.
On the Cauterization of the Uterus.
The early physicians mentioned the caustic obtained from the roots of the safflower for cold uterus, on this condition, that it takes one long dry root from the safflower and makes it as thick as a finger, then immerses it in oil and heats it in fire. Then cauterize it with a single application in the area between the collarbone and the neck, and two small ones slightly curved towards the side of the pubic hair, and two large ones above the breasts in the area between the third and fourth ribs.
Two veins also are situated between the fifth and sixth ribs, slightly bent backwards. Another vein is located in the midst of the chest. Another vein lies above the stomach. Three veins are situated behind one another between the shoulders. Two other veins are located on the sides of the thorax below the vein which is situated between the elbows.
And it is not fitting for you to insert your hand into the vein, but rather let it be visible on the surface of the skin as a swelling. Some of the ancients have said that some people use an iron instrument resembling a mill file and insert it between the ribs until it reaches the very tumor itself.
And the discharge comes out as we mentioned in the case of liver tumors, and in this wound inflicted by the vein either the patient will die from his hour or will be left with a sore that cannot heal.
The 30th chapter.
In the spleen's vein.
If you treated the spleen's disease with the treatment mentioned in the classification, and your treatment did not succeed, then the vein is on three sides, all of which are correct. One of them is to incise it into three or four parts, each one extending along the length of the spleen.
In the shape of the liver's veins, as we have previously described its form. There will be between each vein and vein a thickness equal to the width of a finger or slightly more. The quality of the incision will be like that which we mentioned in the liver's vein, neither should you insert your hand into the vein, and the patient's appearance will be lying on his back.
The other side is in the armpit, and raise the skin on the surface of the spleen where the patient's left armpit ends. And raise the skin on the opposite surface of the spleen where the patient's right armpit ends, and your raised skin will be on the width of the body so that the veins are along the length of the body.
Then the wounds are protected very well until the skin perforates on the other side then the poultice is removed and there will be four scars, and if you wish to tie with another poultice having three sulfides.
Then the site of the scar is treated after it has been left to discharge for many days, he is best among all that has come before in treatment.
The thirtieth chapter.
In the scar of burns.
The scar is only beneficial for scald burns in particular, if you treated the burn with the treatment we mentioned in the division but it did not succeed then you should bind him with four scars around the wound and one scar on the stomach.
And another scar on the liver and one on the spleen, and two behind his back between the ribs, one facing his chest and the other facing his stomach. And the depth of the scar will be near the thickness of the skin, then leave the scar open to discharge for a long time.
And do not neglect the patient's treatment after the scar, as much as is necessary to bring together those who are relevant to him and hasten his recovery, and the shape of the poultice with which he is wrapped on the back will be reddish like its previous form, and that with which he is wrapped on the stomach will be yellowish.
The thirty-second chapter.
In the scar of feet and legs.
If they become inflamed in the patient and are filled with yellowish water, then he should be wrapped on the back of his foot in the space between the ankle and calf.
And hold your hand with the poultice and do not bend it, then lift up your hand and do not return it at all, for the yellowish water will flow out and the poultice will be in this shape.
Then tie the bandages on the legs two on each leg and the knot at the sharp end of the wrapping and the knot be one below the knee and another lower down towards the middle of the leg and on each thigh two bandages.
Leave the knot open without any treatment for a long time, and let it drain water then treat it as we have mentioned.
The Thirty-Third Chapter.
Regarding the bandage of diarrhea.
If the diarrhea is due to cold and humidity until it weakens the binding and enveloping powers in the stomach and intestines, and I treated that with drops of treatment, but it did not recover and I saw the patient likely to require a bandage and having full strength, then apply a large bandage around his belly. As mentioned earlier, with a wrapping of the stomach with a circular bandage and four bandages around the navel, wrapping it gently with the soft Sumerian cloth, and one or two large bandages on the cotton above the waist.
If you see the moisture and the patient likely to require that, then apply a bandage on the lower back, and a bandage on each section, and perhaps add two small bandages on the stomach near the large one, for it is a successful treatment that will not fail if Allah wills.
The Thirty-Fourth Chapter.
Regarding the bandage for hemorrhoids.
If there are chronic or one hemorrhoid in the rectum, and it is caused by thick and cold mucus or rotten moisture, and I treated that as mentioned earlier, but the treatment did not succeed, then apply three bandages to the patient's lower back under the table slightly curved.
And a bandage under the navel like two fingers, and if I find that his belly has become cold and his food does not digest and I see his face pale, then apply a large bandage on his belly as mentioned earlier, and a bandage on his liver. And another on his belly with a wooden spatula and leave the wound open for some time then treat it until he recovers if God wills.
The thirty-fifth chapter.
On ulcers.
After cutting it if the abscess is cut, be gentle with the spatula that resembles a mill then insert it into the same abscess and push your hand until the spatula reaches the pore from which the blood flows do this once or twice.
If the ulcers are many, cure each one individually as we have described and then treat them with what is suitable for them from ointments until they recover, and if the poultice is also large on cotton it is more effective.
The thirty-sixth chapter.
On the wound in the nape of the neck and its environs.
If the ulcer does not yield to the incision and the treatment we described in its place and you give up on that, it is possible for it to recover with a poultice, but if one of the nape wounds becomes infected and purulent discharges occur, the first thing you should do is clean it with a fine probe.
Then know how deep it is with the probe, then be gentle with the spatula that resembles a mill and insert it into the same nape on the straightness of the nape's depth and the amount that the probe entered and treat it with the poultice until all those foul bodies are consumed once or twice or thrice as needed.
And beware of burning a nerve if there is one, or a large pore, and if the nape opens up to the bladder's area or to the anus.
And beware of all these areas, and only do so if the nape is in a fatty area and you have judged that it is not infected, then treat the area until it recovers, if the area closes up and the discharge ceases to come out and remains like that for some time know that it has recovered completely.
If the material does not come off from it, know that it is either decayed or in a deep abscess, or something similar to what will be mentioned in its place.
The Thirty-Second Chapter.
In the kidneys.
If it happens in the kidneys, and there is pain from cold or severe heat, and there is a decrease because of that, then the doctor should apply three poultices on each kidney with the same compressions mentioned earlier, and perhaps apply a third one on the same plate so that three poultices are arranged in succession, thus being more effective.
The Thirty-Eighth Chapter.
In the bladder.
If it happens in the bladder, weakness and relaxation from cold or rheum until the patient cannot retain urine, then apply a poultice at the bottom of the bed on the bladder where pubic hair begins, one poultice to the right and another to the left.
And after the poultice on each side as far as the inguinal ligament, and apply another poultice at the lower back or two if needed, and the compress should be spongy as mentioned earlier.
The Thirty-Ninth Chapter.
In the uterus.
If it happens in the uterus, a material from cold or rheum that prevents the womb from retaining its fluid and makes it hard to touch or examine when pain comes, then apply three poultices around the belly as we mentioned in the case of the bladder. And apply a poultice on the cotton at the lower back or two, and the compress should be spongy.
The Fortieth Chapter.
In the swelling of the hip.
May rheum or mucus gather in the hip joint, causing it to be dislocated and marked by its being longer on one side than the other, and finding a gap where the luxation is, then apply the patient to the hip joint itself with a poultice resembling a circle.
After learning the incision around the area as it revolves to place the right part in the middle of the circle and be the bandage that presents its shape in the cavity of the abdomen; if this bandage is not available, take three layers of the large olive oil bandage.
And assign to the layer a depth according to the thickness of the skin altogether, then treat it until it heals if Allah wills.
The 41st chapter.
In the cleft of the sciatic nerve.
If pain occurs in the hip joint and it is due to cold and dampness, and you treated the afflicted part as mentioned in the division, but the treatment did not succeed, then the afflicted part should be eased with thick poultices of mummy or sassafras oil and so forth.
Then apply and spread the layer with two methods: either with burning medicines or with fire. The layer by fire should be on many faces, one of them being three layers of cube-shaped application in this form.
And it will have a suitable depth, and after every layer there should be a distance equal to the thickness of a finger. The bandage should be an olive oil one, and you can apply a layer in the middle on top of the hip itself, making four layers; or if you prefer, use the circle that was mentioned earlier for removing the hip, in a single layer.
So that the circle encircles all of the hip and burns away all the skin, this is the nature of the layer in sciatic nerve if the pain is constant in the hip itself and does not extend to the thigh or leg.
If it extends to the thigh and leg, apply two layers on the thigh at the location where the afflicted part points to as being painful there, and one layer above the popliteal fossa by four fingers to the lateral side slightly. The bandage should be a thin one, and the depth of the layer should be equal to the thickness of the skin only.
If he indicates that the pain extends to about the fingers of the foot, then apply the point where he has indicated with three or four or more strokes if needed. And if he indicates that the pain is under the knee towards the leg, then apply it there once only, gently.
And preserve in all your applications that you do not reach the point where you burn a nerve or a large artery, for that would cause a bad consequence or a gangrenous condition.
And I have seen one or two people who applied it above the sacrum and reached in the point, whereupon the leg became gangrenous to the extent that it spread to the foot and all of it was consumed and corrupted the entire leg, then diarrhea and death followed; if the pain is on both sides, apply them similarly.
And some wise scholars have said that the application on the back of the heel is like this: he makes a cauldron from iron, its circumference being half a palm and at its mouth it is as thick as the pit of a date or slightly less, and inside that cauldron there is another cauldron and yet another.
And it is like this: between each cauldron, there is a space of about the width of the eyebrow; the cauldrons are open on both sides and its height is about the length of an eyebrow or two; and a cover made from iron is fixed to the cauldrons and this is its shape.
Then it is heated in the fire until red hot and the spark is extinguished; then it is placed on the back of the heel with the patient leaning on the healthy side; it cauterizes three circular applications at once, then it is left for three days and covered with fat, and the wound remains open for some days.
Many; then it is treated with ointment until it heals, he said. I have written this book about this type of cauterization rarely used for its severity and the rarity of those who can endure it except that it is one of the good cauterizations for one who can endure it and is worthy of his position.
What is made by medicines that are purging is that you make two flasks like the circumference of a ring, in which you put Ratajabab from copper or iron.
It is in the middle of them an elevation like two or three fingers, and there is a space between them as thick as a finger, and they are open at the bottom open at the top, and one has been joined to another on this shape.
Then you put them on the patient's hip and thigh, with the patient lying on their correct side, and hold your hand firmly. Then pour between the two circles some hot water, which has been heated by a small fire or embers, and hold it for as long as an hour. The patient endures the pain and burning because he feels a burning like fire.
Until the pain subsides, then lift your hand with the instrument and wipe away the hot water from the whole hip with lukewarm water. Then leave it for three days and anoint him with fat until the blackness of the burn goes away and let it go to pus because it is more beneficial.
Then treat him with ointments until he recovers, if the pain extends to the thigh or leg, make a garment for it as you made one for the hip, whether it is so, and this is the character of hot water and I have proven it in my treatise on the correction of medicines.
You take a part from the unrefined salt and a part from the uncalcinated lime, crush them together, and put them in a new pot that has been drilled with one small hole at the bottom, like the size of a reed, and place another pot under it.
And pour over the salt and lime with lukewarm water until it covers them up to a finger's breadth after you have held them firmly with your hand firmly. Then leave the pot until the hot water flows into the lower pot that is mixed, then gather all of that hot water and pour it on another lump of lime and another lump of salt again also.
If it is the case, then the knife will be very strong and will act in many medical procedures and in all other organs because it does what fire does exactly, and among medicines there are those that burn with it also, like thapsia and honey of baladher and alum mixed with soap.
Galenus claimed a story about an ancient man who cured a rupture of the groin and varicose veins and greatly magnified his case, claiming that he does not need any other treatment and is healed once.
Until he might enter the bath while being carried and go out having been healed, and it is said to take from the green chicory; if the green one is not found, then the new dry one is taken and pounded with something of fat and placed on the groin where the pain is or in the thigh.
And it is bound and left for three hours or as long as the patient feels relief from the numbness, then enter him into the bath; if he is warm in his body, then enter him into the pool, for the pain will go away and he will be healed with God's permission; if he is not healed, then apply the poultice to him again after ten days.
For he will be healed with God's permission, and know that no one should use these medicines except after purging the body; and Dioscorides mentioned that if a goat's fleece is applied to varicose veins, it will be beneficial.
And the cloth will be like this, take a piece of wool and soak it in old oil and place it on the deep spot that is between the wrist and the elbow, and closer to the elbow. Then take a goat's fleece that is dry.
Then ignite it with fire until it becomes a ember, then place it on the wool and leave it until it is extinguished, then take another one and do not stop doing that until the sensation reaches through the armpit to the groin and the pain subsides with God's permission; this type of treatment is called the goat's fleece method.
The Forty-Second Chapter.
About the pain in the back.
The pain in the back may be caused by many reasons, either due to a fall or blow or excessive vomiting and so forth, and it is always accompanied by a cold wet substance, and this type of pain occurs only in this category.
If it is due to a cold liquid flowing, then after the patient has vomited and is satiated with the emetic and so forth, he should be made to lie on his back where the pain is in three rows on the same width as the table itself, after having marked the position with the ink on each row five or more times, according to what you see from the patient's condition and strength.
And it should be cauterized with a pustule-point, or if you prefer, three or four times with a medium-sized cauterizer in this shape.
The Thirty-Third Chapter.
About the pustule at the beginning of an abscess.
This affliction often affects young children, and the sign of its beginning in a child is that it causes him distress when standing or moving, and at the end of his back vertebrae, a swelling will emerge protruding above all the other swellings.
If you see that and want to stop it, cauterize with a ring-shaped pustule in this shape. To take the pustule on all sides of the vertebrae evenly, and if you prefer, cauterize around the vertebrae with a pustule-point in two or three rows, and let the points be close to each other, then treat the area until it is cured as we mentioned.
And take care not to use the cauterizer on an abscess that is caused by nerve tension.
The Forty-Fourth Chapter.
About gout and pains of the joints.
If joint pains occur due to cold humidity and localize in any part of the body, then if the pains occur in both legs, it is usually known as a special type of gout.
Then if the cold gout is treated with the treatment mentioned in the division and the pains do not go away, then it will be removed by cooling it after fumigation around the joints of the legs many times, with a poultice made from olive oil of medium consistency on this form.
And if it is necessary to apply the poultice on the surface of the leg, do so with a point poultice. If the pains rise to the hips or to other joints, and this often occurs, then apply three or four poultices from each side with this olive oil poultice in its own form.
And if it is necessary to use more of this poultice, apply it and do not dig your hand into the poultice but rather make it thick like the skin only. If the pains rise to the loins or to the back, then use what we mentioned of the poultice in its place.
And if the pains are only in the hands, then apply a poultice around the wrists like folds, and if the pains remain in the fingers, then apply it to each knuckle as a point and on the palm of the hand. If the pains rise after some days to the elbows or to the shoulders.
Apply it to both sides and let the patient not lack good treatment and taking medicine, for if he improves his food and brings out the phlegm, then with this poultice, he will recover, God willing.
The 45th chapter.
In the poultice of fatouq.
If a hernia appears in the groin and some of the intestines or bowel descends to the scrotum, and this is just beginning, it is necessary for the patient to be ordered to abstain from eating the next day and to use what reduces flatulence to prevent the stool from accumulating in his abdomen.
Then he lies down between your hands on his back and you order him to grasp himself until the ribs or the spine protrude. Then return it with your finger and learn by applying ink under the incision on the pelvis bone a mark resembling half a circle with its edges directed upwards along the body.
Then you secure this position.
Until it becomes white and you extinguish the burn then return the ribs or spine to their natural position, and have a servant place his hand on the spot so that the ribs do not protrude, having parted the patient's legs and placed a cushion underneath and another servant binding his legs.
And the other on his chest holds his hands, then the bandage is lowered onto the same mark and your hand with the bandage steady and grasping it until it reaches the bone or returns to its original place if it does not reach the bone at first.
And conserve your effort from the ribs protruding while you are stitching, lest it cause either death or great harm to the patient. Know that if you do not reach the bone with your stitching, your work will be unsuccessful, and the bandages for children should be gentle on their limbs, and for adults on theirs.
Then treat the stitching site with oil after three days until the fiery redness subsides, then treat it with other ointments until it heals. Let the patient lie on his back for forty days until the wound is closed.
And it is necessary to make his food suitable for his treatment, so that his belly may ease and the ribs do not protrude when he lies down or stands up. Then, if he wishes to rise after forty days, you should use a strong bandage and apply it for another forty days, reducing fatigue, hunger, thirst, and loud crying.
If he uses this treatment in such a manner, then he will be completely healed, God willing. I will mention the treatment of rupture by incision later, God willing. As for the rent that occurs in all the abdomen and was initially small, if you want it not to increase, make the rent in it circular like a ring according to its size. And let what is burnt from the skin be like a third of it, then treat it as we mentioned earlier. Then it will not increase, God willing. Some of the early ones have said that the rent should be cauterized with an equilateral triangle on this pattern.
After you have learned the incision of the rent and have become familiar with the line that is on the side above the rent and the other line below, then put your hand in the middle with a single, smooth movement, and the first one is easier and better, God willing.
The Forty-Eighth Section.
In the Oath.
If an injury or blow occurs in some of the organs, accompanied by pain and that pain persists for a long time and the treatment with medicines does not benefit, then it is necessary to cauterize at the point with a cautery and each organ should be treated according to its size, smallness, weakness, and strength.
And the pain and swelling will cease from it, then he will be free from the first burn, otherwise reapply the burn because it is a habit of these pains to transfer from one organ to what is near it, so it is necessary to follow them with burns until the patient recovers.
The Forty-Eighth Section.
In the Oath of Leprosy.
And as for the lepers, they may benefit greatly from cauterization, especially the type of leprosy that occurs before the putridity and blackness.
If you want to examine it, then if the leprosy is initial and has been treated as mentioned in the classification, and it does not decrease nor stop, and the patient's condition worsens, give him five kilograms. The one in the middle of the head, the second below it towards the forehead at the end of the hair, two on the temples, and one from behind at the nape of the neck. Place your finger with the kii slightly so that it has a slight effect on the bone.
And peel off the scales to make it easier to exhale the thick vapors from them, and cauterize him with a kii also on the same spot as before. And if the leprosy has continued on the patient and become clearly apparent, then it is necessary to apply these kiatas we mentioned on the head. A kii on the side of the nose, two kiats on the cheekbones, two kiats on the jugulars, six on the vertebrae, and one large one on the coccyx at the base of the spine, and another above it in the same midaah, and two on each armpit, one on each arm. And two on the kneecaps, one on each kneecap, and two on the elbows, two on the wrists, two on the ribcage, and cauterize him with a kii on every joint of his fingers and toes, and on every heel of his feet and wrist of his hands.
And beware of the nerve that is on the back of the heels, lest you burn them. And it may be necessary to cauterize with a kii on the bone of the hip, and another on the mouth of the stomach, and another on the liver. Know that every time you add a kii, it will be more beneficial and effective.
And know that the patient will not feel pain from the kii as a healthy person would, for his body has been numb. And it is necessary to apply the cautery of the big and small on the organs and joints according to their characteristics as mentioned in the descriptions of the patients.
Then treat the wound with pure gallomucilage along with honey and all the treatment until it is cured if God wills.
The Forty-Eighth Chapter.
Concerning a numbness in the privy parts, when an organ of the organs is rendered numb and treated with medicines and ointments and bandages but did not heal, then take the same numb organ and cut it with caustics according to what is due to its size or magnitude, whether thick or thin skin.
Then treat it with ointment until it is cured, and it may sometimes be necessary to cauterize some numbness that is exposed in the back when an exit point of the nerve that moves that organ is reached.
And he should not proceed with that unless he has knowledge of dissecting the organs and exit points of the nerves that move the body.
The Forty-Ninth Chapter.
Concerning a gouty wound.
If the gout is old and there is no remedy from the remedies of medicine, then apply a caustic to it until the whiteness goes away and its color changes.
Then treat it with pure azarum along with the juice of mallow, hibiscus, or dove's blood, one part from each, and mix them all together, and apply it to a cloth and bind it to the place until it is cured.
The Fiftieth Chapter.
Concerning a cancerous wound.
If the cancer is in its early stages and you want to stop it, then cauterize it with a circular fire around it as it turns, and some wise men have said that one should apply a mild caustic in the middle of it, but I do not see that because I fear that it may ulcerate and I have seen that happen many times.
The truth is to cauterize around it in a circle as we said, or with many caustics.
The Fifty-First Chapter.
In the Case of the Debile.
If something happens to a debile and they slow down in their growth, either because of the nature of the ailment or the patient's old age if they are elderly and have little blood or because of time, and you want to hasten the growth of the debile, then surround it with many small pieces of cloth soaked in liquid.
Then leave it, for it hastens growth; but if you want to fatten it with the cloth, be careful of the wrapping which is this shape.
And place it in the middle of the debile until the skin penetrates and the cloth is below what should be easy to remove the pus, then treat it as needed until it heals.
The Fifty-Second Chapter.
In the Case of the Eater.
The Eater is a corruption that seeks to consume the member it eats, like fire consumes dry wood. If you see the eater in a place where it can be treated with hot coals, then prepare many small and large compresses according to what is suitable for that place where the eater is.
Then surround it from all sides until the corruption is completely removed, and nothing of it remains. Then leave it for three days and apply to the affected areas finely powdered sulfur with oil until all the scab and all the corruption are gone.
Then treat it with ointments that promote flesh growth. If after three days you see the flesh growing back healthy and free of corruption, and not otherwise; then apply the compress to what remains of the affected areas, and treat the eater with the sharp medicine.
For it will take effect more quickly with fire, and I have mentioned its treatment with the sharp medicine in the division, so take it from there whenever you need it.
The Third Fifty-Chapter.
In regard to the bent nails and the unbent ones.
This affliction often occurs in the soles of the feet and is a harsh thing that troubles the man. And in it there are two kinds: either to burn with fire or to burn with hot water.
And as for the burning with fire, it is that you should prepare a small iron pincer resembling an eagle's claw made of steel to fit around the nail from all sides and be thin in its edge. Then, place it on top of the nail, and turn your hand with the pincer around the nail until the pincer reaches the depth of the nail.
And leave it for three days to sweat, then wrap it with crushed wild rue mixed with salt, and leave the dressing on it at night. For it will come out from its roots, then treat the wound site with an ointment that promotes flesh healing until it heals, if the nails are not bent.
And often it occurs on the surface of the body, especially in the hands and feet. Therefore, it is necessary to take a tube made of copper or iron or eagle's feather, and place it on the nail or boil, then pour into the tube a small amount of hot water.
And grasp your hand as you turn it slightly with a gentle squeeze, so that the edge of the tube affects the root of the nail. The hot water will then find its way to the depth of the nail and soothe the patient for a short while.
Then leave it alone, for the nail will come out by its roots. Do this with one by one until you have treated all of them in the body, then treat their sites after they have come out with ointments that promote flesh healing.
The Fourth Fifty-Chapter.
In the case of the navicular bone.
If something happens to one of the navicular bones due to frostbite in the nerve or quartan fever or anything else, it is necessary to bind it with four or five ligatures on a cord running along the back between each ligature and in the middle. And with a bandage made of olive oil on his stomach, the navicular bone will heal and quickly recover from the cold disease.
The 50th Chapter.
In the case of a burst abscess in the body.
It may burst in the body with foul boils resulting from cold, thick, and putrid matter. It is necessary to bind each boil with a soft ligature made of a piece of wood that has been ignited at one end or the length of the wild plant or an olive bandage.
And the boils should be bound with a soft ligature in their first burst on this manner, so that they do not increase and spread the disease further, and the patient will recover from it except that it is necessary for the patient to have purged himself beforehand.
The 56th Chapter.
In the case of bleeding that occurs when a vein is cut.
Often bleeding occurs from a vein that has been cut when an injury opens up from outside or when a tumor or ligature of an organ and so forth makes it difficult to cut.
If that happens to someone, hasten with your hand to the mouth of the vein and place your index finger on it and press down firmly until the blood is trapped under your finger and nothing comes out from it, then put a small and large olive oil-soaked cloth in the fire, and fan it vigorously until it becomes very hot.
Then take one, either small or large, depending on the wound and the location where the vein was cut, and place the cloth on the same vein after removing your finger with a gentle movement and hold the cloth until the bleeding stops.
If you push the finger against the artery when raising it from the mouth of the artery and stop the pressure, take another instrument with the wheel from the instruments in the prepared fire and do not stop doing that one after another until the bleeding stops.
And beware not to burn a bone that will cause harm to the patient with another bleeding, and know that if the artery bleeds from it, then it cannot be cut off at all, especially if the artery is large except by one of four sides, either by cauterization as we said or by cutting it off if it has not been severed. If it is cut, the ends will contract and the bleeding will stop; either that it should be bound tightly with threads or that a medicine should be put on it which can cut off the blood and be tightened with ligatures.
And as for whoever tries to cut it with a ligature or by tightening with a cloth or putting caustic things and the like, then that will not stop the bleeding at all except in rare cases; so if someone is exposed to this situation without a doctor or medicine, let him put his forefinger on the mouth of the wound itself as we described.
And let him tighten it a lot until the blood is constricted and flows out above the wound and on the artery and finger, and do not move it from its place with cold water always; until the blood becomes frozen and thickened and stops; and during that time, look what it needs from cauterization or medicine.
The second chapter.
In incisions and wounds, boils and abscesses and similar injuries.
He said: We have mentioned in the first book all the diseases that require cauterization with fire and caustic medicine, their causes and reasons, instruments and illustrations of instruments, and made it chapters from head to foot.
And I follow in this chapter that same path with precision so as to facilitate for the student what is required...
Before I begin with this, it is necessary for you to know that this chapter contains some of the most grievous errors above what is in the first book.
And because of this, it is necessary that the warning be greater here since the work in this chapter is often accompanied by bleeding which causes life to cease when an artery or vein is opened on a tumor or abscess or to relieve a hemorrhage or extract a stone or make an incision on a calculus and so forth, all of which are fraught with dangers and terrors, and many of them result in death.
And I warn you against falling into what is uncertain, for it may happen to some of you in this craft that certain types of people will be afflicted with various diseases and some of them will become weary of their illness and surrender to death.
Due to the severity of their disease and the prolongation of their suffering and the effects of the illness which indicate death, and some may spend their wealth and give you a guarantee for their health, and they will strive against their sickness, so do not be deceived by those who have this kind of condition.
And let your caution be greater than your desire and zeal, and do not attempt anything of that sort unless you are certain in your knowledge of the outcome, and use the concept of prevention and warning in all treatment of your patients.
For you have in that a means of acquiring praise and renown, commemoration and glorification. May Allah guide you, my sons, and not deprive you of the truth and success, for that is in His Hand, there is no God but Him.
And I have arranged this chapter in sections according to what came before in the book of kyi from ancient to modern times, so that you may easily find what you want from it if Allah wills.
The First Chapter.
In the Treatment of Water Which Congregates in the Heads of Boys.
This wound is often exposed to children at birth if the mother presses their head without care, and it may also be caused by an unknown cause that is not known.
I have not seen this cause in anyone except children, and all those I have seen of them died quickly because of it. Therefore, I have come to leave the treatment of it alone. I have seen a child whose head was filled with water and his head increases every day. Until the child can no longer sit up by himself because of the increase in his head, and the moisture increases until he dies.
And this moisture is either gathered between the skin and the bone or beneath the bone on the peritoneum. And the treatment for that, if the moisture is between the skin and the bone and the swelling is small, one should make a single incision in the middle of the head, about two palms long, until the moisture drains, and this is the image of the scalpel.
If the moisture is greater and the swelling is greater, make it two intersecting incisions in this shape:.
And if the moisture is beneath the bone, and its sign is that you see the stitches of the head open from every direction and the water subsides when you press it gently with your hand towards the inside and not lightly, then you should make three incisions in the middle of the head, like this shape.
After the incision, all the moisture will come out, then you should close the incisions with a ligature and a bandage, then bathe it from above with wine and oil up to the fifth day, then release the ligature and treat the wound with lint and ointments, and do not leave the head tightly bound, and feed the patient with all dry food that is little moist.
Until the member is strong and healed, and another method of incision is to look where the bone of the swelling appears and the gathering of water, because it may be in the back of the head more or in front or in the right or in the left.
I intend to cut the abscess where it appears on your skin and swelling of water, I will cut it as much as possible and preserve not to cut a vein so that bleeding occurs and the patient dies from that bleeding with draining of moisture.
The Second Chapter.
Cutting the arteries behind the known ears.
When someone presents with a sudden attack to the eyes or chest and it has been tried without success by treatment of medicines, then the treatment is in cutting these two arteries.
It is necessary if you want to cut them that you tie the patient's head with a cloth, then roughen the place by a cloth to show the artery, then tighten the patient's neck with their own shirt, then look where the pulse beats and the two hidden places which are behind the ears, and as little as possible except in some people.
Then learn on them with a styptic, then cut them with a sharp instrument into pieces to the bone and it will be that way with the patient's head, and if you wish, enter the instrument from under the artery and make it go up by cutting and the length of the cut will be about two bent fingers.
If the pulse should cease, blood would flow forth with a throbbing and rapid motion towards the front and back; if the artery does not become visible to the touch, it is necessary that you estimate from the ear after three fingerbreadths, then learn with a styptic and cut to the bone, and what is necessary.
It will send forth six or seven streams on either side, and perhaps more or less of it all, as much as appears to you from the patient's strength and swelling of their arteries; then look at the wound if anything remains on the bone from the peritoneum cut it.
So that a hot abscess does not appear; then tie the wound with a thread of rough cotton and treat it with ointments until it heals.
The Third Chapter.
On the arteries that are in the armpits.
If someone has a chronic pain or severe headache due to excess moisture and heat in the armpits or vertigo, and he was treated with various medical remedies but did not benefit from them; we have tried in this case to ligate or cauterize the arteries of the armpits as we described.
And the method of operating on it is that he should shave the hair in the armpits and seek out the visible artery there, for its pulse will become evident to you and very little will be hidden except in rare individuals.
Or when it is very cold, and it hides from you; let him bend down his neck with the help of his cloth, then you should search for the place with a piece of cloth or stop the bleeding by applying hot water until the artery becomes clearly visible. Then take the ligature which is like this. Then take the ligature and remove the skin gently until you reach the artery, then insert it into the artery and pull it up until it comes out of the skin and frees itself from the surrounding membranes from all sides. If the artery is thin, tie it off with the end of the ligature. Then cut off a portion from it, as much as the distance between its ends will allow, and compress it so that bleeding does not occur. For if it is not cut off or severed, blood will not flow at all. Then drain the blood to six or three [ounces].
If the artery is large, it is necessary to tie it in two places with a strong double thread, which may be made of silk or from the fibers of the tree bark, so that the wound does not become infected before it has healed and bleeding occurs.
Then cut off as much as is between the ligatures, do it at that time or after some other period, and if you wish to cauterize it with a scissor-like instrument until its edges are consumed, then this operation will be identical or even better as we said.
Unless the patient is suffering from fever or melancholy, for the suturing of the wound accelerates the drying out of the liquids and thus becomes more beneficial. After closing the arteries, the area should be filled with gauze and the poultices placed on it. After that, treat with the medicines that promote flesh growth and with the lint until recovery occurs if God wills.
If bleeding occurs during your work from the artery, hasten to cut it off either with a ligature or by filling the area with cotton and tightening your grip until the blood stops. If nothing is available, place your finger on it until the blood coagulates.
And wet the area with cold water until the bleeding subsides and you can suture it as needed. And what is easier and less arduous than ligating the artery is to bind the wound with this compress with two blades after the two areas are painted with blood.
And bring it down carefully until it reaches the bone and the bleeding stops in two places so that what is between its ends does not adhere to this ligature at all. And this is the shape of the compress.
The compress with two blades will resemble two small hooks, except that it will be less sharp than the blades by far. For if they were as sharp as the blades, the cold would spread to them quickly and the flesh would not dry out soon enough; therefore, some thickness was left in them so that the warmth of the fire could penetrate.
And cut through the flesh quickly, and this work is better than all work and easier, and be so after what is between the two blades a thickness of a finger.
The Fourth Section.
Treatment for Prolonged and Burning Eye Discharge.
If the discharge is persistent and it originates from the vessels on the occiput of the head from outside, and nothing benefits in its treatment with medication, and I saw the patient's face had darkened. In his forehead, there is a swelling like an ant's mound and his eyes are drooping, moistened, having thickened their eyelids from the sharpness of tears. So the first ones in treating it resorted to this deed, which they call the treatment by the sword, and that is for him who is afflicted to pluck out the hair on his forehead.
Then cut in the forehead three parallel incisions along the forehead, with each incision being about two fingers long and parallel to the length of the nose in the middle of the forehead, the second one a little away from the movement of the muscle in the temple, and the third on the other side.
And be careful not to cut the arteries on both sides, and keep your hand away from connecting the jawbones. After each incision, make it three fingers deep, and have with you many pieces of prepared sponge or torn gauze to absorb the blood.
Then the skilled surgeon enters the right side as shown in this picture. From the incision next to the temple to the middle incision, peel off all the skin in between with the peritoneum on the bone, and then do the same from the middle incision to the third incision, and then bring out this flaps. And enter into the first incision another instrument called a sharp scissor-like thing from one side and blunt on the other, as shown here.
And its sharp side will be directed upwards towards the flesh attached to the skin, and its blunt side towards the bone. Push it until it reaches the middle incision and cut off with it all the vessels that descend from the head to the eyes without reaching the outer surface of the skin.
Then do the same in the middle incision to the other incision. After a moderate amount of bleeding, wash off the places where the blood has clotted. Then, take a cotton thread and apply it to each incision, placing a ligature that has been prepared with vinegar, oil or gall and oil.
Unless a hot tumor occurs, and on the third day the bandage is removed and much cold water is applied. Then it is treated with rose ointment and whatever else surgeons use to treat wounds until it heals, God willing.
The Fifth Chapter.
Treatment of tears and catarrhs to the eyes from within the head.
When severe and continuous catarrh occurs in someone, and he sees two small pustules coming from his eyes, and their sight has weakened, and the conjunctivas are inflamed, and lashes have fallen out. And there will be a sharp and severe headache in the depth of the head, accompanied by constant sneezing. Recognize these symptoms as indicating that those fluids and catarrhs are coming from many deep veins. The best treatment for this is to have the patient tilt their forehead then make one incision in the middle of the forehead.
And there will be a sharp and severe headache in the depth of the head, accompanied by constant sneezing. Recognize these symptoms as indicating that those fluids and catarrhs are coming from many deep veins. The best treatment for this is to have the patient tilt their forehead then make one incision in the middle of the forehead. Or raise it slightly to the side and begin the incision from the left cheekbone to the right cheekbone, making the incision up to the bone, keeping your hand away from the moving muscles of the jaw when chewing, until the bone is exposed and all the blood is removed with a sponge.
And then separate the flaps of the incision with a cotton cloth or a linen strip, and tie it from above with a ligature. Soak the ligature in wine and oil so that no hot tumor occurs. When you have completed this and seen that the hot tumor has been broken, then you should scrape off the bone until new flesh begins to grow.
Then treat it with the dried compound that promotes flesh growth, like taking two handfuls of barley flour and four parts of calamine, mixing them together to make an ointment, and using it for promoting flesh growth in such wounds.
The Sixth Chapter.
Treatment of what falls into the ear.
All that falls into the ear is of four kinds: either a mineral stone such as iron or glass, or a plant seed like sesame or date pits and the like, or something fluid like water or vinegar and so on.
Or a living creature, if a stone or its kind falls into the ear and it does not increase in the ear, then receive the sun on the ear. If you see the stone only, apply something to it from gentian or sargum, then try to remove it by head movement or with a cotton swab. Block the nostrils when the patient sneezes after placing a bandage made of cloth or wool around the ear and extending it upwards. Often this treatment will bring out what has fallen in, but if it does not come out, then try to remove it with the soft papyrus.
If it comes out with the papyrus, and not then try to remove it with a gentle and slightly curved probe. If it does not come out with that, then make a tube from copper and insert the tip of the tube into the ear canal.
Seal what is around the tube with a thin layer of wax and beeswax so that there is no path for the air except through the tube. Then, draw it out with your breath firmly and strongly, and often it will come out like this. If it does not come out as we described, then take a bit of asphalt or a well-tamed asphalt which is used to catch birds and place it at the tip of the reed.
After wrapping it tightly with a strong thread, then insert it into the ear canal gently after the ear has dried from moisture. If it does not come out with all that we described, then proceed to the incision before swelling or pain occurs.
Formula for incision: First, cause the patient to relax in the quiet room. Then, let out blood as much as his strength allows. Next, have the patient sit between your hands and turn their ear upwards. Cut a small incision in the origin of the ear at the fatty part in its lowest position.
And the incision should be crescent-shaped until it reaches the drum, then remove it as much as you can with instruments. Then, sew up the incision quickly and treat it until it heals.
And as for the object that has fallen into the ear from one of the grains that have grown and swollen, try to remove it as described. If this is not possible, take a thin and gentle probe in this shape.
And try to cut off that type of grain fallen in the ear with it, but only do so if you are certain that the grain has become stuck in the ear canal until it breaks into small pieces. Then, extract it with a blind forceps or a thin and gentle hook or by pulling it out.
As we mentioned, it is easy to remove them. As for the water that has entered the ear, have the patient blow into a reed or first fill their ear with something of cotton wool and they should be reclining on the ear where there is water; if it comes out through that.
And if not, take many small stones on the length of fingers, smooth and well-washed. Then, warm them slightly by fire and have the patient insert one into the ear canal from that direction and let it sit on their foot from that side, then strike another stone against the stone in the ear.
And he should continue to do that with stone after stone until all the water is out. The water may also be extracted by taking a piece of ice or a feather and inserting one end into the ear, while heating the other end with fire until most of it burns, then replacing the feather.
Perform that several times until all the water comes out or draws it with a tube as mentioned before in the stone, and if there is an animal inside it, look; if it is a small creature like lice and so on, treat it as described in the division and so forth.
If its body is large, it will be felt; try to remove it with a cloth and pincers and make it easier than all that is lodged in the ear, and if you are removing the worms that occur in the ear, then treat them as described in the division about the quartans and if your treatment does not succeed.
You should look at the ear in the sun; if something of the worms appears to you, remove it with a cloth or fine pincers. If nothing appears to you from it, take this tube and its shape.
The lower part is narrow and the upper part is wide, and enter the thin end into the ear as far as it can be inserted then grasp it firmly do that several times until all the worms come out. If it does not come out, wrap the tube with wax as mentioned to you in the stone.
If it does not come out as mentioned, use the quartans that I mentioned and which the early ones used to kill worms, you will find that in the division about quartans. Your pouring of medicines and potions into the ear with this instrument and its shape is:.
As you see, make it from tin or copper, the lower part has a small hole and the upper part is wide. If you want the pipe in the hollow of the tube to be firmly made of copper, if you want, take a piece of thread and wrap it tightly around its end.
Then pour the fat or juice or what you want from these medicines into the tube which is in the ear, and then insert the thread with a knot on top and press it gently with your finger until the fat flows into the inner ear and can be felt.
Inserting into the ear, and let what is poured in it be slightly warmed by fire. And beware that the thing which drips in it is not very cold or very hot, for the ear cannot tolerate that.
The Seventh Chapter.
Treatment of the Exostosis of the Ear.
Some children may emerge from their mothers' wombs and ears without perforation.
And also, some people may have a growth in the ear canal due to an injury or flesh that has grown there, and this growth can be deep within the ear canal and not visible to the eye.
And it may protrude slightly outside the canal and be visible to the eye. What protrudes deep within the ear and is not visible to the eye is usually difficult to remove, but what is visible should have Albilli's ear placed in the sun. And you will look at it. If you see the growth, open it with a thin probe and this is its appearance:.
It will have a small, slightly limited edge on one side and the rest of the probe smooth-sided so as not to harm the ear. If the growth is from flesh that has grown in the ear canal, grasp it with a thin wire and cut it off gently until all the flesh is removed.
If the growth is in deep ear, take a thin, smooth forceps and slightly warm it over fire. Then insert it into the ear canal. If you feel the growth with what Albilli finds to be a weight on hearing, remove it gently.
And beware not to injure the ear canal. Then insert a thread into the ear to the extent of the canal's width, which has been soaked in the Egyptian plaster. Do this for several days until you are certain that the wound is closed or take a thread and wet it with water and sprinkle with powdered alum.
You will use it. If you see the ear has become inflamed and there is a warm swelling, then take out the thread and replace it with another thread that has been smeared with rose water until the inflammation subsides, then treat it until it heals.
If bleeding occurs, immerse a sponge or cloth in cold water and apply it to the ear, and use all the treatment that stops the aforementioned bleeding in the article on wounds.
The Eighth Chapter.
Treatment of Pustules That Appear in the Eyelids.
These pustules that appear in the eyelids can be wet or dry; it is necessary to grasp them with a forceps or a needle and cut them off at their base, then apply powdered alum to the place.
If blood flows from it, compress it with a lentil-shaped compress gently; and treat it well after cutting, for it often recurs if anything remains at its base, and if it is cauterized with fire, that remaining part will be burnt away.
The Ninth Chapter.
Treatment of the Congestion That Appears in the Eyelids.
It is often seen in the eyelids something resembling congestion in its firmness and stiffness.
And so it is called "congestion" and is a collection of thick moisture in the upper eyelid and lower eyelid, and the treatment for it is that you should look; if the congestion appears prominent on the surface of the eyelid and moves to every direction, then it is an easy case and divide it with an incision from the outside.
Then remove it from every direction with care until it is released, then tie it with a needle and cut it off. If you cannot cut it off except after the eyelid has been divided by the incision, do not harm the patient; if the incision is large, secure it with stitching and treat it until it heals.
If the wound is small, it is no problem for you; the ointment will cover it and bind it. If the swelling extends inside the eyelid towards the inner surface, then rotate the eyelid and secure the swelling with a thread without needing to cut and remove it from all sides.
If the eyelid is cut, it does not matter; then wash the eye with saltwater after cutting the swelling and treat the area with what binds until the patient recovers.
The Tenth Chapter.
In the treatment of sty which appears on the eyelid.
Sty is a swelling that occurs in the upper layers of the eyelid, and it is more prevalent among children; it weighs heavily on their eyes and exposes them to attacks at night, and they are unable to look at the light of the sun. So that tears come to them quickly.
Therefore they are always leaning on their faces and sleeping, and their eyelids will be damp under the eyebrows, having been blown up by the sty and becoming visible to the eye. When you press the area with your fingers, you will feel the sty between them; and the best course of action is to have the patient put his head in your hand.
Then take a piece of cotton cloth, prepare a thread from it, and make a circle around the sty with the thread, as big as the area it covers in all directions. Then put it on and press with your fingers from all sides to gather the sty in the middle of the circle.
Then cut in the middle of that moistness with a sharp instrument, cutting it horizontally and not making the incision larger than the one that is in the abscess. And if you are in the depth, then you should cut all the skin until you reach the sty.
In most cases, the sty will protrude from the incision in the form of a white fatty piece. You should draw it out with a cloth that you have wrapped around your fingers and direct your hand to the right and left until it is freed. Be careful not to increase the incision so that the instrument does not touch the eye and cause harm to it.
If the abscess does not appear at the first incision, then you should slightly increase the incision with gentle force until the abscess appears. Then take it out as we said and submerge it in vinegar, water, and apply it to the place, and secure it firmly. Some people crush salt.
And put it in the depth of the incision so that what remains of that moisture dissolves, then treat it until it is clean. If an abscess occurs in the place and a hot swelling forms, treat it with poultices until it clears up.
The Eleventh Chapter.
In Kinds of Eye Stitches.
If a growth appears in the eyelid, it will distort the natural direction of the lashes and the eyebrows, and cause harm to the eye, resulting in various diseases such as permanent teariness, relaxation of the eyelids, whitening, and thickening, until it becomes a reason for the invalidity of the eye.
Eye stitching is done in four ways, either with cauterization by fire or with a severe medicine as mentioned earlier in the chapter on cauterization, or it may be done by cutting and sewing or with reeds, according to what I am recording.
You should make the patient's head steady, then turn the eyelid with your left hand. If it turns, and if not, then insert a needle into it from below the eyelid and push the needle through the thread from above, and this should be done near the hair itself, and pull the thread up to the eyelid.
And turn it with the pincers, then incise in the inner part of the eyelid, avoiding the excess hair, using a curved needle from the larger opening to the smaller one, then thread the thread and place a small piece of cotton or gauze under the eyelid, and secure it with glue.
Like the shape of a mulberry leaf, except that it should be according to how much you want to lift the eyelid, because people may differ in this regard, and some may need you to cut from the eyelid an amount suitable for the degree of relaxation of the eyelid.
Among them, there is one who needs less cutting; all of that according to the relaxation of the eyelid. Then, cut with the scalpel on the two lines I taught and begin from the larger puncture to the smaller one, and the single incision will be near natural hair like the thickness of a reed.
Then, the needle enters one of the corners of the skin, then peels it all off, and gathers with suturing using a thin wool thread and cleans the blood, and secures what remains of the threads on the eyebrows with some attached things.
You desired to do that or else you don't care, then the suture and threads remain for about three or four days, then you treat it, and if you wish, you leave the wound without suturing and treat it with what dries and tightens; indeed, the eyelid rises when the wound is closed and gathered, and the suture is better.
So this is one aspect of the scarification mentioned earlier, except that it involves a burden on the sufferer and it is from good work with no danger in it; another aspect in scarification is also that you learn to shape the eyelid into a form like the shape of an aspen leaf as we described. Then, lift the eyelid with three fingers that are spread apart or gathered on this shape:.
Then, cut what remains of the eyelid with a small scissors on this shape, in gradual cuts:.
If you cannot hold the fingers and it is not convenient for you, take a needle with thread and enter it in the middle of the shape, and enter another thread near the larger puncture and another thread near the smaller one, and gather them between your fingers gradually, then lift it with your hand lifted gradually.
And lift the skin that has been shaped on it all as we described, then gather the edges of the wound with suturing and treat it until it heals, if an abscess or swelling appears when you cut or incise, stop that abscess with calomel and similar soothing ointments.
The lower eyelid may also be inverted. In this case, one should use what we mentioned earlier regarding cutting and stitching with fire and with sharp medicine, or with fire or with sharp medicine more effective and less painful for the patient in this case I make both.
Stitching with reeds is in this manner: that you turn the eyelid and cut the slit from inside as I described, then make two or four small reed strips of the same length as the eyelid and narrower than a blade.
And I have bound the edges of each with thread from both sides, where the threads stick together, then joined them gently to what is left of the eyelid's skin and tightened the reed strips on both sides tightly. Then I leave it for a few days until the stretched skin dies, becomes dry and putrid.
Until it falls off by itself, if I delay, I will remove it with pumice stone then treat it until it heals. If the swelling subsides and the eyelid rises without the lashes falling, this is the shape and size of the reed strips that are made in this manner and measurement in length and width exactly:.
The Twelfth Chapter.
In raising the eyelashes from the eye with a needle.
If it is one or two hairs, the work is to take a thin needle and insert into it a thin silk thread that is soft and smooth, then gather its ends and tie them with a very fine knot, the length of the thread being about an inch.
Then you wrap the thread around the hairs three times with another thin thread, and tie its ends if you wish. Then put the patient's head in your hand, that is, near the sun so that the work can be seen clearly, for it is a delicate task. Then enter the needle into the excess hair through the base of the hairs.
The operation is performed in the eyelid with a needle until it emerges from above the natural hair, then draw the thread up to the anastomoses and enter that hair if it is one or two or three at most.
Then grasp the thread with your hand until the hair and anastomoses emerge in the eyelid with the natural hair, if you have pulled out the anastomoses but the hair has not emerged with them, pull the anastomoses down with the thread which is in it until the anastomoses emerge from the upper opening.
Then replace the hair in it and pull them together, do that until they rise in the upper opening and you see it with your eye. When that is so, release the anastomoses and thread and bring them out and tighten the eye and leave it tight for two or three days until the hair takes its place and flesh grows on it.
If the hair is short, either add to it a long hair from the natural hair and let it rise with it, or leave it until it grows longer after some time, then raise it.
The Thirteenth Chapter.
In the treatment of the stye that occurs in the upper eyelid of the eye.
The one who is exposed to this stye is called an Arnbei and this stye can be either natural or acquired. The acquired one occurs from injury, cut, ulcer, or something like that.
The method of treatment in this case is to cut off the induration and split it open and fill what's between its edges with a thread of linen and tie it until it heals, and one should not use things that dry up and constrict.
If you do that, the stye will return worse than it was. Instead, use things that soften like aloes and mastic with water that has been boiled, and cotton wool and cerate of Violets' root, mixed with a little ointment and apply it to the swelling and treat it.
The treatment of this condition is to restore it with all means possible, so that it does not return to its original state. This work we mentioned is only a repair, not a restoration of the place's appearance as it was initially.
The Fourteenth Chapter.
In the treatment of the condition that is in the lower eyelid.
This condition that is from the lower part is called a conjunctiva and is natural, and it is an external one. The external one is from an injury or incision or cut or something like that.
And the method of working with it is to take a needle with a doubled thread and insert it into the flesh, and push it from the left edge to the right edge until the thread reaches the ends of the flesh. Then, stretch the flesh upwards with the needle and cut it off with a broad thumb.
If the shape of the eyelid returns to what is proper, otherwise, take a pommel and place it on the site of the cut and turn the eyelid with it. Cut two incisions inside the eyelid from one side to the other, and the edges of the incisions will be at the corners of the cut that was cut until they meet and form an angle. until it meets and becomes like this shape:.
And it is the Greek letter lambda, then remove that flesh as much as the sharp side of it is below what touches the eyelid, then gather the scattered parts with two stitches and sew it with a wool thread and treat it with what we mentioned from soft medications and poultice until it heals.
And if the condition is caused by a cut or suture or incision, it is necessary to make a simple incision without cutting the eyelashes also as mentioned above, then separate the lips with a poultice on what was mentioned.
The summary of the saying in treating a hernia whether it is above or below that work be done according to what appears to you from the appearance of the hernia for it may be many in shape and the skilled craftsman will devise the trick in any way possible.
Until the shape returns to its natural state or approximates it, and the same disease indicates to you what is suitable for it from the work and the tool in most cases.
The fifteenth chapter.
In adhesion of the eyelid to the cornea or the conjunctiva.
This adhesion may expose many people to having the upper eyelid adhere to the white of the eye, which prevents it from moving easily and hinders its natural functions, so you should then insert a finger under the eyelid.
And lift it up or stretch it with a splint, then cut the adhesion with a scalpel, not with force, but rather gently so as not to disturb the patient during the operation, and let the scalpel slide off that adhesion.
And wait until the eyelid returns to its natural state and the adhesion is completely released, then pour into the eye a salty water that washes it with it or sprinkle in it from the celandine powder dissolved in water, then part the eyelid from the eye with a cotton thread.
And place over the eye a linen cloth moistened with egg white, and after the third day, use poultices until it is released.
The sixteenth chapter.
In cutting the overgrowth and removing the fat from the gums.
For the overgrowth is of two kinds, either it is fibrous and resembles a thin, firm ligature or it is not fibrous and resembles a cold, white moisture if touched with iron or grasped with a splint, it breaks.
And if there is not a snare, then both types start from the larger opening until they are a little bit bent and cover the observer's view, preventing light and eye movement. The purpose of cutting them is that the operator should place his head in the stone.
Then he opens his eyes and raises the eyelid with your hand, then takes hold of the claw with a little bent snare and stretches it upwards, then takes an awl and inserts a hair from a horse or cow's hair and a strong thread, bends the end of the awl slightly and embeds it in the middle of the claw.
And pushes it with the awl, ties the claw with the thread and stretches it upwards, and peels off the side of the claw that follows the pupil as if you were spreading it with a hair to the end, then cuts the rest in the natural flesh of the opening with a fine blade or small scissors and leaves its natural flesh.
So that bleeding does not occur from what is cut, and the claw can be tied with a snare alone or with thread as we said, then peels off with a smooth blade the side that has this appearance:.
And takes care not to touch the conjunctiva with the blade, for if it does, a pterygium will occur and cloud the pupil, then after cutting, some powdered salt or cinnabar ointment is instilled into the eye and left until another day, then treated as needed so that it heals.
If the claw is not firm and you cannot insert an awl or tie a snare into it, this type of claw is often treated with medicines so that it heals as I described in the division, and if you want to cut it, open the operator's eye.
And take a fine, smooth, and weak-edged blade for this appearance:. Wrap the excrescence on the finger with a piece of cloth from above, gently. If you see that it is loosening and breaking apart, leaving only the scar tissue, then take some red or black sulfide of arsenic or powdered salt and apply it to the eye for another day.
Then, reapply the treatment until all of them go away, except if a warm abscess appears in the eye, then leave it and treat the abscess until it clears up, then reapply the treatment with the gauze until it clears up.
If the abscess is bothering the eye severely, tie it with a ligature and cut off some of it, but do not linger in the cutting lest bleeding occurs. Then apply powdered red or black sulfide to the affected area until it clears up.
The 17th Chapter.
In cutting away the granulations and what grows from excess flesh in the eye.
It may grow in the eyes of some people, excess flesh that is red and accumulated until it covers the gaze or approaches or overflows onto the eyelids, and sometimes the eyelids may turn outward and resemble a pomegranate.
And the treatment for this is that the operator should place his head in a vice, then open the eyes and pluck out all of that red flesh with instruments suitable for that.
Or he should grasp it with tweezers or a spatula then cut out the flesh piece by piece until all of it is removed, and take care not to injure the eye during the operation. And your cutting tool may be either the one we described for cutting excrescences or a small scissors. Just as you pluck out the hair with the forceps in the way it is shown in the chapter that follows this one.
If you have completed the cutting and all the granulations have gone, fill the eye with powdered salt or sprinkle red powder and similar medicines in it and apply a swab of white of egg to the outside of the eye to prevent abscess.
If something remains of the conjunctivitis and the blood pressure increases and you fear the warm tumor, leave the eye alone and treat it with what soothes the tumor then return to treating it until it clears. Do the same with the excessive flesh that appears in the eye of this kind.
Unless it is necessary for you to avoid treating any weak eye by the method of habit or by exposing it to work with iron, and do not put your hand into anything from these actions until you see that organ capable of that action.
The Eighteenth Chapter.
In the Wounds of the Eye.
The veins become red and stitch on the eye, causing impairment of vision and weakening the eye with time. Therefore, it is necessary for you first to examine whether the eye in which the veins are stitched is strong and not affected by any other disease except for the veins.
Then the ligation, which is for you to order the patient to put his head in your lap, then tie those veins with one or two sutures according to your skill and have the sutures be gentle in their curvature on this shape.
or they should be two double sutures in one body, on this shape.
Then tie those veins with a gentle scissors, softly and gently, until the eye is freed from those veins and the blood flows freely, and take care not to injure the eye with the tips of the scissors. And do your work half the day in view of the sun.
And be firm in your work, lest you cut anything except those veins. And when you finish, sprinkle the eye with green or red eye medicine to eat away what remains of the veins. If you cannot tie them all up at that time, then fill the eye with what soothes the eye.
And leave it for a few days until the eye becomes calm and the warm tumor subsides, then return to treat it in this manner with its own eye until it clears. This is the end of the wound's pain from it.
The wound becomes dry [and the student's head is in a stone and the other one dries up blood and achieves a view in front of the eye and at the back, and it is necessary in the work that the eye opens with fixed or triangular openings which the student holds.
Pus and it is that the head of the patient is in a stone and the other one dries up blood and achieves a view in front of the eye and at the back, and it is optional to start from above the eye or from below it. The first one drains two vessels in the upper canal, and one is in the last chamber and the other is in the first one.
And it holds it between the middle and the heel, then it takes out strings from under them, then it holds it between the ankle and the calf, and you will pull your hand gently until you see all the passages have risen. Cut from the smaller western part if you can with a pair of scissors or with a fine forceps.
And the bleeding stops on the surface and all the passages are cleared until it rises above the gum, but do not cut the discharge for if the blood and pus accumulate on you.
Then cut with the scissors what exceeds from above and below until nothing remains except in the curvature, for if you can lift it up from the curvature, scrape with the instrument, for that is better and may be suitable for some people.
And if you cut it, it will become swollen for several days, giving pain and warmth to the tumor, then rework on it.
The nineteenth chapter.
In setting the bone back into the nose.
Physicians call the bone nasalitis, if it is treated with vinegar or sharp medicine as previously described and did not heal, then there is no remedy for it except to cut into the tumor when it becomes swollen and extract all the moisture that is in it or pus.
Until the bone is exposed; then if the bone is exposed and you see decay or corruption in it, cut it with this instrument in its shape.
And it is called the "head" or the "nose" and it is made from Indian steel; its head is rounded like a pincer, and you engrave on it a small inscription of the cooling agent or of the esculent, then you place it at the site of the decay in the bone, and turn it between your fingers while you press your hand slightly until you know that decay has been removed.
And you do that several times, then you apply the site with dried adhesive substances; if you stop the bleeding and the flesh grows back in its place and the flow of blood ceases for forty days without returning or oozing.
And you will know that it has recovered, otherwise there is no remedy except to re-drill the nasal bone into this shape, which means uncovering the bone again with steel or with a sharp medicine; if the bone is uncovered then take a chisel in this form:.
The end of the chisel is triangular and its handle is conical, curved towards the end as you see; then place it on the bone itself, being that close to the edge and a little farther from the eye, then move your hand with the chisel until the bone is pierced and the patient feels it.
That the breath comes out of him when he holds his hand on his nose; at that time, apply a compress to the site with adhesive dried substances as I have informed you; if the flesh grows back and the place is firm, then the substance that was standing outside will return to the nose; it will be more comfortable for the patient, God willing.
The Twentieth Chapter.
In Reducing the Eyelid.
If the eyelid swells up with its entirety and there is no defect or loss of vision, then the patient should be relaxed, then divided in the cleft, then put a ligature on the back without restriction, and compress slightly.
Then you put on the eye a poultice made from agaric, saponin, and myrrh and alum. Then you tie the eye from above with the dressing for many benefits, and the recipe for the benefits is that you take a warm poultice of much linen, folding each cloth into four folds to make it thick.
Then you put one on top of another as much as the eye needs, then tie it with a strong linen cloth and apply the poultice to the bandage without condition. Then you remove the bandage and leave the eye tied for a day and night.
If the bandage becomes loose during that time, it should be tightened again. Then remove the bandage after a day and night as we said. If you see the eye has recovered, otherwise repeat the dressing, recipe, tightening, and poultice until it recovers.
The 21st Chapter.
In Cutting the Eyelashes.
If a defect appears in the eyelash layer, then it separates and protrudes outside the lids like a bunch of grapes and disfigures the appearance of man, therefore I have described how to treat it.
And it is that you insert a needle into the base of the eyelash from below to above, then insert another needle with a doubled thread from the side and push it through and leave the first needle as it is.
Then you cut the spot where the doubled thread is bent, and tie it with some of the eyelash around the needle and tighten it well. Then you remove the needle and apply a wet wool to the eye, leaving it until the threads fall off with the eyelashes, then treat the eye as it strengthens.
Until the wound heals, and the eyelashes may be tied from all sides with a circular bandage made of cloth until the eye is tightened well. Then it will be wrapped with a thin bandage that reaches to the bottom of the eye, allowing white moisture to flow down and bring the eye back to its place, then tighten it until it heals.
The Twenty-Second Chapter.
In the Treatment of Abscesses.
This ailment, which is called abscess, is nothing but a collection of fluid in the eye resembling water that has settled and is not present; and the means to do this are for the patient to sit on a raised seat upright, then take his head with your hands from both sides.
And move it until you see the collection going down into your eye, then stop and do not shift; the sight will return to normal and the patient will be able to see things as he used to see them. If it does not go down as we have described.
And otherwise, make the patient sit between your legs then take a thin lancet and cut with it above the conjunctiva little by little at the point where the abscess meets the conjunctiva in the corner until the matter emerges.
If it emerges, then pour into the eye warm water that has been mixed with vinegar or water in which safflower and vinegar have been boiled, and then treat with the rest of the treatment until he is cured.
The Twenty-Third Chapter.
We have mentioned the types of water in the classification and which one is suitable for this case, as we have previously explained it. Therefore, when taking the patient's history, you should make him sit between your legs, upright opposite the light, near the sun.
And bind the patient's good eye and pull it tight, then lift the upper eyelid of the affected eye with your left hand if the affected eye is the left one, or with your right hand if the affected eye is the right one.
Then place the tip of the cup near the corner of the eye with great care in the same direction as the smaller corneal space, then push the cup with force while turning it with your hand until it penetrates into the white of the eye and you feel the cup has reached something empty.
The wound should be deepened to the extent of the distance from the child's hairline to the end of the eyebrow, for in this region the copper [nail] is seen by the observer due to the transparency of the conjunctival membrane. Then the wound should be deepened further up to the position where there is water.
Then compress it down a little bit, then and then again, until the water flows from his cup. Then the patient will see what he has opened to with his sight, and the abscess in his eye, then he will rest a little. If the water rises, then lower it again without letting the abscess come out.
If it has settled and did not rise, then extract the abscess gently and as you stretch out your hand a little at a time. Then dissolve in the water a little bit of pure salt from Andalusia and wash with it the eye from inside, then apply to the outside of the whole eye all smooth or woolen cloth.
With white and pure fat, and tie it with the healthy eye. And as for us and our contemporaries, we put on it crushed onion mixed with white of egg. If the abscess does not want to enter the eye because of its hardness, since some people have a very hard eye. So it is necessary to take the instrument which is called the "barid" whose picture is this:.
Then pierce with it the congealed discharge only and do not linger in the piercing, but rather make a gentle approach to the abscess, then enter the abscess as we have mentioned. And when you complete your action prepare for the patient lying firmly asleep on his back in a dark room.
And he should refrain from all movements and coughing, and make his food conform to its natural consistency, nor should he move his head to the right or left at all, and the bandage should remain on him until the third day, then take it off in that dark room and test his vision.
There are two things then the bandage will return to the seventh day and it is not permissible to do that during treatment or after taking a drink for an hour but it is necessary to avoid doing so before water rises quickly with severe looking.
If a hot tumor appears then it is necessary to open the eye before the seventh day and adjust that so as to calm the tumor until it calms down then release his sight and place on his face a cloth that trains his sight from underneath for some days while he is in that dark place then.
He goes out of the house gradually and takes care of his affairs, and know that drink does not dispense with observation several times then he sets out to work, and it has reached me about some Iraqis that he mentioned making a cup in Baghdad that absorbs water.
And I have not seen anyone in our country make that nor read it in one of the early books and it may be a novelty, and this is an image of types of cups so he can stand on them due to his ignorance:.
It is made from copper in particular and its edge will be like this wicker with a triangular sharp point.
The 24th chapter.
Treatment of the fleshy growth on the nose.
It may grow in the nose different excessive flesh, some resembling many-legged scorpions, and some that is a cancerous flesh with a dark color, and some that is a soft non-cancerous flesh.
And what is not cancerous or malignant, then the patient should sit in front of you facing the sun and open his nostrils and receive the scalpel in that flesh then pull it out to the outside then cut off as much of it as possible with a sharp and thin knife from one side.
Until you learn that all the flesh has gone, and if there remains something that you could not cut off, then scrape it off with one of the fine instruments gently so that nothing remains, unless the blood flows or a hot tumor appears.
As the skin abscesses or evil ulcers, then begin by cutting it off until the blood stops flowing and all flesh is removed. Then pour in the nose after cutting, whatever remains, with water or a drink. If the nose opens up and moisture flows into the throat.
Know that it is healed, if the moisture does not flow as it should, know that there is fatty tissue grown above the hollow bones which the instrument did not reach with the cut, so then take a thread of linen that has some thickness.
And tie many knots in it, and make between each knot the length of a finger or less. The surgeon will then insert one end of the thread into his nose with a forceps or what is available, after he has made it like a thimble, and pull its scent until it reaches the nostril.
And it comes out on the mouth and often children do this in writing, which is something that makes it easy for one who intends to do so, then gather both ends of the thread, one end that came out at the mouth and the other that remained in the nose.
Then use the flesh to tie the knots that are in the thread, do this until you know that the flesh has been cut by the thread's knot, then remove the thread and insert it into the nose after wiping away the blood, which it had sucked up with the ointment, do this for three days or more.
Until the ointment has eaten away all that remains of the flesh, then insert the last thing into the nose a lead pipe for several days until it heals, if it needs treatment to dry out use that.
And this is an image of the catheter with which medicines and ointments are poured into the nose:.
He places a lead or copper pipe like a small candle wick open at the top and also hollow.
If you wish, I can make the tube closed like the pipe and grease the inside of the tube smooth.
It has a handle at its end, as you see, which one grips if the fat or whatever greasy things or scattered objects you want are put inside.
The twenty-fifth chapter.
In the swellings that appear at the tip of the nose.
Many times a boil appears at the tip of the nose, grows and increases over time until its appearance becomes unpleasant.
Therefore, it is necessary to cut it off at its first appearance and remove the entire thing, then apply a poultice or a caustic remedy that serves as a poultice. If cutting it off does not work until it becomes large, look; if it is hard and scarred with little sensation.
So do not treat it with iron, for it is a cancerous tumor; and I have often seen people who had this tumor cut out of them suffer from great suffering afterwards. If the tumor is soft and fleshy, but not scarred, and you see that cutting it out is possible entirely. Then drain the swelling and cut it off without caution or hesitation, and treat the area with something that dries and constricts until it heals.
The twenty-sixth chapter.
In the suturing of the nose, lip, and ear. If the connection is torn apart due to a wound or something similar, know that when this occurs in one of these organs, it is rare for anything to be done there except in some people.
Therefore, when something like that occurs to someone, look; if the wound is still fresh with blood, then gather the edges of the wound together by suturing and treat it until it heals. And if the disconnection has separated the lips and each side is sound, then you must strip off each side by scraping away the visible skin until it becomes numb.
Then the lips are brought together by suturing and tightened, and on them is sprinkled powdered myrrh and saffron, and a poultice of frankincense or other unguents is placed above the stitches, and it is left tightly for two or three days then it is removed.
And the treatment is changed and it is left until the sutures break down of their own accord, then it is treated with an unguent until it heals. The art of suturing is to bring together what has become disconnected either with a needle as we described in sewing the abdomen or with a thread as I have explained elsewhere.
The Twenty-Seventh Chapter.
In the removal of the knots that appear on the lips.
Many people may have in the inside of their lips small, hardened lumps that resemble some kind of wart and some smaller and larger than others. So it is necessary to turn the lip and cut on each lump and tie it with a thread.
And it is cut from all sides then the wound is packed with powdered salt until the bleeding stops and it is rinsed with vinegar, salt, and the wounds are treated with whatever is necessary until they heal.
The Twenty-Eighth Chapter.
In cutting away excess flesh in the gum.
Often a redundant flesh grows on the gum which the ancients called apolles, so it is necessary to tie it with a thread or grasp it with forceps and cut it at its origin and let the bleeding stop then put powdered salt on the place.
or one of the drying constrictors, for if that flesh returns after treatment, it often returns and is cut again and cauterized, since it does not return after being burned.
The Twenty-Ninth Chapter.
In the fixation of teeth with iron.
There may gather on the surfaces of teeth, from within and without, and between the gums, rough and foul scabs which may thicken and dry out and turn green until decay spreads to the gum and the teeth are thereby spoiled.
The patient should sit before you with his head in your lap and remove the calculus and tooth that appears to have scales on it, until nothing remains, and do the same for the black, green, yellow, and other colors, until it is clean.
If what is there is removed from the beginning of the calculus, and it is not so, then you should redo the calculus again on another day and another day after that, until you reach your goal, and know that the calculus requires different forms of treatment many in number according to what presents itself to your work.
In order that the calculus which removes the calculus from within is not the same as the one which removes it from outside, and the one which removes it between the teeth in another form, and these are many forms of treatment to have all prepared.
The thirtieth chapter.
About extracting teeth.
It is necessary to treat the calculus with all its might and spare no effort from extracting it, for there is nothing behind it if extracted, since it is a noble substance, so that even if extraction is not needed.
It is necessary when the patient decides to extract that you ensure the calculus is set until it becomes firm in your hand. The patient is often deceived by the calculus and thinks it is sound in the tooth, so he extracts, then the calculus does not go away until the sick tooth is extracted, we have seen this repeated among barbers.
If the calculus is set in your hand with precision, then it is necessary to clamp around the tooth with a forceps that has some strength until the gum releases from all sides, then move it slightly with your fingers or fine pincers at first little by little until it is loosened.
Then the two clamps grasp it well, and the jawbone is fixed between the tibias, which has been stiffened so that it does not move. Then pull the tooth into place to maintain its alignment lest it break; if it does not come out, then take one of those instruments and insert it under him from all sides with gentleness and cause his movement as I did at first.
And if the tooth is perforated or loosened, it is necessary to fill that hole with a ligature and seal it tightly with a thin thread so that it does not open up when you pull on it with the clamps; and it is necessary to search around the gum from all sides firmly.
And preserve your effort so that it does not break, and some of it will remain and return to its original position; beware that you do not do what ignorant barbers do in their bridges and actions without using what we have described.
For many times they inflict great torments on people, the likes of which are not more terrible than having a tooth break and its roots remaining all or some of it. And either he pulls out some of the jawbone as we have seen repeatedly, then swallows it after extraction with drink or vinegar and salt; if bleeding occurs from the site, many times this happens so that afterwards something should be applied to stop the flow.
And if not, then take a cloth, if the gauze does not help you. The shape of the clamps that move the tooth first is long-handled, short-jawed, thick-handed, lest it bends when you grasp it with the tooth; and this is the shape of the large clamps:.
It will be as you see, thick-handed until when you grasp it firmly it does not give in nor bend; and let it be made of Indian iron or from well-forged steel, with teeth on its end that fit into each other so that it grips firmly and tightly.
And it is made into a shape like that of the cooled liquid, so it will also be strong in its grasp.
The 23rd chapter.
Regarding the removal of roots of abscesses and extraction of broken jaw bones.
If the root of the abscess remains after extracting it and has been broken, then a thread soaked in fat should be placed on the spot for one or two days until the spot relaxes, then you can insert a probe or pincers. Which resembles the edges of a bird's beak called the "blerga", and this is an image of the pincers:.
It should be made like a cooled liquid from the inside or like an esculentum, if it does not yield to the pincers then you must dig into the root and uncover all the flesh with the scalpel, then insert the instrument which resembles a small awl, and this is its image:.
Short and thick on one side, not to be nicked otherwise it will break, if the root comes out like that, otherwise use these other instruments, this is their image, the first resembling a triangular shape with some thickness:.
Image of another small triangle:.
And we also use this instrument with two prongs, and this is its image:.
And besides these instruments and tools mentioned earlier in the section on abscesses, we also use this instrument which resembles a large scraper, and this is its image:.
A triangular instrument with some thickness on one side, lest it breaks, and is not nicked. Know that the instruments for abscesses are many, as well as all other instruments which cannot be counted, and the skilled craftsman may invent for himself tools according to what his work and diseases dictate themselves.
Because some diseases have not been mentioned, and the ancients did not invent instruments for their various types, if a bone from the jaw or one of the mouth's bones is broken or decayed, then search for it in its place with one of these instruments and pincers that were mentioned in extracting roots.
We resort to this figure:.
There is some firmness in it slightly to set the bone so that the bone does not slip until it emerges, and we treat the location with corresponding medications. If there is a slight decay in the bone, we remove its decay and smoothness until it becomes clean, then treat it until it heals.
The 22nd chapter.
In the treatment of excrescent tumors on others.
The excrescence, if it grows on anything other than its natural site, spoils that appearance, and even more so when it occurs in women and the weak. It is necessary to examine it; if the excrescence has grown from behind another one.
And if it cannot be removed or scraped, cut it off; and if it is attached to another excrescence, cut it off with this instrument, which is this:.
And it resembles a small Indian steel beak; let it be very sharp and have its cutting edge for many days because of the hardness of the excrescence, lest it disturb other excrescences. And if it can be removed with scraping, scrape it off with an ice-like instrument, which is this:.
It will be all of Indian steel and a thin scraping, very fine like the instrument used to make sharp needles. The excrescence cools slightly over many days with gentle application, lest it fall off; then it is grasped later and scraped off with some forceps.
And if the excrescence has broken off some of it and hurts the tongue when speaking, then it is necessary to scrape it also until the sharpness of that break goes away and becomes smooth, so that it does not hurt the tongue or spoil speech.
The 33rd chapter.
In the binding of movable excrescences with silver threads or gold threads.
If a wound appears in the front of the body and moves and becomes inflamed from a blow or fall, and the patient is unable to apply anything that can be eaten lest it falls off, and treatment with binding medications does not succeed.
And the trick in this is to bind it with a thread of gold or silver, and gold is better because silver tarnishes and decomposes after days, whereas gold remains unchanged forever, without being affected by that. And the thread will be of medium thickness in the tenderness and firmness according to what fits between the wounds.
And the picture of binding is that you take the thread and put it between the correct teeth, then sew with both ends of the thread into the moving wounds, one or more, until the sewing reaches the correct tooth from the other side.
Then you sew back to the side where you started and pull your thread gently and wisely until it does not move at all, and your pulling the thread should be at the roots of the wounds so that it does not slip away. Then cut off the excess ends with scissors and join them together and fold them over and hide them between the correct tooth and the moving tooth.
So that the tongue is not harmed, then leave it like this tightly bound until there is nothing left. If it comes undone or its tightness is loosened with another thread, one will enjoy it like this for all eternity. This is the appearance of the wounds and the binding in two correct teeth and two moving teeth as you see:.
And one or both of the teeth may return to their place after they have fallen, and be bound as we described and remain. But only a skilled craftsman can do that, and he may carve bone from cow's bones and make it resemble a tooth and put it in the place where the tooth fell out. And pull as we said, and remain, and enjoy that.
The Fourth and Thirty-Second Chapter.
On cutting the ligament that appears under the tongue in those who are unable to speak.
This ligament that appears under the tongue may be either natural, with which man is born, or it may be a residual result of an old wound.
The procedure for this is to open the patient's mouth and place his head in your lap, then lift up his tongue and cut that nervous ligament with a blunt instrument until the tongue is released from its grip. If there is some hardness and complexity due to an old wound, then insert a probe and gently split it open until the ligament is relaxed and the knot is undone.
And beware that the incision should not be too deep, lest it cut a vein and expose bleeding. Then compress the incised area with rosewater, vinegar, and cold water. Then place under the tongue a piece of cotton for the patient to hold in his mouth every night.
So that it does not reform again; if bleeding occurs, apply powdered alum to the place. If the blood is profuse, cover the area with a compress made of wool suitable for this purpose. Then treat it with the rest of the treatment until he recovers.
The Fifth and Thirty-Second Chapter.
On removing the toad that develops under the tongue.
A tumor resembling a small toad may develop under the tongue, preventing it from performing its natural function and sometimes growing so large as to fill the mouth. The procedure here is to open the patient's mouth facing the sun and examine the tumor.
If you see it with a bluish color or black and hard, the patient has no sensation of it, do not interfere with it for it is cancer. But if it inclines towards whiteness and there is moisture, then insert a fine forceps and split it open on all sides.
If the bleeding occurs while you are working, place a powdered alum on it until the bleeding stops then return to your work and complete it completely before rinsing with vinegar and salt.
Then treat it with the same treatment that is suitable for it until it recovers.
The Thirty-sixth Chapter.
In the Treatment of a Tumor of the tonsils.
And any growth that appears in the throat from any other tumor, can be exposed inside the throat glands that resemble those which are exposed outside and are called tonsils. If you treat them as mentioned earlier, but they do not recover.
If it is a hard tumor, pale in color and insensitive to the touch, do not apply iron to it. And if it is red in color and its root is thick, do not apply iron to it either, for fear of bleeding, but rather leave it until it ripens, whether it becomes soft or bursts from within itself.
And if it is white in color, rounded and its root is thin, this is what needs to be cut. The procedure for this is that you look at it before starting the operation to see if the tumor has cooled down completely or reduced somewhat.
So then sit the patient beside the sun, with his head in your lap, and open his mouth and take a cord between your hands and tie his tongue down to the bottom with this instrument which is:.
It is made of copper or bronze, thin like a razor. When you have tied the tongue with it and revealed to you the tumor and placed your finger on it, take a forceps and insert it into the tonsil and pull it outwards as much as possible without pulling anything from the peritoneum with it.
Then cut it with this instrument which is similar to scissors except that the two ends are curved, each one bending around the other very sharply. It is made of Indian steel or Damascus steel.
If this instrument is not available, then cut it with the cutting tool of its shape:.
Sharp on one side and not sharp on the other, so after cutting one nasal passage you cut the other in the same type of cut. Then, after the cut, the patient is cleaned with cold water or vinegar and water.
If bleeding occurs, clean with water that has been made hotter by adding the husks of almonds or the leaves of asafoetida or something similar from the gourds until the bleeding stops. Then treat it until it heals. If in the throat, other ulcers appear besides the nasal passages, cut them according to what was mentioned for cutting the nasal passages, whether one or both.
And I treated a woman who had an ulcer that had appeared inside her throat, striking the tonsil and threatening to block the airway. The woman was breathing through a narrow passage and had been unable to eat or drink water.
And she was near death if she had remained for a day or two, and the ulcer had risen to the point where it had produced two roots that emerged onto her nostrils. I acted quickly and inserted a hook into one of them, then pulled it out and extracted a healthy piece.
Then I cut it where I reached from the nostril, and did that to what emerged from the other nostril. Then I opened her mouth, compressed her tongue, and inserted the hook into the same ulcer again. Then I cut off some of it; only a little blood was shed.
Then the woman's throat opened and she began to drink water from that moment on, and she took food again. We did not stop cutting off pieces of that ulcer repeatedly over a long period of time, until eventually it was completely gone, for both of us.
And the ulcer hardened and became compact inside the throat, so it stopped increasing. Then I left the area and did not know what Allah had done with her after that.
The Thirty-Seventh Chapter.
On the removal of a tumor from the forehead.
What is called a 'anbah' if it descends to the forehead and becomes swollen, being white and rectangular in shape. And if it is thick at the bottom and rounded, it is called an 'umud'. If treated as mentioned in the partitioning, but the treatment did not succeed.
And I saw the hot tumor which subsided from it, and was thin. It is necessary to cut it off. And if it does not have continuity, or has the color of blood, blackness, or no sensation in it, then it is necessary to avoid cutting it off.
In it there is danger to the patient. Therefore, if you see it on the skin as described by its whiteness and length, then let the patient sit in the shade and bind his tongue with the instrument which I have described, then insert the pincer into the swelling.
And draw it down and cut it off with one of the two instruments mentioned in cutting the stones, and it is necessary not to cut more than what exceeds the natural state, without anything extra, because if you cut too much, it will harm the voice and speech.
Then, after cutting, use what we described in cutting the stones and treat it until it heals. If the patient refuses to cut it off, then one should use cunning in any way without fear or caution, and the only way is with a strong medicine, which is that you place the patient's head in your lap.
Then bind his tongue with the instrument we mentioned, then take from the strong water which was mentioned in the chapter on binding and mix it with a quantity of clay that is not too thick or too thin, and fill this instrument with it, like this.
The end of it, where you put the medicine, should be made like a spoon's bowl. Put the instrument with the medicine on the forehead itself and have the patient lie down on his side so that saliva flows out from within his mouth and does not go into his throat.
Then take hold of the medicine with your hand and press it against the boil for half an hour until you see it turn black and the pain subsides. If you wish, take a thread and wrap it around the edge of the cloth and tie the thread in the medicine.
And you enter the cloth with the thread into a tube from above until the thread sticks to the boil, and do that repeatedly until you achieve what you want of the swelling, then leave it alone. It will dry up and fall off after three or four days. If you need to reapply the medicine, prepare it again.
And after the swelling has subsided, wipe around it with a cloth soaked in oil and absorb what's left of the medicine. Then, rinse with cold water and treat from outside with compresses and from inside with poultices until it heals. This type of treatment is safer than cutting and farther from fear.
And the boil can also be treated with what is milder than cutting and cauterization, treated with steam on this manner. One takes wormwood, absinthe, sassafras, gentian, papain, and similar herbs, gathers them all or some of them in a pot, and immerses it in vinegar.
And it boils and the pot is well-covered with a mixture of vinegar, and there is a hole left in the middle of the lid. On this hole, one places an instrument made of tin or brass on this manner.
And one enters the end of the instrument with the powder into the wound until the steam rises to the boil through the tube, until the boil is satiated, then do it repeatedly until it dries up. And beware not to make this treatment in the first occurrence of the boil.
For it often happens that the boil increases, and it should only be done when its heat subsides. If you do not have this instrument, take a reed and wrap an eggshell on its tip so that the mouth of the wound does not burn.
Because the shell of the egg prevents the heat of steam from burning the mouth, this is good treatment with safety.
The 28th Chapter.
In removing thorns and what is stuck in the throat, not otherwise.
Often a bone, fish thorn or something else gets stuck in the throat; it is necessary to remove what is visible after moistening the tongue with the instrument in the sun.
To show you what is in the throat, and what does not appear to you and hides in the throat; it is necessary that the patient should vomit before eating his food again, for perhaps the stuck thing will come out with the vomit or the patient will swallow a piece of lint or the root of a hair.
Or he may swallow a crumb of dry bread or take a piece of seaweed, make it soft then swallow it, and when it reaches the place of the thorn, pull the string quickly and do that several times.
For often the thorn or bone sticks there and comes out, if it does not come out as mentioned, otherwise use an instrument made of lead in this shape:.
It should be slightly thicker than a reed and at the end, there is a depression that the patient inserts into his throat gently while lifting his head upwards and takes care not to touch his epiglottis lest he coughs and pushes out the bone or thorn, or the doctor puts it in with his hand.
And the patient's insertion of it is better because he knows the location of the stuck thing and pushes it down or pulls his hand with the instrument up, all that according to what appears to him until it comes out.
The 39th Chapter.
In removing the stuck mucus in the throat.
If you treated the mucus as mentioned in the treatment with medicine and it did not succeed, then look at the patient's throat by the sun after moistening his tongue with the instrument that I described to you.
If you fall upon the boil, grasp it with a small forceps or with a soft and firm spatula. If you cannot manage that, take a cleaned tube and insert it into the patient's throat up to near the boil, then insert a fire-heated blade into the tube's cavity.
He will do that several times and the patient will tolerate the water all day, then he will take a spoon filled with cold water, open his mouth into it, and suck on it without swallowing a drop, and move the water from time to time with his hand.
If the boil falls onto its place when it feels the water, and if it does not come out as we described, then clear the throat with urine and with a poultice on the instrument which I described in the remedies book. Do that several times, for it will come out.
And the procedure in the remedy is to take a certain amount of warm ember from the fire and cover it with a cloth, leaving a hole in the middle. Then, place one end of the instrument into that hole, and give the remedy to the patient, having them put their mouth onto the tube's end and closing their mouth until you know that the remedy has reached his throat.
If the boil falls onto its place, and if it does not come out, then repeat the remedy several times and make the patient endure thirst and eat salt and onion, but do not let him drink water. It is necessary that it comes out with this treatment. And this is the image of the instrument which draws out the boil from the throat if one looks upon it.
And it resembles a forceps as you see, except that it has this peculiar design which enters the throat and its two ends resemble the beak of a bird where the metal is rough if it bites onto something and does not let it go.
And there is another instrument which holds the tongue, it is a wide iron ring that can fit over the mouth above the tongue. It enters the mouth standing upright on its side and keeps the mouth open without the patient's intention, nor can he remove it at all until it is pulled out.
Description of the instrument with which the mouth is opened according to this measure exactly.
The Forty-First Chapter.
In it, he makes a speech in the breast of the tumors and cuts them apart.
The tumors are many and varied, according to what is mentioned one by one in this book, and they differ in their breast and cutting according to two aspects: one, the type of tumor itself, and what it contains from moisture.
And the second type, according to the locations in which they occur on the body, because a tumor that occurs on the head is not like a tumor that occurs on the hip or a tumor that occurs in a limb, and each one has its own rule for treatment.
And among the tumors, there are some that should not be cut until the pus inside them has matured and is complete, and there are others that should be cut while they are still green and have not yet reached their full maturity, such as those that occur close to the joints.
Because if a tumor occurs near a joint and its condition is prolonged until it corrupts what surrounds it, perhaps the ligaments or nerves of that joint will be damaged, becoming a cause for disability of that limb or making the tumor occur near a principal organ.
Because if you delay cutting it until it matures, you will harm the principal organ or make it occur near the hip, then cut it green and not yet fully mature, lest the cavity becomes putrid and penetrates into the inside of the hip, becoming a suppuration.
And it will not heal, and it is necessary to learn the time for cutting tumors that have fully matured, which is when the tumor is at rest, with pain subsiding, fever decreasing, redness disappearing, swelling subsiding, and signs of inflammation gone.
And it is necessary to anticipate the cutting in the lower part of the tumor if possible, so that the flow of pus will be easier and more abundant at the bottom or in a thinner part of the tumor, and the cutting should proceed in length along the body if the tumors are on the arms or legs.
The muscles and tendons and nerves and vessels, and in general all the places that are flat and do not bend, but as for those which bend, let it be guided by the joint according to that place, and if there is a tumor in soft places then it is best to leave it.
Until its growth is completed as we said to the end, you should not excise it before that time has passed, for fear of excessive bleeding and much pain, and perhaps even stiffening of his lips and tongue, and some tumors may be excised on the surface of the body when necessary or according to what the part needs.
And it is necessary to use a small incision in small tumors, and for large tumors a wide incision or multiple cuts according to the size of the tumor, and there may be some tumors that require cutting through the skin and cutting off if it has become like a thread.
And it may happen that some of them die off like what is seen in many boils and abscesses, and among them some will cut open a triangle-shaped incision and others will be removed in the shape of a mulberry leaf.
And among them some will use a circular incision and a crescent-shaped incision and the like, and what does not have a head like smooth flat tumors should be excised with only a small incision, and if the tumor is large and has accumulated for a long time and is being excised, then it should not be hastened to come out all at once in that moment.
But some of it is extracted first, then the tumor is pulled back to another day and some of the pus is also extracted, doing this repeatedly by degrees until all of it comes out.
And especially if the patient is weak in strength or a pregnant woman or a small child or an old man, the vital spirits are often exhausted along with the pus when it comes out suddenly, and perhaps the patient will die without you realizing it, so beware of this danger extremely.
After cutting away these ulcers, the wound should be cleaned and examined. If the ulcer of the tumor is small or there is only one simple incision, use a lint or cotton ball. If the tumor is large and the cuts are many.
It should be inserted into each incision a thread until some of it reaches the other, and if the tumor has been cut from the skin or pared down, it should be covered with cotton or linen cloth without moisture and left tight for three days.
Then remove it and treat it as needed with ointments until it heals. If bleeding occurs during the procedure, use cold water and vinegar after soaking a linen cloth in them and applying it to the bleeding spot several times.
If the bleeding persists, it is necessary to use the treatment and remedies that we have described in many places of this book and from our division. If you are in winter time and the tumor's location is rich in nerves, it is necessary to wrap it with warm wine and hot oil.
And put it on the spot. If you are in summer and the location is hot, it is necessary to wrap it with water and oil or wine and oil, all of which should be cool. Then, when the third day comes as we said, the tumor should break open and be cleaned.
And use what is similar for its treatment until it heals. This is what you need to know about treating tumors in general, and as for the detailed method, I have described each tumor how to treat it briefly and concisely.
The Forty-First Chapter.
On the incision for tumors that appear on the skin of the head.
Appearing on the skin of the head are small tumors, which are a type of sebaceous cysts, having conditions like those of hens' nests, and their kinds are many. Some are fatty, while others contain moisture similar to pus.
From it, what absorbs moisture like a cloth and a dishrag, and so on. And from it, what is hardened into solidity; all of it poses no danger in its incision and removal unless an artery intervenes.
And the procedure for it is to first probe it with an instrument that resembles its shape, which is called the maddah, until you learn what it contains. If what it contains is moisture, then make a small incision along its length following this shape.
And begin the incision from point ~B~ to point ~C~, and if the moisture has been released, then excise the sac that contained it and cut it all off, leaving nothing behind. For many times it comes back if something is left.
Then immerse a thread in the salted poultice, if available; otherwise, in salt water, and fill the wound with it, leaving it until the next day. For it will consume what is left of the sac. Then repeat the process with the thread again and again as needed.
Until you are certain that there is nothing left of the sac. Then treat the wound with poultices until it heals. And if the tumor contains fatty matter, then make an incision along this shape.
Make a longitudinal incision and pull out the edges of the wound. Remove it from all sides, and use your best effort to remove the fatty membrane that contains it. If an artery intervenes, do as I have described to you. And do the same for the tumor if it is hardened in the incision.
And the treatment is specifically for what I have mentioned, and the incision on a hardened tumor is easier because it has little blood and moisture. And some of these tumors that are in people's heads may not have any moisture with them, as I have already described regarding a tumor.
The head of an old woman was like a stone, hard and white as limestone. No one could break it, not even if they threw something at it with all their might. The only other tumors that occurred on the head were those that appeared on the heads of boys.
And at the roots of the ears, I split them all with a slight incision and made their edges from the surrounding tissue to ease the flow of the material down, then treated it as it required.
The Forty-Second Chapter.
In the incision on pigs, these tumors often occur in the neck, and under the armpits, and in the elbows, and sometimes they occur all over the body; some of them arise from one another.
And each pig is inside a special sac belonging to it, just as in the womb and tumors of the head which we described; and kinds of these pigs are many, some calcified, some containing fluids, and some malignant and do not respond to treatment.
And I did not see any of them in a good condition when touched, and its appearance was close to the color of the skin, it moved in every direction and was not attached to the neck artery or jugular vein or any major vessel nor was it curved. It is necessary to make a slight incision from top to bottom of the body in this shape from line ~j~ to line ~b~.
And to peel it off from all sides and apply a few or many stitches to the skin as we mentioned in the case of head tumors, and bring it out little by little, and let it be on the neck without cutting any nerve or vessel, and the surgeon is not too sharp.
So that your hand does not become too skilled in cutting or disturb the patient, and do not cut what is not needed to be cut; if you cut a nerve or vessel and stop working, then put powdered alum or some other cauterizing agent into the wound.
Leave the wound alone and let it be until the swelling subsides and the wound heals. Then, worry about cleansing it. When the bleeding ceases, return to your work until you are free, then search with your index finger if there is any remaining. Then cut off small pigs and clean them.
If there is a large vein in the pig's ear, you should not cut off that part of it. Instead, you should bind it with a double strand of thread and leave it until it falls off on its own without harm, then fill the wound with cotton wool that has been soaked in the Egyptian ointment and treat it.
And if you cut off the entire pig, you should close the wound and stitch it from one end to the other after making sure that there is no remnant at all. If you see that there is a remnant due to the size of the pig.
It is necessary to seek the source and root of it, and use suturing as we mentioned, and if any fluid remains from the pig, stop it with a small pad where you see its location and place the pad below as we said.
Then you should use the gauze with Egyptian ointment and similar substances to absorb what remains of the decay, until you see that the wound has cleaned up with medicinal ointments for skin, so it will heal.
The Third Forty.
In the incision of the throat due to a swelling inside the larynx.
The ancients mentioned this incision in the throat and I did not see anyone in our land who performed it, and this is their method of speaking. As for those who have asthma, they should avoid making an incision in the throat as it will be of no benefit to them.
In order for the organs and lungs to be free, and as for those who have a hot swelling in the mouth, throat, or tonsils, if there is no cause in the trachea, it is necessary to use an incision in the throat to escape from the obstruction that comes from choking.
If we wish to do so, it is necessary to cut the trachea under three circles of the esophagus or four small incisions between two circles as much as the incision is in the diaphragm not in the cartilage and this position is suitable for the incision.
Because it has no flesh and its blood vessels are far away, if the doctor is timid, he should apply a strip of skin to a ligature then cut the skin until it reaches the esophagus, avoiding the blood vessels if he sees any.
Then he should cut the diaphragm as we described, and verify the incision of the esophagus by the phlegm that comes out with what is torn away and loss of voice, and leave the wound open for some time. If the time passes and no asphyxiation occurs, he should bring together the edges of the wound with skin.
And he should draw it and sew it without the cartilage, then use medications that promote flesh growth until it heals. He who wrote this book said: the explanation of all this speech we have mentioned is only if they see a patient whose trachea has been blocked by one of these tumors mentioned.
And the patient is on the verge of death, they themselves are about to give up breathing, so they went to incise the trachea in order for the patient to breathe at the site of the wound and be saved from death. However, they were ordered to leave the wound open until the disease subsides and its course lasts three days or thereabouts.
So then they were ordered to suture the wound and treat it until it heals. And I myself have seen a servant take a cauterizing iron and send it onto her trachea, cutting off some of the lung tissue. I was called in to treat her and found her to be as good as dead, so I exposed the wound.
I found the blood that came out of the wound to be slight, so I was certain that she had not cut a tendon or artery and the breath was coming out of the wound. So I made an incision in the wound and treated it until it healed, and nothing bothered the servant except for some noise in her voice, no further.
And she returned after days to her best state, so we say that cutting the trachea is not hazardous.
The Forty-Fourth Chapter.
In the incision on the swelling that appears in the bronchus from outside and is called the tracheal tumor.
This swelling which is called the tracheal tumor is a great swelling on the body's color and it is common in women, and it is of two kinds.
Either it is natural or exceptional, and if it is natural, there is no remedy for it, and if it is exceptional, it will be in two kinds, one resembling the fatty tumors and the other resembling the tumor that results from the obstruction of a vein and in its cut, there is danger. One should not expose it to iron at all except what is small of it, if one examines and searches with the probe, and finds that it resembles fatty tumors and was not related to anything from the veins, then cut it as one cuts on fatty tumors. And remove it with what it contains from the sac if it is in a sac, and if not, collect all of it, then treat the place as needed.
The Forty-Fifth Chapter.
On the incision on fatty tumors.
The fatty tumors are many in kind and I have mentioned all of their kinds in the classification, and it is necessary to know here the difference between the tumor and abscess as they are difficult, so I say that the abscess is accompanied by heat, fever, and terrifying pains until the pus subsides. When the suppuration is complete, fever and agitation then subside, and the merchandise is not accompanied by heat or fever or pains. It contains a sac-like covering that has a special relationship to it and is of the same color as the body, and its beginning is like a boil and becomes larger and smaller.
And it is of two kinds, either fatty or watery. And the colors of the moisture are many as I mentioned in the classification. Therefore, if you resort to treating the merchandise, you should examine and inspect it first with the instrument called the "mold" as shown in the chapter that follows this.
Measure the size of the tumor, then take out the mold and look at what comes out in its wake. If watery substance with any color comes out, cut it with a simple incision as I mentioned in all the tumors. And if no fluid comes out after taking out the mold, know that it is fatty.
Cut it with a curved incision in the shape of this figure as I have taught you, and attach it to the sutures. Remove the skin from all sides gently and preserve it in the sac if you can manage to bring it out properly with the merchandise.
If the sac breaks open while you are working and you cannot bring it out properly, it often happens that way. Bring it out in pieces until nothing is left. For if anything remains, be it little or much, the merchandise will return to its original state.
If it overpowers you and only a little remains, clean the wound thoroughly with some sharp caustics and apply something to calm the hot tumor. Treat it with all the treatments until it heals, if the merchandise is large, draw its edges and treat it as needed.
If a vein, artery or other vessel obstructs you or presents bleeding and exposes blood, begin to wash the area with powdered pumice and leave it thus for two or three days until the wound heals and the bleeding subsides, then return to cutting what remains of the merchandise.
The Sixth Forty-Fourth Chapter.
In the Forms of Instruments.
Which are exercised in the wound and its cavity, and they are three kinds: great ones, intermediate ones, and small ones.
The Form of a Large Ligature:.
The Form of an Intermediate Ligature:.
The Form of a Small Ligature:.
It is made of steel, quadrilateral in shape, tightly closed to hasten the entry into ulcers and this is the form of a probe and it is called the cold one and it has three kinds also: great ones, intermediate ones, and small ones. The Form of a Large Probe:.
The Form of an Intermediate Probe:.
The Form of a Small Probe:.
It is suitable for examining ulcers, wounds, swellings, and cavities to see what bones or other things are inside them. It is made rounded, smoothed, and polished like copper from China or esparto, or from bronze, iron, or tin, and the best one is that which was made from esparto.
And probes can also be made from lead and it is suitable for examining swellings that have a curvature in their cavity so as to bend with the same curvature, and it has three kinds: long ones, intermediate ones, and short ones.
According to the size of each swelling, it makes its thickness according to the width and narrowness of the swelling. The Form of a Large Lead Probe:.
The Form of an Intermediate Lead Probe:.
The Form of a Small Lead Probe:.
Forms of Forceps and they are many kinds because some have a single hook, and there are three kinds: great ones, intermediate ones, and small ones. And then there are the forceps with eyes, which are also three kinds. And then there are the forceps with double hooks, which are also three kinds. And it is three types, including the Sannarin with three openings, and it is three types. Each one of these types needs its place, a simple or large picture of a Sannarin:. A simple picture of a Sannarin:. A small simple picture of a Sannarin:.
A large blind picture of a Sannarin:. A medium blind picture of a Sannarin:.
A small blind picture of a Sannarin:.
A large Sannarin with two openings:. A medium Sannarin with two openings:. A small Sannarin with two openings:.
A large Sannarin with three openings:.
A medium Sannarin with three openings:. A small Sannarin with three openings:.
And these are the pictures of the instruments that cut and scrape with, and they are three types, one big, one medium, and one small, a large instrument:.
A medium instrument:.
A small instrument:.
Its blades which it cuts with are limited and the other parts are not, but I made it so that it can be used to scrape away tissue when there is fear of cutting a vein or nerve and the wound would become painful and the patient would find relief a little from the pain that they would experience when scraping away a tumor.
And these are the pictures of the forceps, and they are three types, one big, one medium, and one small, a large forceps:.
It is made from a copper-like material that is hammered to shape and at one end it resembles a broad spoon with two layers on top, in the head of which there is a hidden blade resembling the tongue of a bird that runs inside and outside as desired.
Pictures of excrescences which appear between the fingers when compressing the tumors do not feel to the patient and there are three kinds, some large, others medium-sized and small. Picture of a major excrescence:.
Pictures of ligatures with which one stops bleeding and there are three kinds, some large, others medium-sized and small. Picture of a large ligature:.
It is made of copper or of tin, rounded to a length slightly as you see and it becomes fit for the palm. You should have these kinds of ligatures both large and small in order to stop blood quickly when needed, and when no medicine is available.
But you should not use it to stop blood in every place of the body, rather you should use it only in places like muscles such as those of the thigh and leg and arm and breast and abdomen and pelvis and similar soft organs.
And small instruments can be made from it resembling pistachio shells on this shape:.
One stops bleeding with it if blood flows from the incision or when cutting a vein or artery and small ones can be made on this shape:.
The Seventh and Forty-Ninth Chapter.
For the cure of breast tumors in men.
The one that resembles the breast of women, sometimes the breast of some people swells to resemble that of a woman and remains ugly. So whoever dislikes this should incise the breast with a crescent-shaped incision on this shape.
From line ~b~ to line ~c~:. Then remove all the fat, then fill the wound with medicinal soap, then sew the edges of the wound together and care for it until it heals. If the breast sinks down and relaxes like it does in women.
It is necessary to cut in its upper sides with two incisions resembling a halyan shape, each one connecting to the other at their ends until the larger line encircles the smaller one on this form:. From the line ~b~ to the line ~c~, then remove the skin that is between the incisions and take out the fat, and use what we mentioned of suturing and appliances, and whatever is needed for treatment until it recovers.
If it is not possible to accommodate the cut, then you should fill the wound with gauze soaked in astringent ointment and leave it until what remains of the fat has been absorbed, then treat it until it recovers.
The forty-eighth chapter.
In the armpit of tumors which are exposed under the arm.
These tumors which are exposed under the arm are of a hard type like a stone, and they contain a sac; from some of them, fluids come out; as for those that do not have fluids, it is necessary to make an incision in the shape of a halyan.
From the line ~b~ to the line ~c~, if it has emptied all that is inside the tumor, fill it with cotton and leave it until another day, then remove the cotton.
And treat it with the suitable ointment until it recovers; if the tumor is of the type of stone hardening, cut into it as we mentioned for hardening stones, whether or not the wound extends to discharge pus, and use in it what we mentioned earlier.
The forty-ninth chapter.
In the incision of the tumor which is exposed before the artery or vein and is called aneurysm.
If the artery is injured and the skin above it is torn, very often a tumor will be exposed from that; likewise, if the vein is also exposed, there may be inflammation and swelling.
The signs by which you recognize if the tumor and swelling are due to an artery or a vein. If the swelling is due to an artery, it will be cylindrical and gathered in depth within the body. And if you push on the swelling with your finger, you will feel it as if it had a solid core.
And what is due to a vein will be rounded on the surface of the body. And cutting into these swellings is dangerous, especially those in the armpit, elbow, and neck, and in many places of the body, and it was very great; therefore, one should avoid treating them with iron.
And what is due to it also in the extremities or in the head, one should avoid. And if it is an aneurysm of an artery, one cuts into it on the skin with a long incision then opens the incision with scissors and cleans out the artery and frees it from the adhesions.
Until it is exposed then a probe is inserted under it and pushed through to the other side and the artery is tied off with a double thread in two places as I have described to you regarding the arteries in the groins, then you should ligate the place between the ligatures until all the blood that is in it comes out.
And the swelling will subside then you should use the treatment that produces pus until the ligatures come off then treat it with ointments suitable for that until it heals.
If the swelling is due to an incision in a vein, you should grasp as much of the swelling with your hand along with the skin then insert a probe below the place where you grasped it and push it through, having a double thread inside until it comes out on the other side. Then you should tie the swelling tightly with a good knot as I have mentioned to you regarding tying an artery from both sides with one thread, if you fear that the threads will slip then insert another probe with another thread underneath the entire swelling at the point where the first probes meet.
Tie the threads in four places then cut the tumor in its middle until what is inside comes out, then cut off excess skin and leave what remains connected, then place a poultice that has been soaked in wine and oil on it. Then use the treatment with ointment and creams until it heals.
The Fifty-First Chapter.
In the tumor that appears from nerve twisting.
As the tumor appears in the artery and vein, so too does it appear in the nerve if there is a blow or excessive fatigue occurs or something similar and it is more prevalent in places of the elbows and hips.
And in each place it moves, and is a swelling that resembles the color of the surrounding body, and is usually painless, unless pressure is applied strongly, then the patient feels numbness, but the tumor is not collected in the depth of the body.
But it is under the skin and moves in all directions, not going to the front or back, what is inside the joints should not be treated with iron, for it may cause inflammation, and what is inside the head or forehead.
Cut the skin with a scalpel, if the tumor is small, grasp it with forceps and cut it off from its base, but if it is large, tie it off with a ligature and remove it, then sew up the wound with stitches and treat it until it heals.
The Fifty-First Chapter.
In cutting off pustules that appear on the abdomen.
Some people may experience many pustules on their abdomens and other parts of their bodies, which are called "futriyah" because they resemble the fruiting body, its root is fine and its head is thick; its lips have turned into small ones and some become very large.
I have seen a man with two growths in his abdomen, resembling things like sprouts. There was no white patch to distinguish between them at their origin. They had transformed into lips and split open, and moisture was always flowing from them. I excised them and threw them away, weighing the first one around 18 ounces and the other around 6.
And the method for cutting them is to examine, if the patient is moist and the growth is white and thin in origin. Cut it off with a broad knife and have a pomegranate in front of you in the fire, for often much blood flows when cutting it.
Then, if the bleeding is heavy, compress it. If you see that the patient has become weakened and frightened by the cutting with iron, take a strong lead thread and bind it to the growth in its shape, and leave it for two days, then increase the tugging on the lead.
Every time I touch the growth until it dries up and falls off from itself without difficulty, if the growth is thick in origin, then there is some fear and hesitation, especially when it's in the abdomen; but it may be possible to cut half or some of it.
Then, compress it so that it does not recur, then treat it until the wound heals. And beware of exposing a growth that is like a boil with little sensation, rough in appearance, for it is a cancerous tumor and we will mention cancer later.
The Second Section Fifty.
In the treatment of varicose veins.
Varicose veins are caused by many reasons, either from the rupture of the peritoneum on the abdomen which emerges from it as a vein or a intestine, or from blood that flows out from a vein or artery as mentioned earlier, or from wind that accumulates in it.
If it happens that the peritoneum has torn and the hernia has protruded, then the color of the tumor will resemble the color of the body and it will be soft without pain, and its position will appear different. And if it happens before the evacuation of the intestines, then its position will be like what we described with a greater difference. If you press it with your fingers, it will disappear and then return, and sometimes it may have a lump and become much larger when entering the bath and severe fatigue, unless it is due to moisture, in which case it will be soft.
It will not disappear when you press it with your hand, nor will it increase or decrease. If it is due to blood, then with these signs the tumor will appear black. If it is due to fatty tissue that has grown, then the tumor will be hard and firm in one place.
If it is due to wind, then its touch will be soft. The method in this case is to observe; if the tumor's origin is from blood vessels or veins or wind, then it is necessary to abstain from treating it because there is fear and distress as I informed you in the chapter where I mentioned tumors that occur due to blood vessels and veins.
If the tumor's origin is from the intestines or hernia, then it is necessary to order the patient to hold himself and stand upright, stretched out, and then learn by making a circumambulation around the tumor entirely. Then order him to lie down between your hands on his back, then grasp with a broad ligature around the tumor at the place where you learned by making a circumambulation, and then stretch the ligature across the tumor up towards the top with a large needle, and then bind the ligated area with strong silk or linen bindings tightly.
And the ligature will be tight, then open up the stretched tumor above the band and insert your index finger and ask the patient to evacuate; if you find it has been taken by the band, then release the tension and push the intestines back into the abdomen, and if you find a hernia, then pull it down with a needle.
Cut off its advantage, if a vein or artery obstructs you. Then bind it tightly and return to your work. Take two strong threads and insert them into the two injections that you made around the tumor, then pull the tumor in four places along the threads.
And if you wish, remove the threads and leave the area until the hardened flesh falls off or separates from itself or is cut apart if it rots and putrefies. Then treat it with whatever ointments are necessary until it heals. If the serous discharge is from flesh that has grown into it.
Or if there is moisture, it is necessary to enucleate the tumor as we said and extract the blood or moisture that you find in it. Then treat the area with what will heal it.
The 53rd Chapter.
In the treatment of cancer.
We have mentioned in the classification the types of cancer and how to treat it with medicines, and warned against treating it with iron lest it ulcerate. We also mentioned the cancer that develops in the womb and warned against treating it.
And the ancients mentioned that when cancer is in a location where it can be removed entirely, such as the one that occurs in the breast or thigh and similar parts of the limbs, for its complete removal, especially if it is small and recent. But if it has progressed and become large, it should not be approached.
For I have not been able to cure anyone of it, and I did not see anyone else reach that point, and the treatment in this case is as we said, to proceed gradually and ease the patient's suffering over several days, then remove it if it is in a visible swelling.
Then the patient will take a seat, being able to do so, and then receive the medicaments that are suitable for it. Then enucleate it from all sides with the skin on a thorough search until nothing remains of its roots, and let the blood flow slowly without interrupting it quickly.
Wash the areas and remove all thick blood with your hand or whatever instruments you have available. If you encounter an obstacle in your work, a great deal of bleeding will occur from cutting a vein or artery. Stop the bleeding until it ceases, then treat it with other treatments until it heals.
The 50th Chapter.
In the treatment of Haubn.
We mentioned in the classification types of dropsiness and how the water gathers and the signs of each type, and which is treated with iron, namely the qiqi type alone, and it does not approach the tabbi or lami types at all.
If that treatment is a struggle, then if you have treated this type of qiqi dropsiness with medicine and your treatment has not been effective, look again; if the cause has become weakened or there is another disease present besides the dropsiness, such as...
Cough or diarrhea and the like. Avoid treating it with iron, for it is a mistake. If you see the cause strong and not having another disease besides dropsiness alone, and it is not a child nor an old man, then direct your treatment to apply the remedy while standing before you. And a servant behind him should massage his back with their hands, and push the water downwards to the side of the buttocks, then take a splinter-shaped tool in this form:.
Limited to the two sides, long and limited to one end like a splinter, except that it has a small notch so that it may not injure him during work on the abdomen and thus cause harm, then investigate if the dropsiness originates from the intestines.
It is necessary to separate by the section from the back, a distance of three fingers' breadth downwards, and above the buttocks. If the dropsiness originates from liver disease, then your incision should be on the left side of the back for three fingerbreadths. If it originates from spleen disease, then the incision should be on the right side of the back for three fingerbreadths.
And it should not be that the incision is in the side which the patient wants to lie on, lest the fluids flow to that weak place. Then the instrument pierces all the skin and enters the incision and raises your hand.
With the retractor between the skin and the omentum, as if you were peeling it off, and the quantity that you peel off is like the length of a fingernail or slightly more. Then puncture the omentum until the retractor reaches an empty place which is the place of water then take it out and put in the other instrument which is this shape.
And it is like a tube made from thin cane, manufactured from bronze or copper or smooth asparagus, with a small hole at the bottom and three holes on its sides, two of which are on one side and one on the other, as you see.
And it may be placed with the tip rounded like a reed pen in this shape:.
And at the top of it is a ring. If the instrument reaches the water, then it descends from its time on the instrument, and you will drain the water in moderation, because if you drained more than necessary at that time, the patient may die due to the dissolution of their vital spirits.
Or a membrane may be exposed to him that approaches death, but drain it from him according to his strength and what your observation of the patient's condition tells you about his pulse and good color, then take out the instrument and stop the water, for it is stopped by its time.
Due to the skin that is holding the puncture in the omentum which I told you to seal off on that side, then return the instrument another day if you see the patient capable of it.
And also take out from the water a small quantity, do this days and you are on guard and keep an eye out for error until there is only a little water left, if you hesitate over the patient and leave a great deal of water, he will be injured by being buried in hot sand.
The excessive moisture in the bath and sun, and pour it on thirst and treat with dried medicines until he recovers, and bandage the stomach, liver, and spleen after removing water as I described earlier.
Fifth Chapter Fifty.
In the treatment of children who are born with their urethral orifice not pierced, or if the opening is narrow or misplaced.
Some boys may be born with their urethral orifice not pierced, so it is necessary to pierce it from the moment they are born.
With a very fine needle:.
Then you put a thin leaden peg into the opening and tie it, holding it for three or four days until the child wants to urinate and then return it, and if you do not do so, it is possible that the urine which flows onto the place will not leave it closed.
And as for those whose opening is narrow, it is treated with lead as we said, for many days until it expands, and among them are those whose opening is in the wrong place, namely that some are born with the opening at the end of the urethra so they cannot urinate forward.
Until he raises the penis with his hand above and does not allow it to be born, since the sperm cannot reach the uterus in a straight line and this is a very unpleasant cause, and the method of treatment for that is to have the patient lie on his back.
Then you stretch the penis with your left hand very tightly and bend the head of the penis with a sharp knife or a fine thread like a large pen nib, as if you were carving something to make its center hollow and have the opening in the middle where it should be.
And take care to prevent bleeding during your procedure, as it often occurs and respond by stopping the bleeding and treating the wound until it recovers.
The Sixth and Fifty Chapter.
In the wound that opens in the armpit, chest, arm, corruption, decay, and the sticking together of the skin on the chest.
This wound often appears in the groin and is a foul-smelling abscess that may be wholesome or unwholesome; the unwholesome one should be lanced with a fine needle.
And cut it until it is completely clean, then wrap it with a soaked thread in the Egyptian ointment, and treat it afterwards with the aloes ointment until it heals; but if the abscess is unwholesome and has a foul color, one should use gall after cutting and cleansing it.
If the abscess is in an uncircumcised armpit and some of it is inside the armpit and some of it is outside, then one should first remove the abscess that is inside, until it has drained; then afterwards treat the part outside.
Because if you treat both together, the armpit may split open; it can also appear in women and in the armpit as decay and corruption, so one should remove all that has become blackened and is likely to decay or has decayed.
Then apply honey to it afterwards, along with crushed and pounded almonds and saffron, and treat it with the rest of the treatment until it heals; if bleeding occurs, use gall with a holly leaf in this manner:.
If the gall is beneficial for both conditions, namely bleeding and wound if it decays; if the chest has become inflamed and gone away somewhere, then one should insert a lead tube into the urethra to pour out the pus upon it, and as for the sticking together of the armpit with the chest.
And this sticking together only occurs in a person whose armpit is healthy and has not been circumcised, and it may also appear as a result of a wound or tumor; one should therefore scrape it off with a rough scraper until the bond breaks and the chest is freed from all sides.
If it is difficult to distinguish them through exploration, then something should be peeled from the membrane and from the peritoneum; for the peritoneum is thin, so that it may tear quickly due to its thinness. Then separate the peritoneum from the membrane with a thin piece of linen cloth that has been wet in cold water so that it does not stick also.
Then he treats it with a constricting drink until it heals.
Chapter Fifty-Seven.
In the purification of boys and the treatment of what befalls them from error.
The excision is not anything other than the separation of connection, just as with all surgeons; except that since it is something we do by our own will and use particularly in boys, it is necessary to describe the best way to perform it.
And the easiest way to safety, so I say that the early ones did not mention excision in anything of their books because it was not used in their practices and we are the ones who acquired it.
Through experience and that is because I found the crowd of craftsmen and barbers using purification with soap and scissors and using forceps and bandage with thread and cutting with a claw and I have tried all these forms.
So I did not find better than purification with scissors and bandage with thread because purification with soap often leads to the skin being torn apart, for the peritoneum has two layers of skin, so that sometimes the upper layer is cut and the lower layer remains.
So it becomes necessary to cut again and the pain starts anew, and purification with forceps does not ensure that you do not cut off the end of the urethra because it may enter into its hole, and as for purification with a claw, perhaps the skin will burst open and your work will be ruined or the boy's skin is naturally short.
For many are born like that and do not need purification, and I have seen this. And as for purification with scissors and bandage with thread, experience has revealed its excellence to me because the scissors are suitable for cutting in order that the incision above is like the incision below.
When you have sewn the edges of the wound to match the two threads in a single measurement at one time, then the management of the suture thread will be like a wall surrounding the skin of the urethra from all sides, not falling short by even a hair's breadth. The first step in this operation is to make the novice think he is doing something.
And especially if the person has a slight understanding that you are only tying the thread in his urethra and leaving it until another day, then making him happy and content with all your might, and he accepts this from his mind; then stop him before you in upright posture.
And he should not be sitting and holding the forceps in your palm or under his foot, nor should the novice's eye fall upon it at all or any of the instruments; then enter your hand into his urethra and blow on the skin and pull it upwards until the head of the urethra emerges.
Then clean it of what is gathered in it from lint, then bind the area to be treated with a double thread, and bind below it slightly with a second stitch; then grasp your thumb and index finger firmly and cut between the stitches. Then lift the skin up high quickly and bring out the head of the urethra, then let a little blood flow, for it is better and less likely to form an abscess in the urethra; then wipe it with a damp cloth, then sprinkle on it from burnt dried pumpkin ash, for it is the best thing I have tried or the most delicate of remedies.
Then lift the skin up high quickly and bring out the head of the urethra, then let a little blood flow, for it is better and less likely to form an abscess in the urethra; then wipe it with a damp cloth, then sprinkle on it from burnt dried pumpkin ash, for it is the best thing I have tried or the most delicate of remedies. Then cover it with a poultice of cooked egg yolk mixed with rosewater, perfumed with rose water and good treacle, and leave it on until another day; then treat it with the rest of the treatment until he is cured.
And this is a picture of the forceps that is suitable for cleansing:.
The wound will be very deep and the splinter will not bend in it. The length of the two edges will be equal to the length of the handles, regardless. As for the error that occurs during cleaning, perhaps all or part of the inner skin may be turned over when cutting; therefore, you should stretch it with your finger before the place becomes swollen.
And cut it smoothly. If you cannot grasp it with your finger, then draw it out with a forceps and cut it. And if three days have passed and what is under the head of the artery remains swollen and warm, then leave it alone until the inflammation subsides and then remove it gently.
And cut it according to what appears to you, and be careful from the head of the artery. For if you cut something from the head of the artery, that will not harm; treat it with whatever dressing is necessary for the wound as we described in the chapter on dressings.
And if you cut from the skin more than necessary and it shrinks above, that will not harm much either; treat it as we mentioned until it heals.
The 48th Chapter.
Treatment of retained urine in the bladder.
Retained urine in the bladder is caused by obstruction from a stone or solid blood clot or pus or flesh that has grown and so forth. If you treat this as we have described, the various treatments mentioned in the classification.
And the urine does not flow and you see that its obstruction is due to a stone which has become lodged at the neck of the bladder; then you should make the patient sit on his heels, then he should place one leg on his back and stretch out his abdomen to his back and hold onto himself as much as possible.
Then the neck of the bladder is forced to push the stone into the back and the urine flows. If it does not flow as mentioned above, and the situation becomes more severe on the patient; then you should use the instrument called a catheter which has this shape:.
The catheter is made from fine, smooth, and soft material, like a bird's feather pipe, long about half a finger's length. It has a thin rim at its head. The face of the urethral orifice should be grasped with it and take a thread-like material such as silk or cotton, binding it tightly on one end.
The end of the thread enters the bottom of the catheter and is tied with a ligature if something from the silk is preferred so that it closes like a seal, then the catheter is lubricated with oil or grease or egg white and the surgeon sits on a chair.
He anesthetizes his bladder and urethra with wet dressings or oil and lukewarm water, then the catheter enters the urethra gently until it reaches the root of the urethra, then the urethra turns upwards towards the abdomen, and he pushes the catheter inside.
Until the urethra turns and the catheter is pushed inside until it reaches close to the prostate, the penis tilts downwards with the catheter inside then he pushes it until it reaches the bladder and feels that the surgeon has reached something empty.
This is done in this manner because the flow of urine which follows it bends, then the thread is pulled with silk tightness so that the urine follows the silk, then it is withdrawn and the urine is drained, and the catheter is reinserted.
She continues to do that until the bladder is emptied and the surgeon finds relief.
The Ninth Chapter.
How to Drain the Bladder with a Syringe.
The instruments that are suitable for this purpose are made from fine or smooth ivory, having a long tube on a handle and a cup to pour in water and medicines, which is called a syringe, and this is its picture:.
It is made from ivory or polished horn, having a long tube inserted into its upper part on the handle side, the whole being except for one end which is closed. Two holes are drilled in it, one from one side and one from the other as you see.
And the hollow place where the pellets are, will be as full as it can be without any excess, until if you pull something wet from it, it pulls out and if you push it in, it pushes back to the extent that the lubrication is made which they throw with oil in naval wars.
So if you want to drain the wetness into the bladder, you will put the tip of the instrument into the wetness and pull it upwards with the pellet, then the wetness will be pulled into the hollow part of the instrument, then its tip will enter the urethra as we described in the catheters, then the wetness will be pushed out by the pellet.
For that wetness will reach the bladder at the right time until it is felt by the patient, and this is also a gentle catheter which drains the bladder.
It is made from ivory or wood, its upper part resembling a small funnel and below it is a channel where the ligament lies. Then it takes a camel's bladder and puts the wetness you want to drain into it, then binds it between the two channels tightly with a threaded string.
And then that wetness is slightly warmed over the fire, then the tip of the catheter enters the urethra, and then you pull your hand tight on the bladder with the wetness tightly until the patient feels that the wetness has reached the bladder.
If you do not have a bladder, take a piece of cloth and make a circle from it, then pierce it all around its circumference, then insert a strong thread into those perforations as if spinning, and then gather the circle as one gathers a skirt after placing what you want in it, namely wetness, powders, and water.
Then tie it in the device and make with it as you made with the bladder from the time your hand is wet until the moisture reaches the bladder.
The twentieth chapter.
Regarding the removal of stones.
We have mentioned in the classification types of stones and their treatment with medicines, and we have mentioned the difference between those formed in the kidney and those formed in the bladder and its signs, as well as those in which surgery is performed by hand and incision.
And it is the stone formed in the bladder, specifically, and that attaches to the urethra, and I will describe this with a clear explanation and concise summary.
And I say that the stone formed in the bladder is more prone to being exposed by children, and one of its signs is that urine exits from the bladder resembling water in clarity.
And it appears with sand, and its edges are rough and distorted, and many times it detaches then spreads out accompanied by pain in many of them, and it is easy for children to remove it until they reach the age of fourteen years, and it becomes difficult in the elderly, while young men fall in between that.
And as for the one whose stones are greatest, its treatment is easier; on the contrary, small ones are more difficult. So when we come to the treatment, it is necessary first that the patient be purged with a purge that removes all the gravel in his urine, for it may prevent the existence of the stone during the search.
Then the patient is taken by his legs and made to void and shake downwards so that the stone may descend to the neck of the bladder or be dislodged from a higher place several times, then he is seated in front of you standing up with his hands under his thighs so that the entire bladder becomes tilted downwards then search for it.
You are to grasp it from the outside; if you feel a stone in the wound, start pressing on it with your finger. If it does not fall under the nail of the little finger, then wipe away with the ring finger of the left hand if the patient is a child or the middle finger.
If the patient is a full-grown child, then insert your finger into his urethra and search for the stone until it falls under your finger. Then, gently push it little by little towards the bladder neck and press on it with your finger and push it out to the outside towards the place you want to cut.
And order your servant to compress the bladder with his hand, and order another servant to stretch out his right hand between the pubic bones towards above, and with his other hand to stretch the skin under the pubic bones towards the position where the incision will be, then take the surgical needle which has this shape.
And cut between the pubic bones and the perineum, not in the middle but to the side of the left ala, and the incision will be on the same stone, your finger in the pubic bone, and you are pressing it outwards so that the incision is wide from outside and narrow from inside as much as possible for the stone to come out.
Not too large, for perhaps the stone may be pressed by the finger in the pubic bone when cutting and come out easily. And know that there may be stones with angles and curves that make it difficult to remove them, so.
And some are smooth like pomegranates and curved, which makes it easy to remove them. But if any of them have angles and curves, you should enlarge the incision a little bit; if it does not come out thus, then take hold of it with a firm grip that has a handle like a razor.
So that it is secured to the stone and does not slip away from you, or else insert a fine instrument with a sharp point under it; if you cannot manage it, then widen the incision a little bit. If anything of blood overflows, cut it off with a lancet.
If there is more than one, then push the large one into the urinary opening first, then cut it, and then push the small one afterwards. And do the same if there are two. However, if they are very big, then know that you must not cut them with a great incision because you will expose yourself to one of two things.
Either he will die or he will experience constant urination because the place will not be healed at all. But try to push it until it comes out or break it with forceps until it comes out completely.
If you have finished your work, clean the wound with camphor and soap twice, then apply a compress soaked in oil and wine or rose water and cold water to reduce the hot swelling. Then let the patient lie on his back and do not remove the bandage until the third day.
If the swelling subsides with much water and oil, then treat it with the asphalt ointment and the balsam ointment until it heals. If a new hot swelling appears in the wound, such as blood freezing in the bladder and urine being withheld, and you recognize this from the bleeding with the urine.
Then insert your finger into the wound and remove that blood, for if it remains it will lead to the corruption of the bladder and its closure. Then wash the wound with vinegar, water, and salt, and apply every kind of treatment suitable for it until it heals.
It is necessary during the entire period of treatment to bind the thighs together and unite them in order to secure the medicines that are placed on the site. If the stone is small and has become lodged in the urethra, has taken hold there and urine has ceased to flow, then remove it with a instrument such as I have described before it enters the incision.
For many times I have dispensed with this treatment and used an incision, and that is when you take a tool made of iron steel with the shape:.
Like a triangle, cut the tip of the instrument on wood, then take a thread and tie it to the penis below the stone so that it does not return to the bladder. Then, insert the sharp point of the retractor into the urethra gently until it reaches the same stone.
And guide the retractor with your hand in the same stone little by little, as you make a hole in it until you pass it from the other side. Then, the urine will flow from its source. Then, grasp what remains of the stone outside the penis, for it breaks apart and comes out with the urine, and the patient is cured.
If this treatment does not become available to you due to an obstacle that hinders it, then tie a thread under the stone and another thread above the stone. Then, cut into the stone in the same penis between the two threads and bring it out.
Then release the thread and clean the stagnant blood that has accumulated in the wound. And it is necessary to tie the thread under the stone so that it does not return to the bladder, and the other thread above so that if the thread is released after the removal of the stone, the skin will return to its place and cover the wound.
And therefore, you should lift the skin up when you tie the upper thread so that it returns to its place and covers the wound as we said.
The Twenty-First Chapter.
In the removal of the stone for women.
Only rarely does the stone occur in women. If one of them has a stone, it is difficult to treat and there are many obstacles. One of them is that the woman may be a virgin and another is that you will not find a woman who will consent to let the doctor examine her.
If she is a virgin or related to the prohibited degrees, and thirdly you will not find a woman who excels in this craft, especially with manual skills, and fourthly the location of the incision on the stone in women is far from the location of the stone so you need an incising instrument.
In that case, there is a risk; therefore, if necessity demands it, a well-trained female nurse should be taken or, failing that, a pious and companionable doctor or a woman who is knowledgeable in women's affairs or someone who gives some indication of being skilled in this craft.
Make her wait and order her to make all that you order her to do, such as inspecting the stones first; so she can look if the woman is a virgin; then she should insert her finger into the woman's private part and inspect the stones; if she finds them and presses them under her finger.
Then order her to cut it open, if she is not a virgin and was previously married; then instruct the midwife to insert her finger into the woman's private part and inspect the stones after placing her left hand on the bladder and pressing it well.
If she finds it, then she should pull it out from the mouth of the bladder down to the extent of her strength until it reaches the origin of the thigh; then cut it open at the junction with the half of the private part at the origin of the thigh, whichever way is easiest for her and feels the stone in that direction.
And her finger should not be removed from the stone, pressed beneath it; and let the cut be small at first, then she should insert the rod into that small cut, if she feels the stone, increasing the cut as much as she knows the stone will come out of it, and know that there are many types of stones.
Among them are small and large, rough and smooth, long and curved, and those with a tuft; know their kinds so you can infer from that what you want, if blood gushes forth, stop in the spot where it is flowing and hold it for a moment until the bleeding stops then return to your work.
Until the stone comes out, and do as I have told you with the instruments mentioned for removing stones from men to assist you in your work; if blood gushes forth and you know that it is a vein that has been cut, place the lint on the spot.
Secure the wound tightly and firmly, do not remove it and leave it, do not take out the splint nor remove it. For perhaps the inflammation will subside, then treat the wound. If the bleeding has subsided after some days and the place has softened, return to your work until the splint is removed.
The 22nd chapter.
In a wound on the water-filled bladder.
The water-filled bladder is the gathering of moisture in the white peritoneum that lies beneath the skin surrounding the testicle and is called the tunica, and it can be in a special sac, which nature prepares for it on one side of the testicle.
Until one thinks it is another egg and there will be between the skin of the testicle and the white peritoneum which we mentioned, but it will not be so except in rarity, and this water-filled bladder is produced from weakness which exposes females to it, and this matter settles upon them, and may expose them to a blow on the females.
And this moisture is of many colors, either it becomes yellowish, or blood-red, or dark red, or white like water, and most often it is so, and the signs by which it is recognized.
Where there is a gathering of water, then if it is in the white peritoneum which we mentioned, the swelling becomes rounded to the length slightly like an egg shape and the testicle does not appear because the moisture surrounds it from all sides.
And if the moisture is in a special sac, then the swelling becomes rounded on one side of the egg.
And for this reason, a person may think it is another egg. And if the moisture is between the skin of the testicle and the white peritoneum, then one touches it. As for knowing the color of the moisture, apply the swelling with the square cloth which its shape has been mentioned before, and what comes out after applying the cloth will be judged according to what is inside.
If we proceed to treat with iron, it is necessary for the doctor to order the patient to void his bowels if he can do so and then I saw his body full, then he lies on his back on something slightly elevated and you put a blanket under him. Then sit down beside him.
And order a servant to sit on his right, to stretch his hand towards one of the sides of the scrotum and the direction of observing the abdomen, then take a broad probe and cut open the scrotum from the middle lengthwise to near the anus.
And the incision will be straight, parallel to the line that divides the scrotum into two halves until it reaches the white peritoneum. Then it will be peeled off and preserved so that you do not cut it open further, and your peeling of it should be from the side that is closer to the ovary as much as possible.
Then you will fill the peritoneum with oil or butter and extract all the water. Then, you will separate the edges of the incision by sewing it shut and lift up the peritoneum upwards without touching the containing scrotal skin. You will cut the peritoneum as much as you can, either in one piece or in small pieces.
And especially on the thin side, because if you do not cut it to its full extent, the water may return. If the ovary protrudes outside of its skin during your operation, then when you have finished cutting the peritoneum, turn it back and gather the edges of the scrotal skin with sewing.
Then treat the wound as other surgeons do until it heals. If the ovary has become infected from another disease, then it is necessary to ligate the vessels that are in the groin, fearing bleeding. Then cut the spermatic cord from the groin and remove the ovary. Then treat it as we have mentioned.
If the fluid has collected on both sides, know that it is a pair and cut open the other side as you did with the first one, whether it takes one operation or not. Then wipe away the blood.
Inserting a wick of wool which has been dipped in oil or rose water, and it comes out from the outside a wick of wool which has been dipped in wine and oil, and it is spread over the testicles and observes the belly and puts from above a folded gauze and this is the outcome. And ties it on top with the band which has six arms, as shown in this figure.
Then two cloths are taken, sewn together and stuffed with the fluffed wool on this model and make the arms that are tied with cotton or wet wool and gathered by pulling tight into a belt for trousers and one of the arms takes hold at the crotch to the back.
And the second takes hold towards the anus and the two arms on the thighs from below and the remaining two arms on the perineum and gathers all the pulling tight into a belt for trousers, and this structure can also be made with leather instead of iron.
And that is to take a thin suture needle and cut the scrotal skin as we described until the white peritoneum containing water is exposed, then take another needle on this model.
And it resembles the Greek eye, then it is sewn with that peritoneum as we described until all the moisture comes out, then it fills the peritoneum with wax and peels off with a needle the containing layer and cuts it according to what you can do until you remove all of them and preserve from the egg so that it does not touch fire.
And know that this work is more secure and farther from bleeding blood and better than the operation of cutting, for if you encounter any difficulty in suturing or when using the ligature a warm tumor or bleeding or something else, then it is necessary to treat each time you encounter such an obstacle with the treatment that is suitable for it as mentioned.
If the patient is impatient and does not endure this treatment for his pain, then use the poultice as I have described it, and if it agrees with you according to what we have mentioned from the evidence.
The swelling is watery, so let the patient sit on a high stool then compress the swelling with a broad spatula from below, and make the poultice reach along the length of the body and be wide open until all the water flows away then apply a cotton cloth and bind it.
Leave the compress on until all the water is absorbed then treat it until the wound heals. If drainage of the water does not occur when you apply the poultice, it is because the white membrane obstructs the mouth of the wound and prevents the water from coming out.
Therefore, you should insert a goose quill or the instrument used to extract water from the loins which was previously described, or slightly widen the opening of the wound.
And know that the water may return and gather after six months or so. If it gathers, apply the poultice to the same nature and the patient should defend his days.
The Twenty-Third Chapter.
Concerning the abscess on the fatty flesh and its treatment.
Know that the abscess on this fatty flesh is often a passage leading to death in most cases, therefore we see leaving it alone and avoiding it, and I have described its treatment and types of swellings.
I say that many swellings may occur in the bodies of women, which are part of their composition and can be caused by many reasons, either from a burning waste ascending to the women or from a blow, and the color of the swelling will be like the color of the body and there is no water in it.
And the swelling may be gangrenous and sometimes the swelling is discolored with inflammation and has no sensation, and it can be due to complication of vessels and their swelling as previously described or from swelling of the veins, so whatever is the cause of swelling's swelling will be recognized by the swelling's dissolution.
If you compress it with your fingers and should not expose it at all, and as for what is from the swelling of the veins then nothing escapes when compressed by the fingers, and this type can be pierced on it and on all flesh.
And he is that you cut the scrotal skin then stretch it upwards and bring out the testicle from the white peritoneum and free the vas deferens from the vessels and tie the vessels and cut the vas deferens after freeing it from every direction of the testicle, if the testicle has adhered to those growing flesh.
It is necessary to bring out the testicle and cut it, and if there is adhesion between something of the peritoneum or among the vessels, then it is necessary to free all that adhesion and cut it into rounded pieces.
If there is growth of flesh in the place of adhesion which is from behind, then it is necessary to cut all of it and bring out the testicle as we said. Then, if you have finished your work, wash the wound with wet wool in rose water and wine, then treat it with other treatment until it heals.
The 46th Chapter.
In the treatment of strangulated hernia.
The strangulation is a tumor-like mass of twisting resembling a bunch with relaxation in women and causing difficulty for the sufferer to move, exercise, and walk, and in the treatment of this disease from ulcers close to what has been mentioned.
But it is necessary to mention the work done by those who came before, I say that it is necessary for the sufferer to sit on a high chair then push the vas deferens downwards and grasp the scrotal skin with your fingers along with the vessels which are near the penis.
And another servant holds it and stretches it strongly, then cuts with a broad and sharp knife, cutting in the direction of the vessels until the vessels are revealed, then frees it from every side as I mentioned to you earlier about the treatment of the veins that are in the scrotum, then inserts a needle into it with a double thread.
You tie it in the first position that the incision exposes to, and you also tie it at its end. Then, you cut it open in the middle, a cut standing upright along the length of the body, and bring out what has accumulated within it from the filthy impurities.
Then you treat the uterus with the treatment of other wounds that you wish to produce a period for, so that the vessels which nourish one of the ovaries do not come forth. But if the incision exposes all the vessels, then it is necessary for one of the ovaries to come forth with the vessels lest the egg's nutrition be cut off. Before cutting the vessels, it will wither and will not benefit from it.
The 47th chapter.
In the treatment of urethral fistulas.
The occurrence of this urethral fistula is from a cut that exposes in the omentum extended on the abdomen, about two inches from the margin of the abdomen, and the urethra issues from that opening into one of the ovaries.
And this opening is either from a cut in the omentum or from its extension. These two types of reasons occur due to many causes, such as a blow or a kick or a cry or lifting something heavy and so on. And its sign is that if it occurs from an extension of the omentum then it will appear little by little over a long period of time.
And it does not occur suddenly and the tumor remains steady towards a depth before the omentum compresses the urethra. And its sign is that if it occurs from a cut in the omentum then it will occur at first with a great pain and the tumor will be different in appearance under the skin nearby.
And that is because of the urethra's exit and its course towards the outside from the omentum, and sometimes the hernia may come out with the urethra, and this type of fistula will be called urinary-hernial and it can be accompanied by a discharge. And sometimes a clot may enter the urethra and get stuck there, resulting in the patient's death.
Because a severe pain and numbness occur, especially if the time passes, and treating this type of condition with iron is hazardous; therefore it is necessary to beware of falling into it. The prescription for the treatment is that you should have the patient bring his tongue back into his mouth when he returns.
Then he lies on his back between your hands, raises his legs, and you stretch the skin that is next to the armpit upwards and cut all of the scrotal skin with a length. Then you insert probes into the incision as needed to open the incision by them.
And the incision will be as long as it is possible to extract the testicle, then you remove the peritoneum that is underneath the scrotal skin until the white firm peritoneum is exposed from all sides. Then insert your thumb in what follows the testicle.
Between the white peritoneum underneath the scrotal skin and the second peritoneum, you loosen the adhesion that is behind the testicle. Then you bend your right hand towards the inside of the scrotal skin, while with your left hand you lift the white peritoneum upwards and raise the testicle together with the peritoneum towards the incision.
And you order the servant to lift the testicle upwards, while you loosen the adhesion that is behind completely and search with your finger so that there is nothing twisted in the white firm peritoneum. If you find something, push it down into the abdomen below.
Then you take a needle with a thick thread that is twisted from ten threads and insert it at the end of the peritoneum underneath the scrotal skin which follows the incision. Then cut off the ends of the thread until there are four threads. Then you tie some of it to the other in a knotted way and bind with the peritoneum that we said is underneath the scrotal skin, tightly from two sides. Then also wrap up the ends of the threads and bind them tightly so that nothing from the vessels that nourish it can reach it. Unless there is an abscess that is hot and swollen, and then a second ligature will be placed outside the first one at a distance of less than two fingers from it. After these two ligatures, a cut is made in the peritoneum underneath the scrotal skin to a length equal to the width of the finger.
Unless there is an abscess that is hot and swollen, and then a second ligature will be placed outside the first one at a distance of less than two fingers from it. After these two ligatures, a cut is made in the peritoneum underneath the scrotal skin to a length equal to the width of the finger. And the rest is cut off in a circular fashion and the testicle is removed with it. Then, an incision is made below the scrotal skin with bleeding, as we described earlier, and then the lint soaked in oil is used to fill the wound and the ligature that we described is used.
And the white peritoneum that we mentioned after its cut is done with caution to prevent bleeding, and it often appears that way. The ligature is left until it falls off on its own; if it does not fall off quickly, let hot water be poured over it and hold it in place until it falls off.
Then the wound is treated with all the treatments of wounds until it heals.
The Twenty-Sixth Chapter.
In this swollen bladder, I have never seen anyone attempt to treat it with iron and the ancients mentioned that one should do as we described in the case of a bladder with an incision, by ligating the vessels below the incision.
Then a cut is made in the middle and the tumor is treated as it opens up until the vessels are ligated and the wound is treated as we mentioned until it heals.
The Twenty-Seventh Chapter.
In the rupture that occurs in the perineum.
The rupture in the perineum may occur as we mentioned, and nothing from the anus will descend to the females; if something did descend it would be slight and would return at all times.
But if the time passes, the cut in the peritoneum will increase until the anus and intestines descend into the scrotum and it will appear as an extension of the peritoneum that is in the perineum as we mentioned. Therefore, the peritoneum stretches then relaxes and reaches the affected area and settles, and its treatment is with linen as I previously described it.
And it may be treated with iron, and that is by having the patient lie on his back between your hands then cutting the affected area, orifice, to a width of three fingers, then pressing down on the peritoneum under the skin.
Until the white peritoneum is exposed, which follows it, then take a needle and place it on the affected area coming from the peritoneum and push it to the depth of the abdomen, then sew the two openings together with one stitch.
Then release the end of the needle and do not cut the peritoneum at all nor touch the ovary or anything else as I have informed you in the treatment of intestinal perforation, then treat it with surgical treatment.
If the sutures are cut and the wound is closed until it heals, then the peritoneum will contract and the orifice of the perforation will not increase.
And linen is better in this place because it is closer to safety.
The 68th Chapter.
In Relaxation of the Scrotum Skin.
Many times the skin of the scrotum relaxes in some people without the contents inside it relaxing, and its appearance is unpleasant, so one who desires to treat it should make the patient lie on his back.
And he cuts off all the relaxed skin on the thick skin, then gathers the edges, and if you wish to sew it first with three or four stitches and make sure of the sewing, then cut what is between the stitches.
Then treat it with the treatment of other wounds until it heals and the sutures are removed.
The Ninetieth Chapter.
On Castration.
Castration is forbidden in our creed.
Therefore, it was not fitting for me to mention this in my book, but I mentioned it because of two reasons: one being that the doctor should be knowledgeable about castration if asked and know how to treat someone who has undergone it; and the other reason is that we often need to castrate some animals for our own benefits.
Just as donkeys, sheep, and cats, and similar animals, so I say that castration is done in two ways: either by cauterization or by cutting and splitting. As for the one done by cauterization, its method is that we place the animal in hot water until its femoral veins relax and become soft and swollen.
Then you cauterize it with your hand until it relaxes and does not become sensitive to the touch, and as for castration by cutting and splitting, it is necessary to hold the animal and remove its scrotal skin with your left hand, then tie the spermatic cords and cut each one in a single slice.
until the testicles emerge, then cut them off after skinning them and leave nothing on them except the thin peritoneum that is attached to the vessels; this method of castration is better than the one done by cauterization.
because cauterization may leave some of the female organs intact, causing the animal to become fertile again; then the wound is treated until it heals.
The Sixtieth Chapter.
On Treating Hermaphrodites.
The hermaphrodite is found in men in two types: one type is when it appears as a fold or part of the scrotal skin between the female organs, resembling a woman's vulva and having hair; and sometimes urine flows from what is in the scrotal skin.
And as for women, one type is and it is above the vulva on the perineum like the small testicles of men, two of them going out towards the outside, one resembling a man's penis and the other two being feminine, and treatment of the three types.
The two types of men and the one type of women should be cut from those excess flesh until its effects cease, then treated with the treatment of other wounds until it heals. And as for the second type of men in which urine comes out from the skin of the scrotum, there is no operation nor is there any healing.
The seventy-first chapter.
In cutting the clitoris and the flesh that comes from the vulva of women.
The clitoris may increase in size beyond its natural state until it becomes ugly and disfigured, and in some women it may even spread like men's and become suitable for coitus.
It should be grasped with your hand or forceps and cut, without pausing in the cutting, especially not in the depth of the root lest bleeding occur.
Then treat it with the treatment of wounds until it heals, and as for the flesh that grows back, it is a flesh that grows in the mouth of the womb until it fills it.
And perhaps it emerges outside like a tail. And that is why some of the ancient ones call it the tail disease, so one should cut it as one cuts the clitoris, whether it grows back or not, and treat it until it heals.
The seventy-second chapter.
In treating lockjaw.
Lockjaw is when the vulva of a woman is not pierced or has a small opening, and it is either natural or acquired. The acquired one is from an underlying condition that has developed and it is either from excessive grown flesh.
A thin or thick ligament, it may be in the depth of the uterus, or in its sides, or above or below, and it prevents from copulation, childbirth, and menstruation. Recognition of this is by examination of the woman.
If the blockage is apparent and near, then if it is not apparent, search for it with her fingers or a probe. If the blockage is from a thin ligament and is near the two shells (i.e., fallopian tubes), begin to cut through it by placing something like a sponge on the shells, then press your thumbs from both hands together.
And the woman lies on her back with her legs spread apart, then she stretches the two shells (i.e., fallopian tubes) with force until the thin ligament is cut and the blockage opens. Then she takes a cloth, soaks it in oil, and places it on the spot; and she copulates with the woman every day lest the spot becomes inflamed again.
If the ligament is thick and dense, it is necessary to cut it with a broad knife resembling an aspen leaf. If the blockage is from flesh that has grown, remove it with scissors; and be sure to have remedies to stop bleeding without pain, such as vinegar, opium, and rose-petal white powder.
Then she uses a wide lead tube so that the wound does not become inflamed quickly, holds it for days and uses a lint thread; then treats with all the means of healing until it is cured. And if there is another growth in the uterus, cut according to this type.
Unless it is a malignant tumor, the uterine tumor that occurs will not respond to iron at all.
The Third Seventieth Section.
In the treatment of hemorrhoids, piles, and red boils that occur in the vaginas of women.
Hemorrhoids are an inflammation of the mouths of the veins until much blood flows from it constantly. If hemorrhoids become prominent, they turn into varicose ulcers, and we mentioned their types, signs, and symptoms in the classification, and we mention them here.
What is treated from it and what is not, I say that hemorrhoids and varicose ulcers if they are in the depth of the womb and have not appeared to sensation, there is no treatment with iron. And that which appears to sensation in the mouth of the womb is that which is treated.
It is necessary for the woman to enter a cold house, then to tie off the varicose ulcers with a thread or a rough cloth and cut it from its roots, then apply it to the bleeding wound from one of the arteries that stops blood flow without swelling.
Like aloe, and sycamore, and dates and the like, then raise her legs to the wall for a moment, then lower them in cold water. If the bleeding continues, seat her on a poultice of sammut, buckthorn bark, and the like, then take barley flour and mix it with honey and vinegar.
And bind it on her back. If the blood stops, otherwise bind tightly the hard cloth and breasts without exception. Then take a woolen cloth, immerse it in tamarisk juice or snakeroot juice or fig sap with a decoction of gallnuts, and bind to the place.
If the swelling subsides, treat the area with an ointment until it heals. And as for the red boil, it resembles the rough-looking heads of the hackberry plant. It is necessary to cut off what appears from it according to what I mentioned in the varicose ulcers, and then treat it until it heals.
The Seventy-Fourth Chapter.
In the scrotum of the abscess that appears in the womb.
The fetus may display many types of tumors such as cancer, calcified tumor, ulcers, boils, eaters, nodules, fistulas, and hot tumors. All these diseases and their kinds and signs have been mentioned in the classification.
It is necessary to mention in this article the hot tumor that appears in the uterus if it is one of the tumors that gather matter. It should be examined carefully because if the tumor's pain begins sharply with beating, inflammation, and fever.
And I saw it red if the sensation falls upon it, do not hurry to lance and treat what is necessary for maturation until these symptoms cease. Then it becomes necessary for the woman to sit on a chair with two seats and lean against her back.
And she should gather her legs towards the lower abdomen, with her thighs apart, and make her arms lie under her hipbones, and bind them with a suitable band.
Therefore, the accoucheuse should sit from the right side and use the instrument that opens the uterus which will be shown later. And it is necessary if you want to use this instrument to measure the depth of the woman's uterus so that what enters through the instrument is not deeper than the uterus.
Then the instrument will be blocked. If the instrument is longer than the depth, it is necessary to place a guide on the rim of the uterus to prevent the entire instrument from entering the depth of the uterus. And it is necessary for the spiral which is in the instrument to come out from the upper side.
And you should hold the instrument and have the servant direct the spiral until the neck of the uterus opens. If a membrane appears and can be touched with the hand, and if it is thin and weak, it is necessary to cut it at its head with a broad knife when all the time has passed.
It should be made in the wound a soft, well-lubricated thread of linen or green soap mixed with some pitch. The thread should then be brought out through the incision on the umbilical cord and sewn outside to the perineum and the vulva with pure wool soaked in boiling water mixed with baking soda.
Then it should be treated after two days with the ointment suitable for that, until it heals.
And the womb and wound should be washed by being soaked in water and honey, then with boiling water mixed with saponaria or long sorrel, and then return to the ointment; if the abscess is hidden internally within the womb.
It should not be treated with iron, but rather with what has been mentioned in this section.
The Seventy-Fifth Chapter.
In the teaching of the clamps, how they should treat living fetuses if they emerge in an unnatural shape.
It is necessary for the clamp to know first the natural shape of childbirth, from its signs; if you see the woman bending down and craving to breathe and her breath becoming labored.
And it hastens the exit of the child; know that this childbirth is in its natural shape, and the child's exit will be with its head and shoulders or attached to its navel cord; if you see these signs, then it is necessary to cut open her belly so that the child may exit quickly.
If it descends with its head, then the navel cord will descend with it and be cleaned from those impurities in a good cleaning; as for any childbirth that is not like this, it is condemned as unnatural because the child may emerge on its feet, or its hands before its head and feet.
And one hand or one foot may emerge, or its head and hand may emerge together, or it may emerge folded and perhaps turn over on its back and so forth from the condemned shapes; therefore, the clamp should be skilled and gentle in all these things and beware of mistakes.
I explain each shape of it and how to do it so that you can deduce it and rely on it. If the fetus emerges on its head in natural exit and becomes strong against the woman, making it difficult for her to deliver, and I saw her strength weaken, then I sit her down on a chair and order women to support her.
And I cover her with a cooked poultice and wet cloths, then the attendant enters between her fingers, making a small cut, and tears open the membranes or cuts them with her fingernail until what is inside becomes fluid and the woman's belly is emptied until the fetus descends.
If it does not descend, then the woman should be injected with the cooked poultice mixed with aloe and then I order her to sneeze and blow into the kohl and grasp her nose and mouth. If the fetus's hands come out first, then they should be gently guided back in a little at a time.
If it does not come out, then place the woman on a board and raise her legs up high, then shake the board on the ground, and the woman should hold herself so as not to fall. If the hands do not enter and the fetus is dead, then cut them off and pull out the rest of the fetus.
Or bind its hands with a cloth and pull them out gently. If the fetus emerges on its feet, then it should be pushed up and then the fetus should be turned slightly at a time until it is straightened out, then take one of its feet and stretch it slightly at a time.
If they emerge to the hips, then order her to sneeze and blow into the kohl, for it will come out. If it does not come out as we have described, or else gently turn the fetus slightly at a time until it is in its natural shape, for it will come out smoothly at that point, if it refuses what we have described entirely.
Take from the fat of the knees and the fat of the navel, and grease the thighs and a liquid resin. Then strike all together in the mortar well, then bring it to the woman's abdomen and lower part of her belly. Then sit her down in lukewarm water until she is warm.
If you see that it has come down to her, make for her a poultice from therb and let her wear it. If the poultice is removed after an hour, then sit her on the stool, then blow on her mouth and nostrils and press down on the lower part of her belly with a gentle pressure, for the child will come out through its hands, coming forth on its knees and arms.
If it comes forth in this manner, then take hold of its hands little by little. Then the woman will lie on her back and let her legs dangle down while she is leaning on a bed and clasping her hands, then press gently above her belly little by little. Then bring out what is under her legs from the cloths until it is positioned below. If the child does not come out, take both her legs and move them with a strong motion. Then press gently above the pubic bone little by little until the child ascends to the top. Then the attendant will put in her hand and soothe the child little by little.
And order the woman to straighten up until the child comes out, coming forth with its head and hands towards one of her hands. Take hold of its hand if you are able; but if not, then make the woman stand and let her walk; and if she is unable to walk, then have her sit down.
Her bed, then shake her legs with a strong shaking. Then use the papyrus that I described from the fat; if it takes hold of it, then sit her on a stool, then attend to bringing forth the hand and settle the child in its natural shape, and blow on the woman, and order her to straighten up until the child comes out.
Delivery of the fetus on its back with outstretched arms and face towards the mother's back, it is necessary for the attendant to hold the fetus' hand then gently turn it a little and cover it kindly. If it is stable, let her carry it on her lap as we have described in the fats and ointments.
Then move her a little, a little. If she does that, let her sit on the chair and order her to lean towards the right side. Then order her to undress and blow into her nostrils with camphor, for it emerges, the exit of the fetus standing upright on its side.
If it descends into the womb in this manner with the placenta, tear the placenta with your fingernails until it is free from moisture, lest it cling to the face and neck of the fetus. Then cut the cord and push the fetus inside until it is in its proper place.
And order the woman to undress repeatedly, for it emerges easily, the exit of twins or many infants. Know that twins are often born and sometimes three or four are born and they live except that is in rarity. As for five, it is something outside nature and do not survive at all.
And surround them, even if they are many, with one placenta and separate between them a membranous barrier connected to the sac of each one. And sometimes it emerges as a single fetus emerges naturally easily, and they emerge as we have described, emerging abnormally.
If some of them are difficult at birth and become what we have described as unnatural shapes, handle them as we have described. And let the attendant be gentle and do what she does kindly and carefully, and consider each shape in accordance with what her skill guides towards safety.
Mention what is conceived in the womb of infants, and they are aborted. Sometimes one is conceived and two or three or four or five or six or seven or more than ten, and it has been verified to me that a woman miscarried seven and another fifteen, all of them conceived thus.
In consideration of the All-Knowing, this is all that should be known by the skilled physician, so that he may meet it as needed someday.
The Seventieth Chapter.
On Delivering the Dead Fetus.
If you have treated the dead fetus as described in the previous treatment and it has not been delivered, and the situation requires manual intervention, then look carefully. If the woman is physically strong and there are no symptoms that would put her at risk of harm, then let the woman lie down on a bed on her back.
And her head should be tilted downwards, and her legs raised high, with a servant holding her from both sides or tied to the bed so that her body does not move when the fetus is delivered.
Then moisten the mouth of her uterus with wet poultices, along with myrrh, galangal, and large flax seeds. Then have the surgeon anoint their hands with these poultices and emollients, then gently insert them into the uterus and request a place where the fetus's extremities and corresponding locations can be grasped.
Look, if the fetus is positioned so that it descends to its head, then grasp the extremities in its eyes or shoulders or mouth or throat or beneath its chin or on the nearby places near the collarbones or under the armpits.
And if it descends to its feet, then in the buttocks and middle collarbones. It is necessary that you grasp the extremity with your right hand, bend it between the fingers of your left hand, and gently insert it into some of those places we mentioned.
Until you reach something empty, then insert another or third extremity opposite it, if needed, to make the traction even and not inclined to one side. Then stretch forth with a steady pull, moving in all directions, not just straight ahead but also flexing towards each side.
Easing his exit as with a tooth extraction near the gum and it is necessary in between that he stretches the cord, if there is obstruction from one side then the operator should grease some of her fingers with oil and insert them into it to turn it back what is obstructing. If some of the fetus comes out then the obstetric forceps should be transferred to other places.
She should lift it a little to do this until the fetus comes out entirely, if her hand comes out before the others and cannot be returned due to compression then she should wrap a cloth around it and pull it until all of it has come out.
Either in the wrist or in the elbow and so it is necessary to do this with the other hand and feet, if the head of the fetus is large and needs pressure to come out or if there is a lot of water in his head then she should insert a sponge-like instrument between her fingers.
And she should use it to break through the head and have the water come out or to compress it with an instrument called the extractor which will be shown along with the pictures of other instruments in the next chapter.
Similarly, she should do this if the fetus has a large head by nature, so she should break through the skull or compress it with the extractor as we said earlier and then remove the bones with forceps. If the head comes out and gets stuck at the nape of the neck, then she should break through until the moisture inside the chest is reached.
If it then joins the chest, but if the chest does not join and there is no way out, cut as much as you can. If the lower abdomen is relaxed or there is a congestion inside, then she should tie him off until the moisture seeps out from him.
If the fetus is on its feet, then pulling it out and bringing it to the mouth of the womb will be easy. If it gets stuck at the abdomen or chest, then she should pull it out with a cloth that has been wrapped around her hand and break through the abdomen or chest until what is inside them seeps out.
If you have removed all the organs and grasped the head and held it still, let the skilled hand enter the left hand. If the opening of the womb is open, then the hand enters into the neck of the womb and seeks out the head and pulls it with the fingers towards the mouth of the womb. Then, enter a retractor or two and pull it back with it.
If the opening of the womb has united with a hot tumor, it is not necessary to force it but rather one should use wet and thick substances, and use poultices, and sit in the waters that soothe and moisten.
And as for the fetus that is on its side, if it can be corrected, then use what we mentioned for a living fetus. But if it cannot be done, then cut and extract, and do not leave anything of the placenta inside at all. If you have finished treating, then use what we mentioned for treating hot tumors that appear in the wombs.
If bleeding appears, then descend into the constricting waters and use all the treatment. And I have seen a woman who had become pregnant, the fetus died in her womb, then she became pregnant with it again.
Then the other fetus also died, and after a long time a tumor appeared in her groin area, swelled until it burst and let out pus. I was summoned to treat her and treated her for a long time but the wound did not heal so I applied some strong medicinal poultices on top of it.
Then a bone came out of the place, and after some days another bone came out. I was amazed by this because the abdomen is not a place where bones are found, so I conjectured that it was from the bones of the deceased fetus. She searched the wound and extracted many bones, including those of the head of the fetus.
And I did not stop following that until she extracted many bones from her, and the woman was in her best state. And indeed she lived for a long time with pus occasionally coming out of the place, but this is what happened here.
Because in it is knowledge and aid for what the physician endeavors to achieve with his own hand from treatment.
The Seventy-Seventh Chapter.
In which are the images of the instruments that one needs for extracting the fetus.
Image of a forceps with which to open the uterus:.
This is the instrument with which one writes, whether it be two forceps at the ends of the boards, except that this forceps should be softer than the instrument and should be either from ivory or from the wood of the box tree, and each board should be as wide as two fingers.
And they are bent like a finger, and their length is half a hand or a little more, and their width is about two fingers or a little more, and these two handles.
They are the ones that enter into the uterus to open it with, another tool like this one, softer and lighter:.
It is made from the wood of the ebony or box tree, in the shape of a calipers, except that it has handles on its end, as you see, with each handle about a hand long and wide as two fingers, so if you want to open the uterus with it.
Then the woman sits on a low chair, with her legs spread apart between her thighs, then you insert these two handles into the uterus and hold the end of the instrument below between her thighs, then open your hand with the instrument as you would with calipers, according to how much you want to open the uterus. Until she does what she wants, image of another forceps mentioned by them:.
Image of the instrument with which one pushes out the fetus:.
Image of the extractor with which one extracts the head of the fetus:.
It resembles a saw with teeth on the end, as you see, and it can be made rectangular like calipers, as you see, with teeth like those of a saw that cuts and smooths:.
Picture of a trephine also:.
Picture of a saw:.
This saw is made thicker so that it does not break when using it to cut the foetus, Picture of a saw with two handles:.
Picture of two broad forceps for cutting the foetus:.
All these instruments, the more their kinds increase and are prepared by the craftsman, it is easier for him to work with them and higher in esteem among people because of his ability, so do not despise any instrument that you have, for you will certainly need it.
Seventy-eighth chapter.
In removing the placenta.
If the placenta becomes stuck after delivery, then it is necessary for the midwife to hold her breath, then grasp the placenta with the cord and pull your hand through her mouth and nostrils. If it comes out like this, otherwise take as much as you can.
And then make a hole in the membrane, and put open herbs like podophyllum, senna, sambucus, bryony, hyoscyamus, squill, and cantharides, all these medicines or some of them into it. Then immerse it in water, heat it on fire, and place a silver tube on the hole in the membrane, with one end inside the uterus.
And hold it until the steam reaches the bottom of the uterus, then take out as we said, and the placenta will come out quickly. If it remains after this treatment and does not come out, tell the midwife to put her left hand in the fat of the shoulder or the cheek.
Then she will put it into the pubic area and search for the placenta. If she finds it, she will grasp it and pull it out little by little until it comes out. If it is stuck deep in the uterus, she will insert her hand as we described until she feels the placenta, then gently pull it out without causing harm.
Unless the uterus falls at the strong traction, it is necessary to pull gently towards the sides then increase the amount of traction, as it yields then and frees itself from adhesion. If the uterine orifice is closed, we have described the treatment with ligation and the treatment of the peritoneum and membranes.
If it does not come out with everything we have described, then do not force it upon it again with traction. Instead, bind what has come out to the uterine orifice to the woman's thigh, then apply the quadruple ointment to it. It will loosen it after days.
And it will be resolved and come out, except that if it becomes gangrenous, a foul odor will spread to the stomach and head and harm the patient. Therefore, a suitable decoction should be used.
Therefore, some of the early practitioners have tried using decoctions of herbs and dry dates. An illustration of the instrument which the woman uses when her menses and placenta are retained, and so on:.
It is made of lead resembling a pipe, or it is made of copper. The thin end is placed at the front and the wide end is heated over the fire with incense, until the incense is gone and another is applied.
The Ninetieth Chapter.
In the treatment of unbroken piles.
Many boys are born with their piles not being broken, and a thin membrane having closed them. The midwife should then pierce this membrane with her finger, or else she should tie it off sharply and warn the muscle not to touch it.
Then she should place a wet wool compress on it in the bath and oil, then treat it with ointments until it heals. If she fears it will close up, she should insert a lead tube into the opening for many days and remove it when the child is ready to have a bowel movement.
The wound may also be exposed in the seat, due to an abscess or injury. It is necessary to cut open that abscess then treat it as we mentioned earlier in the treatment and medication.
Chapter Twenty-Eight.
Treatment of ulcers that occur below.
The ulcers that occur below are a complication and thickening that occurs near the seat, either from outside or in one of the cavities on one side, and they can be one or more.
And if that complication opens and a whitish or watery discharge flows from it, or it may extend to the rectum and to the anus, and it may not extend. If it does extend, it can be recognized by what comes out of it through the stool and wind when using a laxative bowel movement.
And perhaps the worms will come out of it, and it may also be ulcers if it extends to the bladder and the urethra. It may also extend to the hip joint and to the coccyx, and what is recognized by the extending ulcer also from the non-extending one.
Put your index finger into the anus and insert a thin instrument made of copper or iron into the ulcer if there is no obstruction. If there is an obstruction, then insert a leaden or horsehair thin instrument.
Until you feel the instrument or hair in your finger, and if you do not feel it at all and nothing comes out of the opening, neither feces nor wind nor worms as we said, then know that it is not extending. Then proceed with the treatment immediately.
And if the ulcer extends to the bladder or to the urinary tract, a sign of it is the flow of urine from it and its resistance to being treated with medicines. And if it extends to the hip joint or to the coccyx, then the sign of it is the reach of the instrument there.
If it does not have a suturing to the bone and there is pain in one direction and discharge of pus from it constantly, and no treatment results in it nor does it stick with an ointment, all these affected nerves are completely unhealed.
And its treatment is futile for one who practices it from among the ignorant doctors, but if it is not inflamed and non-persistent, then healing can be expected with iron as I have described and tried, which is that you should make the patient lie down in front of you on his back.
And you should draw up his legs and incline his hips towards his abdomen, then insert the copper or lead probe if there is suturing in the abscess until you learn where the probe ends. Then, if the patient feels it towards the crease, you should insert your thumb into the crease.
And if you feel with your thumb that the probe has reached on its own, exposed and not feeling between it and something like a fold or flesh, then you should know for certain that it is inflamed, so do not bother with it as it will not heal as we said.
And they have said that it can heal in some people in rare cases, and the treatment that is expected to be beneficial is to apply a thin compress according to the size of the abscess as mentioned earlier, and insert it into the abscess until it reaches near the crease, then return it two or three times.
Until you learn that all those excessive fatty tissues resembling a bird's quill have been burnt, then treat it with anointed gauze in oil until the burnt tissue comes out, and then treat it with ointment if it heals.
And if not, it will never heal with any other treatment. But if you inserted the probe and it did not reach your thumb which is in the crease and there was a thick veil of flesh or fat between it and the probe, and you saw the abscess follows the surface of the skin then cut the skin from the beginning of the abscess. And you pass by the cut with the scalpel, when it is in the notch until you reach where the tip of the scalpel ends and the scalpel lets go and falls. Then you scrape away those fatty substances that resemble a bird's feather tube and nothing remains from it.
Then treat it with the poultice until it heals. If blood flows and comes between you and your work to cut away those fatty substances, do better what you are doing and hasten its benefit by setting fire or a sharp remedy because setting on fire gathers two good states: burning away those excess fatty substances.
Cut away the blood and wipe off the moistness. Then treat it with the poultice soaked in lard or sulfurous powder mixed with oil until the place is cleansed and those burnt fatty substances come out in the cleansing, then after that, treat the wound with the same poultice prepared for solid flesh.
And it is the medicines that contain a stop and wipe off. If it has coagulated, then it has healed and there will be no relapse. But if the notch has reached the depth of the cavity and is away from the surface of the body, then put your finger into the cavity and search with it.
So if you feel the scalpel and there is a veil of membrane or flesh between it and yourself, and it is close to the opening, then there is no work except through greed and hope. And that is by using one of three methods: either to cauterize it as we said.
Or else to cut it until you reach its bottom so that you can put the poultice and treatment close by, and do not continue cutting lest you cut the surrounding muscle of the cavity, which would cause the patient's excrement to emerge without intention, then treat it as we mentioned, and perhaps he will recover as we said.
Or else to penetrate that veil and cut away after you have cut up to the vicinity of the cavity, as we said, either with a scalpel or another sharp instrument, then scrape away all those fatty substances in the incision until you can reach by searching.
Then fill the wound with gauze, along with the split and the upper mouth until it is sewn up and the suture remains open inside the dressing so that it will be less painful for the patient, and sometimes the suture may remain in this state.
And when you put the thread in the suture and it is on one side of the dressing towards the surface of the body with the skin and surrounding the dressing, then take a needle and make a hole at the end like an awl on this shape:.
And put a thread of five threads or so loose inside it, then insert the needle with the thread into the suture until it reaches its depth, if it is spread out on the edge of the dressing from within and close by.
Then take the thread out of that hole by putting your finger into the dressing, and pull out one end of the thread and join both ends together and tighten them and leave it for a day or two, so whenever you cut the thread in the flesh, tighten it tightly until the flesh between the threads is cut off and falls away, then treat the wound until it heals and closes.
If the mouth of the suture is not spread out, then push it forward as much as you can except that it may be deep; do not do that for the sake of the muscle lest you cut it, then proceed with it as we mentioned until it closes.
The shape of the bone cutter that cuts sutures is very sharp on one side and not sharp on the other, lest it cut what does not need to be cut as you see:.
Ninetieth Section.
In haemorrhoids which bleed and are cut, and the treatment of fissures.
Haemorrhoids will be two types, either they will be inside the rectum resembling red pinches or like grape clusters and there will be small and large ones, and blood will flow from them always.
One will be many and will be outside the seat and on its edges except that what is outside the seat is usually less moist, dripping yellow or a little blood at times, and has the same color as the body.
And the treatment of what is inside the seat is that you should order the sufferer to strain and squeeze until the seat comes out and the ulcers appear, then hasten and tie them with strings or grasp them with your nail and cut them at their roots; if the strings do not hold due to its moisture and relaxation.
Then grab it with a rough cloth or a piece of moistened wool, or pull it with your fingers then cut it, and afterwards sprinkle some sharp powders on it so that it becomes like a cauterization or do as is mentioned in the chapter on cauterization.
Then treat it with the remaining treatment until it is cured, if the seat does not come out then inject the sufferer with an injection that contains a little bit to wash away what is inside the seat and make it easy to come out quickly when the sufferer strains, so as for the ulcers that are outside the seat, order them gently.
And that is by taking it with your nail or tying it with a string and cutting it, then treating it as we mentioned until it is cured, and if someone dislikes cutting with iron, it is necessary to use its powder in this manner: take an unwound thread and insert it into a needle.
Then pull the tumor upwards and remove it with the needle from its root on the other side, wrap the two ends of the thread below the needle as it is obstructed and pull the tumor tightly and securely, then tie the thread and withdraw the needle, do that for all the tumors and leave one not to be removed.
So that some blood may ooze out, then put a cloth moistened with rose water or vinegar on the seat and put it there, order the sufferer to rest then leave them be until the ulcers drop off, if they have dropped off, treat them with ointments and all other treatments until they are cured.
Treatment of fissures, many times it is exposed by the blisters and taking the natural course. If it does not heal with medicine, then you should remove the crust that has formed on top of it using a surgical knife or your own razor until it becomes moist and the upper crust that prevents it from healing disappears.
Then treat it until it heals as it should. If it does not heal, then repeat the treatment with greater severity than the first time, until a scar forms and the flesh sloughs off. Then treat it, for it will be healed.
The Twenty-Second Chapter.
In the treatment of inverted and non-inverted ingrown hairs, and abscesses.
The ingrown hair is a rounded knot on the skin resembling a horn, which can be found all over the body, especially in the soles of the feet and hands, and causes pain when walking.
It is necessary to cut around the ingrown hair and grasp it with a probe or a pincers, then pull it out from its root, and treat it afterwards. As for abscesses, each one of them is a small rough, swollen, rounded growth above the surface of the skin.
And many times it appears on the hands of boys, and its treatment is to drain the abscess and cut it off or destroy it with a silk thread or a hair until it falls off, and if you wish, treat it with fire or medicine as previously mentioned.
And abscesses can be removed using the device I mentioned in the treatment of an ingrown hair, and as for a boil, it is also a small, swollen, thick growth on the surface of the skin that goes deep into the flesh, and if it catches a chill, you will feel pain similar to the stinging of an ant.
And it can be found in all the body, and most often in the hands. Its treatment is to take a reed from a swan or a strong falcon's wing, and make that reed encircle the boil until its circumference is enclosed by the reed, then turn your hand with the reed until you cut around the boil.
You will make it in the depth of the flesh and extract the flea from its source, and if you wish, do so with a copper or iron tube on this shape:.
It will be the top of the tube fixed firmly to the skin, so that it may be easily controlled by the fingers and opened, and if you wish, you can remove the flea as mentioned earlier in the chapter on fleas.
The third and eightieth chapter.
In the forms of instruments which are used for injecting with them in cases of constipation, diarrhea, and cholera.
The syringe may be made of glass, or of bronze, or of hammered or shaped copper, and it may be made in small and large sizes according to the users of it. Then the one used for treating small children will be small, and those whose constipation is narrow or obstructed will have syringes that are very fine, large syringe shape:.
The top of which the tube is tied will be wide on this shape, having a barrier where the tube is tied as you see, and the lower end which enters the rectum will be fixed firmly to the skin on one side with two holes and on the other side with one hole.
The width of the hole will be as thick as a finger or slightly thicker, and the tube through which you make the medicine from an animal's bladder or a goat's skin will be made in the shape of a small shield, being one shibra in width.
And it will have many holes like a spiral, and each hole will be as wide as a finger, then a tightly wound thread of about ten or so strands of yarn will enter those holes and gather the tube like a shield. So if you put the medicine in it, pull tight at the head of the syringe between two stones, pulling tightly, then inject with it, and this is the shape of the tube and hole:.
How to fill the bladder or kidney with medicine, when it is inflamed, by applying the medicine as much as possible to the affected area and beware that it should not be too hot or too cold, then have the patient lie on his back and lift up his legs above.
And he puts a linen cloth or compress underneath, then he anoints the tip of the catheter with fat or egg white or henbane sap or something similar. Then it is inserted into the urethra gently and a servant takes hold of the catheter with both hands and squeezes it strongly until all that is in the catheter is emptied into the bladder.
Then the catheter is removed and the patient lies on his back with his legs against the wall. If the medicine stimulates him to go, let him strain as much as he can. And if he falls asleep for the whole night, it will be more effective in purging. If it is used to treat diarrhea, hasten its exit until it has been purged.
If there is a swelling or painful lump in the urethra, let the catheter be very soft and smooth like the one used to drain a child's bladder. This is an image of a soft catheter tied with its own skin.
The 84th Chapter.
In the Treatment of Wounds.
I have mentioned in the classification of treatments what concerns the treatment of burns, and I am mentioning it here as a treatment by hand and with medicines to perfection. So I say that wounds differ according to what the wound is caused by and according to the location where the injury occurs.
The things that cause wounds are many, such as a stone blow or sword cut or knife wound or arrow shot or stick or something similar to many things.
And as for the wounds according to their locations on the body, such as a wound on the head or neck or chest or belly or liver and similar organs.
And I describe the treatment of some wounds to make them a standard and a law for all wounds. And I begin with simple head wounds, in particular, because complex ones will be mentioned in the third part of this book.
I say that if a simple wound occurs in the head, and it is not a bone fracture, then look at whether it was caused by a stone or something like it, and whether the skin has only been torn and the wound is large and there is fear of heat ulcers, then hasten to apply the dressing to the place. And do not delay in doing that, and remove from him as much blood as his strength allows, unless a preventer of bleeding prevents it, especially if the blood coming out of the wound is slight and the bleeding is from the opposite side of the injured area.
And warn the patient against overeating and drinking, especially if a preventer of bleeding prevents it. If there is no preventer, let him reduce his food intake and not approach meat or drinks, and apply a poultice made from rose oil alone or with wine containing opium to the wound.
And if the heat ulcer is absent, apply to the wound if it is moist with blood and has not been affected by the dry air that I will describe to you later. But if it has been affected by the dry air, apply some ointments to it.
Until the pus has formed and then treat it until it heals. If the wound is large and was caused by a sword or something like it, and its edges have not united with the surrounding tissue, sew it together as I will describe in the suturing of abdominal wounds.
If the skin has been exposed to the bone and is stuck, but its adhesion is only slight, then cut it off and treat the wound with medicines that will cause firm flesh to grow in place of the skin. And instruct the patient to eat nourishing foods such as heads and brains and things like them.
If it happens on the skin and it is putrid and has not stuck to the bone, cut off the rotten part entirely and warm it up then treat it. If in these wounds there is a vein or an artery that bleeds blood from it and the bleeding does not stop with medication, search for the vein.
If it (the wound) does not stop bleeding, apply pressure with a sponge and tie it. And if necessity demands, if what we mentioned does not work, pour water on it until the bleeding stops. If these wounds are small and flat, consider them easy to treat by simply applying this powder while they are still bleeding.
Before the air changes it, the recipe for this powder is that one part comes from aloeswood, two parts come from alum, and three parts come from either unslaked or slaked lime. Grind all of these together, sift them, and fill the wound with them, pressing firmly until a good scab forms on it.
And it coagulates with blood, then tighten it from above with lint and leave it as is until it does not ooze. For it is not treated with medicine until it heals. And sometimes the lime alone can do that if you do not have aloeswood or alum.
And this action can also be done with myrtle in many large wounds if you master its application and tightening, and the wounds are fresh with their blood, as long as the air does not change them. But if the air has changed them somewhat, especially in summer time.
There is no meaning in applying this powder as we mentioned earlier by pouring some prepared ointments or a mixture of barley flour made with water and honey on it until the discharge subsides, then treating it with the rest of the treatment until it heals.
But if a fracture occurs in the bone near the wound and it is slight, pull it back with a rag. I have mentioned the treatment for skull fractures earlier in the surgery of the neck. If the wound is in the neck, there is no difference in the treatment between a wound of the head if it is slight.
If it has been cut off from the neck or a vein, then if it is a nerve, there is no remedy except to avoid treating it with a tight bandage like a leather belt and a cloth napkin and similar things because they harm the nerve and numb it.
And nothing cold should be placed on the wound at all, because the essence of the nerve is cold and its connection to the brain which is the most noble of organs will be affected, and what treats it with medicines like powdered saffron mixed with water that has been previously filled with oil or with rose paste and turpentine.
If it is washed also with clean water and all the metallic stones on this account and moist creams, and as for if the wound is large, use suturing or closing his lips with herbs then treat him until he recovers.
If the wound has a depth and there is a hollow in its bottom where pus has accumulated, then it should be cleaned in the lowest part of it; if there was a vein cut open in the wound and its blood flows out, then stop it or tie it off or cauterize it if necessity demands that.
If the wound has cut off some or all of the rings of the windpipe, and the tubes have been loosened, then bring together the edges of the skin with suturing on a stick of the windpipe and do not touch the windpipe but soothe it and restore it to its natural shape then secure it tightly and leave it for days.
Then treat him with creams that contain astringent and drying properties until he recovers; if the wound has affected the bone, then remove it; if there are fragments of bone, then extract them all or as much as possible and what you cannot extract leave it until the wound heals and recovers and it will be easy to remove.
If the wound is fresh, sprinkle it with the powdered herbs that we have described; if there is a bone in the wound and it becomes inflamed, then treat it as mentioned in its chapter, in the surgery of the chest and between the shoulders.
If the wound is from a spear or knife and you see pus in it, then look. If wind comes out of it when the patient exhales, know that it is an open wound. If not, if it is clean with her blood, do not put anything inside it at first glance nor pull it tight lest the blood become trapped inside it.
He should be referred to the heart and will kill the patient. However, put a little bit of attractive ointment in it and dissolve it twice a day. If you do not have ointment, put a clean cotton thread into the wound's mouth to absorb what comes out from its moist parts and let the patient sleep on the wound.
There is no concern for what gathers there. And if the wound has been three days or more and the patient's pulse, breathing, and respiration are all normal, and I see all his conditions are good, then know that the wound is healed and can be treated with lint and other remedies until it is fully recovered.
If the patient's sight is obscured and his breath is always labored, then know that he has become a hopeless case, and his treatment should be from its source. The patient on the wound is not concerned with what gathers there; if it is in the chest or back, treat it as previously mentioned in suturing.
If it is large or in the folds, if it is small, then know that it has affected the bone and broken off fragments. Clean the wound and proceed to remove those fragments if they are clean. If they are not clean, leave them until.
The wound should be cleaned because it facilitates their removal. As for other wounds occurring in all organs, the judgment regarding their treatment is as mentioned earlier.
The 78th Chapter.
In surgery of the abdomen and rectal prolapse and its suturing.
The rent that is exposed to the abdomen can be large, small, or medium-sized. The large one may cause rectal prolapse or multiple intestines to come out, making their insertion and suturing more difficult and harder.
The small intestine is also difficult to return from another aspect, so it must be returned with difficulty and the bowel will not move into its place at its hour if it does not precede in entering it. It becomes swollen and distended, making it even more difficult to enter. Therefore, it is better to use the medium intestine because it does not cause difficulty in returning the bowel like these two types.
Know that stitching the abdomen has four faces, two of which are general and suitable for stitching the abdomen and other surgical wounds on the body, while the other two are special and only applicable to stitching the abdomen.
And I will describe it to you one by one with explanation and clarification, so I say that if the wound is small and something from the bowel has come out of it and it is difficult to return, this is due to one of two reasons: either the intestine is small as we said, or because the bowel has been exposed to inflation before being blocked by air.
So if it is like that, then it is necessary to soften it by immersing a sponge or a wet cloth in cold water alone or with cumin, coriander, and cardamom, and then using it to relax the bowel until the inflation subsides.
And one can also do this by drinking the decoction that has been prepared and it is better than water alone in relieving the inflation. If you see that the inflation has subsided, then gently insert the bowel with a decoction of thyme or baker's yeast, for it makes it easy to enter.
And if it still does not return after this treatment, then cut the intestine a little with the instrument that is used to cut umbilical cords. The first treatment is better than cutting, but one may have to resort to cutting in cases of necessity and the exhaustion of all means. And this is the image of the instrument:.
Its single direction is curved and limited, while the other direction is unlimited. The thin end does not have a rounded edge but is slightly flattened, resembling a small chisel as you see it. If the wound opens up and the bowel enters, then its return must be to its natural shape.
If you can manage that, it is better. However, if the wound is wide and in the lower abdomen, then the patient should lie on his back with his legs higher than his head; and if it is in the upper abdomen, he should raise his head and chest above his lower part.
And similarly, if the wound is in one side of the abdomen, then always keep that side with the intention and purpose higher than the other side; and thus it is necessary to use this method for great operations and medium-sized operations.
And as for small operations, you should do according to what is possible for you, then prepare a loyal assistant beside you who holds the wound entirely with his hands and brings together its edges, then reveals it little by little to the one in charge of stitching.
And this is the general characteristic of stitching, which is to take a needle or several needles according to the width of the wound, then leave from one side of the wound the thickness of a fingernail and insert one needle without entering it into the edges of the skin. With the edge of the peritoneum underneath the skin from inside until it is passed through from that side, and having brought together the edges of the skin and the peritoneum, there are four layers; then tie with a doubled thread around the needle from both sides entirely until the wound comes together strongly.
Then leave also the thickness of a finger and insert another needle, then tie it with thread as you did with the first needle, and continue to do so as needed with needles until you have freed the entire wound completely, and let the needles be moderate between thickness and fineness.
Because very fine needles cut the flesh quickly and it is difficult to enter them into the skin, therefore it is necessary for them to be moderate in fineness and thickness, and it is not necessary for the needle to be inserted at the edge of the skin at all.
Unless the flesh becomes necrotic quickly and the wound opens before it is sutured, nor should it be far from suturing lest the wound refuses to unite. Then cut off the tips of the needles so that they do not harm the patient when he sleeps, and make a bolster from torn cloth on all sides to grip the tips of the needles.
And leave it until you learn that the wound has united, and this type of suture with needles is more suitable for small wounds because it can be sufficient to suture them with one or two or so needles.
Or, the secondary suturing is to gather together the four edges, namely the skin and the peritoneum, in one suture with a needle having a moderate-sized thread in the thickness and density, then when you have passed this edge with this needle, withdraw it from the side where you began.
So that the thread is knotted from above the wound, so that the suturing is like the sewing of a garment which holds together and makes between each stitch a small thickness, and this suturing is known to everyone.
And with this suturing, I stitched a wound that was exposed in a man's abdomen, which had been cut with a knife and the incision was more than an arm's length, and it had opened from his intestines about two arm's lengths from the middle of the belly, in the middle of the abdomen.
I brought him out of the coma after 24 hours and the wound united in about 15 days, and I treated him until he was healed and lived for many years, managing all his affairs; and the doctors would declare that he would never recover.
And it's a wonder that I didn't treat him with ointment because I was in a place where there was nothing of medicine, so I would put cotton on the wound twice a day and entrusted its cleaning to honey water until he recovered.
One of the types of special suturing is what I mentioned from Galen's words, which is to start the suture from the skin and insert the needle from outside to inside. If the needle reaches the skin and the muscle that is straight in the entire abdomen.
I left the peritoneum's edge on the side where I inserted the needle and inserted the needle in its other edge from inside to outside on the other edge of the peritoneum. If I reached it, then I inserted it again in this same edge from outside to inside.
And I left the peritoneum's edge on this side and inserted the needle in its other edge from inside to outside, and as you insert it into the peritoneum until it reaches the edge of the pelvis which is in its direction until it penetrates all of it.
Then I also started from this side, the same one, and cut with the edge of the peritoneum on the other side and brought out the needle from the skin that is near it, then returned it to that skin and cut the edge of the peritoneum on the other side with this edge of the pelvis.
And brought it out from the skin that is on its side, and do the same thing again and again until you suture all the wound in this way, and the whole characteristic of this suturing is to sew a suturing of the skins for the skins.
By suturing the peritoneum once from one side with the edge of the skin and leaving it once on the other side until it is released, and as for the second type of special suturing mentioned also by Galen, this is his word exactly.
And it is that you suture it according to the example of those who heal by gathering each part to its corresponding match in a natural way, and bringing together the edge of the peritoneum to its other edge and the edge of the pelvis to its other edge, which will be as I described to you.
The needle should be inserted into the peritoneal fold near you from outside and penetrate it to go inside alone, leaving the peritoneal fold then bringing the needle back out and penetrating both peritoneal folds, then bringing it back also.
And penetrate it from inside to outside into the other peritoneal fold on the opposite side, and this stroke of stitching is better than general easy stitching which was mentioned earlier, as Galen said in his book, and some people say that the stitching of the abdomen can be done with two needles. And so you would put one thread in and start by inserting the needle from where you are and penetrating it to the other side, then insert the other needle from the opposite side to penetrate it from where you are according to the stitching of seamstresses whether or not.
And know that the wound in the middle of the abdomen is more difficult to suture than any other place in the abdomen, and as for treating the wound, its treatment is governed by the same rules as all wounds, namely that if you find the wound bleeding with blood before it becomes dry from air, and you have washed and dressed it and applied a compress, then you should cover it with lint or cloth.
If the wound has become dry from air, then cover it with some ointments that you prepare until it becomes clean and the stitches dissolve and the peritoneum and peritoneal fold are united, then treat it as you would any other wound until it is healed.
If you don't have any medicine, then cover it with cotton wool and change it twice a day as I taught you until it is healed; for in most cases, if the wounds are simple, you won't need to apply another treatment, unless you fear that the wound will become infected and affect the main organs.
It is necessary to soak a linen cloth in moderate heat oil or rose pomade and place it around the areas between the armpits and pubic area, if he feels pain or odor in his underwear, then often that becomes cured by drinking cold black tea.
And especially if the odor has reached his underwear and become a flowing wound to his abdomen, and know that what is thick from the intestines is easier to heal, and what is thin is harder to heal.
And as for the intestine known as the sigmoid, it does not accept healing from surgery at all, due to its many veins and their thickness, the softness of its flesh, and its proximity to the nature of the nerves. And if what emerges from the wound is a thrombus and it reaches the fatty part, then reattach it according to the intestine's return, whether or not.
If he has passed some time and it has turned green or black, then it is necessary to tie him up with a thread above the spot where it turned black so that bleeding does not occur, for in the thrombus there are veins and arteries, then cut off what is below that ligature.
And make the two ends of the thread attached from below the incision outside it, to facilitate your pulling and removal when the thrombus falls and the wound heals, mentioned is the wound that appears in the intestine, so if an opening appears in the intestine and it is small.
For it is possible for some people to recover, although I saw a person who had been pierced in the abdomen with an arrow and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, so I left the wound open and it became suppurated, excreting stool and wind from it, and I treated him without expecting him to heal. And I did not cease to apply compresses until he healed and the wound closed, so when I saw that the wound had closed I was afraid for the patient that something bad might happen in his abdomen, but nothing bad happened to him at all and he remained in the best of circumstances. Truly he eats and drinks and cohabits and enters the baths and complies in serving him, and some people of experience have said that when an injury appears on his back and is small, it is necessary to sew according to this manner.
And it is that the large ants with heads are taken, then the edges of the wound are gathered and one ant is placed there, its mouth open on the edges of the wound. If it seizes onto it and tightens its mouth, its head will be cut off; then another ant should be placed nearby.
And it is not stopped until many ants are made to do that according to the size of the wound, then it is closed and the wound is sewn; for those heads remain stuck in the flesh until the flesh heals and recovers without any defect occurring, and it may also be sewn with fine thread.
What is taken from the flesh of the animal stuck to it after it enters the abscess, namely that one end of this thread is taken from the abscess and a knot is tied, then a cotton thread is wrapped around it and made thin, then that thread is entered into the abscess. And in it, the thread of the abscess is sewn with the wound, then it returns to its cavity; and this stitch with ants and abscess is only by way of desire and hope.
As for if the rupture is large and wide, especially if it is in one of the intestines, there is no remedy and recovery is impossible.
The 68th chapter.
In the treatment of catarrh and nasal congestion.
Know that every wound or tumor if it becomes old and dry and turns into an ulcer, and does not heal and the pus always flows continuously, is called in general nasal congestion, no matter what part of the body it is in; and we call them catarrh and nasal congestion.
He has a factitious swelling on the white bone which does not cause pain with it and has a cavity like the hollow of a bird's wing.
And therefore, some of them called it a wing, and at times it may be wet and always filled with pus, and sometimes the moisture may cease in certain times, and this moisture may be abundant or little, thick or fine.
And I mentioned in the classification when mentioning wounds that not all ulcers heal or cover with flesh unless it is due to one of nine reasons, one being lack of blood in the body, or its coagulation, or because there is hard flesh inside and on its edges preventing good flesh from growing. Or because it is many and hard, or because the ulcer itself is putrid and the material that nourishes it is of bad quality, or because the treatment does not agree in its cure, or because there is a corruption that has fallen in the land from the type of disease, or because it is a special case.
Or because it is many and hard, or because the ulcer itself is putrid and the material that nourishes it is of bad quality, or because the treatment does not agree in its cure, or because there is a corruption that has fallen in the land from the type of disease, or because it is a special case. As it is in the city of Saragossa, where it is difficult for diseases to mature and healing of tumors is slow by nature, or because there is one bone or several bones, and I have shown all these causes and their signs and treatments with medicines in the classification.
And it is necessary for me to inform you here about the treatment of boils and catarhs that occur by way of work with the hand, know that boils can occur in all parts of the body, some of which end at great ulcers or sinews or nerves.
or to sinew or gut or bladder or rib of the ribs or vertebra of the vertebrae or joint of the compound joints, such as the hand and foot, and some that end at a nearby major organ and so on.
What is not from these types of wounds on this characteristic is from the difficult diseases that do not accept treatment and concern with ignorance, if what is from the wounds has not reached these places which were mentioned and hoped for its treatment.
I wanted you to know that, take a probe made of copper or iron if the wound is straight, and search it with it. If the wound has an indentation, search it with a lead probe because lead softens its body.
It bends when entering and turns towards the indentation. If the wound has many mouths, you cannot determine them with a probe, so take one mouth from among them, for the moisture that fills it flows to the other mouths.
From it then search thoroughly on any side that you can to know if there is a bone or nerve, or if the wound is deep or near, or if there is one wound with many mouths, and rely on your keen observation of its existence through the pain when you touch the place.
And as for other signs and causes that occur to the boil, so if you have observed all of this with certainty, then proceed to the treatment with confidence, and look, if it is.
The wound is apparent, near or in a safe place far from a joint or nerve or vessel or vein or one of the places mentioned to you. Cut open the wound as described before and remove what is inside from bleeding and rotten flesh and excess flesh.
And what grows in its mouth from flesh or pus and the like, treat it until it is cleared. If the wound is deep-seated and on a straight path, then you should cut it open to its depth as much as you can, then clean it of all rotten flesh.
Then use the soaked linen in harsh medicines and insert it into the abscess which is reached with iron, do that several times until the harsh medicine eats away all the remaining corruption from the abscess.
Then compel it with ointments that bring flesh to its natural state until it heals. If it does not heal with that, apply what has been mentioned before, if the cause of the abscess is bone and you are certain about that, then cut into it and split it as I have informed you, unless prevented by something.
Bone, or nerve, or main organ as we said. If the bone is revealed to you and it has some corruption and blackness, clean it until its corruption is gone, then treat it with what brings flesh to its natural state until it heals. If it does not heal and pus accumulates as was the case before.
Know that you have not reached all the removal of corruption, so uncover everything on it again and clean it with your greatest effort then compel it. If it heals, otherwise know that that corruption is deep in the bone from the corruption, so uncover everything on it again.
And clean it thoroughly with your greatest effort, if the corrupted bone is a small one and you can remove it, then remove it with fine forceps that are suitable for that.
If the bones are many, then clean up removing them all and do not leave anything, with great effort. If something from the ligaments gets in your way without it being a danger to cut them, then cut those ligaments and meat if there is any, and free the bones.
If it is not possible for you to remove the bones at that time, then carry what needs to be removed and leave it alone for a few days until what surrounds those bones from the meat and ligaments decays, and preserve the wound so that the cut you made during your work does not stick.
Put on him some gauze soaked in powdered sulfur with oil or some gauze soaked in the Egyptian ointment or one of the green ointments. If those bandages weaken and the bones become loose, it is easy to extract and draw them out.
If it is a single large bone, like the tibia or femur, and only one side of it has decayed, then scrape away that part with a sharp scraper until the discoloration and decay disappear. Then, close the wound. If the decay has reached the end of the bone, it must be removed.
Cut it all the way to where the decay ends, then scrape away what's left until it closes. I'm telling you about a case that happened to a man in his leg as an example and aid in your treatment, and this man was young in years.
Near thirty years old, a pain appeared in his leg due to something moving inside the body until it reached the leg and swelled and became a large boil. And the cause was not from outside, then time passed with doctors' mistakes until the boil opened.
And a great deal of material was discharged from it, and the treatment was poor until the leg became gangrenous and many abscesses formed, all oozing pus and bodily fluids. A group of doctors worked on it for about two years without one among them having expertise in manual art.
Until I was summoned, and when I saw his leg and the material flowing from those abscesses in a great stream. The man's body had wasted away and his complexion had turned yellow. So I inserted the trephine into one of those abscesses, and the trephine reached the bone, then I searched all the abscesses.
And I found that some of them were flowing together from all sides of the leg. So I made an incision on one of those abscesses until I exposed some bone. I found it decayed, blackened, and rotting, and hollowed out to the point where the trephine penetrated to the brain. Then I opened what was revealed to me.
I enabled the fleshy bone to decay, and I believe that there is no decay in the bone except for this one which I cut and spread and extracted then placed a compress on the wound with powerful medicines for a longer period, but it did not heal, then I returned and uncovered the bone again above the first uncovering.
I found the decay connected to the bone, so I spread what appeared to me also from that decay then placed a compress on it but it did not heal nor tighten then I uncovered it again and did not stop cutting away the bone little by little until I cut off about a finger's length.
I removed it with its membrane, then dressed it with medicines and it healed quickly and fully, but this repetition in his treatment and incision was due to the patient's weakness, lack of endurance, and my fear for his death as he would often experience severe bleeding at any time, causing him to relapse and then recover completely.
And a hard flesh grew over the bone and his condition improved in his body, his strength returned and he began to behave normally without any harm affecting him at all while walking, unless there was a broken bone in some part of the body.
So it should be spread in this shape, and a ligature should be taken to bind it at the end of the broken bone, then have someone tie it up above, and make another ligature from thicker cloth than the first.
Then bind it to the flesh beneath the bone and extend its end so that the flesh will be drawn down, while you uncover the flesh at the place you want to spread, lest the saw hurt the flesh; then place a board or plate firmly under the bone from below.
Because if you do that, the saw will not be prevented from cutting into the decayed bone; and it should be spread slightly above the place of decay so that any remaining decay in the bone does not appear on its surface and you would have to spread it again.
If the bone is decayed and has not split, but some of it is attached to other parts and the decay is in its middle or some part, then uncover the flesh from all its sides altogether, then place the board at the bottom, then spread it out from the first side where the decay is.
If you have finished spreading it out, then spread it out from the other side and let the spreading be a little distance away from the decay as we said. If the decay is in a joint, cut off the decayed joint itself and spread out the bone where it connects on the other side.
If the decay is in the connection of two joints, there is no remedy except amputation. If the decay is in the thumb or foot, the matter in its treatment is very difficult; however, you should scrape away the decay as it appears to you, clear it and clean it in any way you can.
And by what means can you succeed when the nerves or arteries do not obstruct you, and know that the saws and forceps for cutting these bones are many according to the position of the bones, their thickness, roughness, coarseness, largeness, smallness, hardness, and brittleness. So it is necessary to have a suitable instrument for each type of work.
And know that the work itself will guide you to the type of instrument you need, if you have a long chisel and knowledge of the arts of this craft, because one who has mastered the art of surgery and has seen many cases of diseases. So he will be able to deduce for himself what instruments he needs for each disease, and I will show you in the end of this chapter a few instruments.
Making them examples to follow and measurements to measure against others, if God wills, an image of a saw:.
Image of another saw:.
Image of a small saw:.
Image of a large saw:.
It should be the head of this simple thing in the shape of a straight awl and its pattern in the shape of an esculapia writing, but it is suitable to use on the heads of joints if they are rotten or large and wide, Simple picture next, small:.
Simple picture broad:.
It is made with the upper curve and its blade from iron and handled with a fixed cone-shaped wood, Simple picture with a cavity:.
Simple picture next, delicate:.
Simple picture next, with the end attached:.
Small simple picture resembling a file:.
Image of another small section:.
And its edge is like a rasp that works in many places on the bone, Simple picture suitable for what has been bored through from the bone:.
Its edge is triangular and sharp, made from Indian iron, and all that we have mentioned of the rasps and sections should be made in this way, Simple picture:.
Seventh and eighty-ninth section.
In cutting off limbs and breaking bones.
The limbs may be decayed either from an external or internal cause; if you treat that decay with medicines, and the treatment does not succeed, and I see the decay progressing in the member without being checked by anything.
Therefore, it is necessary to cut off that member up to where the decay has reached, so that the patient may be saved from death or great suffering, which is greater than the loss of the member; and a sign that this should be done is when the member becomes inflamed until you think the fire has consumed it.
He will rot after the blackness until that rot reaches what is below and takes hold in the majority of the body. Therefore, start cutting it off, and likewise if the cause of corruption is due to the invasion of some worms such as the sea scorpion or snake or rat and so forth.
If the corruption or rot is in the tip of the finger, cut off the finger and do not let the corruption spread to the hand. Likewise, if it takes hold in the hand, cut it off from the wrist and do not let the corruption spread until it takes hold in the arm of the shoulder.
And likewise, if it takes hold in the arm, cut off the arm at the shoulder joint itself. If the corruption spreads and reaches as far as the shoulder blade, do not cut the shoulder blade, for that would be fatal to the patient; instead, use another treatment according to the patient's strength.
And likewise, do the same with the leg if corruption takes hold in the toe, cut off the toe at one of the joints. And if it takes hold in the calf of the leg, cut off the leg altogether, but if it spreads to the knee, cut off the thigh at the knee joint.
And if the corruption has reached above the knee, there is no remedy except to leave it and let the patient succumb to death. And the manner of cutting off the limb or spreading it is to tie a ligature at the bottom of the place you want to cut off and another ligature above it.
And have one servant stretch the ligature down, and another servant stretch the upper ligature up. Then remove the flesh between the two ligatures with a broad knife until all the flesh is exposed, then cut or spread it out. And you must put lint all around from every direction.
So that the saw does not touch the correct place and expose the patient to excessive pain and a hot tumor. If bleeding occurs during your work, stop the bleeding quickly or apply some cauterizing substances on it, then return to your treatment until you are finished.
Then bind the wounded member with a bandage that is suitable for it and treat it until it heals, and I will inform you of an example of a presentation on a man in his leg, just like the one I described to you, and it happened to him in his leg as blackness with burning resembling fire.
And that corruption was the first thing to happen in his finger until the man had taken it all, and when the man saw the corruption spreading in the member with great pain and burning, he cut it off at the joint and it healed.
So when a long time had passed, that same corruption appeared in his ring finger and he sought me out, and I treated the abscess with the medicines I carried on my hand after cleansing his body, but the abscess did not recede and continued to spread in the other finger.
Until the abscess took over his hand, and they asked me to cut off his hand, but I refused him, hoping that I could treat the abscess and fearing for him as well when his hand was cut off, because the man's strength was on the verge of collapse; so when I despaired, he left for his country.
And I was informed that he had cut off his hand with all its parts and it healed, and I told this story to be a warning for what happens in cases of this disease and to be an example to be followed.
The Eighth Eighty-Ninth Section.
In the treatment of abscesses and how to inject them with medicines.
If a tumor occurs in some of the soft tissues and it persists for a long time until the tumor gathers material, then bursts or breaks open and all that was inside comes out and the site remains empty like a vessel.
And the skin over it, like a patch, had crumbled and was not extensive in its corruption that it would affect bone or nerve or ligament; from this, it is deserving to be called an abscess and should not be called an ulcer unless its duration prolongs until the corruption affects something of these members.
When that happens, it is called Nsra or Zakama. And its treatment is to cut off all of that skin completely, as it grows and especially if it has become like a rag and you have ensured that it does not stick to the wound due to its rottenness.
If the skin sticks and it has not reached that degree of rottenness, and there is a thick layer of fat under the skin, then treat it with an injection, which is to look at the wound, if it is large, and the pus that comes out smelling bad, inject the Egyptian medicine into it.
Which is a mixture of powder, oil, honey, and ginger, whether gathered together in a vessel or not, cooked over the fire until the medicine thickens and comes to be like the thickness of honey, then take what you need from it, mix it with water and honey, and inject it into the wound, tie up its mouth and leave the medicine there for two hours.
Then take it out by rinsing, and do that for a few days until the wound cleans up and the stench goes away. And if this medicine is not available to you, inject with ash water, which is to take the ash of grapevine or ash of beechwood and pour water on it.
Then clean it and inject with it until you are certain that the wound has been cleaned, if there is no expectation of improvement from the Egyptian medicine or ash water, then inject it with water and honey, which has something of ground ginger mixed in.
Or inject it with honey and wine mixed, because honey cleans and washes, and wine sticks to the wound, especially if the wine has a quality of coagulation and drying. If you do that several times and are certain that the wound's corruption has gone away, then inject what promotes the growth of flesh in it.
Like taking some of the ointment and mixing it with honey, wine, and coagulated sap or injecting it with some medicines and other creams that we have mentioned in the chapter on creams. If the mouth of the wound is narrow and does not accommodate a syringe tube.
Expand it with iron a little or put a thin thread in the Egyptian plaster or the Srigun plaster until it is sufficient. Similarly, if the mouth is also wide, gather its lips with stitching and leave from it as much as the catheter can enter without excess.
And if the mouth from which pus is flowing is raised upwards, divide it in its lowest part so that the pus does not flow downwards, because if the pus accumulates in the wound's cavity, it prevents the flesh from growing there.
If you cannot divide the wound downwards as you wish, then fix the member so that pus flows out from it easily in accordance with what is convenient for you and make sure that not a single drop of pus remains there.
And as for the poultices which are placed on the wound from outside, and how to apply them to it, that is, take one of the poultices similar to what you want, and spread it on a piece of cotton cloth so that the cloth covers the entire wound. Then cut a slightly larger hole than the mouth of the wound with scissors next to it, then spread another poultice on another piece of cloth over the hole and put it on, keeping it away from the mouth of the wound so that pus can exit easily, but do not remove the large cloth until later.
A few days, and as for the one on the mouth of the wound, it is the one that you remove every time so that what has accumulated in it from pus can exit and you can see how much serum flows out, whether it is much or little, or fresh or not.
And also take care of the wound itself, whether the patient feels pain in it or not, and whether there is an abscess or not; if you continue to treat it this way and see that the matter that comes out from the mouth of the wound is slight.
Know that the dressing has stuck or almost stuck. Then remove it on the fourth day or the third day at the latest, and after you have removed the wound, replace the dressing with a different one and reapply the ointment. If pus has emerged from the dressing after a long period of time, do not lose hope in its closure.
Healing is near because some people delay the growth of flesh in their wound, and some are contrary to that. If pus emerges from the dressing after many days but is not yellowed, know that the dressing has not stuck. Then if the dressing delays its closure.
And its duration will be prolonged, so increase the drying of the medicines and let the medicines be in their consistency wet and in their substance dry, like the ointment of mastich, if it has been increased with an addition of galactor. And what is most effective in treating it is to take the ointment of mastich.
And it will be treated with honey and water, and it will be poured on top of it, then mixed with it, and used. And one can do this action if the ointment of mastich is not available, by mixing it with old wine until it becomes frothy and then using it, or taking from the myrrh, patience, and cinnamon, grinding all together and pouring it on honey while it is on fire. Then cover it with a cloth and bind it to the dressing or anoint it with the honey that has been mixed until it thickens, and pour the medications on it, and place the cloth and bind it.
And one can use in that the long lemongrass and the root of the cardamom, and the powder of the saffron, either individually or together, grinding and sifting them, and pouring them on the honey I described and using it. If the dressing's treatment is prolonged and does not heal with this treatment, know that there is corruption in its depths.
The treatment of the nasal bone or any other solid nerves or ligaments has been effective as mentioned earlier.
The 88th Chapter.
In the treatment of clubbed fingers, deformed nails, and removal of excess fingers, as well as suturing together of fingers.
The clubbed flesh is a thick growth that sprouts under the nail of the thumb or other fingers, and sometimes on all fingers; if it persists and its treatment is neglected, it becomes swollen and hot with inflammation.
Or it will decay and become putrid until it eats away at the nail's root, or maybe even the entire nail, or sometimes it reaches the bone to the point that it has a foul odor and the tip of the finger becomes broad and its color is like boils; if you treat it as mentioned in the section and your treatment does not succeed.
You should cut away all the excrescence that grows from the nail with iron, then dress the wound afterwards; for the application of kohl is very beneficial in this case. And if the bone is sound and the nail is also sound.
And if the corner of the nail containing flesh has become inflamed and has begun to eat away at it, you should place a thin needle under the corner of the nail where the flesh is inflamed, lift it up, and cut away that flesh gently.
And you should apply the burning and caustic medicines to what remains of the flesh until it is all gone, then treat it with ointments until it heals. And if the decay has affected the bone, you should cut away that bone and remove it; for it will not heal as long as there is a decaying bone present.
If you see the decay and swelling spreading in the finger, cut it off at one of the joints as mentioned earlier, then treat it until it heals. And if the nail is struck or bruised and pain becomes severe, you should first apply a sedative.
Then cut the nail with a sharp instrument, slanting it from above to below, and be careful not to reach the flesh underneath the nail, for this will cause severe pain to the patient and may lead to excessive bleeding in the area. Then treat the area as calms the pains.
And as for the extra fingers that occur in some people's hands, sometimes they may be all fleshy, sometimes they may contain bone in part of them, and sometimes there may be a nail and there may be growth in some of its root near some joints of the fingers.
Or it may grow near some joints of the fingers, and that which grows near some joints of the fingers does not move, and that which grows at the joint of the finger may possibly move; as for what is fleshy only, cut it off easily by cutting it at its origin with a broad instrument.
And as for what grows at the origin of the joint, its treatment is difficult and one should not cut it off; and as for what grows on the finger near one of the joints, you should first cut away its flesh in a curved manner to reach the bone, then spread out the bone with one of those appropriate instruments.
Then treat it until it heals; and as for the fusion that occurs between some fingers with each other, this often happens and is what a person is born with, and may occur when a wound or burn or something similar occurs, you should cut through that fusion.
Until the fingers return to their natural shape, then place between them a fold or an opening, sutured with red thread, lest it becomes too attached and separated, or make between them a thin lead plate until the wound heals as it should.
And likewise, if there is fusion between some fingers of the hand, cut through that fusion according to what appears and adapts to the shape of the member.
The Ninetieth Chapter.
In cutting the tendons.
The tendons are twisted, tough, and fibrous veins that occur in most parts of the body, but more frequently in the legs, especially in the calf muscles of riders and carriers. It is necessary at first to use a gentle massage on the body several times with strong pressure.
Then, cut off the affected area, and as for treating it with iron, there will be two methods: one is to make an incision and let out the black blood, while the other is to scrape away the sweat and let it all come out. As for cutting, this is done by soaking the leg first in hot water, yes.
Until the thick, foul blood is liquefied, then bind the affected leg from above its ankle to its knee with a bandage, and then cut the sweat in one place or two places or three wide incisions.
Then, take out the black blood with your hand from the bottom of the leg up and from top to bottom until you extract all the blood that seems sufficient or what the patient can tolerate, then bandage it and advise him to avoid foods that bring on the black flux and resume massage and cupping.
When the veins are distended and that harms the patient, but if it is a blister, then treat it in this way: wrap the patient's leg with binding thread if there is much hair on it, then immerse his leg in hot water until it turns red and sweats or gets used to strong exercise.
If the hot water does not reach it until the member is heated, then cut the skin on top of the sweat with a long incision either at the end near the knee or at the bottom near the heel, then open the skin with scissors and scrape away the sweat from all directions until it becomes visible to the touch.
He will appear to be red and swollen when it appears, then after he has healed from the skin, he will also seem like a string. Then, a needle will enter under him until it rises and comes out of the skin, and he will tie it with a thread, smooth and blind, then cut another incision near that incision by the space of three fingers.
Then, remove the skin from over the vein until it appears, then lift him up with a needle as I did and tie him with another thread as I did initially, then make another incision or many incisions if needed.
Then, take him and cut at the end of the incision near the ankle, then pull him out until he comes out from the second incision, then pull him up to the first incision and do that until you pull all of it out, and when all of it has come out, cut it.
If it is not possible to pull and cut, then insert a needle with strong thread that has been doubled and tie him, and pull him and insert the needle under him and hold your hand in every direction until he comes out and preserve him so that he does not break off. If he breaks off, then it will be very difficult for you to cut.
And a bad thing will happen to the patient from him. If you have cut it all, put soft flax on the wound site, soaked in rose water or fat or oil and treat him until he recovers. If the swelling is twisted with folds in its direction.
And if it is not straight as we said, you should cut on it in every direction where the folds are and the places of twisting, then tie it with threads until all of it is tied up, and take care when cutting on it that you do not cut the vein or injure it, for it will be difficult for you to cut and preserve your effort.
Image of the bone saw with which the wound is cut.
Image of the blind needle.
It should not have a handle like all the other needles and its sharp end should not be so as to cut the skin; it should be thick and smooth, otherwise if it is thin, it will cut the skin with its tip, but it should have a thickness that we mentioned.
The Ninetieth Chapter.
In the wound of the ordinary skin.
This wound is formed in the legs in hot countries like Hijaz and Arab lands, and also in areas with little fertile soil in hot regions; it may also occur in other parts of the body besides the legs and is caused by putridity that occurs under the skin.
Just as it occurs inside living bodies, such as abscesses and boils, and also the pustules that form between the skin and flesh; the sign of the beginning of this wound is that a strong inflammation occurs in the leg, then the place swells up and the wound begins to emerge from that swollen area.
As if it were the beginning of a plant or animal; when a part of it appears, it is necessary to wrap it in a small piece of lead which should be worth one to two dirhams and tie it tightly and leave the lead hanging from the leg.
And every time something emerges from it, wrap it in lead and tie it tightly; if it is too long, cut off some of it and wrap the rest. Do not cut it from its beginning before everything has emerged, because if you cut it, it will shrink and enter into the flesh, causing a boil, abscess, and bad ulcer in that place.
Therefore, it should be carefully extracted and pulled out little by little until everything has emerged from its end without leaving anything inside the body; sometimes in some people this wound may extend to a length of five cubits and ten fingers.
It has reached me that a man had twenty fingers, and if it is cut off from him during the treatment of his wound, then insert a piece of wood into the stump and extend it with the body until everything inside it is removed. Then try to dress the place with medicine for some days.
Then treat the wound with a remedy for ulcers. This excrescence may have many roots, especially if it appears in the joints of the leg or in the leg itself, and openings will form many times, and from each opening a branch will emerge, which you should treat as we described earlier and mentioned before.
The Ninetieth Chapter.
In the incision on the vermiform appendix that develops under the caecum and is called the bovine affliction.
This disease is called the bovine affliction in some of our countries, because it is often exposed to cattle, and it is a small worm that develops between the skin and flesh and spreads throughout the body, ascending and descending.
It becomes noticeable when it moves from one limb to another until it bursts, and where it bursts on the skin, a wound forms and it emerges, forming an abscess of some of the humors as it exposes itself to worms, larvae, and putrid matter in the abdomen.
And it is expected that if it moves in the body and rises to the head, reaching as far as the eye, it may open there and emerge, causing the eye to be destroyed, which often happens. If you want to treat it and remove it, then it should be done when it moves and appears on the skin.
It is necessary to bind what is above and below it with a strong bandage, then cut into it and remove it. If it sinks into the flesh and you cannot find it, then carry a hot cinder to the place until it burns it, and the greatest fear is that it will destroy the eye as we said.
If you see it has become in the head near the eye, then tighten under it on the forehead tightly and then cut into her and take her out, and it is necessary for the patient to strive to purify his body with gentle medicines for foul and bad humors and beware of nourishing foods that contribute to corruption.
The Third Ninetieth Chapter.
In the incision for the disease known as the Naffer.
This disease which is known in our land as the Naffer is a pain that appears in some organs, then it transfers from organ to organ and I have seen it as I will describe to you.
I was summoned to a sick woman in some villages, so I uncovered her arm and showed me a slight swelling in the arm vein. When I stayed for an hour, I saw that swelling growing with the pulse like a worm ascending to her shoulder as quickly as can be, like mercury.
If it moves from place to place, the pain will cease from that location and settle in the shoulder. Then I waited for an hour and it spread throughout her body until it reached the other arm. Then she told me it was moving all over her body as I had seen.
I was amazed at the speed of its movement from organ to organ and I had never before seen this disease with my own eyes in this way except that I had seen a group of people who found the pain moving from organ to organ, but I did not see it like I saw it in this woman.
And I did not attribute that except that the woman was a Bedouin, her body rough and her veins exposed, so from here it became apparent to the sense of that moving heat and it was necessary for it not to appear in this way among people of luxury and bodies with hidden veins.
So if you want to treat him and the patient feels the pain, then as it appears to you in the way we mentioned, tighten above and below with a bandage and cut into him until that congested heat emerges and the place is cleared.
If you do not see it with your own eye, treat it by removing the bodily fluid and what expels wind and fans it out like the ointment of the pustule and the ointment of the abscess and similar medicines.
The 94th chapter.
In the removal of arrows.
The arrows may vary according to their types and the parts of the body where they are lodged, and as for their variation in terms of their types, there are large ones and small ones, some with a flat glass tip and others with a rounded one, and some that have three angles and four.
And there are those that have tongues and those that have fragments, and as for those that vary according to the organs where they are lodged, they may be two kinds: either the organs themselves are major ones with a flat surface like the brain, heart, liver, lungs, kidneys, intestine, bladder, and so on. So when an arrow falls into one of these organs and the signs of death that I have described to you appear, then it is necessary for you to avoid removing that arrow from there, because in most cases death will befall its owner. And when these bad signs do not appear to you and the arrow is not lodged deep in the organ, then remove it and treat the wound. And if an arrow strikes the brain, and penetrates the skull and wounds the peritoneum that is on the brain, then it will expose its owner to a severe headache, nausea, and dizziness.
And when these bad signs do not appear to you and the arrow is not lodged deep in the organ, then remove it and treat the wound. And if an arrow strikes the brain, and penetrates the skull and wounds the peritoneum that is on the brain, then it will expose its owner to a severe headache, nausea, and dizziness. And redness in the eyes, and redness of the tongue, and trembling, and a state of confusion, and vomiting once or twice, and sometimes blood may come out from the nostrils or ears, and sometimes speech may be interrupted and the sound may disappear, and liquid may flow from the wound like white pus, and bleeding may occur.
So if these signs appear to you, then stop treating the patient and do not remove the arrow unless it has already been removed, and as for the signs of the arrow if it hits the heart and is close to the left breast and feels like it has lodged in something hard rather than something soft.
Perhaps the arrow has a movement similar to the pulse and flows from the wound black blood, followed by numbness of the limbs, cold sweat, and pallor. Know that death is imminent, and the sign of the arrow if it pierces the lung is the exit of foamy blood from the wound.
The vessels that lie next to the neck become swollen and the patient's complexion changes, he breathes rapidly and requests cold air. If the arrow reaches the diaphragm which is in the chest, it will be near the small ribs and breathing will be great with severe pain.
He trembles and all the members of the back move, and if the arrow reaches the liver it will be followed by severe pain and black blood like the liver in its color exits from the wound. And if the arrow reaches the stomach then perhaps something other than digested food exits from the wound.
His case is apparent, and if the arrow reaches the abdomen and becomes lodged there, something from feces, urine, or stool may exit from the wound or discharge, so no hope exists for his treatment or removal of the arrow. If the arrow reaches the bladder and the urine exits.
And something emerges from there to the outside and the pain becomes severe on the patient, know that he is doomed. As for other organs such as the face, eye, throat, shoulder, arm, back, thigh, leg and similar organs, they will succumb to the most dire consequences.
Not until the arrow encounters a vessel or an artery and is not poisonous, I inform you of some of what I have seen regarding these arrows in order for you to deduce from that how to treat them. This was the case with an arrow that had pierced a man's eye socket at the root of the nose.
I extracted it from him from the other side under the rim of the ear and he recovered, without any harm occurring to his eye. I also extracted another arrow that had pierced a Jew who had been struck in the corner of his eye beneath the lower eyelid; the arrow was lodged and I only removed its small tip which adheres to the bone.
It was a big arrow from the quiver of the skilled surgeon, made of smooth iron and not having any grooves. It was given to the Jew, and nothing bad happened to his eye. And another arrow was taken out from the neck of a Christian, and it was an Arab arrow.
And it was for the one who had grooves and I cut open his abdomen between the two folds. He had a wound in his neck, so I probed with it until I extracted it, and the Christian recovered, and then I took out another arrow from a man who had been struck in his stomach and we estimated that he would die from it.
So when a period of thirty days or so had passed and nothing had changed for him, I cut open the arrow and examined it, and extracted it, and he recovered without experiencing anything bad. And I saw a man struck by an arrow in his back, and the wound became inflamed on him.
So after seven years had passed, the arrow came out in its original place. And I saw a woman who had been struck by an arrow in her stomach, and the wound became inflamed and the arrow remained without anything changing in her condition nor causing her any harm in anything of her natural actions.
And I saw another man struck by an arrow in his face, and the wound became inflamed and he was not experiencing much pain. And many were like this, and I extracted an arrow from a man who was one of the Sultan's guards who had been struck in the middle of his nose, leaning slightly to the right side.
And the arrow was extracted entirely. I was called to treat him after the arrow had been struck, three days later. And I found the wound of the arrow to be very narrow, so I probed it with a fine probe and did not feel anything, but he was feeling numbness and pain beneath his ear on the right side from the incision.
I thought that numbness was from the side of the arrow, so I applied a dressing with adhesive strength to the area and waited anxiously for the swelling to appear and the sign of the arrow to show. Then I cut open his skin, but nothing happened in the area indicating that the arrow had reached the location.
I treated the wound with a poultice for many days, and nothing happened. Then I closed the incision and left it alone until the patient felt a pain inside his nose one day, so I was informed. I then applied to the wound the harsh, severe medicine for many days.
Until it opened and I probed it, and I felt the thin tip of the arrow that stuck in the wood. Then I increased the opening of the wound with that harsh medicine until we saw the tip of the arrow clearly, and it remained with me for a period of time, approximately four months.
Then when the wound had expanded and I was able to insert forceps into it, I drew it out and moved it. It did not respond to being removed, so I continued to manipulate it with various instruments until one day I grasped it firmly, as will be shown in the final part of this book.
And the doctors were saying that his nasal cartilage would not heal. I treated it and the wound closed, and the patient recovered completely without being bothered by anything at all, and I am telling you how I removed some arrows in order to make a comparison and an example of what I did not mention.
Because the details of this craft and its intricacies cannot be comprehended through description or contained in a book, but rather the skilled craftsman measures little by much, and what is present implies what is absent, and derives a new action and instrument when faced with unusual situations.
If I were to descend from this craft, I would say that the arrows come out of the parts in which they are lodged in two types: either by being drawn out from the location where it entered or else from the opposite side, and those that come out where it entered.
Either the arrow is exposed in a fleshy part and is drawn out, or else it does not respond to being removed at its current time. If it does not respond, you should leave it alone for some days until the surrounding flesh becomes softer and easier to draw out, just as when it has lodged in bone.
It will not be necessary to remove it, so leave it also for some days and continue to pull and move it every day, as it will come out. If it does not come out after some days, then you must drill around the arrow in the same bone from all sides with a thin awl until it widens for the arrow, then pull it and remove it.
If the arrowhead is in the skull and has entered one of the hollows of the brain, and some of those symptoms I mentioned to you have appeared from the wound, then stop pulling the arrow and leave it until its condition stabilizes after a few days.
Then occupy yourself with pulling out the arrow, and if it is deeply stuck and does not come out for you to pull, then use a file around the arrow as I described to you, then treat the place until it clears up, and if the arrow has lodged in some part of the body. And if sensation is absent, probe it with a probe and if you find it, pull it out with some instruments that are suitable for pulling it out. If you cannot do so due to the narrowness of the wound or the distance of the arrow in the cavity and there is no bone, nerve, or artery involved.
Then cut around it until the wound widens and you are able to pull out the arrow, if it has ears, grasp them and free the flesh surrounding them from all sides with every means possible for you to do so, and occupy yourself even if you cannot free the flesh in breaking the ears and opening them until you are freed.
And if you try to pull out the arrow in any place, use a spiral motion with your fingers towards all sides until it is freed and apply great care lest the arrow break and it becomes difficult for you to pull it out. If you cannot do so within your time.
Leave it for some days until the flesh around it becomes putrid, then try again. For if bleeding occurs, use what we mentioned earlier in its treatment, and be cautious not to cut a vein or nerve or tendon, and use guile.
You can release the arrow from every angle, and when doing so, be gentle, cautious, and steady as I described to you. And when pulling out the arrow, it is necessary that you cause the flesh to return to its original shape as it was before the arrow struck, for this is more effective.
If you cannot do that, use what is possible. And if the arrow comes out from the opposite side, it will either have protruded something outside or you will find the tip of the arrow feeling near the surface of the skin and see it emerging.
Cut into it, but make the incision as deep as your forceps can reach. Then pull it out, for it will be easy to do so. If it gets stuck in a bone, bend your fingers until the arrow affects the bone and widens its own path, then pull it out.
And if not, leave it for some days and try again until it comes out. If the arrow shaft is still in there, push it forward with it. If the arrow shaft has fallen and you want to use pressure, insert the prepared instrument into its groove in the arrow shaft's stump and then push it forward with that.
If the arrow is hollow, push it forward with an instrument that fits into that groove. The arrow will come out easily because of this. If the arrow is poisoned, you should remove all the flesh where the poison has spread if possible, then treat it as needed.
If the arrow is lodged in the chest, belly, bladder, or groin and is close to what can be reached by probing and you can make an incision on it, make an incision and be cautious not to cut a vein or nerve, and pull it out.
Then draw the wound if it needs sewing, then treat it until it heals, the image of the calipers which attract arrows:.
Its edges are shaped like the bird's beak, having been made to resemble a caliper if it grasps the arrow or something it does not leave, and types can be made from it, great and small and medium-sized, all according to the size of the arrow and its width and narrowness.
Image of the fired cannon:.
Image of the calm cannon:.
This is a calm edge, like a groove, to make it easy to enter into the fired cannon and push it.
The fifth and ninetieth chapter.
In bloodletting.
The veins which are usually bled in the body, thirty of them, sixteen of them being in the head, the two jugulars behind the ears known as the Hassisin and the two carotids visible on the forehead known as the Nazarin.
And the vein that stands in the middle of the forehead, and the one that is at the tip of the nose, and the two arteries that are in the neck, and the two veins that are in the upper lip of the mouth and the two that are in the lower lip, and these veins known as the Jiharik, and the veins that are under the tongue.
And as for the veins that are bled in the arm and hand, they are five veins, one of them being the Qifal which is on the lateral side and is known to the masses as the Vein of the Head or the Median Vein, which is composed of the Basilic branch and the Qifal branch, and is known to the masses as the Vein of the Body.
And the Basilic which is situated on the medial side and is also known as the Elbow Vein, and is known to the masses as the Vein of the Abdomen or the Arm Cord, which is situated at the bend and is stuck in it, and appears clearly above the flexure.
He is the vein which lies between the hamstring and the peroneal, having two branches. In the thigh and leg, there are three veins, one of which lies under the patella from the outer side, the second saphenous and its place at the ankle from the inner side, and the vein of the calf and its place at the lateral malleolus from the outer side.
And in the other leg, there are three veins like it. As for the two veins that lie behind the ears, they are beneficial to remove chronic catarrh, shyness and fever sores, as well as chronic and serious wounds; and how to remove them as I have described.
And it is that you shave the head of the patient and smooth out his nape in the place where the veins are, with a rough cloth, well-smoothed, then compress the patient's neck with a cloth until the veins appear and their places become visible behind the ears in the two low spots on the head; then search for them with your finger and where you feel their pulse under your finger, perform the operation.
Then take a thin lancet, which is known as the "nashal", and insert it under the vein in the skin until it reaches the bone, then lift your hand with the vein and skin upwards and cut the vein along with the skin, making a disconnected cut of about two thumb-widths.
Or send out the required amount of blood, then tie them off and leave them until they heal. And as for the two veins that lie behind the ears, it is beneficial to remove them in case of chronic shyness, severe headache, and constant pain; and also for sharp pains shooting directly to the eyes.
And how to remove them as I have described for you: the patient should compress his neck with a cloth until the veins appear clearly and their pulse becomes visible under your finger; then perform the operation with the medicine. Then lift the skin from above the vein up towards the head with your thumb.
The surgeon inserts the needle from below and raises the vein to above and cuts it as he did in the other veins and sends out the blood according to your need then loosens the patient's constriction and places his finger on the vein at that moment.
Then you put a ligature and a bandage on it and pull from above tightly and strongly and leave it until he recovers, as I mentioned its cutting and dressing in the beginning of the book. As for the bleeding of the forehead vein, its benefit comes after bleeding the temporal vein to treat chronic facial problems such as eczema, wounds, and sanguineous redness.
And how to stop it as I described to you, the patient's neck will be constricted with a compress until the vein appears then take the instrument called the "fass" and this is its form:.
You put the rounded end of the "fass" on the same vein and strike from above with a comb or something else towards it, and let the blood flow to the measure you want then loosen the patient's constriction and tie him until he recovers.
And it may be opened with a broad needle except that the needle should not be sharp-edged like all needles but rather broad-edged slightly and open it according to the deviation because the bone is nearby so perhaps the needle might break if it was thin.
And as for the veins that are in the corners of the eyes, their benefit is to treat the eye from freckles, redness, and styes, and facial diseases. As for how to stop them, it is by constricting the patient's neck with a compress then opening them while you stand on his head and the bleeding will be on deviation slightly to length with a small broad needle slightly.
If the site is not fatty, then it should be done so that if the needle is thin it may break, then send out the blood according to your need and put a ligature on them and tie them for one night then loosen them. As for bleeding the nasal vein, its benefit is in treating acute fever.
The severe headache, one of the diseases of the face like red congestion that appears in the nose, especially if it is chronic, and how to stop it: by applying pressure to the patient's neck then grasping his nose with your left hand and taking a long thin forceps.
And insert the forceps into the middle of the nostril itself, between holding the nose straight because the moisture does not appear to be felt there then the blood appears from his hourglass, and it is necessary that your hand with the forceps remains a little and sends out as much blood as you need then ties it at night because it will soon dry.
And as for the boils, their removal is beneficial in stopping the shortness of breath and the beginning of leprosy and black diseases that appear on the surface of the skin like black spots and scabies and bad ulcers and eczema, and how to remove them: by applying a bandage under them on the patient's neck and standing the surgeon on the patient's head.
And the patient sits on a chair then the moisture is applied to the length and width, slightly, then bleeding occurs of moderate quantity or as much as is needed, then do the same with the other moisture and untie the bandage.
And the two moles are pulled with a medium pull so that the patient does not choke and leave it overnight as the wound heals, and as for the moles of the jawbone, their removal is beneficial after removing the boils because they benefit from calottes in the mouth and rotten gum and bad ulcers and lip fissures and bad ulcers.
The ones that are in the nose and around it, and how to remove them: by having the patient sit before you and tugging his neck with a turban then turning his lips and looking at the two moles which you see one on the right side of the lip and the other on the left side and determining from their color.
Thus also, the vessels around them are thin and black, so cut them off in pieces, disconnected. If it is difficult for you to know what they are, then aim at cutting the larger one and expose it, and do the same with the two veins below.
And as for the veins below the tongue, it is beneficial to tie them off after tying off the gullet, for the ulcers that occur in the throat due to leprosy and mouth diseases. And how to tie them off: sit the patient before you facing the sun, raise his tongue and look under the tongue from one side, a vein, and on the other side, a vein, and their color is black.
And tie them off and keep watching, do not look closely at cutting them off, for under them are veins that may bleed from those veins. As for the three veins that are tied off in the arm, it is the usual practice to tie them off in people altogether, and tying them off will be on two faces.
Either a wide rosemary or olive stick thrust into the flesh, or else a thin sycamore and it is this shape [and here is its picture], picture of the wide rosemary.
It is wide as you see to fit opening the thick and prominent veins that are full of thick and dark blood, and this is the picture of the olive stick.
And this stick is narrower and thinner at the end to fit tying off thin veins that contain pale blood.
This sycamore which is suitable for cutting and will be of various widths and thinnesses according to the size and narrowness of the veins, and it can serve as a guide for others and is well-known among craftsmen.
And as for the baselic which is one of these three veins, it is beneficial to tie it off because it draws blood from ulcers that occur under the throat and neck, after the chest and abdomen. And when tying it off, the person who ties it off should beware and be careful not to cut any of those veins underneath, for if he makes a mistake and increases the incision of the stick, he will cut that vein.
Blood is spilled, therefore it should not be stopped by compressing the wound with a ligature, but rather by dividing it with a scissors. If the blood vessels do not become clearly visible, it is necessary to avoid them and adjust to another part or take some of their share.
Or bind the place with a bandage, for it is clear and divide it with scissors as we have said. If you want to stop bleeding at that exact spot, you should first examine the location until you identify the pulse, then learn to apply pressure on it with a compress.
Then bind the arm and divide the vein with a scissors in a slanted manner as we have said, and make sure to strike at a distance from the location of the artery. And when you tighten the bandage and see puffing up in the place where you learned to apply pressure with a compress, then that puffing is the expansion of the artery, so avoid it.
If you see the blood at the site of the incision clotting like a child's blood, and it is thin and red, then know that it is from the artery. Therefore, hurry and apply your finger to it for a long time, then remove it. If the blood stops flowing greatly, then tighten the bandage.
Leave it, and warn the patient not to neglect it and be on their guard; let them be at rest for a few days until they recover. If the blood does not stop flowing and you are overcome by fatigue and do not receive medical attention in time, then ligate the artery if it appears before you; for its ends will shrink and the bleeding will stop.
Or take a leafy stem, cut it, and take one half of it, and bind it tightly to the location of the vein with a bandage and splints until the next day. If the bleeding stops, or else apply what has been mentioned earlier about applying tourniquets to stop the bleeding; and cutting off blood flow is not difficult in most cases.
For a small wound and the bandage in the arm, inform him. As for the white vein, it is beneficial to stop it from drawing blood from above the head and below the body because it is composed of a branch of the basilic and a branch of the cephalic as we said.
It is necessary for the suture to be above his nape, because if it is below, it will be hard to feel and may not heal at all; this cord is often visible to the touch.
If it is fine in some people and cannot be seen, you should make your suture a cut with the needle and avoid the cord as much as possible; if there are two cords between them, then divide the cord lengthwise. As for the cephalic vein, it is beneficial to stop it because it draws blood from the head.
It is beneficial for eye diseases and you should stop it in this vein, especially if you want to stop it; to stop it with two stitches of the olive or broad cinnamon suture because it is safer than all the veins since there is no artery or nerve underneath.
Unless it is necessary for you to avoid the head of the muscle with the suture and request a relaxed position; it does not harm him if he is not hit by the first stitch, but rather repeat the suture until it is completed except that it may become inflamed in some people if it is not sutured in the first place.
But that swelling does not harm him; as for the manner of suturing and its complications, what should be done to correct it, first you must learn that suturing is either used only to preserve health.
Or else it is used for diseases, and that which is used to preserve health, maintain it, and prevent the occurrence of diseases; then suturing should be in one of the three veins in the armpit, namely the cephalic, basilic, or median cubital vein, and the suturing should take place at the beginning of spring if signs of fullness appear.
Lymphatic drainage should take place on Sunday or Tuesday, after the sun has gone down for three hours. As for the lymphatic drainage used in treating illnesses, it does not have a limited time but whenever necessity and urgency require it by day or night.
In every hour and in every season, and it is not proper to lance the young ones until they reach fourteen years of age nor to lance the elderly who have surpassed sixty years. If anyone decides on lancing for any reason whatsoever.
It is necessary to purify the pus with a linen thread before lancing, if there is much sediment trapped in it, lest it be drawn into the veins during the lancing and cause harm to the main organs. One should not lance the abstinent, drunkards, or intoxicated individuals until that state has passed from them.
And one should also beware of lancing after a heavy meal, or during defecation, urination, copulation, excessive physical or mental exertion, sleeplessness, fasting, and all bodily or emotional states that weaken the strength. Then look at softening the swellings before that, if the blood is thick.
With food, drink, and medication if possible, then he should enter the bath unless hindered by something or some physical exercise to thin the blood and make his lancing in the morning as we said, and strive to clear his mind that day of all bad psychological afflictions.
Like worries, anger, fear, and all bodily afflictions such as exhaustion, stiffness, excessive copulation, and the like, and prepare his surroundings with what people are accustomed to using from perfumes, aromatic substances, music, and the like, each person according to their ability.
Then the lancer sits on a raised seat, higher than that of the one to be lanced, then he extends his arm and the lancer takes hold of it with his hand twice or thrice, then tightens the bandage together with the assistant twice or thrice, the tightening being moderate.
Because the tightening is not moderate, it is either excessive in tightening and prevents the flow of blood or moderate to relaxation, and also prevents the flow of blood. Then after the tightening, it is necessary that the surgeon wraps his hands altogether with all four fingers together.
Until the veins swell and become prominent to be felt, then he smoothes the excised skin with a gentle touch of old oil especially. Then he places his pinky finger from his left hand on the same vein under the site he wants to divide so that it does not escape the blow. Because some veins are like a thread that is caught when the skin is incised, and there are those that are filled with air. When the surgeon puts his hand on them, they go down under his hand and deceive the exciser, and the vein does not open up, and if it does open up, then it only opens up slightly.
Therefore, the exciser should be careful and cautious in these matters, then he descends the surgeon. If the vein opens up from there, and it does not, he will do it again once more under that site a little or above it by twisting if the site does not swell.
If the swelling or the abscess is painful, leave it for a day or two and do not tighten the bandage. It may bring forth a warm pustule and will not allow entry to the bath, then he can resume the excision if desired. If the surgeon's prick was small and the opening was slight and there was little bleeding.
And feared that the blood you wanted would not come out, so the surgeon goes back to the same hole and stretches in accordance with the straightness and increases the opening a little and does that by twisting before the site becomes swollen, because many people's sites become swollen when the small opening is made.
If you see that it has become swollen, do not touch it at all, because it will not benefit you and put something from old oil on it, for it facilitates the flow of blood and is better in this place than the oil itself and other ointments.
Use olive oil to treat all types of bleeding from veins when there is difficulty stopping the flow of blood. One can also use treyak al-Faroq and shikhzanaya if one applies one of them to the affected area, for then the blood will clot and congeal if it is thick.
If a swelling occurs at the site of the incision and it is large, this often happens especially to those who have not been bled before or if the vein was opened small. First, apply a cloth soaked in warm water and salt to the swelling and tie it for an hour, then it will subside.
It is necessary to do this after the blood has left the vein itself in full or from another vein. If something of blackness or greenish color remains at the site after a few days, it does not harm; if you wish, just be patient and apply some vinegar dissolved in water.
Or something from opium and similar things, and often a swelling and edema occur when bleeding the saphenous vein. Place your hand on it if you find it to be tender when you press on it; if that is bad edema then beware of applying anything we mentioned earlier.
Perhaps the artery will bleed from it, but tie it off tightly so that the place becomes firm then treat it with the rest of the treatment until it is cured. It is necessary to let out as much blood as possible for each person according to his strength and what appears to be the dominant color of the blood.
If the blood is black, let it come out until it turns red. Similarly, if it appears thick, let it come out until it clots. Also, if it is purplish, let it come out until its sharpness passes. It is necessary for someone who is full and strong to have the blood let out all at once.
To expand the incision of the vein and for the lance to be broad; and if one is weak, then do the opposite. It is necessary to let it out in portions and for the puncture to be narrow. The best thing to use when bleeding a vein is something that makes it flexible, movable, and split, not bored through.
This incision is safe from bleeding and nerve cutting, and it is more so when performed on the surface and length. Whoever habituates himself to this incision during surgery should give him something to eat beforehand, mixed with rosewater or balsam.
If it is inflamed and blood is let out three or four times, and if his temperament is irritable, he should take something to eat beforehand, mixed with the drink of dates or with honey mixed with vinegar, or with the pleasant rosewater.
If the patient faints during surgery and it is due to excessive bleeding, he should be given water mixed with rosewater and a little honey, and he should be fumigated with camphor and wrapped in a cloth, and he should be treated as we mentioned earlier in the section on fainting.
The one who is due to vomiting, and as for him who wants to relieve his arm and stop the bleeding again, he should be given blood transfusions in small amounts, according to his strength, over a period of several days.
And as for him who wants to relieve his arm and stop the bleeding again, and his body is strong, he should do so after six or seven hours from the first incision. And as for him who wants to attract the blood from his body towards the opposite side which was affected, he should do so on the second or third day.
And as for him who has a lot of blood in his body that is hot and inflamed, and he develops fever, it is necessary to let the blood out all at once, and remove a great amount, and widen the incision until the bleeding subsides after all the surgical conditions have been met. And you should place your hand on his pulse when the bleeding subsides, so that death does not occur instead of fainting. This often happens if the surgeon is unaware and careless, and it is not necessary if you want to relieve his arm and stop the bleeding again.
And the mouth of the artery becomes closed and it is difficult for blood to exit. So it should be pressed upon with great force or twisted with strength, for that will cause a severe blockage. Either leave it alone until it breaks apart again, or take away with the forceps what has clotted in the mouth of the artery.
Or place something salty on it, such as that which has dissolved in water, or a piece of aperient variegated or shakhzanaya, and press it gently until the blood comes out. If the artery has become inflamed, leave it alone.
And do not touch it until the swelling subsides. If necessity requires releasing the blood again, then either release it above that spot or in the other arm or in another artery.
And as for tying off the arm vein, it is tied off in place of the akeel and basilic if they are not found or are hidden because it is composed of them. The way to tie it off is that the operator will put their hand into hot water until the tendons become red and the artery becomes clearly visible, then tie above it with a bandage with moderate tension.
Then tie the artery on a slight curve, neither too wide nor too long, and make the opening wide enough. Tie off to it above the wrist joint slightly. If blood does not come out, put your hand back in the hot water container and let the blood flow into the water.
Until you reach your need. If it is summer, you may not need to put your hand back in the hot water again. But during winter, it is best for the blood to flow into the hot water as much as possible. And tying off this artery is safer than all arteries. Because there is no artery or nerve beneath it. And as for tying off the subclavian vein from the right hand, it is beneficial in treating liver disease. The way to tie it off is that you should bind the wrist with a bandage or your own hand after putting it into hot water until the vein becomes swollen.
Because there is no artery or nerve beneath it. And as for tying off the subclavian vein from the right hand, it is beneficial in treating liver disease. The way to tie it off is that you should bind the wrist with a bandage or your own hand after putting it into hot water until the vein becomes swollen. It is demonstrated to him thoroughly, then dissected a little, and if not removed at all, that will not harm it. He should be careful not to insert his hand into the incision, as beneath it lies the nerve of the fingers and the position is exposed from the flesh, then return the hand to hot water.
Let it flow with blood, for if you do not wash it in hot water, the blood will congeal in the wound and cease to flow. When you have removed as much blood as needed, place a linen cloth soaked in salt on the wound so that it does not quickly clot.
And similarly, you should do the same for each narrow vein. As for the benefits, you can also remove it from the left hand, as it is beneficial for the liver and also do the same with its removal as you did in the second one, whether it is so or not. And as for the removal of the saphenous vein, it is beneficial for diseases that are below the body, such as diseases of the pelvic area.
And chronic diseases such as menstruation, kidney ailments, and ulcers of the thighs and legs, and similarly other diseases. And how to remove it: his foot should enter into hot water and a sponge be placed on it until the veins appear, then pull it up above the ankle joint by the company and the vein is in its position at the heel visible towards the Achilles tendon.
And many branches branch off from it on the face of the leg. Remove it at its widest branch or at the ankle when all its branches are gathered, for this is better and safer. If you remove it on the face of the leg, be careful not to touch the nerves that are beneath it on the face of the leg.
Make the incision for him as if you want to remove it, and the surgeon should be steady. If the blood flow is difficult, let his foot be in hot water and leave the blood to flow until it subsides, if the surgeon mistakes the vein on the first attempt.
Let the surgeon lift the flesh up slightly, for if the position is safe and he has avoided the nerve as we have said, there will be no harm. He should do the same with the sciatic nerve in the other leg, whether it is man or woman. As for the pudendal artery, its place is as we have said, at the back of the thigh on the fleshy side.
The benefit of cutting through the gluteal muscles is that if a sore or boil appears before the hot blood, and how to cut through it, the patient should enter the bathwater, hasten and pull their leg from the back of the hip up to the ankle with four fingers wrapped in a long thin cloth.
If it appears, then cut through it in any case. Either make a slight incision and that is the best, or cut it off with an instrument or slash it open. If its position is safe, which is usually the case for most people, and if you do not find it.
And if it does not appear at all, then cut through some of its branches, which are those that appear on the back of the foot near the heel and anklebone, and take care to avoid the nerves and send away as much blood as you want.
Then loosen the ligature and place it on top of the incision, and tighten the position, for it will soon heal.
The sixth section ninety.
In bloodletting and how to use it.
The lancets can be made of horns, wood, copper, and glass. The bloodletting can be done in two ways: one is with a ligature to remove the blood, and the other is without a ligature.
And this bloodletting which is without a ligature is also in two ways.
Names of bones: the occipital bones, which are two plates at the back of the neck from both sides, and the hyoid bone, which is located beneath the lower jawbone in the mouth, and the clavicles, and the sacrum on the seat of the spine, and the tibiae, and the calcanei.
The cupping is that which draws blood from the superficial veins embedded in the flesh. Therefore, it does not cause a drop in strength like a phlebotomy nor should cupping be used with fire or without fire in any of the diseases that are due to excess until the body has exhausted itself.
If there is a need for cupping due to disease or habit, we have used it at any time, in the beginning of the month and its end and middle and whenever was needed.
And it is as if some people when their blood becomes excessive and needs to be removed through cupping, they find heaviness in their head and dizziness. Some of them find swelling and redness on their face, head, and neck. Some of them find black spots on their face, groin, and thighs. And some of them experience dimness and clouding in their eyes. And some of them develop a rash at the site of their cupping.
And some of them laugh excessively. Some of them find the taste of blood in their mouth and their gums tremble, and they spit out blood. Some of them sleep a lot. And some of them see in their sleep blood, redness, killing, wounds, and things similar to that. Whenever we see something like this.
And especially if it occurs in the middle of the month, we have ordered cupping after two or three hours pass from daytime. As for the benefit of cupping on the neck, it is beneficial for a heavy head and water that ascends to the eyes.
But it is necessary that this occurs after the body has exhausted itself. This cupping may be an alternative to phlebotomy on the neck, and one should beware of using it for someone whose blood is cold or has a congestion, because it can cause him great harm.
Therefore it is not permissible for the elderly and those with cold diseases to use it, nor those who have habituated themselves to it and forgetfulness has been generated upon them.
Therefore it is necessary for the cupper to lower his hand slightly into the groin in fear of forgetfulness, and as for the cupping of the patient, it is a substitute for the purging of the black bile and purging of the saphenous vein.
Therefore it is effective for asthma, constriction of the breath, and spasmodic breathing, and coughing and distension. And it is necessary to raise the cupping of the patient slightly because if it is done downwards, it will cause weakness in the heart and stomach.
And as for the cupping of the temples, it is effective for headaches that occur in the head and temples, and for boils, abscesses, and swelling. And it is a substitute for purging the saphenous vein. It is necessary to instruct the cupper not to deepen his hand in the groove lest he cut a vessel and bleeding occurs.
And as for cupping under the jaw, it is effective for abscesses in the mouth and decay of the gums and similar diseases that occur in the mouth. And it can take the place of purging the jugular vein which is in the cheeks. And as for cupping the armpits, it is effective for hiccups that occur from distension and heat.
And as for cupping the sides of the abdomen, it is effective in that which purges the three saphenous veins, the jugular and the femoral, because it draws blood from all those saphenous veins that are in the flesh and draws those saphenous veins from thicker veins until it reaches the three thick veins.
It is necessary to instruct the cupper not to be deep in the groove because the place is narrow from the flesh and under it are nerves and vessels. And as for a single cup that is applied to the sciatic, it is effective against hemorrhoids and wounds of the lower part.
It is necessary for the surgeon to order the dressing to be large and made of copper because the place requires great strength. Perhaps the glass dressing has broken and it should be fixed frequently. As for the dressings of the legs, they will be reduced in size by a clear amount.
Because it absorbs blood from the entire body and benefits from chronic pains in the kidneys, womb, and bladder, and regulates menstruation and benefits from boils and pimples. It serves as a substitute for cupping with scarification and leeching, except that it exhausts the body greatly and causes darkness in most people, and the dressings of the perineum have an advantage close to that of leg dressings.
The method of applying the dressings is to put the dressing on first empty and with a moderate suction, without prolonging its application, but rather placing it quickly and removing it quickly to allow the pus to flow into the place evenly and steadily, repeating this process until you see the place red and open.
When the redness of blood appears, then fix and repeat the suction gradually gradually, and then look at the condition of the bodies, so if anyone among people has thin flesh with porous pores, it is necessary to fix it by itself without others, lest the place becomes spoiled.
The surgeon should order the bandage to be widened slightly and deepened, and adjust the suction with gentleness and slight movement. If the blood is thick, it is necessary for him to repeat the application twice, whereupon in the first instance he will open a path for the flow of thin blood and its liquidation, and in the second instance, he will make an effort to remove the thick blood.
If the blood is very turbid, he will repeat the application a third time to achieve the goal. In general, if we want to remove little blood, we are satisfied with one bandage, but if we want to remove much blood, we will apply more bandages, and if we find that the blood is thick.
It is necessary to make a deep incision and the normal depth in the skin only, what should be used from the medicines when placing the splints and waters and what to beware of the patient, but he who has thick, hard, and tough skin with narrow pores.
It is necessary to grease the places of the splints with open, smooth, and dissolving medicines; but if it is in the time of summer, then like greasing with rosewater or jasmine oil or sweet almond oil or pumpkin seed oil.
And if it is in the winter, then like greasing with lavender oil or jasmine oil or balm leaf oil or poppy oil and similar; but if the skin is thick and cold, let it be with rosewood oil or henna oil or bearberry oil or aloeswood oil and similar.
If the patient has wide pores, loose flesh, it is necessary to abstain from greasing; and these people should wash their splints after the bloodletting with rosewater or cold water or mulberry water or pumpkin water or gourd water and similar. And if the patient's blood is very watery.
He washes his splints with vinegar or asafoetida water and similar. And if his skin is thick, he washes his splints with old wine or rosewood oil or aloeswood extract or balm leaf extract and similar. And it is necessary to beware of bloodletting in the bathhouse and after the bath.
Rather, it is necessary to use it after leaving the bathhouse for an hour or two hours. And it is not necessary that anyone sleep after bloodletting, what the patient and the doctor should prepare with before the bloodletting and afterwards.
It is necessary to look first, if the patient or doctor has bilious temperament and the dominant quality of his blood is acridity and inflammation, then it is necessary for him to take cooling medicines such as pomegranate with vinegar, henbane with vinegar, lettuce, senna, and similar. And he should make his diet soft, mutton soup, and similar.
Whoever's temperament is cold, it is necessary for him to be given a drink of honey and vinegar or saponaria juice and to take moderate aromatic wine that is between the old and new. He should be ordered with a small amount of food and his diet should consist of farinaceous foods, quinces, and pigeons, and white pigeons' eggs. It is necessary for him to drink more liquid than food on the day of bloodletting and purging.
And it may be necessary for some people at some times to be given theriac, musk medicine, or silt before bloodletting and purging, or after it, in order to strengthen the main organs and improve the blood; nor should they give him stimulants.
And as for the unconditioned bleedings, they are those that are placed on the liver, spleen, breasts, belly, backside, kidney, and iliac region; because these organs do not tolerate constraint. But rather it is intended by them to draw blood from one organ to another.
We place the bleedings on the breasts in case of indigestion, or we use them to relieve an organ that is overheated and congested; just as we place the bleedings on the belly and backside, for it relaxes the organ, cools it down, and removes the pain so as to clarify it.
And it may be placed on the kidneys if there is a blockage or stone, so that its strength may perhaps open up the blockage or dislodge the stone from its place. Similarly, it does this when placed on the liver and spleen when they are overheated; and these bleedings can be used empty with pressure only.
And it may be used with fire or filled with lukewarm water for cases of inflammation; that the bleeding is large and only with hot water or water in which some herbs suitable for that purpose have been boiled.
Then it is placed full on the place and held and removed and repeated as needed, and this is a picture of the cauterizing instrument used with fire:.
Its capacity is two open fingers as we have shown, and its depth is half a finger in the profundity; and on its side, about half of it, there is a small hole, to the extent that the needle can be inserted, made from Chinese copper or thick yellow copper.
A flat and smooth plate, lest it harm the part when placed on it; and in its center, a groove obstructed with copper or iron where the candle with fire is placed; and this cauterizing instrument can be made large, larger than what we have described, and small according to the diseases.
The way it is used with fire on the part is that you take a thread of cotton or a small candle made from pitch and place it in the middle of the cauterizing instrument.
So that the fire rises to the top, towards the bottom of the cauterizing instrument, lest the patient's body be burned; then it is placed on the part and the finger on the hole we mentioned until we grasp the cauterizing instrument as needed, and removed the finger.
And the steam comes out of that hole, and the cauterizing instrument becomes loose at its place; then take the thread away and return it if needed. As for the cauterizing instrument used in treating hydrocele with water, there is no inserted rod nor hole.
And it is used by filling it with water and placing it on the part only; and this is its form:.
And this cauterizing instrument, whenever it was large enough to hold a lot of water, was better.
The Seventh and Ninetieth Chapter.
Regarding the Treatment of Hydrocele.
The suspension is only used in most cases for the members that cannot have a compress applied to them, either because of their small size like the lip and tongue and similar parts, or because the member is exposed from the flesh like the finger and nose and similar parts.
And how its use is that you take the suspension which is in pure potash from the waters, then leave it a day and night in the water until it dries out and nothing remains inside it. Then cleanse the body either by bleeding or purging, then wipe the affected member.
Until it turns red, then place the suspension on it. If they are full, they will fall off; and if possible, dress the area with a compress, for that is more beneficial; otherwise, wash the area with vinegar and then with much water and massage it gently, squeezing out any remaining blood. If bleeding continues after the suspension has fallen off and it was done hastily, soak a cotton cloth in cold water.
And place it on top until the bleeding stops. If there is excessive blood, sprinkle powdered white lead or oxide on it until the bleeding stops or apply a poultice of half-burnt pitch to the affected area.
And leave it until the poultice sticks to the affected area, and then the bleeding will stop. It is necessary if there is need to reapply the suspension not to apply that one again, but rather another one; and if the suspension cannot be reapplied, wash the area with fresh blood.
Or prick the area with a needle until something comes out from the blood, then apply it. If it feels anything from the blood, it will stick to the place; and if you want it to fall off, sprinkle some powdered alum or salt on it, then it will fall off onto the place.
The Third Chapter.
In the knee.
This chapter also deals with and demonstrates what is needed in the practice of medicine, which is setting broken bones and treating fractures that occur in the bones.
Know, my sons, that even the ignorant among doctors and laymen, and those who have never read a word of this book nor perused its ancient pages, may dare to claim expertise in this chapter.
And for this reason, this art has become non-existent in our country, and I have never found anything good in it at all. And I have only benefited from it to the extent that my long reading of the early books and my diligence in understanding them allowed me to extract its knowledge, then I persisted in practice and experience throughout my life.
And I have recorded for you in this chapter everything that is encompassed by my knowledge on the subject. And I have put my experience to practice after presenting it to you, and I have simplified it as much as possible, clarified it in every way, and illustrated it with many pictures of the devices that are used in it.
It is a matter of increased clarity, as I did in the preceding chapters, and there is no strength except with Allah, the Most High, the Great.
The First Chapter.
In it there are generalities and summaries about the matter of broken bones, and it is necessary to present them before we start mentioning individually each injured or dislocated limb, so let us first mention in the beginning of this chapter general principles and chapters. You are compelled to understand it and stand by its truth, for you alone among all those who wish to learn this noble craft are not like them.
I say that whenever one of the limbs is broken, dislocated, or sprained, or there is a fall, it is necessary to hasten first to stop the bleeding or alleviate the pain or all of them. If there is not a barrier to that, such as weakness of power or something like that happened to him, a child or an old man, then the one who experienced it became very hot or very cold indeed.
Then he restricts himself to cold beans and the meat of birds and small game, and forbids drinks and fatty meats, and avoids food that fills the vessels with blood until if the swelling subsides and does not expect the matter to gather at the place.
Therefore, the patient should return to his initial regimen which he was accustomed to. If the broken bone is in a splint, then the patient should be fed abundant food that is fatty and nourishing, containing ingredients such as beans, rice, heads of cattle, and cow's udders. And eggs, fried fish, and thick drinks, and so on. For with this regimen, the consolidation of the fracture is faster and better. And know that if a broken bone is in old men or elderly people, it is not possible for it to reunite and heal as it was originally forever.
The bones of their limbs become fragile and soft, and it may reunite and heal like the bones of young children. But nature grows on the broken bone from all directions something resembling a thick glue, which fuses with it and holds it together until some parts cling to each other.
And holds some parts together until it comes to be in great strength and firmness, like it was originally, so that nothing hinders him from his actions.
And for this reason, it is necessary to give the patient food that contains strength, nourishment, and thickness as we said. And know that fractures differ in their types according to the difference of the members, for a fracture of the tibia is different from a fracture of the skull, and a fracture of the breastbone is different from a fracture of the back.
Also, all the members are different from each other, and we will mention each type of fracture in its own chapter separately, and there may be a difference in the type of bone fracture itself.
Because it may be a crushing fracture without fragments, and it may be a longitudinal fracture with fragments, some bare and others not. The fracture may also occur with an open wound and laceration in the skin, and it may be a slight crack.
And each type has a special trick for its treatment, which will be mentioned separately in its place. And what is known about a bone fracture is its crookedness and length and appearance to the sense and roughness when you touch it with your hand.
So if there is no apparent crookedness, roughness or sensitivity when you palpate the bone with unease and the patient does not feel much pain, it's not a fracture but rather a bruise or a slight crack. One should not move it at all by stretching or pressing.
But one should apply to it the medicines that will be mentioned later, which agree with the condition, then bind it gently. And know that if the bone is crushed and split in two without fragments, except that each part has separated from its owner.
So it is necessary for you to start by setting and aligning it as soon as possible, before a hot abscess occurs. If a hot abscess does occur, leave it for some days until the abscess subsides, then set it in any way that can be done with care and skill.
And know that setting and aligning it is easier than the bone with fragments, then attach as what will be mentioned next. If the bone has fragments, it is necessary to extend the broken member on both sides by hand or foot.
If the member is small, then by your hand; or with two straps; or with a strap and your hand. And let the position of the member be on its natural place until the broken bone extension reaches. Then, reform those extremities in their places with all the skill and care you can muster.
Strive to avoid causing the injured person pain or discomfort by your action. Strive to bring together one of the bones with its companion in the best possible alignment, and at that time touch them both with your hand. If you see something abnormal, correct it and adjust it according to your ability.
And beware of strong pressure and powerful grasping, as many unskilled people do, and often they cause heat or numbness in the member, as I have seen them do repeatedly.
Then, secure the member after setting and adjusting it, and hold it firmly in a state of quiet and stillness. Warn the patient not to move it during his wakefulness, sleep, or at any time when he is changing positions, stirring, or doing any other movement, until the pain has completely ceased.
And that is so, because whenever the patient feels pain or discomfort in his set position, he should move him to a different position where he does not feel pain, and take care that this new position be steady and straight.
So that the member does not become distorted when it sets, and as for the manner of setting a broken bone, I will describe it to you as I see fit. Know that broken bones differ in their smallness and largeness and complexity, so what is small like an arm or finger or thighbone and the like.
So it is necessary for the bandages to be smooth and soft when dealing with small bones, but what is large like a thigh or back or chest requires bandages that are coarse and firm. For the broad bandage is needed for the large member and holds it firmly from all sides with equal tension, without any defect.
Then start after finishing the alignment to apply the corresponding plaster. In a winding motion on the site of the fracture, then start to wrap the bandage around the same site three or four times according to what is worthy of the limb and tighten your hand slightly with the bandage then take it to the upper part of the site of the fracture.
By tightening slightly less than your grip on the broken site, then gradually move away from the site of the fracture a little and relax the tightness a little until you take something good from the correct site then take another strap and wrap it also around the broken site.
Wraps, then take the wrap to the lower part of the fracture and make your action in tightening and relaxing it as we mentioned earlier with the first upper wrap, then place between the wraps of the winding or rent whatever matches the curvature of the fracture.
If there is a curvature, then do not put anything in it; then wrap another strap over it and align with these tight compresses of your time if there is no swelling or warm abscess in the limb.
If there is swelling or warm abscess, then apply to it what calms that abscess and goes away with the swelling and leave it for a few days; then tighten over it compresses such that the compresses are from the middle part of reeds prepared wisely or the compresses are from the wood of tamarisk.
The one made from cypress or palm fronds or cotton tree or tamarisk and similar things that are available from it, and let each compress be of sufficient size in this shape and form exactly.
Unless the compress that is placed on the fracture itself is thicker and slightly wider than the other compresses, and as for the length of the compress it is made according to what suits the broken limb in its size, shape of the compress:.
Then you tighten on the splints with another bandage according to the tightness of your first one, and you bind from above with the tightly tied threads as we mentioned regarding the tightness, that it should be tightened more on the break point. And whenever you are away from the break point, the tightness is less.
And it is necessary for the threads to be moderate in thickness and firmness, and they should be from wet kitan especially, because if the threads are coarse like what I have seen the foolish people do, making their threads from loose kitan strips, which is a great error.
Because the tightness is thereby exceeded, and the firm threads are also not suitable, since you do not attain what you desire with them in tightening, and it should not be less than a finger's width between the bandage and the splints.
So if the patient complains of the edges of the splints after tightening in the correct places, put a layer of soft linen or loose wool underneath so that nothing bothers him from that; and as for when the break is with an injury and a tear has occurred in the skin, we will deal with it separately.
And know that not every broken bone should be tightened with splints from the first day, because if the bone is large, it is not necessary to put splints on it except after five or seven days or more, according to your precaution against the occurrence of the hot swelling.
And this is the characteristic of the dressings that the ancients used to apply to fractures, jaws, and dislocations, a general dressing characteristic that sets the fracture and suits most temperaments, especially children and women, since it is not troubled by heat or cold.
And it is that you take from the flour dust, which is the bottom of the millstone where the fine powder adheres when the mill is in motion, and crush it as it is without grinding it with white chalk, making its crushing neither thick nor thin, then using it.
Description of the last poultice that binds fractures, removals, and contusions. It is taken from masha, ladana, aquaqia, rassan, mogath, and Sukk, each one ten dirhams. And from Marar, five dirhams. And from Athil, twenty dirhams. And from Armenian or Roman clay, twenty dirhams. All of them are ground and mixed with water from Athil or egg white if the patient's temperament is hot. Then this poultice is used, for it is good at binding broken bones quickly and is suitable for most people to use moderately.
Description of the last poultice that also benefits fractures and contusions. It is taken from mogath, masha, and white pomegranate peel, each one ten dirhams. Marar and Sukk, each one five dirhams. Aquaqia six dirhams. Armenian or Roman clay twenty dirhams. All of them are ground finely and mixed with water or egg white and used.
Description of the poultice for joints and loose bones that are out of their places, and it calms the pain that afflicts them and old-age fractures. It is taken from rotten wool, which is dipped in vinegar and cooked oil, and placed on the place. And this poultice does not have binding power.
But it is good at calming hot swellings and driving away pains. Description of the last poultice that binds broken bones. It is taken from unripe tamarisk leaves and wild opium, all of which are ground together and applied with moisture. Description of the last poultice that is used when a bone fracture occurs suddenly.
And if you want to reduce the rest of the swelling, take from pomegranate peel, papain, and mallow, each one a small part. Grind all together and mix with vermilion if the member is not inflamed, but if it is inflamed then mix with water or with cayenne pepper and use.
Description of the last type of poultice, which is stronger in analysis than this one. It is used when a hard swelling occurs at the end of the bone. It is taken from the root of the thyme, and the bark of the cypress, and the leaves of the king's flower, and mercurial ointment, and violet juice, and balm from each one part.
They are all crushed and mixed with vinegar water or sweet water or with oil, each one according to the warmth of the part and its tranquility. And as for Hippocrates, he did not mention in his book that it should be put on a broken bone when setting it.
Except for the compound made from wax and oil, which is not to be used, it was described as being of medium consistency between hardness and softness. And as for Galen, he thought that things containing flesh with something warm like myrrh, aconite, and saffron should be put on a broken bone when setting it.
Description of a poultice that is beneficial for weakness and pain. It is taken from the gall of a goat, sumach, human hair, crushed or bird feather, thyme, and salt. Whether it is crushed, pounded, or mixed, it is applied with this, and as for the amount that should be left on the bandage.
Then it is melted, and one looks to see if the pain, inflammation, or movement of the broken bone from its place has subsided. If not, do not remove it for many days, because if this happens in that place, severe inflammation or painful swelling or pus may occur.
Then, proceed to remove it at the time and do not delay, and wash away the poultice from it. Then take a linen cloth or sponge, wet and damp, immerse it in cold water and wash the place until the inflammation subsides and the pain ceases, then leave the part to rest for an hour.
Then wrap the soft cloth, which is soaked in vinegar and oil or rose water, around it until you ensure the warm swelling subsides, the organ calms down, and its pain goes away. Then return it to gentle compression and light bandaging, but do not pull it with the same force as before.
And let it rest until it recovers, if you see that the swelling, redness, pain, puffiness, and all symptoms have completely gone away and you need to apply compression and gentle wrapping again, then return it to its original condition, whether or not anything happens in the part mentioned.
Do not remove it except after three days or four or five or seven, and sometimes twenty, according to what appears to you from the condition of the part as we said, until if necessary, a fracture has formed and the flesh is about to set on it.
Add also at that time to the compression more than your initial compression, and add also to nourishing the patient's food as previously mentioned, if you see the fracture site has become dry and cracked more than it should be, then know that the nutrition is unable to reach it.
If then bathe it with lukewarm water every time you remove it, and do so in every three days, and reduce the compression a little, for by doing this, nourishment will reach the part and it will heal quickly; as for what the ignorant ones do to the broken bone by breaking it once again.
For if it does not heal as it should and instead becomes deformed, that is a great error on their part and a huge mistake; although they may have written about it in their early books and done so, I did not see any of them produce any effect. And the truth is that one should not do so.
The Second Section.
In the fractured skull in the head.
Kinds of the fractured skull in the head are many and its forms are different and its causes are varied. Some fractures may occur due to a sword blow and it may be that all the bone is broken until it reaches the peritoneum underneath the bone. As happens in wood when it is split.
And therefore this type of fracture is called a splitting, and sometimes the sword cut may break some of the bone and bruise its surface only, without penetrating to the end, and this type of fracture is called a simple cleaving, and the wound from these two fractures can be either large or small.
And there is also a type of fracture that is crack-like or splintered, and its cause is a blow with a stone or falling on a stone or something similar. This fracture can be either open, having almost reached the membrane underneath the bone, or it may be on the surface of the bone.
And the wound from these two fractures can also be either large or small. And there is a type of fracture that is hidden in the bone, in the bald spot, which is a slight concussion.
And therefore this type of fracture is called a hairy one, and from it there can be a fracture that occurs due to a fall or hitting the head with a stone or something similar, which enters the surface of the bone and becomes concave like tin if hit, having part of it enter inside.
And this is more common in the moist skull of a young boy, and there can be fragments from all these types of fractures that are loose or not loose, and we will come to discuss their treatment in its place, and we will recognize all these types of fractures by observing them.
And searching for them by probing and removing the rotten flesh from them, and as for the hairy type, it is recognized by uncovering the bone and wiping and staining it with vermilion if the fracture appears black. And as for the treatment of the fracture, one first looks to the symptoms of the patient.
If you see from his symptoms what indicates a clear sign of fear such as diarrhea, lethargy, loss of consciousness, cessation of speech, fainting, and high fever with redness and swelling of the eyes and similar symptoms, do not approach him nor treat him because death is certain in most cases without exception.
And if you see symptoms that do not alarm you and hope for his safety, then take up his treatment, and that is that when the wounded person comes to you at first when he was injured and it was in days of winter.
It is necessary to strive to remove the bone before the fourteenth day in any case, and if it is in days of summer, then hasten to remove the bone before the seventh day so that what is under the bone from the membrane does not putrefy and expose those symptoms which we described.
If the bone fracture has reached the membrane covering the brain and is accompanied by swelling and inflammation, then it is necessary to cut off the portion of damaged tissue as I described to you, which is that you should shave the head of the wounded person.
And you should uncover the bone in any way that is accessible to you and according to the shape of the wound and what lies on the wounded person, for when you uncover the bone, bleeding or warm swelling may be revealed to you, so respond accordingly.
And this is that you should fill the place with a poultice moistened in wine and rose water, and grease it with camphor, and dress the wound until the swelling subsides and bleeding ceases, then take up straightening the bone and extracting it, which will be one of two ways.
One way is to cut the bone with a thin, narrow saw, and this is its form:.
Then you will use another saw after this one, slightly wider than it, and this is its form:.
Then you will also use a last piece, wider than the second and it is necessary that you have several pieces different from each other, some longer than others and some shorter, and they should be of great fineness at their edges, made of Indian steel or good iron.
And use the mallet to strike on the piece so that the head does not tremble and is not harmed, if the bone is strong and hard then you should pierce around it before using the pieces with the non-soaking gouges but they are called non-soaking gouges.
Because it does not exceed the limit of the skull's bone to what is behind it, so that the gouge has a curved edge on what is below its sharp head similar to a ring or small circle preventing it from digging and exceeding the thickness of the bone.
And it is necessary for you to take many of these gouges, each one suitable for the thickness of that bone until you prepare yourself for every skull gouge with its sharp edge in length and shortness according to the thickness of that skull, and this is an image of three kinds. Of large, medium, and small gouges.
And as for the method of piercing around a broken bone, it is that you place the gouge on the bone and turn it with your fingers until you know that the bone has yielded then move the gouge to another place and make sure there is a distance between each puncture equal to the thickness of the rod or approximately.
Then cut with the pieces between each puncture and do it with all the force you can exert on it as we said until the bone is loosened either by your hand or by something else from some of the tools that I prepared for that.
Like the file and fine pliers, and it is necessary for you to beware all caution that the gouge or piece does not touch anything from the membrane, if you have loosened the bone and freed it from the membrane when it was attached to it and extracted it then you should scrape.
Smooth out the roughness that remains in the bone with another tool similar to the cutting instrument, but it should be finer and softer than all other cutting instruments. Then take any small bones or fragments gently along with what you have of tools.
Then treat the wound after that with poultices and ointments as mentioned earlier. As for the other side of the work, it is a straightforward matter far removed from pitfalls, as Galen has mentioned and praised greatly, and this is what he says. It is necessary for you to start by exposing the part of the bone at the location where it is broken more severely and extensively, until if you expose that part, you will find under it a corner of this rounded instrument; and here is its appearance:.
The rounded part of it is smooth and does not cut anything, while the sharp part of it on its edges in the direction of length as you see; it should be standing on the periosteum and the face of the sharp instrument in the bone. Then strike the instrument from one side only.
With a small mallet until it cuts all the bone gently as you turn, and while you are safe from the membrane that does not happen with frightening consequences; even if the doctor is unaware or asleep.
If there is anything remaining of the membrane that clings to the bone in some places, scrape it away from him with the rounded part of the instrument itself and free him from it gently; for it will release him without harm or fear.
And if the bone break has not penetrated to the membrane and what is detached from the bone is its surface, and there remains roughness and fragments; then you should remove that roughness and extract those fragments with a scraper made of a material which has been taken in different proportions so that you can use it in every place where it is most suitable and best suited according to what guides you in your work.
The broken bone and its shape, it is necessary to use in your excision or rather the widest part of the excision then use subsequently a smaller one and do not cease until you reach the thinnest and smallest.
And as for the other small cracks and fine breaks, it is necessary to treat each one with a remedy according to what leads to its healing, which is something that does not escape anyone who has even the slightest knowledge in this craft, and he stands by what we have written and explained about the major breaks.
If the membrane remains exposed when you remove the bone, it is necessary to take a piece of cotton as big as the wound, immerse it in rose water and put it on the wound's mouth, then take another piece that is triangular or quadrangular. And immerse it in wine and rose water, and put it on the first piece, making sure to do that as lightly as possible so that you don't burden the membrane, then use it above a wide bandage without tightening it except for as much as holds the wound only.
And leave it with this treatment for a day or two until the swelling subsides, then remove it and use after that the medicines which are beneficial like salsola roots, coriandrum powder, cinnamon, and similar ones, being that you make from these medicines a poultice.
And apply it to the wound as it is wet and in general, use a medicine that can dry it up without causing inflammation, and strive hard when treating the wound so that it remains clean, not containing any fat or pus, nor do you leave any pus accumulating there.
Because pus, if it accumulates on the membrane of the brain, corrupts and destroys it, and what happens to the patient is a great calamity; and it may cause an abscess in the skull when the bone is exposed, especially if treatment is neglected.
Swelling on its surface is looked at. If it presents with the symptoms we mentioned, then know that it will perish inevitably, and even if the swelling occurs due to a treatment applied upon it, and the power of that treatment was to cause that swelling.
It is necessary to take a part from honey and three parts from rose resin, and to pound them well together, then apply them to the bandage. Then, treat it with all kinds of treatment until it heals.
The Third Section.
Broken Nose Repair.
Know that the nose does not break except for its upper part, either both or one of them, because they are hard and do not break, while the lower part is cartilaginous and may be subjected to bruising, bending, and flattening.
If one of its parts is broken, then it is necessary to insert the little finger into the nostril and push that fracture from inside with your pinky and ring fingers from outside until the nose returns to its natural shape.
If the break is at the top of the nose and your finger cannot reach it, then it should be pushed together with a blunt instrument that is slightly thick. If the break is on both sides, do the same thing. And begin to set it in the first day after the break.
If possible, and not otherwise, after the seventh or tenth day when the swelling has subsided, then insert a thread of linen cloth into the nostril if the break is on one side, or two threads if it is on both sides.
And the thread should be thick to the extent that it fills the nostril, and some early practitioners have mentioned that you should grease the thread with fat and change it every day. I do not see this as necessary, but rather the thread should be greased with egg white mixed with camphor powder.
Then leave the splint until the bone is set and the cartilage hardens, and sometimes insert into the nose a place where the splint will be held by a rent in the skin of the swan after which it has been wrapped around it, so that its grip on the nose becomes stronger lest the patient be unable to breathe.
And this is not necessary if you wish to make it or if you want to make the splints, for in your work on the nose, a swelling may occur and you must apply a poultice of vinegar or a moist cloth soaked in gall or rose oil or something from the diachylon ointment.
If no swelling occurs, then you should apply a fine powder of alum and camphor which we have mixed with egg white, and place it on top, wrapping it in a linen cloth without binding the nose at all; if the bones of the nose are fractured slightly.
Or if it has broken off, then you should cut it open and remove it with the appropriate tool, then sew the incision and treat it with whatever unguents are suitable for that; if there is an injury inside the nose, then you should treat it with a splint and use lead tubes. until it heals.
The Fourth Chapter.
The Treatment of a Fracture in the Lower Jaw Which Has Broken.
If the lower jaw has broken and is not accompanied by a wound, then if it has only fractured on the outside and has not split in two and torn inwardly, then knowing how to treat it simplifies things.
Then if the break is on the right side, you should insert your left thumb into the patient's mouth and do likewise on the left side by inserting your right thumb and gently lifting the broken edge from inside to outside.
And with your other hand from the outside of the bone, control it so that you can smooth it out. If the jaw has fractured in two, then use a splint on both sides to keep it straight until it can be smoothed out. If there is displacement of the teeth, then...
You separate and reassemble what you have cut away from the fragment of bone, using a golden or silver thread or silk. Then, you place on the fractured bone the splint, and place over it a broad and tight bandage or a piece of leather equal in length to the bone. Then bind it from above according to what appears to you as binding and coincides with its fit, so that it does not come undone. Command the patient to rest and quietness and make their food bland and watery. If you think something has changed in shape on any of the sides, then attend to it on the third day.
Then bind it from above according to what appears to you as binding and coincides with its fit, so that it does not come undone. Command the patient to rest and quietness and make their food bland and watery. If you think something has changed in shape on any of the sides, then attend to it on the third day. Then repair what you have wrapped with powdered alum, white of egg or fine breadcrumbs, after removing the splint from it. Place on the swelling a compress made of linen, as long as it adheres to that swelling and does not change in relation to the bone, leave it so.
Do not remove it until the fracture heals and the bone is strengthened. Many times this fracture takes three weeks to strengthen, if a hot abscess appears during that time, then use what we mentioned repeatedly to subdue it until that abscess goes away.
And if the fracture is with a wound, looked at it; if there is a splinter or fragments of bone that have separated from the bone, gently remove them according to what appears fitting for their extraction from the apparatus. If the mouth of the wound is narrow, then widen it with a probe to the extent of your need.
Then, if you have removed those fragments and there is nothing left, draw the edges of the wound apart if it is wide, otherwise, apply one of the ointments that are suitable for that. And heal the wound until it closes.
The Fifth Chapter.
On Repairing a Broken Wrist.
The clavicle breaks more frequently in front of the scapula than at its end, and its fracture occurs on one of three faces; either it breaks and splits into two pieces without causing any fragments to form, which is easier to set.
Or fragments may form in the fracture, which is more difficult to treat; or the fracture may occur with an injury, and the procedure is as follows: if the fracture is without an injury, two servants should be summoned, one to stabilize the shoulder blade that follows the broken clavicle, and the other to pull the neck towards the other side.
Then set the fracture into shape with your fingers until it takes its proper form and does not have any crevices or irregularities; if you need to stretch more, it is necessary to place a ball of cloth or wool under the patient's armpit.
And its bone will be to the extent of your need, stretch and raise the clavicle and press the ball with your hand until the fracture takes its proper shape; if you are not able to pull the end of the clavicle outside because it has become deep, then the patient should lie on his back.
And a pad of medium thickness should be placed under the scapula, and the servant should press down on the scapula until the bone of the clavicle that is deep rises upwards; then set the fracture and shape it with your fingers.
If you feel that a fragment of the clavicle has broken off and is moving, then it is necessary to cut into it and carefully remove that fragment; if the fragment is lodged in the bone, use one of the saws I have prepared for this purpose. After that, place under the clavicle the apparatus which holds the diaphragm, which is a wooden or metal device; this is its form:.
It resembles a spoon with no cavity, and its width should be according to what you need for the size of the bone, big or small; as for its length, it should also be according to what is possible for you to work with, and let it have two ends, one wider and the other narrower, as you see.
If the wound that you made when removing a fragment of bone is wide and the inflamed tumor is prominent, then join the edges of the wound with stitching. If the wound is small or you fear the inflamed tumor, then expand the wound by cutting and suturing it according to the depth of the wound.
If there is an inflamed tumor before the incision in the area of the wound, on the vein and vinegar or wine, then place it on it. And as for setting the bone if it is not accompanied by a wound nor a cut, it is to apply the poultice made from wheat bran with white eggwhite. And place the splint on it then put a ball under his armpit if needed, then take a bandage that is very long and its width is a span or almost that much, then wrap a compress around the splint and poultice, then take a thin board. Its width will be three fingers and so in length, then insert it into a cloth, then insert that cloth with the splint into the place on the bandage where the fracture is, then tighten the bandage around the fracture as one wraps. And bind it on his neck and under the healthy armpit and under the sick armpit, wrap it around many times in every direction as you see fit, so that the binding sets the fracture firmly, which is not hidden from you.
And all of this is to ensure that the splint does not move away from the broken bone. And therefore the patient should be watched every day, and whenever the bandage relaxes and you see that the splint has moved, then adjust it and re-tighten the bandage. Then make the patient lie on his back and place a small pillow under his healthy armpit when he sleeps at night.
So that his arm rises above his side and the fracture of the shoulder blade is elevated to the height of the neck or his arm is tied to his neck, and do not remove the bandage unless an accident occurs due to stiffness or swelling within twelve days.
Then renew the dressing if you see any sign of it. Set in the splint and leave it until it is fully healed and the fracture of the wrist becomes firm and strong, with increase in twenty-eight days. And it may be that in some people, it takes less than that.
The sixth chapter.
In the treatment of a collarbone fracture. The collarbone rarely breaks in its broad place, but rather it breaks into its parts; so when it breaks at any point or in its middle and you recognize that by touch, then according to what the shape of the break is, form.
Set it right and return it to its natural shape with all the skill you can, then apply poultice of powdered rice with white of egg and fine linen cloth on top, and then place a wide splint from a board.
Thin on the same measure as the entire collarbone or slightly wider, if there is a swelling under the splint in any of the places of the collarbone, then smooth out that swelling with a fine linen cloth until the splint lies flat, and then tighten from above with a long bandage.
Tighten it firmly and secure the splint so that it does not move from its place, and tighten the bandage every day; whenever the bandage relaxes, tighten it again and reposition the splint if it has moved, and let the patient lie on their healthy side, and the collarbone will heal in twenty.
Either in one day or twenty-five days, if this period is complete, then release the bandage and you will be safe; for it is one of the bones that does not fear breaking nor dislocation; but if a fragment of bone protrudes under the skin and was pressing beneath it, cut into it and extract it. And do what I mentioned for a wrist fracture regarding relieving the hot swelling if anything of that occurs.
The Seventh Chapter.
On Repairing a Broken Chest.
The chest may be broken in its middle and only slightly exposed, whereas its edges are more prone to breaking and splitting. One of the symptoms if it is broken in its middle is that it will incline downwards and expose itself to severe pain, difficulty breathing, and coughing.
And sometimes, blood may flow and the bone fracture will be revealed, and it will not go unnoticed. The treatment is for the patient to lie on their back, with a pad placed between their shoulders, then their arms are brought forward and their ribs are held in place by the hands from both sides, and the dressing is smoothed out as much as possible.
And so, until the bone returns to its proper shape, then wrap it in a compress and a mesh, and place over it a splint made from a thin piece of wood, such as willow or boxwood, wrapped in cloth. Then, wrap it tightly around the broken bone so that it does not come loose, and check the bandage on all sides to ensure it is in place, tightening it each time it relaxes.
And if necessity demands that it be opened in the event of suppuration, pain, or swelling at the site, then open it and remove the dressing, treating what has become apparent according to its treatment, then reapply the dressing if necessary. And so, ensure that he remains in a state of stability until he recovers.
The Eighth Chapter.
On Repairing the Ribs if They Are Broken, know that the ribs are most prone to breaking in their hard-to-reach areas behind the back and at their front edges; these areas are not easily felt by the fingers during examination.
Set it in place by adjusting the fracture with the fingers on the capable side until the shape is even as it should be, then apply and tighten the broken bone with a splint if necessary. If the rib cage is fractured and inclined towards the inside, it exposes itself to inflammation and severe pain.
And it is like the one that exposes itself to someone with pleura so that the bone exposes the diaphragm and also obstructs breathing and coughing, and expectoration of much blood, and this is a difficulty in treatment, and the ancients have treated it by many means.
And among them is one who says that it is necessary to make the patient's food produce belching and flatulence so that the stomach swells, stretches, and discharges the fracture outside, and we dislike this so that it does not become a cause for the occurrence of tumor; if it has occurred, then it increases in it and confirms it.
And some have said that a poultice should be placed on the spot, then it should be pressed with force, and this is similar to a poultice except that one fears that the poultice will draw excess moisture to the spot due to its weakness. And some have said that the spot should be covered with wool that has been soaked in hot oil.
And a bandage should be applied between the ribs until it is full, so that the bandage becomes even if you wrap it around in a circular motion. Then the patient is treated with treatment of pleura from food and medicine, unless the patient's condition is severe and unbearable. And the bone was exposed to the diaphragm in a dangerous manner, and we were afraid for the patient, so it is necessary that we open up on the spot and uncover the broken rib then apply the instrument which preserves the membrane that I have described earlier and extract the bone gently and bring it out.
Then we gather the edges of the wound if it is large with suturing and treat it with ointments until it heals. If a tumor occurs during that time, we immediately apply cooling pomegranate juice to the spot and treat the patient with what soothes the tumor from within as well.
He lies down on the side where he will fall asleep until he recovers.
The Ninth Chapter.
For the treatment of fractured neck and back.
But as for the bones of the neck, if they are fractured and little exposure is given to it and more to the flesh and also vertebrae of the back, then if that happens to someone and you want to know whether it will heal or not. Then look, if you see his hands have become stiff, numb, and immobile, and he is unable to move or straighten them or flex them, and even if you tickle them with a needle or massage them, he does not feel it and does not find any pain in them, then know that in most cases he will not recover, he is doomed.
And if he is able to move them and feels pain when tickled or massaged, then know that the bone marrow has recovered and the patient will recover with treatment. If a fracture of the back occurs like that and you want to know whether it will also recover or not.
Then look at his legs, if you see that they have also become stiff and the same thing has happened to them as happened to his hands. Then if he lies on his back, flatulence and stool will come out involuntarily, and if he lies on his stomach, urine will come out involuntarily. And if he lies on his back and wants to urinate but cannot, then know that he is doomed and do not concern yourself with treating him. But if none of those things happens to him, the matter will be less severe, and the treatment for what has happened is to cool down the inflamed swelling.
By applying to the inflamed vertebrae rose oil alone or with roasted egg yolks, you should apply it three times a day until the inflamed swelling subsides. Then wrap one of the compresses on the place, tie it tight and order him to rest and remain still.
He does not sleep unless on the side where he does not find pain until he is healed. If it has happened near the bone in the vertebra or something that can be removed from it, then the skin should be cut open and that bone extracted. Then the wound should be stitched if it is large, and treated with soothing lotions until he is healed. If the last bone of the vertebra breaks, which is the coccyx, then the index finger from the left hand should be inserted into the saddle.
And the broken bone should be set with the other hand according to what can be done and attention is paid to setting it, then it should be wrapped in a poultice and plaster if necessary, and then it should be fixed.
And if you feel a broken fragment inside, cut into it and remove it, and treat the wound with the treatment mentioned until he is healed.
The Tenth Chapter.
Regarding the Repair of a Fracture of the Hip.
The bones of the hip never break, except that if they do break, it is for them to shatter into fragments and split in their length and incline towards the inside and expose themselves to danger and pain at the site, and numbness and paralysis of the leg on which the fracture occurred from its side.
And you should place your hand on it until you can feel the shape of the fracture. If the fracture is only in its edges, then set that fracture according to what presents itself to you for setting, until it resembles its natural shape.
And if the fracture is in its length or has inclined towards the inside, place the patient on his stomach until you can set that fracture. Then, once you have set it, wrap a poultice around it, and then apply a splint made of wood or skin and bind it tightly.
Do not fear for the fracture to shift or the splint to come loose, but rather adjust the irregularity of the wounds according to what it fills until the binding is even, and order the patient to sleep on his back or his healthy side, if he shows a warm swelling.
Stop applying the poultice and splint until the hot tumor subsides, and place upon it what soothes it according to what has been mentioned before. Then return to the splint and tighten it as is fitting. If there is exposure of the bone or anything breaks off from its edges, do not remove it.
And do not touch it, but smooth it out from outside as we mentioned and leave the splint on until it heals.
The Eleventh Chapter.
On Setting a Fracture of the Arm.
The arm is what lies between the elbow and the shoulder tip, if it breaks then set it on one of its two sides; one way to do so is to take a smoothed-out, moderately thick, curved branch with this shape:.
And bind it with two bandages on its ends, then suspend it from a high place and have the patient sit in a chair. Then let him place his broken arm on the branch until his elbow becomes stuck in the middle of the curve of the branch, then suspend something heavy above it.
Or have a servant stretch it downwards, then let the doctor set the fracture with his hands together until the fracture is reduced to what is proper. The other way is for the patient to lie on their back and have their hand tied to their neck with a bandage.
Then order two servants, one to hold something above the fracture with his hands and the other to hold something below it. Each servant stretches out in their direction. And if you want the traction to be stronger, bind a bandage under the fracture and another on top of it, and have each servant stretch out in their direction.
If the fracture is close to the shoulder tip, it is necessary that one bandage be placed under the armpit and the other under the fracture towards the elbow. And likewise if the fracture is close to the elbow, it is necessary that the bandages be placed in that location and on the elbow itself.
Then set the fracture gently without force until the fracture is aligned as it should be, and it is well-matched. Then bind it if it does not expose a hot abscess; but if it exposes a hot abscess, leave the binding until the seventh day and apply a moist cloth soaked in rose water.
Until the abscess subsides, then bind it. The way to bind is: to place a dressing on the fracture, then wrap a new cloth over the dressing, and gather the arm onto the shoulder itself, placing the hand open on the collarbone.
And wrap the cloth and binding on the shoulder and arm so that the arm supports the splints, unless something prevents you from doing so or the broken bone changes in any way. If you fear it may change in some way, use splints.
That is to place on the fracture itself a splint that is wider and stronger than the other splints, making between each splint a gap of a finger's breadth, with the length of the splints according to the fracture, adding three fingers from each side.
Then bind on the splints with the binding I mentioned at the beginning.
And that your binding is tighter on the location of the fracture.
And whenever you inspect the fracture, if you see that the binding and splints are as we said when you first applied them to the limb from the beginning, then do so.
And if you fear the hot abscess, leave the binding and splints alone until the seventh day as we said, then inspect the dressing every three days lest a sore or swelling occur in that location, or the food be hindered from reaching the limb due to excessive binding, so all will be as we described.
And if you are confident that nothing will happen, do not remove the dressing except after many days, and the patient should lie on his back with his hand on his stomach, and a soft cloth filled with wool, moderate in thickness, placed under the shoulder.
And it is necessary to be present at all times, whether day or night, lest the shape of the broken member change or the bandage relax; and mend all this with your effort, and make the patient's food according to what we have mentioned, that is, light foods at first until the bone ceases to ache.
It is necessary to strengthen his food, for it is a habit of the thigh and leg to become inflamed in forty days; at that time, it is necessary to ease him off and use the bath and treat with ointments suitable for this purpose, if the fracture is severe and swollen.
Do not remove the bandage from him until fifty days or two months.
The Twelfth Chapter.
In Treating a Fracture of the Arm.
The arm is composed of two bones and it is called the humeri, one small being that which is next to the shoulder and the other large being that which is situated below the small one from underneath; so perhaps only the uppermost humerus will be fractured or only the lower one will be fractured or they may both be fractured.
When the upper small humerus is fractured, its treatment is easy and its healing is faster; when the lower humerus is fractured, its fracture is severe and its healing is difficult. And if both humeri are fractured, then the treatment of the one that is fractured is more severe than the other.
It is necessary for the physician when treating him to make his splint small and gentle so that it settles him; if the large humerus is the one fractured, then he should make the splint stronger; and if both humeri are fractured, then he should make the splint extremely strong.
And it is necessary to shape the hand when treating him and extend his splint on a pillow, so that the forearm is higher than all the fingers, and the little finger is lower than the other fingers, and the patient should sit elevated above himself.
Let it be with the pillow lifted beside him so that the patient does not suffer difficulty.
Then the servant extends the arm from below, either with his hand or with a strap, and another servant extends it from above, then the physician straightens the bone until he puts it back in its best shape possible; if there is a fracture of the bone, he will trim.
Put each splinter in its place with effort; if a splinter appears and it is exposed and does not want to be joined and there is no hope for fixing it, then cut it off on the manner we mentioned earlier. If the fracture is with an injury, you have prepared it for him.
Then take care of that from there; if an abscess appears in the first dressing and is hot, apply a poultice with the powdered rose and white beeswax, let it be moderate between thick and thin, and bind the poultice on him firmly until the swelling subsides.
Then remove the poultice and apply the prepared padding with dust from the rye, mixed with white of egg. Take the bandages and let the one that is placed on the fracture itself be a little wider and stronger. Know that the number of arm bandages will usually be six.
The fracture was in one bone or in both bones together, then make your tautness stronger and tighter at the site of the fracture. As you tighten it up or down, make the tautness a little looser than what we mentioned earlier in the first book.
Let the poultice that covers the fracture be a soft, moist compress, not hard at all. Let the thread with which it is bound be from specific silk of medium thickness between thin and thick as we described, and fix the limb and bandage after days.
If something needs to be fixed, such as a pimple that appears on the limb, it is necessary to wrap the limb with warm water until that pimple subsides. Leave the limb unwrapped at night until it rests then resume binding again.
If the tension has relaxed and the bone has moved or something like that, then take all your effort to restore it. Also look at this: if nutrition does not reach the organ due to excessive tension, you must loosen it slightly and leave it for some days until nutrition reaches it, then tighten it.
If nothing is exposed to the open air from what we mentioned, it should not be treated except after twenty days or so, then tie the hand of the patient to his neck and let his arm be moderate, and he must conserve his energy from irregular movements and make him sleep on his back.
Know that this fracture of the arm will heal in thirty days, or in twenty-eight and perhaps in twenty-eight and ten days, all according to the temperament and strength.
The Thirteenth Chapter.
In Setting Broken Fingers of the Hand.
Indeed, the bones of the palm and the ligaments of the fingers rarely break but are often affected by luxation, so when it is exposed to a fracture or luxation.
It is necessary for the patient to sit elevated and before him a cushion on an even level.
Then he should place his hand on it stretched out, then the servant of the bones would straighten and set them in order. The doctor should adjust them until they are aligned well, then a compress and bandage should be applied, unless there is an inflamed swelling, then a splint from above to the extent of the position.
And if it is a fracture to the bottom towards the palm of the hand, make a semi-sphere from linen and order the patient to grasp it with his broken hand then tighten it with a long linen band.
And let the splint be from leather, soft and pliable, so that it bends with the flexion of all the hand and is tightened as needed. If the fracture is to the outside, then make a splint above and another below in the hand, so that the hand remains open standing.
Then he carries the splint as the hand turns and binds it between the fingers with a bandage. If the fracture appears on one of the finger slaps, if it is the thumb, then he should align it as it should and pull with the hand; and if you want to make for him a small standing dressing to stabilize the fracture.
And he should not move. If the fracture is in any of the fingers like the middle finger, ring finger or pinky, then it should be aligned and bound to the adjacent healthy finger; otherwise, all of them should be bound together as one, for this is better; or a small standing dressing can be placed on top.
As we said in the thumb and similarly in a boil, taking care when it is fresh and after it has cooled down, facing it as it should be whenever anything of that sort happens again as its description was repeated.
The Fourteenth Chapter.
In a cast for a fracture of the thigh.
The thigh bone often breaks and is palpable because it moves forward and backward; and its dressing is done by pulling a bandage above the fracture and another bandage below the fracture, with the patient lying on their back.
Then he stretches each bandage servant to its direction, in moderation; if the fracture is in the middle of the bone, and if it is near the origin of the thigh then it is necessary to bind a soft bandage, either from wool or something similar.
At the origin of the thigh towards the buttock so that the stretch goes above and the other bandage is below the fracture; likewise if the fracture is near the knee then let the bandage be near the knee so that the stretch goes down, and then the doctor adjusts the bone with both hands until it returns to its natural shape.
And the bone is adjusted well, and then it becomes necessary to apply a compress and pull; unless an inflammation occurs in the limb, if it does occur then leave it for a few days until the inflammation subsides, and then return to its treatment.
As for the wrapping, it is necessary that you wrap a strong and wide bandage around the break twice or thrice, leaving some excess, then wrap the leg until the ankle comes to the origin of the Achilles tendon and insert a long thread between the thigh and leg near the knee from below and make the ends of the thread come out on top from both sides.
Then wrap the excess bandage around the leg and thigh, then place the gauze on the thigh in the same location as the break and make one pad on the tibia bone, then fill the gap between the thigh and leg with linen rags to level the wrap.
Then begin to pull the bandage tightly from the center towards the break three or four times, and with each wrapping, make your pull less tight, looser, and gentler.
Then proceed to the ends of the thread that you inserted between the thigh and leg, tie them to what follows from the gauze above, then pass by the ends of the thread down until it reaches the ankle bone, and pull both ends also.
So that the bandage does not shift from its place, then leave it on as long as there is no swelling, redness, inflammation, or other such thing, but if anything of that sort happens, attend to it and correct everything according to what we have mentioned repeatedly.
If there is a splinter in the bone, it is necessary that you smooth it out if possible, and if not, split it open and remove it, then treat the wound as we have mentioned earlier until it heals, and this break may be pulled from the thigh without applying gauze to the leg.
As we mentioned in the case of the arm and shoulder, except that setting it like this does not allow him to walk without a limp, even if you set it alone without applying it to the leg, then its owner will always be lame.
Know that the thigh heals in fifty days or increases a little or decreases a little, all according to the differences of temperament and other circumstances.
The Fifteenth Chapter.
In Fracture of the Knee Cap.
That the kneecap rarely has a fracture, but it often has an abrasion; and if it does have a fracture, then either it will split or become separated into its parts, and that can happen with or without injury.
And rely on all of that by feeling, and repair it by putting back together with your fingers what has become separated into its parts until it comes together and conforms to the extent that setting and gentleness permit, then place a compress on it and apply a molded splint if necessary.
And then pull from above the corresponding splint, and take care of all the conditions we described in other fractures, such as inflammation and similar ones, by matching each obstacle with what is suitable for it until it heals.
The Sixteenth Chapter.
In Repairing a Fracture of the Leg.
That the leg has two bones, one thick and called the tibia, and another thin and called the fibula, and it is exposed to various types of fractures as those that affect the bones of the arm. And therefore, its repair is like the repair of the arm's bone, whether it is a single or multiple fracture; if both bones are broken, the leg will turn in all directions, and if only the thin bone is broken, the leg will turn forward, but if the thick bone is broken and that happens from below, it is what you do not hide.
And use a splint and setting, and bind the bandages according to that, whether or not; except that if the leg's fracture is a severe one with many fragments, then the splint should be less and lighter, and take care in repairing it.
In the leg from the work is something added to the arm and that if you have finished binding the bandages and are free from all your work, take two pieces of cedar wood which are used in flattening the grooves that are placed between the joints of boards or are made from palm leaves or similar things.
And choose from them what is a little thick and not from the reeds, let its length be as long as the leg from the knee down, then wrap each one with two cloths wrapped around it and place one of them on the leg and the other from the opposite side.
And let it be from the knee down to the foot, then tie the two cedar pieces in three places on both sides and the middle, for by this binding the leg will not incline to the right or left and will be well supported.
And place it in order to preserve it from movement and do more of that especially if there is a fracture with a special wound, then inspect the leg every day and take great care about swelling or puffiness or any such thing. So when anything of that sort happens, treat it as needed until it heals, and the leg bone will heal in thirty days or so.
The Seventeenth Chapter.
On Fractures of the Leg Bones and Fingers.
However, the ankle does not usually experience fractures, but rather the leg bones, and fingers are rarely fractured, although in most cases it is swollen.
If the leg bones are fractured and you see those bones touching each other, then have the patient stand with his foot on the ground straight like a mule, then come and place your own foot on what is higher of that bone and press it down.
Until it returns to its place, then take the dressing and the bandage from above and put it under the sole of the foot, let there be a small board with two flat surfaces, then tighten it firmly on the foot after wrapping it with cloth and everything else that is needed.
If three or four days have passed, release the bandage. Then you will find the bones straightened, whether they were broken or dislocated. Do as you see fit, and if some of the fingers are broken, set them and shape them according to what I described to you in setting the fingers of the hand.
Then put a splint on the broken finger, as long as the finger, and make it slightly wider than the finger. Then place this board under the foot, which I described to you, and tighten it firmly, if two or three or more of the bones are broken.
Put a splint on each finger, according to its length, in a soft cloth and tighten the board at the bottom of the foot, so that the top of each end of the board is outside the foot's arch, binding it securely.
And you must not forget to apply all that we mentioned to you in treating the fractures, and to respond to each situation as it arises.
The Eighteenth Chapter.
In the fracture of the pelvis, the femur and the man's thigh bone.
When a woman's pelvis is broken, place her in an elevated position, then bend her slightly towards the back, and hold from behind. Then fill the pelvis with cotton until it is full and becomes like a ball in her pelvis.
Then shake the woman and lift her thigh slightly, slightly. For that cotton comes out until it becomes like a ball at the entrance of the pelvis and returns the bone fracture. Then put a pad on her back, and when she wants to urinate, remove the cotton gently until she urinates.
And return it to the way you put it in originally, then go back to her original pad. Do this for seven days or so, and it will heal. And if you want to use a catheter, tie an instrument tube around her mouth and insert the entire catheter into her pelvis.
Then blow into the tube with force until the bladder swells inside the vagina, and the fracture is reduced. Then wrap it in cotton and secure for as many days as we described until it heals. And if the femur bone of a man or woman breaks, use this method to repair it.
And treat it as we described for the lumbar vertebra, and do not hide from you what is correct in these rare fractures that rarely occur, especially if someone has some experience and understands this book well, because the fracture itself will guide you in most cases.
On the right path in setting and splinting, understand this. And if a man's thigh bone breaks, take a goose's tendon and insert it into his member, then place on it a cloth bandage and apply it, leaving for three days or so until it heals.
The Nineteenth Chapter.
In setting fractures of the bones when accompanied by a wound.
It is necessary for whoever encounters a fracture with a wound, especially if the bone is large such as the femur or humerus or similar, to start by cleaning it from its time and applying the conditions of cleansing as we have described.
If the wound is bleeding blood, it is necessary to act quickly by applying powdered sulfur on it if you do not have something else. Then take care of setting the fracture that very same day and do not delay.
If it is not inflamed, do not intervene. But if it becomes inflamed, leave the setting until the ninth day until the inflammation subsides; and do not approach it in the third or fourth day at all, for it will be exposed to bad consequences.
If the broken bone is protruding through the skin, it is necessary to bring it back and set it with your own hands gently and a little distance. And if you are not able to bring it back and set it with your own hands, then use this instrument which is made of iron, its length being seven or eight fingers long. Expose it according to the size of the wound.
Therefore, the physician should take from it three or four according to what he needs for treatment in each type of fracture, and they should be slightly thick so that they do not bend when being struck upon during work.
And its edge should be sharp, with a curve on one side, and the top part thicker and the lower part very thin, as follows:.
And it is called in Greek "perim", meaning a small peg, and so the physician should make its sharp edge curved on one side of the bone fragment, and push it with a stroke until the bone settles and becomes somewhat even; then he can join the edges of the fracture to each other.
If the broken end is thin and the instrument does not grasp it well, then the physician should cut off that part of the bone until the instrument can take hold of it; if he cannot restore the bone to what we have described, then cut it off as much as possible with the fragments mentioned.
Or spread it with one of the splints as much as possible, then strip what remains on the bone of its roughness and scraggly parts; if after setting the bone and finding that the patient experiences severe and painful distress, know that the bone has not returned to its natural position.
If you can set it back to its natural position, then do so, for you will be benefiting the patient with a great benefit; after completing the bone setting, dip a cloth in a strong black compress liquor and especially if you are in summer, and do not apply any ointment or anything similar to the wound.
So that decay and corruption do not occur; then, use the bandages when you have finished setting the bone, and leave the wound open, but apply a compress on top of it with a razor in folds according to the size of the wound.
Be cautious of all caution not to pull the wound with the fracture, for many ignorant doctors have done so and caused harm to their patients either by death or eating away or gangrene. Let your pulling be gentle and soft, unlike that of other fractures.
If the wound is small or a large one and you fear some bad symptoms that we have described, and it finds pain in the place causing anxiety, do not put dressings on it; rather, make him bandages from hard cloth in the place of the dressings and pull with them.
If it has been a day or two and you see the wound starting to develop pus, remove from it the bandage that you put on him with liquid, then use the poultice and ointments which are accustomed to treat wounds like the quadruple ointment and others; and you should loosen the bandage.
And observe the wound every day, both morning and evening, until it heals and closes; and you should position the member in such a way that the pus flows out easily downwards. If the wound has been for many days without healing or the pus ceasing to flow from it, know that there are small bone fragments present.
And it is necessary that you search the wound with a probe, and if any of those small bone fragments are exposed, remove them and extract them; and if some of them are not exposed but are causing movement of the member and producing pain, then cut them off and extract them in any way that you can.
If an abscess or gangrene or another kind of corruption and putrefaction appears on the wound, it is necessary that you treat each one of them with its corresponding remedy as described in its place.
And it is necessary that you take heed of my words and prepare your mind if a large bone is broken and its fragments are scattered on the member like the femur or the humerus and others of the major limbs, for do not attempt to pull it or remove it. Many times the abscess is exposed, but leave it until it has matured, perhaps after twenty days or thirty.
Then you treat the wound if you find a place to treat it, and otherwise leave it.
The 20th chapter.
In the treatment of complication that appears after some fractures.
Often this complication appears after the bone has healed, especially near joints, and it can cause an unpleasant shape to the limb, and perhaps prevent the part from performing its natural function.
If the complication is fresh, use medications that constrict such as saponin, and aloes, and myrrh, and opopanax, and similar things by taking some or all of these and mixing them with a constricting drink or egg whites or vinegar.
And apply it to the complication in a wrapping and pull it tightly on top of it, and leave the wrapping for many days until it falls off then reapply another one until the complication goes away if God wills, or apply a lead poultice tightly wrapped.
If the complication has become hardened and worsened, and necessity demands its removal, make an incision above it and cut off the resulting scab or remove it with some forceps until it goes away and treat the wound until it heals.
The 21st chapter.
In the treatment of fractures when they have healed and the limb has remained weak after that, unlike its original nature.
If a bone fracture has healed and the limb has remained afterwards weak, feeble, then that is due to many reasons. One reason is that the bandages have been loosened too much and bound it wrongly, or another reason is that the bandages have been tightened excessively so that the nourishment cannot reach the limb, or another reason is excessive stretching, or another reason is violent movements at the wrong time, or another reason is a lack of blood in the patient's body and its weakness.
Treatment of that is to nourish the patient and stimulate his body until there is a lot of blood in it, and to use the bath and to bring joy and happiness to him, and so on. Then, apply the grease to the part to attract grease to it greatly or to keep it moist with warm water. Until food is present in it and returns to its natural shape.
The 22nd chapter.
In the treatment of broken bones if they are deformed and prevented from moving as they should.
Therefore, when a member that has been set right after being broken appears deformed or bent to the extent of the fractured bone or complicated and hindered because of which the appearance of the member is distorted. Unless the member has not refused to perform its natural function, it is not right that someone claims to break the member at the head, and many ignorant doctors and surgeons have done so in our country.
And this act is very much to be condemned, leading to a great and wretched affliction. However, if the deformity and complication are acute, it is necessary to apply the water in which the boiled soft herbs such as safflower leaves, and its stalks, and the crown of the king, and so on.
And it is plastered with soft plasters such as Diachylon, or the tender shoots of safflower are taken and beaten with hen's fat and masticated tallow and plastered with it, or the sweet fig is taken and pounded with dove's dung and so on from the medicines that are called "breakers" of the congealing.
And if the complication persists, it will be resolved with continuous gentle massage using the hands and moving the member in all directions at all times. If the deformity has progressed and hardened and necessity requires its treatment with iron.
The wound above should be split and the bone connection severed, and what remains of the complexity or bone should be cut into thin sections. Then, use forceps with effort and care in that, and treat the wound as mentioned earlier until it heals.
The Twenty-Third Chapter.
The jawbone is the exit of a joint from its place, which hinders movement and disfigures the organ, causing severe pains and suffering to the patient. Therefore, whenever anyone presents with a fracture of the jawbone, it is necessary to begin treatment at that very moment to set it right.
He should not be delayed at all, for if he is delayed, the area will become inflamed and it will become harder to set the jawbone right. Therefore, one must not delay or hasten or prolong the treatment while it is inflamed, as it often causes great suffering and pain to the patient.
But if that occurs, one must begin by purging the patient, then leave him until the swelling subsides slightly, then immerse the limb in hot water and apply an ointment, then set it right gently and treat each part as mentioned earlier in its place.
And the chapters on the jawbone have also been organized according to what was mentioned earlier about fractures, from top to bottom of the body.
The Twenty-Fourth Chapter.
On the treatment of the lower jaw fracture.
The two jawbones rarely come together except in rare cases, and their separation is either slight and temporary, causing some stiffness, or complete and total until it becomes stiff. until the patient drools saliva from his mouth and is unable to hold it or articulate speech with his tongue, and in fact, if the separation is slight, he may recover on his own in many cases.
And if the fracture is complete, it is necessary to hasten its treatment quickly and not delay it at all. And let a servant hold the patient's head and the doctor enter with one finger of his hand into the origin of the jawbone within his mouth if the jawbone is on one side.
Or he enters all his fingers if the jawbone is from both sides and the rest of his fingers arrange it from outside, and orders the patient to open his mouth and release his jaw and let it go to each side and the doctor arranges the jawbone and pushes it until it returns to its place.
If it is difficult to correct it, especially if both jawbones are so, use the plaster with hot water and grease until it eases its correction and does not delay it at all as we said. And when they return and settle in their place and the patient's mouth has closed without stiffness, then apply to them a poultice of the kind made from wax and grease and red ointment.
Then bind it gently with a stretched bandage, and the patient should sleep on his back with his head elevated between two pillows so that he is not disturbed to the right or left nor does he struggle to chew anything, but rather makes his food soft and easy.
Until the pain subsides and the jawbone is set, let him eat what he desires, and use it gently without straining when eating, drinking, or speaking until the jawbone is set and recovered.
If the jawbones are difficult to correct and they become loose at some time and do not return to their places, many times that leads to headaches and dizziness and perhaps the patient's belly runs or he vomits repeatedly without stopping. If you see that, then know that it is a fracture.
And many times death occurs due to this complication within ten days.
The Twenty-Fifth Chapter.
In the separation of the atlas and the axis.
As for the atlas, it does not separate from the internal side due to its connection with the chest; and it may separate outwardly, as will be evident by palpation. Its correction is that the patient should lie on his back and stretch out his arms.
Then press the place firmly with your hand, for it will return; then apply a poultice and liniment to it, and bind it. As for its part which is attached to the nape of the neck, it does not usually come loose except in rare cases; but if it does come loose one day, you should bring it back and adjust it as we have described and what appears to be the case.
Then apply a poultice and liniment to it, bind it, and order the patient to follow a quiet and calm regimen until he recovers; and with this treatment alone, the nape of the neck will also return to its proper place.
The Twenty-Sixth Chapter.
In the separation of the nape.
Know that the nape separates in three directions: one is that it separates towards the armpit downwards, and the second is that it separates towards the chest; and sometimes it may separate above the nape, which is rare.
It does not separate towards the back at the place of the shoulder nor does it separate towards the front at the place of the nerve; rather, it tends to separate and come out downwards towards the armpit, especially in those with a weak build because it comes out quickly in them and enters quickly.
And as for those with a strong build, it is the opposite, meaning that it comes out slowly and enters slowly; and sometimes some people may receive a blow or fall and the nape becomes swollen and hot, so one might think that it has separated, therefore one should examine this until its truth is known.
When that is done, it advances in its treatment. The vertebrae will be identified if it goes down towards the armpit. If there is a difference between the ribs and the healthy ribs, you will find a clear disparity and find the head of the rib stuck and under the armpit when touched, as if it were an egg.
And the patient cannot lift his hand to his ear nor move it in all movements. And also, if he bends down towards his chest or up, you will find that evident when touched, not hidden.
And this vertebra may be easy to correct if it is fresh or the patient is young, and its correction is to have a servant lift his hand up then make your fingers under his armpit and lift the joint with force upwards to its place, and the servant lifts his hand and stretches it upwards.
Then it is brought down and it returns quickly. But if it does not return as described and the vertebra has been affected for many days, then the patient should be bathed in hot water and use the poultice that loosens and relaxes like cooking the roots of the henbane and the king's crown flower in water and use it.
Then the patient lies on his back and you place a ball of wool under his armpit, moderate between looseness and tightness. Then the doctor will put his foot on the ball and take hold of the patient's hand with his hand and stretch it down.
And the doctor will push the ball with his foot and it returns to its place. And if you wish, reduce him on this way by having a man taller than the patient take hold of him from the side and enter his shoulder under the patient's armpit and lift his armpit up until the patient is suspended in the air. And another servant will pull the patient's hand down to his stomach. If the patient is light, it is necessary to tie something else with him to support him because the vertebra will return to its place, and also on another occasion.
He should focus on a long piece of wood in the earth, its head being circular like a millstone, not too thick or too thin. Then it is placed under the patient's armpit after a small incision has been made on the head of the wood and the patient stands along the length of the wood.
Then he should extend his hand down on the other side and stretch his body also from the other side with force, so that the joint returns to its place quickly. If it is difficult to return it as we have mentioned, then use this treatment: take a piece of wood about two arm-lengths long. And make its head circular, not too thick, so that it can enter the armpit deep on this shape.
Then it is bound on the circular head with a thin incision so that it does not harm the patient. Then he sets it under the armpit and stretches his entire arm and hand onto the wood to the bottom, and binds the wood on the shoulder and forearm and wrist.
Then the arm is placed on a support. The hand is stretched down and the rest of the body is left hanging from the other side, so that the joint enters its socket. If it has entered in any way possible, then a ball made of wool should be placed under the armpit of moderate size.
Then he carries the prepared poultice made of wheat dust, myrrh, and egg whites on the shoulder entirely as it turns from above. Then the ball is pulled tightly under the armpit and the hand is tied to his neck with a bandage.
And he is left not to move his hand for seven days, and it is necessary to make the patient's food little until the part recovers, for it is faster for healing. Then it is released after seven days or five days, and he exercises with movement. If it has set in place and not swelled, then he is cured.
If the joint dislocates frequently due to moisture exposure or another condition, it is necessary to use the bandage with three cerises as described in the chapter on bandages. If you have done this and released the ligament after seven days and the joint has not stayed in place.
I wrapped the dressing and tightened it several times, but it did not stay in place and fell down relaxed; I was unable to lift it up. So know that the nerve which is in the head of the shoulder has been severed or lengthened or relaxed. So know then that the joint will never stay in its place.
As for the jaw that is towards the chest and breast, and to the back of it, it can be brought back by pushing and stretching with the hands until it returns. And all of the tightening and treatment should be used on it until it recovers. If an obstacle appears after recovery in the part and slows down its movement.
Let the healer use warm water frequently until that member becomes soft and returns to its natural state.
The Twenty-Seventh Chapter.
In the treatment of the shoulder joint.
The shoulder joint dislocates quickly and also returns quickly, and it dislocates in all directions, especially towards the front or back, and its dislocation is not hidden from you because it is under observation and touch in any shape it dislocates.
And if you bind the dislocated shoulder with a correct cast, it will become clear to you through visible demonstration of the joint's dislocation and it will not be able to bend the arm nor touch its shoulder, and one should hasten and return the dislocation to its place before a warm swelling appears.
And if a warm swelling appears, it will be difficult to return it and it may not recover at all, especially if the dislocation is towards the back, for it is the most serious of all kinds of dislocations and causes great pain and many times leads to death.
If it is possible for him to return, then he should have a servant stretch out his hands and arms flat, with the doctor's hand above the elbow and below it, and push the joint back with both hands or just the base of his palm until it returns to its place.
And if the jawbone is in front, it can be returned by bending the hand once so that it hits the base of the palm which is next to it. If the jawbone does not return then use strong force indeed, and have the arm assistants.
And the doctor also has his assistants grasp tightly so that it does not slip when the arm is stretched then turn the arm in all directions after it has been wrapped on his hand with a cloth or a wide bandage, and if the doctor's hands are greased with ointment it will be easy to move the joint.
Then the joint is pushed strongly until it returns, and after its return it is necessary to apply a compress on it which contains compression and drying with egg whites and pull tightly and securely, and the arm should be suspended from the patient's neck and left for some days.
Then loosen it, if the joint remains in its place untie the bandage from it and leave it, and if you see that the joint is not strong yet reapply the compress and bandage and leave it for some days until it strengthens then loosen it. If a swelling occurs after the joint returns and is loosened.
And if there is difficulty in movement, use moistening in the bath and gentle rubbing and massaging until it softens or put a fat goat's leg on the joint then bind it and leave it on for a day and night then remove it and enter the bath, and if sweat occurs, grease the joint with moderate greasing.
Then put it on him three times, and with each bath time until it softens, and if you wish to put cow's fat on it wet and greasy with oil, do so and tighten it on him, for that will soften it and return it to its original state.
The Twenty-Eighth Chapter.
Treatment of the Wrist Dislocation.
The wrist of the hand is often dislocated and returning it to its place is easy, except that it should be hastened as soon as possible when it is dislocated before the swelling or warmth appears in the place.
Returning it (the wrist) is to place the afflicted wrist on a flat surface, and have a servant hold out his hand, and the doctor puts his hand on the joint and pushes until it returns; except that one should observe if the dislocation has moved to the back of the hand.
He should place the afflicted hand's outer side on the flat surface when applying and returning, and if the dislocation is visible to the outer side of the hand, then he should put his inner hand on the flat surface so that his doctor's hand falls on the same joint; then it will return immediately; otherwise, he should bind it with a compressing bandage for the swelling.
And then one should not attempt to repeat it, for it does not tolerate nor can it return after some days have passed; except that the joint remains in its place and the afflicted person is harmed nothing, unless the hand becomes stiff and unable to grasp anything.
Therefore one learns that the nerve has been cut off or crushed, and there is no remedy in this case except to tie it with a ligature; perhaps it will be of benefit, and perhaps not. If the wrist dislocation is returned, then wrap it with the compressing bandage we described, then bind and leave for five days.
Then loosen and exercise the hand; if its movement is resisted and there is something tight in it, soak it in warm water and massage several times until it relaxes.
The Twenty-Ninth Chapter.
Treatment of the Finger Dislocation.
The fingers may bend towards every direction. When a finger bends from one of them towards the outside of the hand or its interior, stretch the finger and push back the hand with your thumb until it returns, then tie the tip of the finger and attach it to the direction it bent towards.
Leave it for two days, then release it and stretch it until it becomes even with its normal state. If you bind it at night the same way, it will heal during the day, and practice moving it at night; do that for some days until it strengthens.
And you do the same with it if it bends towards the interior of the hand, binding it in the direction itself and doing to it what you did first until it heals, and you do the same with it whenever it bends towards any other direction.
The Thirtieth Chapter.
Treatment of a Fracture of the Backbone.
When a fracture occurs in one of the vertebrae or the neck, and it is a complete separation or many vertebrae have shifted from their places, there is no treatment for this because death hastens to the sufferer.
And a sign of that is that the sufferer's excrement comes out without intention, and he is unable to retain it; often some of his limbs become paralyzed, either his legs or his arms, or one of them, and if one vertebra has shifted from its place, many will follow.
And it will occur to four directions, and the one that shifts towards the back is called a luxation; and as for its treatment, look at it: if the luxation has occurred from habit, there is no treatment for it whatsoever, nor will the sufferer be cured by any means; but if it occurred due to a fall or blow, and so on.
I have mentioned it to the previous ones with lengthy treatments, but most of what they said was not beneficial; and I shortened from that what is sufficient for little, whereas they brought a lot from my approach and explanation.
I say that the abscess which occurs in front of the chest is incurable and untreatable, and likewise those which occur on both sides. However, I treat those which occur specifically in the back with what I have described, namely by having the patient lie down on his face.
On a platform or dais near the wall, spread a wet cloth underneath it so that his chest is not injured. Then place a wooden board standing upright in a hole in the ground at the head end of the platform and another one at the other end for his feet.
And a servant holds the board, it not being firmly rooted in the hole; another servant holds the other one in this manner. Then wrap a cloth around the patient's chest and under his armpits, tightly binding it. And stretch the end of the cloth to the board that is at his head and tie him there.
Then tie another cloth above his knees, and above his ankles, and at his calves. Then gather all the straps together and tie them to the other board that is at his feet. Then each servant will pull his end of the strap towards the board without the boards moving from their fixed positions.
Except that they are not firmly rooted as we said, and the physician puts his hands on the fulcrum with great force until it returns or puts a board on it. Then he leans on the board with his feet until it returns. If it does not return by this treatment, he takes a board that is about three arm-lengths long.
And dig a hole in the wall that we said should be near the patient, put the end of the board into it, then place the middle of the board on the abscess. And the physician puts his feet on the other end and pulls with great force until the fulcrum is tightened.
And it returns to its place. If you wish to make it with the screw that is turned by hand, which is to insert into the ground at the head of the patient at the end of the platform two wooden boards each a length of an arm, and at his feet also at the other end of the platform two wooden boards.
Let it be after each beam a span, and let there be a hole in each beam through which the screw passes, and secure all the wood to the ground until it does not move at all, so that the stick, which is the one that winds the strap around both beams.
And in its side, a hole that has been secured with a stick as long as a span, and so too the other beams. Then, tighten the strap which you tightened in the middle of the patient in the screw at his head, and the straps which you tightened at his legs in the screw at his feet.
Then he stands at each screw, a servant who holds the tool that turns the screw and the doctor adjusts the bandage as we have mentioned, and this is the picture of the screw, the splint, and the patient.
Then, after the swelling subsides and the position is evened out, it is necessary to wrap the dried dressing with egg white then linen, and then place a splint from a piece of wood that is three fingers wide or so, and its length should be as long as takes the bandage's position.
And on some correct stones, then it should be bound with the strap that is needed, and the patient should use gentle food until he recovers. If some swelling remains in the place at the end of the recovery, it is necessary to use medicines that soften and relax, along with the use of the board we described for a long time.
And in that case, a lead plate can be used. And if some swelling remains at the end of the vertebrae's bones, it may be thought to be a dislocation and it will be an additional bone which has been protruding, so do not expose yourself to this treatment for fear of death.
The 29th chapter.
In the treatment of a frozen shoulder.
Know that the joint of the hip and the joint of the loin are exposed to the knife only, and they are not exposed to what other joints are exposed to, namely slight dislocation and bending. The joint of the hip is divided into four directions.
That is because it divides into inside and outside, forward and backward, with more division towards the inside and less towards the forward or backward. A sign of its division towards the inside is that if you align the healthy leg with the affected one, it will be longer.
And the knee will be crooked more than the healthy one, and the patient cannot bend his leg at the joint. The position that follows the joint and from there to here is indicated by a slight indication before the head of the thigh reaches there.
And a sign of what is exposed to the knife towards the outside is that its symptoms are contrary to these symptoms. And a sign of what is exposed to the knife towards the front is that he extends his leg to the utmost except that he does not bend it without pain; and if he tries to walk, he cannot do so in that direction.
And he hesitates to walk and trembles his joint; and when walking, his foot stamps on the heel. And a sign of what is exposed to the knife towards the back is that he does not straighten his knee nor can he bend it before bending his joint; and also his leg will be shorter than the other one.
And the joint is relaxed, and the head of the thigh is at the position of the crest. As for the types of this joint, look if it has been old and worn out with its owner, and has not been tried to be restored and remained in that state; then there is no treatment whatsoever.
So it should not be exposed to that. And as for what is a new joint, regardless of its type from the four directions of the joint, hasten to loosen the joint and stretch it towards the inside and outside, and move it to the right and left; perhaps.
If he does not return, then it is necessary to prepare a strong assistant with a pole, either by his hands or with a cloth that wraps around his leg above the knee and another servant supports him from above.
So that he enters his hands from underneath his armpits, then pulls with a soft cloth on the origin of the thigh and has another servant hold the end of the cloth, and this servant's support is either from in front, towards the hip to the knee, or from behind, towards the back.
And all of their supports will be in one movement until the patient lifts his body from the ground and remains suspended, for this type of support is common to all four types, so if the jaw returns as we mentioned, otherwise it is necessary for each type what I mentioned earlier.
But if the jaw is to the inside, it is necessary for the patient to lie on his healthy side then to spread cloths around the origin of the thigh between the top of the thigh and the place under the armpit.
Then the strap is stretched upwards from the armpit to the top of the body to the knee, and another strong assistant takes hold with his arms and holds the thick part of the affected thigh and pulls strongly until it returns to its place.
And this type is easier than all other types of treatment that involves the return of this member, if you are unable to proceed with this type of treatment at all then it is necessary to bind the patient's legs together with a strong soft cloth on the ankles and knees.
And it will be so that each of the patient's legs is bound with four fingers' width, and the affected leg will be stretched more than the other by two finger widths, then the patient will be lifted onto a board that is in the house and will be suspended off the ground by two arms.
Then order a strong servant to grasp the femur head and another servant to hold onto it, while pushing the other servant grasping the femur with force. Then, the joint will return to its place quickly. As for his own [servant], if the jawbone is outside.
He should lie down on the stretcher according to what we described in the patient with a fractured hip, and tighten the splint on his upper thigh and chest. Then, two boards should be placed one at his feet and another at his head. Then, an additional board should be placed in the middle of the stretcher very securely.
It should be wrapped with a wet cloth so that the patient is not harmed, lest the board between his thighs causes him to slide down when he moves. Then each servant will stretch out in his direction and the physician will adjust the splint with his hands, if he returns.
And if not, then place a board on him and secure it as we described in the case of the fractured hip, unless he lies on his sound side. And if the fracture is in front, then the patient's leg should be stretched once while he is in this position on the stretcher.
And the physician will place his right hand on the upper femur, then press it with his other hand, while keeping the pressure extended downward to the knee area. And if the fracture is behind, then the patient should not be stretched downward.
And he should be elevated off the ground, but rather placed on something sturdy, as well as having his ankle outside, according to what we described of him lying on the stretcher, with his face down and the splints tightened.
As we said earlier, and it is necessary to use the pad on the board also at the location where the joint has returned, if the hip joint has returned as it should be, and its return can be recognized by stretching the patient's legs.
If you see them staying and the leg is grasping the thigh and stretching it without obstruction, then know that the limb has returned to its proper place. Then tie the bandage and tighten it firmly, so that the swelling does not shift to any of the directions.
The wound requires rest. The calmness is for three or four days, then release the bandage and swelling and cut the leg into another shape. If you see them equal in size in the swelling, know that the fracture has set, so allow the patient to walk. And if you notice something of relaxation in it.
Go back and rebind it, and tighten it according to your first tightness, and leave him also for three days, then release it. And gradually ease the walking on it until he is strong enough, if Allah wills.
The 22nd section.
Treatment of a fracture of the knee.
The knee fractures in three directions, it breaks inward and outward and downward, meaning towards the back, but not forward at all. And a sign of its fracture is that you order the patient to bind their leg to their thigh.
If it does not stick to the thigh, know that the knee is fractured. And correct all its faces so that the patient sits down and if they are able, stretches out their legs and sits a servant behind him to hold his middle and tie him towards the back slightly, then you sit on his thighs.
And lean your back against his face, and place his leg between your legs. Then grasp his knee with your hands, and lock them together between your fingers on his knee. Then bind his knees tightly with force, and have another servant stretch out his leg until the knee returns to its place.
And a sign of its return is that the leg sticks to the thigh in a relaxed manner, not forced. Then bind it and tie the leg to the thigh, then bind them together with bandages for three or four days, then release them. And he should only use gentle walking for some days until he gets strong.
If difficulty arises, refer to what we have described and if not, use the strong bandages mentioned earlier in treating sciatica until it subsides.
The Thirty-Third Chapter.
In the treatment of ankle fracture.
The ankle may become dislocated slightly or completely and its fracture may be either towards the inside or outside, and a sign of its fracture is that you will see the ankle swollen and prominent on the side to which it has been displaced.
If its dislocation is slight, it will be easy to reduce it and that is by gently stretching the leg and straightening it until it returns. And if it has fractured completely, the patient should sit down and have a strong assistant grasp him from behind his back in the middle.
Then you should grasp the patient's right foot from above with your right hand and their left foot from below with your left hand at the ankle joint, then pull the foot towards yourself with your right hand and then with your left hand twice, then straighten it with your left hand and push the foot with your right hand towards the leg without force.
You should do that twice as we described, then push the foot towards the leg in the third time while pulling on the ankle, if it returns to its normal position one or two times with this method and you see the foot is straightened, otherwise repeat the process because it will return.
If it does not return as we described, then place the patient on their back on the ground and tie them down securely so that they lie between their thighs, and have a blanket wrapped around them, lest the patient be injured, then have an assistant secure their thigh.
Then another assistant will stretch the patient's leg either by hand or with a bandage tied around his ankle, then each assistant will pull in the opposite direction of their companion and the wedge will remain between the patient's thighs to prevent their body from sliding down during the stretching, then the doctor will straighten the joint with their hands.
And the servant should grasp the healthy leg from below. If the jaw returns quickly, then when the jaw has returned and you have confirmed its return, take the compress and bandage and bind it securely with strong threads. Secure the foot to the bandage going down. One must beware of the nerve that is above the anklebone from behind.
So that the bandage is not too tight and causes harm to him. Then leave it for two or three days, then remove it when the swelling subsides. Then release him on the third or fourth day, and prevent the patient from walking for forty days.
If he tries to walk before this period, do not guarantee that the jaw will not become dislocated and be ruined, and then it will not accept treatment afterwards. If a severe inflammation occurs, one should use what we described earlier for treating it in any other location until it passes.
The 34th chapter.
Treatment of the fingers of the hand.
One should straighten what has become bent from it with a gentle movement, without force, and this is not difficult but rather easy. If the jaw is in some of the joints on the top of the foot, one should make the patient place their foot on a flat surface from the ground.
Or on a board and he stands like walking, then stand you and put your foot on what remains of those joints then press it with your foot with force until it returns and you see that it is straight and there is no prominence in the place.
Then make a board or a plate under the arch of his foot, so that all the toes are on it. Then bind it tightly and securely with strong threads for three days, then release it and keep him from walking for many days until he strengthens and there is no return, God willing.
The 45th chapter.
In types of jawbone that accompany an injury or a fracture or both.
When something like that occurs and swelling of its treatment and suturing often follows death.
Therefore, it is not proper that someone without extensive experience and expertise in the art of medicine, being neither cautious nor hasty, should attempt to treat such a case unless they use medicines that calm hot swellings at first, and then wait for the patient's condition.
Praise be to Allah, except for the amount I hope for from the patient's recovery from the affliction with a slight illness and some hope appearing in it, so that you can relieve him at first before the hot swelling occurs.
If the limb returns to what you desired, use the treatment that calms hot swellings and treat the wound with what is suitable for it from dried ointments. If the jawbone is with a fracture and fragments of bone are exposed, then extract them. And adhere to what we mentioned in simple diseases as we presented it in its places.
And strive with your best efforts and purify yourself from falling into the traps, as we previously warned you and counseled you. This is for the benefit of your reputation and the preservation of your standing, if Allah wills.
