And the writer of this book has completed it for you, sons, since he has finished writing this part which is a part of the science of medicine in its entirety and has reached the utmost clarity and explanation. He saw that he should complete it with this chapter which is a part of the work by hand.
Because manual work is non-existent in our country and at our time, to the extent that it seems one cannot study its knowledge or follow its method. And what remained of it were only slight sketches in the books of the early ones, which the hands had blotted and the pens had smeared and distorted, so that its meanings became obscure and its usefulness was lost.
So I saw that I should revive it and compile this chapter in the manner of explanation, clarification, and abridgment, and to bring forth the pictures of the tools and instruments of surgery as they are needed.
And the reason why there is no skilled surgeon in our time who has mastered this craft by hand is that the profession of medicine is long and requires its practitioner to have previously acquired knowledge of anatomy as described by Galen. Until he stands on the benefits and defects, connections and disconnections of the organs, and knows the bones, nerves, muscles, their numbers, exits, and vessels, both pulsating and tranquil, and the locations of their exits.
Therefore, Albuqrat said: "Physicians are many in name, but few in deed, especially in the craft of hand surgery," and we mentioned some examples of this earlier in the introduction to this book.
Because whoever is not knowledgeable about what we have mentioned in anatomy will inevitably fall into error that kills people, as I have seen many who pretend to be experts in this science without knowledge or understanding.
And I have seen an unlearned doctor who attempted to cut out a goiter from a woman's neck, and he tore some of the neck's ligaments, causing the woman's blood to flow until she fell dead at his feet.
I saw a doctor who had successfully removed a stone from an old man who had been troubled with it for many years and the stone was large so he hesitated but then extracted it with a piece of the bladder membrane. The old man died about three days later, and I was summoned to examine the stone and the patient's internal organs, and I observed what had become of them as a result.
I saw another doctor who was practicing medicine with some local leaders in our country.
Then there was a young man with a fracture in his leg near the ankle, along with an open wound. The doctor hastened to treat him despite his ignorance and applied the splint tightly without leaving any room for the wound to breathe.
Then he left him to his whims and abandoned him for a few days, ordering him not to remove the splint until his leg and foot had swollen and threatening with death.
So I was summoned to him and quickly removed the splint, and he gained relief from his pain and stood up from his suffering, except that the damage had already become severe in the member and I was unable to restore it.
And so the damage continued to spread in the member until he died.
I saw another doctor who had a swelling caused by a tumor and it ulcerated after some days until it became a great sore on his patient, which is that if the tumor is pure from black bile then it should not be treated with iron at all.
Unless it is in an organ that can have its entirety removed.
And therefore, my sons, you should know that the work of your hands is divided into two parts: a work that accompanies safety and a work that accompanies harm in most cases.
And I have warned you in every place that this book's work, which contains pitfalls and fears, so you should beware of it and reject it.
Unless the ignorant one finds a way to speak and cut, take hold of yourselves with firmness and vigilance and care for your patients with kindness and attention.
And use the best route leading to safety and the praised outcome, and turn away from dangerous and difficult diseases.
And purify yourselves from what you fear may lead to doubt in your faith and worldly status, for it is more precious to your souls and elevated in this world and the hereafter according to your decrees.
For Galen said in some of his counsels: Do not cure a bad disease and call yourself a bad doctor.
And this treatise has been divided into three doors.
The first door.
In the fire and in the sharp medicine, a sequence of the ancient to the modern times, pictures of the instruments and containers, and all that is needed for the manual work.
The second door.
In the incision, puncture, cupping, and bloodletting, and surgical operations, and extracting arrows, and all that is similar, a sequence and pictures of the instruments.
The third door.
In the splinting, bandaging, and treating of ulcers, and all that is similar, a sequence from ancient to modern times and pictures of the instruments.
The first door.
In the fire.
And before we mention its use, it is necessary to mention its benefits and drawbacks, and in what temperament it is used.
For I say that the talk about the benefits and drawbacks of the fire is a long and detailed speech, a hidden secret, and many wise men have spoken about it.
And they disagreed on this, and I have only briefly summarized their words, fearing tediousness.
I say that the kafi is beneficial for every kind of evil temperament, whether it is with matter or without matter, except for two temperaments: one dry and devoid of matter, and another hot and devoid of matter.
As for the dry temperament with matter, they have disagreed about it. Some have said that the kafi is beneficial in this case, while others have disagreed and said that the kafi is not suitable in a disease that arises from heat and dryness because the nature of fire is hot and dry.
It is unlikely that a hot and dry disease would be treated with a hot and dry remedy. And those who disagree say that the kafi, with fire, can benefit in cases of hot and dry diseases that occur in human bodies. Because when you add the moisture of the human body to the fiery temperament, the human body becomes cool.
And I say so because experience has revealed it to me on numerous occasions, unless one should assume that the matter is true only for someone who has gained expertise and has a profound understanding of the subject. And he stopped at the differences in the temperaments of people, the states of diseases within themselves, their causes, symptoms, and duration.
And as for the other temperaments, do not be afraid of them, especially the cold and moist diseases, because all physicians have agreed on their benefit from the kafi.
And know, my sons, that those who prefer the kafi treatment with fire and esteem it above the caustic remedy because the fire is a single essence that does not exceed its effect on the affected part nor harm another connected part except slightly.
And the caustic remedy can exceed its effect to other parts, and it may cause a disease in the affected part that is difficult to treat and may even kill. And fire, due to its nobility and the excellence of its essence, does not do so unless it is excessive.
Our experience has demonstrated that to the length of service and care in the craft, and standing by the realities of the matter.
And therefore I have spared you from lengthy discourse, except that it does not befit this book of mine to reveal to you in secret a mysterious manner and how to do it in bodies, and to reject diseases with philosophical reasoning.
And know, my sons, that they have disagreed about the time when it is suitable for an operation, and have considered the best time to be in the spring.
And I say that an operation can be suitable at any time, since the harm that has occurred beforehand takes its toll in the benefit that is brought about by the operation. Especially if the operation is for a severe and necessary pain that cannot be delayed, lest it lead to greater harm than the internal harm that has occurred beforehand.
And do not think, my sons, that the operation which cures a disease will never recur and make it chronic.
And do not think, my sons, that the operation is only like a medicine that adjusts the temperament and dries up the humors which are the cause of the pains.
Unless, indeed, an operation is preferred over medicine in its prompt success, strong action, and intense authority.
And it is possible that the disease may recur at a later time according to the temperament of the patient and the strength of his disease, as well as what occurs in his body from the accumulation of bad humors and neglecting himself in acquiring nourishment and other such causes.
May God forbid that the disease for which an operation is performed be a gentle one and affecting a part with little humors and moisture. Like the extraction of pus from a boil and similar conditions, it may not return to its normal state, and that is possible in the least.
And as for the common people's saying that the cupping is the last remedy, it is a correct statement not like what they say because they assume that no treatment is effective by medicine or otherwise after the cupping has been done and the matter is unlike that.
And the meaning of "the cupping is the last remedy" is that when we try various treatments for a disease and they do not succeed, then we use cupping as a last resort and it succeeds, so from here it becomes the last remedy. Not according to the meaning that the common people and many ignorant doctors have.
And the early ones have mentioned that gold cupping is better than iron cupping, and they said that because of the moderation of gold and the excellence of its essence, and they said it does not disturb the place of the cupping, which is not at all the case.
Because I have tried that and found that it does not always do so in all bodies, and the cupping with gold is better and more excellent than iron as they said; except that if you heat the cupping ball in fire from gold, you will not know when to stop heating it for the desired redness of the gold.
And because it hastens to cooling and if you add more heat in the fire it melts, and the craftsman falls into trouble from that; therefore, cupping with iron is faster and closer to being correct in practice, if Allah wills.
And I have organized this chapter on cupping into sections from the head to the foot so that it is easy for the student to find what he wants, if Allah wills.
The First Chapter.
In the cupping of the head one cup.
This remedy is effective against the pressure of humidity and cold on the brain, which are the cause of headache and excessive drooping from the head to the direction of the eyes and ears, and excessive sleepiness and pain in the teeth and throat. And in general, all illnesses that are exposed to cold, such as apoplexy, epilepsy, and paralysis, and similar diseases.
The image of this remedy is to order the patient first to vomit with the gentle and purified medicine for the head, three nights or four according to what the patient's strength, age, and habit require.
Then order him to shave his head with a razor, then seat him in front of you, reclining and placing his hands on his chest.
Then place the tip of your finger on the tip of his nose between his eyes, where your middle finger reaches.
Then take the oilcloth mentioned in this image.
Reveal as much of the bone as is needed for the top of the skull or a coriander seed, lift up your hand or else use the same or another needle if it grows cold. Until you see from the bone what I mentioned to you, then take something of salt, dissolve it in water, make it into a poultice and put it on the place, and leave it for three days.
Then wrap it with a poultice soaked in ghee and leave it on until the scab falls off like ash, then treat him with the quadrangular ointment until he is healed if Allah wills.
And they said that the wound, whenever it remains open, is better and more effective.
And some said that one should cauterize the skin to the bone and hold the oilcloth until some of the thick bone is burned, then strip off what has been burned afterwards.
Others say that one should strain with the caustic until it has a strong effect on the bone, causing it to break off like a small piece of coral or a tiny rock. And they claim that he exhales from that place a mist of the head and leaves the wound open for a long time.
Then he treats it until it heals. And I do not see these two types of caustic at all except in some people and on the surface, and I leave it better off with peace if that is so. For the head becomes inflamed when its natural connection is severed, as we have seen in all other members.
And especially when the patient's head is naturally weak, the first type of caustic is the best and I prefer it, and I use it with success, if God wills.
The Second Chapter.
Also in the head.
If it occurs in the head, a chronic headache that persists for a long time with the patient and he has used poultices, poultices, fomentations, bandages, and wrappings, especially if he has applied only one caustic as we described, and nothing has benefited him from that, then look. If the patient's head is strong by nature and not weak, and he finds a severe headache, then apply another caustic on top of that slightly. Then apply a caustic to each crown of his head until the skin thins and the quantity of bone that we described is revealed. And apply a caustic to the back of his head in the place known as the "axe", and ease your hand in this case, without exposing the bone, for the patient will find it very painful, unlike the pain caused by all other head caustics, and I will mention this caustic in its place.
The wound that is cauterized with the horn of the head and its tip should be softer than the wound that is cauterized with the middle of the head, and this is its form.
Chapter Three.
In non-chronic ulcers.
If it happens in a fissure of the head accompanied by headache and dizziness, and the pain extends to the eye, then the patient should take purgative medicines for the head and use all the treatment mentioned in the divisions of diseases. If that does not succeed, the treatment is applied on two ways. Either by burning medicine or by iron.
As for cauterizing with burning medicine, take one of the garlic cloves and scrape it, then cut its edges on both sides. Then, incise the affected area from the forehead to a width of about an inch, until it becomes an opening under the skin that can accommodate the garlic.
Then, insert it under the skin until it disappears, then bind it tightly with a strong bandage and leave it for about fifteen hours. Then, remove it, take out the garlic, and let the wound remain for two or three days before moving.
Then, anoint it with a thread soaked in fat until the area is cleansed. Then, treat it with ointment until it heals, if Allah wills. Or you can do that with some burning medicines which I mentioned in the eighteenth chapter on burning medicines.
And as for cauterizing with iron, it is done in this manner: take the caustic mixture that has this form.
And it is called the Masmariya caustic because its head has a shape resembling a Masmara reed, with some roughness and in the middle a small notch.
Then, place it on the affected area and hold your hand firm as you slowly turn the iron, and what burns through the skin will be like half its thickness. Raise your hand so that you do not burn the vein which is below and bleeding occurs, then soak a piece of cotton in salt water and put it on the place and leave it for three days. Then wrap the cotton with fat, then treat it with ointment until it heals if Allah wills.
And if you wish, cut this ligature with the pointed side of the knife that comes from the scissors and keep it away from the non-inflamed part of the vein.
The Fourth Section.
In chronic ligatures.
If you treated the ligature with what we mentioned earlier and in the divisions of diseases, but the treatment did not succeed and you saw a condition that cannot be treated as we mentioned in the first remedy or the one by fire. So you should tie the scissors tightly until it whitens after learning where the pain is, along a line parallel to its length about half an inch or so, and leave your hand once and then pull it tight until you cut the vein and reach towards the bone.
Unless you beware of the connection of the jaw that moves when chewing, so as to burn the muscle or nerve controlling it and causing tension.
And beware of hemorrhage from the vein that you cut, for in its cutting is danger. Especially for one who does not know what to do and has not been tested by experience, and leaves the work first.
And the treatment of bleeding from the vein on its surface will be mentioned in its place in this book, if Allah wills. If you see a condition that cannot be treated by this remedy.
And if you see the patient's body swollen, apply the ligature in the middle of the head as we described and treat the wound until it heals if Allah wills.
If you wish, you can use the suture we mentioned in the chapter on ligating the artery with the instrument having two blades. It is a better and more effective one than this.
The fifth section.
In the wounds of the ears.
If there is pain in the ear due to cold and it was treated with poultices and all the treatment we mentioned in the classification, but the pain does not go away, then use the instrument called the point which this shows its form.
Then press it against all around the ear as it rotates or against both of them if the pain is in both. And then take the suture away from the base of the ear a little after having marked its place with ink, and the suture will be about ten points long in each ear or so, and then treat the places until they heal if God wills.
The sixth section.
In the wounds of the elbow.
The elbow which is treated with a suture is that kind which occurs from purulence as we mentioned in the classification of diseases.
And it should be avoided, the type which occurs from ulcers and tension on the nerve.
When you have treated this type of elbow with poultices, compresses, and plasters, but your treatment has not been effective, then the patient should be sutured three times. One at the base of the ear, the second a little below the corner, and the third where the lips meet.
And make your suture on the opposite side of the affected area, because relaxation only occurs in the healthy-looking part.
And the shape of the suture is to make it like a tie on the upper edge of the ear, under the crown of the head, slightly and another one in the corner, and its length will be according to the length of the eyebrow.
The hand descends gradually until it burns to the extent of half the thickness of the skin, and this is a picture of cauterization, which is a type of burn that advances its appearance slightly less than the other kind as you see. And it is necessary for the cauterizing tool to be slightly thicker, then treat the area as previously mentioned until it heals if God wills.
The Seventh Chapter.
In chronic ulcers.
If the ulcer has been abscessed and treated as mentioned, and your treatment was not effective and there is no evident fever, then take four poultices. On each crown of the head, a poultice and in the middle of the head as mentioned, and a poultice on the back of the head as previously.
The recipe for cauterization as mentioned, and it can also be applied with a poultice to the mouth of the stomach, and it will be more effective, then treat as previously mentioned.
The Eighth Chapter.
In forgetting.
Whoever is afflicted with phlegm, it is necessary that the patient first be given a potion from the major aromatics and purifying grains for the brain.
Then he should shave his entire head and carry on the back of his neck a poultice of mustard written in the article about ulcers, and it is said to be effective if repeated.
And do the same on each spot as mentioned there, and he will be cured with that, otherwise take three poultices for the back of his head, arranged from the top of the head to the bottom of the neck.
And place a thick layer of fat between each poultice and the next, then treat the poultice as previously mentioned, if you wish to add more and the patient is capable of it, take the middle poultice.
If you wish to increase it, then apply the poultice on the joints and treat it until it heals, and the swelling will be like an olive oil on the appearance that has been presented.
The ninth chapter.
In paralysis of the limbs and relaxation of all the body.
It is necessary to proceed in cleaning the head with balms and what we mentioned, then shave the patient's head, then apply a poultice in the middle of the head, on each crown of the head, and on its occiput.
And three on the vertebrae of the neck. If it is necessary for the treatment of relaxation of the body to go beyond that, and the patient is capable of bearing it and the disease is strong and firmly established, then apply four poultices on the vertebrae of his back. And continue the poultice until it burns most of the skin and raise your hand, then treat him as mentioned earlier until he heals if God wills, and the swelling will be like olive oil.
The tenth chapter.
In epilepsy.
It is only the epileptic who has epilepsy due to phlegm, so it is necessary to cleanse his brain first with large balms and all the treatments that we mentioned in the classification, if the patient is big and capable of taking medicines.
As for if the patient is a child and cannot take medicines, then the purging and cleansing substances for the brain should be used before that over many days with improvement of his diet.
Then shave his head, then apply a single poultice in the middle of the head as mentioned earlier and another one on his occiput. And on each crown of his head, a poultice. If the patient is strong and capable, then apply the poultices mentioned earlier for the paralytic and relaxation of the body on the vertebrae of the neck and back, and the swelling will be like olive oil on the appearance that has been presented.
If the patient is a child, make the poultice light on this shape.
The Eleventh Chapter.
In the Case of Malnutrition.
If the cause of malnutrition is putrid fluids and thick phlegm, then follow the measures we mentioned for a person with apoplexy.
If the cause of malnutrition is leaning towards black bile and the patient's body is moist and humid, then treat his brain as described earlier in the partition.
Then shave the patient's head, then make a tight compress of flax cloth in the shape of a circle and place it on his head while the patient is sitting with his head elevated, holding it from all sides; then take one piece of old goat tallow.
Then warm it on the fire to a moderate heat, as much as the finger can tolerate if inserted into it; then place it in the middle of his head in the circle and leave it until it cools down. Do this with the patient every week, along with all good care, until he recovers if God wills.
And if you wish, wash it with a lot of small pats without grasping the compress with your hand but rather by sprinkling it; for this type of washing cools the brain moderately.
Then anoint him with a dampened cloth in oil or chicken fat.
The Twelfth Chapter.
In the Case of Water that Falls into the Eye.
If it becomes clear to you at the beginning of the water that falls into the eye, by the signs mentioned in the partition, then purify the patient's head and keep him away from all moisture and bathe him in a warm bath for several days.
Then wash his head with a poultice in the middle of the head, and then apply two poultices to the temples if the beginning of the water falling is in both eyes or on one side if it is only in one eye.
Then cut with the scalpel all the veins and arteries under the skin, making sure there are no tears in the flesh and prevent bleeding.
If you find anything of it, cut it off at the spot with any treatment that is possible and we will come to the wisdom in ligating veins and arteries and preventing bleeding.
And there may be a severe cut on the back under the bones, two deep cuts.
The Thirteenth Chapter.
In chronic bleeding wounds.
If the bleeding from the eyes is chronic and persistent, and it comes from the veins and arteries inside the skull outside the head, and you are certain that this is due to a thick and hard tumor-like growth, then cut the vein I have described at its beginning point where the water flows. A vein in the middle of the head and two veins on the temples and two veins under the bones at the back, and if you need to increase it, then cut a vein on each side of the eye socket up to the eyebrow with a small scalpel.
The Fourteenth Chapter.
In chronic bleeding from the nose.
If you have treated it as we mentioned in the division and the treatment has not been successful, then take three doses of the poultice of soap stone, then shave his head and cut out the middle vein with a fat-wood scalpel. Then cut with the sesame-wood scalpel two veins above the eyebrows under the hair a little and prevent bleeding, do not cut it. And this is the image of the sesame-wood.
The Fifteenth Chapter.
In relaxing a twitching eyelid.
If the eyelid twitches due to disease or moisture, then cut the eyelid into one piece with this holly-wood scalpel.
And if you wish, bring the two sides up above the eyebrows a little bit in each direction and widen from the temples, with the length of each side being the length of the eyebrow.
And do not exaggerate your fold, but to the extent that one-third of the skin is creased, and the appearance of the fold will be like this.
The Sixteenth Chapter.
Of the Fold of the Eyelid.
If its edges turn inward then we will excise the eye and there are two types of fold in it. Either by fire or by caustic remedy, and as for the fold made by fire, the patient should be instructed beforehand to remove his eyebrows if he has one that he plucks until it grows long and even.
If it is excised when it is new, it will be tightly bound with a bandage so that it does not move until it grows out. Then, once it has grown out and evened out, place the patient's head in a vice and then mark on the eyelid with ink an indication of the shape of a leaf from the asphodel tree.
And the mark will begin near the edges then place a black thread under the eyelid in white of egg or in gum arabic and preserve this form's appearance.
Then shape it gradually little by little in many times until the surface of the skin which is like the shape of an asphodel leaf appears, and a sign of the success of your work will be that you see the eyelid has turned inward and the hair has risen above the eye socket.
Then raise your hand at that time and leave it for three days, then smear it with fat until the crust falls off, then treat it with ointment until it is cured if Allah wills. If something from the hair returns after a while and the eyelid relaxes.
So reattach it to that position as I did first, if there is hair in the lower eyelid then remove it until it returns to its natural place and does not obscure the eye. And as for the treatment with burning medicine, it is that you order the patient to leave the scabs alone until they dry and even out.
Then make a paper image of a leaf or something like that. Take from the usual soap and untempered plaster each one weighing about a dirham or so, and grind them together thoroughly into a fine powder using a mortar, lest it dry out. Then spread some of it on the paper you made in the shape of a leaf and place it on one or both eyelids, and put under the eye a moistened cotton swab dipped in egg white, with the patient's head resting on your lap.
And place your ring finger on top of the medicine and hold it slightly while you move it as long as the patient feels pleasure from the medicine because he finds pleasure like fire, so as long as he feels pleasure leave the medicine and move it with your finger. If the pleasure ceases then remove the medicine and wash the eye with water.
And look, if you see the eyelid has lifted like it lifts when burned or cut, and otherwise, reapply the medicine to the place where the medicine did not affect and did not spread until you complete your work and the eye becomes inflamed, then put a cotton swab on it with grease until the blister of burning subsides.
Then treat it with the ointment of almonds or otherwise until it heals, and it is necessary for you to be extremely careful when working so that nothing from the medicine falls into the eye, because if the eyelid relaxes after a few days and something from the hair falls into the eye.
So reapply the medicine to that place where the eyelid relaxed, especially as I did first, then treat it until it heals, and this is the image of a leaf.
Know that the eyes of people may differ in smallness and largeness, so according to that, be your incision. And there is no shortcut to the correct way for one who has a lesson in this craft.
The Seventeenth Chapter.
In the space between the eyebrow and the eye.
If you treated the eyebrow as we mentioned in the classification of diseases, but your treatment was not successful, then it is necessary to look into this condition.
The patient should place his head in your hands and have a servant hold his head between yours, gripping it firmly so that he does not move or nod his head.
Then you should put a moistened thread in the white of the eye or in the corner of the palate, on his eyes, then cover the compress that takes this shape.
It should be shaped like the tube of a bird's feather, from one end where the ki is located, and if you wish it to be from the other end, or if you wish it to be closed like a reed, but this shape is better for your work, God willing.
Then you should squeeze the eyebrow if it is open and bring out the swelling and shape it, or if it is not open then you should open it and bring out its length; then you should apply the compress to it and hold it firmly with your hand until it reaches the bone.
And move your hand a little away from the ki towards the nose, so that your hand does not stray or disturb the patient, and the compress does not fall into the corner of the eye and spoil it; if you reach the bone in the first layer, and otherwise, prepare the compress again once more if necessary.
And leave it for three days, then apply a thread with fat and treat him with the dried ointment until he recovers; if it has been forty days and he does not recover, then apply the drastic medicine until the bone is revealed, and refer to what will be mentioned in its chapter, God willing.
Face last from the nose of some people, it makes a way to the position of the nose, then puts in the same incision a thin plate like this.
And pour in it the weight of a dirham of melted lead, and grasp the plate firmly with your hand, grasping well and carefully, so that the patient does not move at all lest the melted lead trickle into his eye. It is necessary to put on the eye of the patient a wet sponge in white vinegar or water.
And if the lead burns and purifies the nose, it will be cured wonderfully. If the nose is freed from the boil and treatment as mentioned, then there is no need to use nasal piercing and directing the discharge of the nose back into its natural course as described in its specific place.
The 18th Chapter.
About a sore on the lip.
Many times a sore happens on the lip, called the "shahra", especially in children's lips. For if you treated this sore as mentioned in the division and the treatment was unsuccessful, place a small thin plaster on it like this.
Its surface is on the back of a thin sewing needle, then put it in the same sore as a covering with an awl until the boil reaches the depth of the sore, then treat it with lint cloth until it is cured if God wills.
The 19th Chapter.
About a boil on the nose occurring in the mouth.
If a boil appears at the root of the gums or in the tonsils or at the roots of the teeth and becomes inflamed, pus forms and bursts, and it turns into a nose-like boil, then if you treated it but the treatment was unsuccessful, it is necessary to put a plaster on as much of the boil as possible.
Then put it in the same incision of the boil and grasp your hand until the awl protected reaches its beginning and end, and do that once or twice, then treat it afterwards as mentioned in the treatment until it is cured if God wills.
If the material has broken off and the bone is exposed, or if not, then it is necessary to uncover the place and remove the rotten bone according to what will be mentioned in its chapter, God willing.
The Twentieth Chapter.
In Fractures and Dislocated Joints.
If the joint is dislocated due to moisture and the fracture and its treatment with medication have not been successful, then put the patient's head on a stone then apply the plaster which will be shown after this once you place the tube on the tooth.
And the plaster will enter as a protector with the wheel and hold your hand lightly until the patient feels the warmth of the fire has reached the root of the tooth then lift up your hand then redo the plaster as many times as you want then fill the patient's mouth with water of salt.
And hold it for an hour and then throw him away because the loosened tooth becomes fixed and the dislocated joint becomes steady and the rotten moisture dries up.
The Twenty-First Chapter.
In Toothache.
If the toothache is due to cold or there is an abscess and the treatment with medication has not been successful then it will be done in two ways either by applying fat or by using fire.
Or by applying fat, it is that you take the cow's fat and boil it in an iron pot or a cauldron then take a thread and wrap it around the end of the reed then immerse it in the boiled fat and place it on the aching tooth with the wheel and hold it until it cools.
Then redo it several times until the heat of the fire reaches the root of the tooth, and if you want to immerse a cloth or thread in the cold fat and place it on the aching tooth and let a protected iron plate be above it until the heat reaches the core of the tooth.
And as for cauterizing with fire, it is to take a copper or iron tube and have some thickness in its center so that the heat of the fire does not reach the mouth of the wound. Then take the heated instrument which has this shape and place it on the same vein and hold your hand until the instrument cools down do that several times.
If the pain goes away either on that very day or the next, it is necessary after that cauterization to fill the wound with good sweet grease and hold it for an hour then throw him down. And this is the shape of the instrument.
Burn at whichever end you wish and on whatever part is possible, and this is the shape of the tube.
The 22nd chapter.
Concerning cauterizing pigs.
If the pigs are affected by phlegm and cold moisture, and they have not been cured with medicines, and you want to hasten their ripening, take the hollow instrument which has this shape, having a hole on both sides.
So that the smoke may come out from the cauterization on the other side, and place it protected on the same boil once or twice if needed until you reach the depth of the boil. And if the boil is small, make the instrument according to the size of the boil.
Then leave it for three days and put on him a thread moistened in grease until what was burned by the fire goes away, then treat him with ointment and bandages until he recovers if Allah wills.
The 23rd chapter.
Concerning cauterizing with the sound of a blow and constriction of the breath.
If the moisture prevails over the bronchial tube and especially if that is accompanied by a cold temperament, it is necessary to purge the patient first with softening medicines, then cauterize him with a cauterization in the notch of the throat at the base of the larynx in the low position.
Avoid bringing the knife to the carotid artery and do not burn the skin except for a small area, then bring another bandage at the neck joint in the last loop of it with ease and the dressing should be firmly stuck on the part that preceded.
Then treat him as mentioned earlier until he is cured, if God wills.
The Twenty-Fourth Chapter.
In the treatment of pneumonia and whooping cough.
If the cough and lung disease are due to cold moistures, and there is no fever or pus, but the disease is chronic; then bring two plasters above the collarbones in the low hollows, and another plaster in the middle of the chest between the breasts.
And the dressing should be firmly stuck on the part that preceded, and if you wish, let it be a poultice with the dressing called the "spot" which has been mentioned in relation to earache, and the spots will be thirty or so points.
Then treat him as mentioned earlier until he is cured, and you can also make a dressing with three branches in this shape and use it to apply the plaster because you can use it to apply three plasters at once, and this is the shape of the dressing.
The Twenty-Fifth Chapter.
In the treatment of sciatica.
If the head of the humerus is dislocated due to sudden moisture or does not remain in its place, and it is returned after being removed until it becomes a habit and then dislocates with slight movement as we have seen; therefore, the first thing to do is to return the joint. Then the patient should lie on his back or side, and then lift the skin inside the thigh upwards with your left hand's fingers if the joint has dislocated inwardly.
Then protect the wound with the bandage made of linen threads.
Then cover it with the skin until it reaches the other side and the shape of the fold becomes four folds, and it may be covered with a bandage having three folds, in which case the shape of the fold will then become six folds, and the folds will be on the surface of the flesh.
And this is the picture of the bandage with three folds.
And if one is added to this number, the folds will become eight. Then it should be covered with the crushed garlic and salt and the patient should be kept motionless until they recover, unless the wound becomes inflamed above which rarely happens.
It should be spread over the shoulder a single good fold or many folds dripping with water, because the joint stiffens and moisture goes away and the patient recovers.
The 26th chapter.
In the stomach fold.
If something happens in the stomach, such as indigestion and much moisture, until it expels its contents and many diarrheas come to it and it is treated with various treatments but does not recover, then the patient should lie on his back, stretch out his legs and arms, and then cover him with three folds. A fold under the breast as long as a finger with a good bandage and two folds below the sides of the single fold until the shape of the folds becomes triangular, and there should be a gap between them so that they do not come together; the depth of the fold should be one third of the thickness of the skin and the shape of the folds.
On this picture and to this extent, without further addition.
And if you wish, cover it with a single large fold in the middle of the stomach on this picture.
The surgical dressing that is used for this single wound will take the shape of a circle on this picture.
And the stomach will be marked with dots, that is, to learn on the stomach dots on a pot which you want with ink then bind it with a dotted dressing then treat it with the treatment that is presented until it heals.
The Twenty-Seventh Chapter.
In the cold liver wound.
If a disorder appears from the liver due to cold and dampness or excessive wind until it departs from its natural temperament in an excessive way, and what we mentioned in the division is treated for the sick person, but that does not benefit. Then the sick person should lie on his back and learn with ink three wounds in this shape and this amount exactly on the liver below the ribs where the human arm ends.
And after each wound and wound, the thickness of a finger will be, and the wound will be straight along the body without your hand sticking to the dressing at all.
And it should be as much as burns the skin's thickness, half of it at most, and the sick person should stand on his feet; if he cannot stand, then he should be reclining with his legs outstretched and arms raised, and this is the picture of the dressing.
And you can bind these wounds with a linen dressing if you have a gentle and skillful hand in the craft and take care not to press too hard on the wound, lest you burn all the skin, burn the abdomen, and reach the intestines; for the skin there is thin, so be aware.
The Twenty-Eighth Chapter.
In the abdomen of a liver tumor wound.
If an ulcer appears in the liver and you want to know if that tumor is in the liver's flesh or in its membranes; for if it is in the liver's flesh, then the sick person will feel weight and pain without sharpness.
If there is a wound in the liver, it will be accompanied by a severe pain and I have seen that doctors were unable to treat it. So the patient should lie on his back then learn the position of the warm spot with ink.
Then, wrap the pessary in fire and it is the pessary that resembles a millstone and this is its shape. And cauterize it with one pessary until the skin is all burned and the pessary reaches the peritoneum, causing all the pus to come out, then treat it with the treatment of abscesses until he recovers.
And this type of cauterization should not be performed except by one who has long been on the path of medicine and has practiced these cases repeatedly through experimentation, then he will present such a work and leave it in my hands as the best.
The Nineteenth Chapter.
In Cautering Vesicles.
The ancients have mentioned the cauterizing of vesicles. It is done as follows: one takes from the long, dry root of the Zarawand plant a piece that is as thick as a finger, and then dips it in oil and sets it on fire. Then cauterize one pessary in the space between the clavicle and the neck, and two small ones slightly deviated towards the direction under the pubic hair, and two large ones above the breasts in the space between the third and fourth ribs.
And two more in the space between the fifth and sixth ribs slightly deviated towards the back, one pessary in the middle of the chest, another above the stomach, and three pessaries from behind, one between the shoulders and two by the side of the spine below the one that is in the space between the arms.
And it should not be that you insert your hand deeply with the pessary, but rather it should be just above the skin, a slight impression. Some of the ancients have mentioned that there are people who use an iron pessary resembling a millstone, they shape it and enter it between the ribs until it reaches the same warm spot.
The patient exits as we mentioned in liver abscess, and in this case the abscess is one of the openings of the intestines. It may kill the patient at its onset or expose a wound that cannot be cured.
The thirtieth chapter.
In the spleen.
If you treated the spleen disease as we mentioned in the classification and your treatment did not succeed, then the wound is on three sides, all of which are correct. One is to compress it with three or four ligatures stretched along the length of the spleen.
In the shape of liver ligatures which we mentioned and have its form, with a space between each ligature as thick as a finger or slightly thicker. The compressive feature is the same one we mentioned for liver ligatures, whether you do not penetrate the wound with your hand or the patient's appearance lies on his back.
The other side is in the flank and raise the skin that faces the spleen where the patient's left flank ends, and raise the skin that faces the spleen where the patient's right flank ends, so that your raising of the skin will be along the width of the body for the ligatures to be along the length of the body.
Then you insert the splints well protected until they reach through the skin on the other side, then you withdraw the compressive feature and the ligatures will be four. If you wish to compress with the other compressive feature having three splints.
Then you treat the wound site after leaving it to suppurate for many days, and this is better than all the treatment that came before.
The thirtieth chapter.
In haemorrhoids.
The ligature only benefits in regard to the hemorrhoids, especially. If you treated the hemorrhoid with the treatment that we mentioned in the classification and your treatment did not succeed, then you should compress him with four ligatures around the anus and one ligature on the rectum.
Another wound on the liver and another on the spleen, and two wounds behind his back between the ribs, one near his chest and the other near his stomach. The depth of the wound will be close to the thickness of the skin, then the wound is left open for a long time.
And the patient should not be deprived of treatment after the wound, as those responsible for his care should hasten to cure him. The appearance of the compress with which he is treated will be similar to what has preceded it, and the one with which he is treated will be oily.
The 22nd chapter.
In wounds of the feet and legs.
If they suppurate in the instep and fill with yellow water, it is necessary to apply a poultice on the top of the foot between the heel and the little toe.
And hold your hand with the poultice and do not move it, then lift your hand and do not return it at all, for the yellow water will flow out and the poultice will be like this.
Then apply a poultice to the legs, two on each leg, with one poultice at the sharp end of the compress and another along the length of the leg, one below the knee and the other lower down towards the middle of the leg, and on each thigh two.
And leave the wound open without treatment for a long time until water flows from it, then treat it with what we have mentioned.
The 33rd chapter.
In wounds of diarrhea.
If the diarrhea is due to cold and wetness, until the strength of the holding and binding in the stomach and intestines weakens, and that which was treated did not heal, and I saw the patient likely to develop a wound and strong in power, then apply a great poultice on his abdomen. According to what has been mentioned earlier, in the cutting of the stomach with a circular knife and four knives around the intestines, soften with the gentle mallet-like tool and place a cloth on the gauze above or two.
If you see the discharges abundant and the swelling possible for that, then make a cut on the hip and another on each part and perhaps add two small cuts to the stomach near the large one; it is a successful treatment that will not be wrong if God wills.
The fourth section thirty-third.
In the cutting of hemorrhoids.
If there are chronic or one hemorrhoid in the anus, and it is thick and cold or fetid discharge, and treatment has been tried as mentioned earlier but was not successful, then make a cut three times on the lower back of the navel under the table slightly curved.
And make a cut under the intestines like two fingers, and if you estimate that his stomach has hardened and his food does not digest and you see his face distorted, then make a large cut on the stomach as mentioned earlier and another on his liver. And another on his spleen with a mallet-like tool, and leave the cut open for some time then treat him until he recovers if God wills.
The fifth section thirty-third.
In the cutting of boils.
After cutting it, if you cut the boil, then take the mallet-like tool that resembles a nail and insert it gently into the same boil that was cut and move your hand until the mallet reaches the opening of the pore from which the blood is flowing, do that once or twice.
If the boils are many, then make a cut on each one as we described and treat them with whatever ointments are suitable until they heal, and if it is also accompanied by a large cut on the gauze it will be more beneficial.
The Sixth and Thirty-First Chapter.
In the wound of the nose, which is in the saddle-shaped part and its surroundings.
If the patient does not respond to the incision and the treatment we described in its place and you give up on that, then perhaps he will recover by the wound. But if one of his nostrils is affected with pus and corrupt moisture, first you should measure it with a fine probe.
Then know the depth of his nostril by means of the probe, then take a cotton-like cloth and insert it into the same nostril on the straightness of the nostril's depth and as far as the probe has entered, and apply the poultice to it until all those corrupt bodies are consumed once or twice or three times according to your need.
And beware of burning the nerve if there is one, or a great vein, and if the nostril empties into the bladder's opening or into the rectum.
So beware of all these places, and only do so if the nostril is in a fatty place which you have determined is not infected, then treat the area until it clears up. If you stop and apply no more and leave it like that for some time, know that it has healed completely.
And if the discharge does not cease, know that it is infected or in a deep and corrupt abscess, or something similar to what will be mentioned in its place.
The Seventh and Thirty-First Chapter.
In the wound of the kidney.
If it happens in the kidney and there is pain from cold or severe heat, and this is due to the patient's condition, then you should apply poultices on the kidneys, three times on each kidney, with the same poultice that was mentioned before, and perhaps a third time in the same place so that three poultices are applied in succession, which will be more effective for the benefit.
The Thirty-Eighth Chapter.
In the Bladder.
If weakness occurs in the bladder, and relaxation follows coldness and wetness, so that it no longer retains urine, then make a cut on the lower part of the abdomen over the bladder, where the pubic hair begins, one incision to the right of the midline and another to the left.
And after the incision on each side, to the depth of a finger's width, and make another incision in the lower back or two if necessary, and the packing will be as mentioned earlier.
The Thirty-Ninth Chapter.
In the Uterus.
If a matter occurs in the uterus, from coldness and wetness, so that it becomes blocked by that and its contents become corrupted and difficult to deliver, or if pain occurs when it is due, then make three incisions around the abdomen as we mentioned earlier in the bladder. And make an incision on the sacrum at the lower back or two if necessary, and the packing will be as mentioned earlier.
The Fortieth Chapter.
In the Excision of the Hip.
If a wet discharge occurs, dangerous and offensive to the hip joint, it will cause it to dislocate from its place; and if some part of the leg is stuck together, then find an opening in that place where excision can be made, so make an incision on the hip joint itself, like a circle.
After applying the medicine around the joint as it rotates, so that the joint falls in the middle of the circle; and make the packing as mentioned earlier; but if this packing does not help, then make three incisions with the big fatty gauze.
And make the incision to a depth of the thickness of all the skin, then treat it until it heals if God wills.
The Forty-First Chapter.
In the region of the femoral artery.
If pain occurs in the gluteal region and the cause is coldness and moisture, and you have treated the patient as mentioned earlier and the treatment did not benefit, then it is necessary to ease the patient from the thick menses with the application of hot poultice or Sabur's paste and so on.
Then he should be covered and the cautery mark should be made on him in two ways, either with caustic medicines or with fire. And if it is done by fire, it will be on many faces, one of which is to make three cauterized dots on the right gluteal region itself in this shape.
And it should be deep enough and after each cauterized dot, there should be a distance equal to the thickness of a finger. And the poultice should be olive-like. And one cauterized dot can be made in the middle on top of the gluteal region itself, making four cauterized dots. Or if you want, you can apply it as the circle mentioned earlier for removing the gluteal fold, one time only.
So that the circle encircles all of the gluteal region and burns away all the skin, this is the description of the cauterization in the femoral region if the pain is persistent only in the gluteal region itself and does not extend to the thigh or leg.
If it extends to the thigh and leg, then apply two cauterized dots on the thigh at the spot where the patient indicates the pain is there, and one above the popliteal region by four fingers to the outside slightly, and the poultice should be thin and the depth of the cauterization should be only up to the thickness of the skin.
And if the patient indicates that the pain extends to about the toes, then apply as many cauterized dots as he indicates with a poultice point, three or four or more if needed. And if the pain is under the knee towards the leg, then apply one cauterized dot there thinly.
Be cautious in all your operations so that you do not cut a nerve or major artery, for that will cause the patient an evil or incurable affliction.
And I have seen one or two persons who made incisions above the ankle and cut so deep that the leg became gangrenous up to the foot, and all of it became rotten and the whole leg was corrupted. Then diarrhea set in, followed by death. If the pain is in both legs equally, make the incision in this manner.
And some wise scholars have mentioned that in the treatment of a twisted calf, one should make a hollow reed from iron, its diameter being half a finger's breadth and having at its mouth a thickness like the pit of a date or slightly less. Inside this reed there should be another reed and yet another.
And it should be with a space of about the thickness of the eyebrow between each reed, and the reeds being open on both sides, their height being about the length of an eyebrow or two. A metal holder is made for them and this is its shape.
Then it should be heated in the fire until it glows and is red-hot. It should then be placed on the calf of the patient, who lies on the healthy side, and three circular incisions are made at once. Then it is left for three days and smeared with fat, and the wound remains open for a few days.
Many times. Then it should be treated with ointment until it heals, said the author of this book, this type of incision is rarely used for its severity and unpleasant appearance, except that it is one of the good types of incisions for those who can bear it and are in their right place.
And as for the caustic incision by medicines, it is that one should make two reeds like a ring, into which mercury or iron powder is poured.
The wound between them is about the height of two or three fingers, and there is a gap between them as thick as a finger. The bottom one is open, the top one is open, and they are grasped together in this shape.
Then you place it on the buttocks and thighs, with the patient lying on their side. You take hold of your hand firmly, then pour between the two circles some cold water, which has been warmed by a hot stone. You grasp it for about a sandy hour, and the patient endures its pain and burning, as if it were fire.
Until the pain subsides, then you raise your hand with the instrument and wipe away the cold water from the buttocks altogether with warm water. Then you leave it for three days and apply fat to it until the burn's blackness goes away and pus comes out, for that is more effective.
Then you treat it with ointments until it heals, unless the pain extends to the thigh or leg, in which case you make a bandage on it as I have described for the buttocks. And this is the characteristic of the cold water, and I have established it in my book on medicine.
You take from the salt of the pit and from unburnt gypsum, each a part, crush them together, and put them in a new vessel that has been bored with a small hole at the bottom. You place another vessel beneath it, mixed with water.
You pour water from the warm water over the salt and gypsum, so that they are covered by a finger's breadth. After you have grasped them firmly with your hand, you leave the vessel until the cold water flows down into the mixed vessel below. Then you collect all of that water and pour it on another lump of gypsum and another lump of salt again.
Then it becomes very strong and effective in many medical actions, and in all other parts of the body, because it does the action of fire. And among medicines that are used to treat the buttocks, such as Thapsia and honey of the Balauster tree, and gypsum mixed with soap, are crushed.
Galenus claimed a story about an old man's treatment for sciatica and varicose veins, and magnified its importance, claiming that it does not need any other treatment and cures with one application.
Until he may enter the bath while carried and exit cured, as long as he takes some of the fresh green sage; if the green one is not found, then the dry one is taken and pounded with something from fat and placed on the loins where the pain is or in the thigh or in the hip.
And it is pulled and left for as long as three hours or until the patient feels relief from the numbness, then enter him into the bath; if his body sweats, enter him into the pool; for the pain goes away and he is cured by the will of God. If he is not cured, apply the poultice to him again after ten days once more.
If he is cured, praise be to God. Know that no one should use these medicines except after purging the body, and Dioscorides mentioned that if goat's fat is applied to varicose veins, it will be of benefit.
And the poultice will be as follows: Take a wool cloth, dip it in old oil and place it on the deep place between the elbow of the hand and the wrist, which is closer to the wrist. Then take a dry goat's hoof.
Then ignite it with fire until it becomes a ember, then place it on the wool and leave it until it cools down, then take another one and keep doing that until you reach the sensation through the thigh to the loins and the pain subsides by the will of God; this type of poultice is called the goat's hoof poultice.
The Forty-Second Chapter.
In the Treatment of Backache.
The pain in the back may be caused by many reasons, whether from a fall or blow or excessive purging and so forth; it is due to the flow of cold, wet matter, and this poultice is only for this type.
Whoever causes a matter to be cooled by coldness, after evacuating the affected area with an absorbent cloth and similar things, should place it on his back where the pain is, three rows wide on the same surface as the table, after having measured the position with ink in each row five or more strokes according to what you see of the patient's condition and strength.
And it will be with a small needle, or if you wish, three or four strokes with a medium-sized needle on this form.
The Third Chapter.
At the beginning of the wound.
Often this affliction affects young children, and the first sign of it in a child is that he experiences difficulty breathing when standing or moving, and you will find at the end of his back a pea-sized lump that has risen above all the other bumps.
If you see that and want to stop it, prick with a needle that is circular on this form. To take the prick on all sides of the lumps evenly, and if you wish, prick around the lumps with a fine needle two or three times, and let the points be close to each other, then treat the area until it clears as we mentioned.
And beware that you do not use the prick on the wound that is caused by nerve tension.
The Forty-Fourth Chapter.
On gout and joint pains.
If the pains in the joints are due to cold humors and occur in any part of the body, then if the pains occur in both legs, it is usually called a special kind of gout.
If the cold gout has not been alleviated by the treatment mentioned earlier, then the prick is used to remove it. This is done after evacuating the area around the ankle joint many times with a medium-sized needle that is oily on this form.
If you need to puncture the man's face, do it with a pointed instrument. If the pains rise to the knees or to other joints, and that often happens, rub each knee three or four times from all sides with this ointment, in its own way.
If you need more than this point, rub and do not deepen your finger with the point, but make it as thick as the skin only. If the pains rise to the hips or back, use what we mentioned from the point in its place.
If the pains are only in the hands, puncture around the wrists like a row of two. If the pains remain in the fingers, puncture each joint and the wrist crease. If the pains rise after days to the elbows or shoulders.
Rub them from all sides and let the patient not be without good care and taking medicine, for if he eats well and expels phlegm, he will recover with this remedy if Allah wills.
The 45th Chapter.
About the point of the Fetouq.
If a hernia appears in the abdomen and some of the intestines oromentum descends to the scrotum, and that happens shortly after, it is necessary for the patient to abstain from eating on that day and to use one of the purgatives that will bring forth stool from his bowels.
Then he will lie between your hands on his back and you will order him to hold himself until the intestine or omentum protrudes, then return it with your finger, and learn by applying a tincture under the hernia on the rim of the pelvis in the shape of half a circle, its edges extending upwards on the body.
Then protect this ointment's form.
Until it turns white, extinguish the inflammation, then return the intestine or omentum to its place, and let him put his hand on the spot so that it does not protrude. And I have placed a cushion between the patient's thighs and another servant has wrapped them with a cloth.
And the last one holds his hands on his chest, then the compression is placed on the same spot and you hold it firmly with your hand standing upright until it reaches the bone or you return it once more if it does not reach the bone initially.
And preserve your effort from causing the intestines to protrude, lest you exhaust them and as a result, either death or great harm occurs. Know that if you do not reach the bone with your compression, your work will not be successful; the compressions for children should be gentle on their behalf, and for adults on theirs.
Then treat the site of the compression after three days with fat until the itching of the burning subsides, then treat it with other ointments until it heals. Let the patient lie on their back for forty days until the wound closes.
And it is necessary that you make his food gentle during his treatment so that his intestines do not protrude when he undresses and defecates. Then, if he wants to get up after forty days, use a strong bandage and hold it for another forty days, reducing the fatigue and satiety from food, drink, and loud shouting.
For if you apply this treatment in this way, he will be cured completely, God willing. And I will mention the treatment of hernia by incision in its place, God willing. As for the hernia that occurs in the entire abdomen and is initial, if you want it not to increase, fill the hernia with a round compress according to its size. And it should be what is burned from the skin like a third of it, then treat it as we mentioned. For it will not increase, God willing. And some of the previous ones have said that you should compress the hernia with a triangular compress in this shape.
After you have learned about the hernia by incision and made a straight line on the side of the upper part of the hernia and another line to the bottom, then place your hand in the middle with one continuous compress, and the first one is easier and better, God willing.
The Sixth and Forty-Ninth Chapter.
In the wound.
If something happens to some members due to a fall or blow and there is pain and it persists for a long time, and the treatment with medicines does not bring relief, then it is necessary that it be cauterized at the spot, and each member should be treated according to its size, smallness, weakness, and strength.
And if the pain and wound subsides, then it is clear of the first boil; otherwise, cauterize it again, because it is a habit of these pains to transfer from one member to another nearby, so follow it with cauterization until the patient recovers.
The Seventh and Forty-Eighth Chapter.
In the boil of leprosy.
As for those with leprosy, they can benefit greatly from cauterization, especially the type of leprosy that occurs due to the stagnation of phlegm and black bile.
If you want to cauterize, look at it; if the leprosy is in its early stages and you have treated it as mentioned earlier, but it has not subsided and has not stopped, and the patient's condition worsens and threatens to affect all his humors, then cauterize on the head five times. The first one in the middle of the head, the second one below it towards the forehead at the end of the hairline, two on the temples, and one from behind on the occipital bone prominence; incline your hand with the cauterizer slightly until it has a slight effect on the bone.
And it will peel off from him scales, making it easy to exhale the heavy vapors from it and cauterize another time on the same spot as mentioned before. And if the leprosy has persisted on the patient and a clear appearance has shown, then cauterize these cauterizations we mentioned on the head. Placement of ligatures on the face: a ligature on the side of each nostril, two on each cheekbone, two on the sides of the neck, six on the back of the neck, one large one at the junction of the anus and the rectum, another above it in the same midafternoon position, two on each arm, one on each leg. Two on the kneecaps, one on each knee, two on the shoulder blades, two on the elbows, two on the chest's ribs, and a ligature around every joint of his hands and feet. And also on every heel of his feet and wrist of his hands.
And beware of the nerve at the back of the ankles, lest you burn them. And a ligature on the bone of the hip, and another on the mouth of the stomach, and another on the liver. Know that every added ligature is more beneficial and effective.
And know that the patient will not feel pain from the ligature as much as a healthy person, because his body is numb. And it should be according to the size and age of the parts and joints, as mentioned earlier in the characteristics of the ligatures.
Then treat the ligature with powdered myrrh and honey, and all other treatments, until it heals if Allah wills.
The 48th Chapter.
In the ligature of numbness, when a part of the body becomes numb and is treated with medicines, ointments, and bandages but does not heal, then treat that same numb part with ligatures according to what the bone deserves in size or smallness, and let it be slightly thicker than the skin.
Then treat it with an ointment until it heals, and sometimes numbness that occurs on the hand or foot in the neck of the back when the nerve that moves that part is affected will disappear.
No one should attempt this except someone who is familiar with the dissection of organs and the exit points of the nerves that move the body.
The Forty-Ninth Chapter.
In Gout.
If the gout is chronic and no remedy from medicine has succeeded, then scrape it with a small depth to the extent of the thickness of the skin until the pus goes away and changes its color.
Then treat it with the pulp of red beans mixed with the juice of wild indigo, mother's milk, or gazelle's blood, a quarter from each one, and mix all together, apply it to a cloth, and bind the area until it heals.
The Fiftieth Chapter.
About Cancer.
If the cancer is in its initial stage and you want to stop it, cauterize it with a circular instrument around it as it turns. Some wise men have said that one should cauterize the center of it severely, but I do not see that as I expect it to spread and I have seen that happen many times.
The correct method is to cauterize around it in a circle as we said, or with many cauteries.
The Fifty-First Chapter.
About Abscesses.
If an abscess has occurred in one of the fleshly parts and it delayed in healing either due to the nature of the abscess itself or due to the old age of the patient if he is elderly with poor blood or due to time, and you want to hasten the healing of the abscess, cauterize around it with many small cauteries in a dripping manner.
Then leave it, as it will hasten the healing; and if you want to open it with a caustic, be careful of the instrument which has this shape.
And lower it into the center of the abscess until it penetrates the skin and be so that the caustic is below, making it easy to drain the pus, then treat it as needed until it heals.
The 52nd Chapter.
In the case of consumption.
Consumption is when a corruption seeps into the organ it consumes, like fire consuming dry wood. If you see consumption in a place that can be inflamed by fire, protect with many small and large poultices according to what is suitable for that place where the consumption is.
Then cover it from all sides until the corruption is completely removed and nothing of it remains, then leave it for three days and apply sulfur powder mixed with oil to the affected areas until all the scabs and all the corruption are gone.
Then treat it with soothing ointments for the flesh. If after three days you see that the flesh is growing healthy and there is no corruption in it, otherwise apply the treatment to what remains of the affected areas, and treat the consumption with harsh medication.
For it is more effective to use fire treatment, and I have mentioned its treatment with harsh medication in the previous section; take it from there whenever you need it.
The 53rd Chapter.
In the case of twisted and untwisted ulcers.
This condition often occurs in the soles of the feet and it is something rough that troubles a man, and the treatment for it is two-fold: either fire treatment or harsh water treatment.
As for the fire treatment, it is to prepare a covered poultice like an eagle's feather made of iron, similar in shape and size to the size of the ulcer from all sides and thin at the edges. Then place it on top of the ulcer and wrap your hand around the poultice until it reaches the depth of the ulcer.
And leave it for three days until it becomes crusty, then wrap it with the powdered herbs mixed with salt and leave the wrapping on overnight. For if it is not a twisted ulcer.
Many times, an abscess occurs on the surface of the body, especially in the hands and feet. Therefore, it is necessary to take a tube made of copper or iron or eagle feathers and place it on the boil or pustule. Then pour into the tube a small amount of hot water.
And grasp your hand and turn it while lightly compressing your fingers so that the tube's pressure affects the boil's center. The hot water will then find its way to the boil's core and allow the patient to bear the hot water for a short time.
Then leave it, as the boil bursts with its contents. Do this one by one until you have reached all of them in the body. Then treat their locations after they burst using ointments that promote the growth of flesh.
The 50th Chapter.
In cases of hernia.
If a hernia occurs in someone due to cold or numbness in the nerves, or from fever quartan or otherwise, it is necessary to bind him with four or five bandages on the back between each band and one in his chest. And on his stomach, a band with an ointment-filled wrapping, as the hernia subsides and hastens the resolution of the cold disease.
The 55th Chapter.
In cases of boils occurring on the body.
It may discharge in the body with foul boils that are caused by cold, thick, and putrid matter. Therefore, at their first appearance, bind each boil with a soft cloth wrapped around a burning stick or a long willow twig or an ointment-filled wrapping.
And bind the pustules in their first stage with this same quality, so that they do not increase and the evil humour is purged from them, and the patient is freed from it, except that it should be done after the patient has been purged by bleeding.
The 50th chapter.
In cases of bleeding that occur when the artery is cut.
Blood often flows from an artery that has been cut when a wound occurs from the outside or when a tumor or part of an organ is incised, making it difficult to cut.
If that happens to someone, hasten with your hand to the mouth of the artery and place your thumb on it tightly until it stops bleeding under your thumb without anything coming out from it then take a few small and large olive seeds and char them in fire until they become very sticky.
Then take one, either small or large, according to the wound and the place where the artery was cut, and apply it to the same vein after removing your thumb with a twist and hold the seed until the bleeding stops.
If the bleeding starts again when you lift your thumb from the mouth of the artery and the seed is removed, take another seed with a twist from the seeds in the prepared fire and continue to do this one after another until the bleeding stops.
And be cautious not to burn a branch that is there, causing another laceration on the patient; and know that if an artery bleeds, it cannot be cut, especially if the artery is large, except at one of four points, either by cauterization as we said, or by ligating it if it has not been ligated. If it is ligated, its ends will shrink and the bleeding will stop; or else it can be tied with threads tightly, or else medications that cause blood clotting and constricting by means of strong agents should be placed on it.
And as for someone who tries to cut it with a ligature or by constriction with a cloth or by placing burning things and the like, then it will not stop at all except in rare cases; if this happens to someone and there is no doctor nor medicine, let him proceed to place his thumb on the mouth of the wound itself as we described.
The wound should be tightly bandaged until the blood congeals and flows out above it and onto the artery and finger. And no matter what, you should not lift your hand away from it with cold water, always keeping the cold water flowing over it until the blood coagulates and thickens and ceases to flow. During that time, examine what is needed for dressing or medication.
The Second Chapter.
In incisions and lacerations, wounds and similar things.
He said: We have mentioned in the first book all the diseases that are treated with fire and burnt medicines, their causes, reasons, and instruments, and I presented them as chapters from head to foot.
And I am following in this chapter the same path as before to make it easy for the student who requires it.
Before I begin with that, oh sons, you must know that this chapter contains some of the things that are above what is in the first book on caustics.
And therefore, a warning is necessary in this chapter because the work in this chapter is very likely to involve misplacement of blood which sustains life when opening a vein or incision on a tumor or abscess or surgical treatment or extraction of a bone or incision on a stone and similar things that accompany all of them with danger and fear, and death often occurs.
And I advise you to avoid falling into what is dubious, for indeed it may happen to some of you in this craft that there are types of people with various ailments among whom some have grown tired of their disease and are overcome by death.
Due to the severity of their disease and prolongation of their suffering and illness which leads to a clear indication of death, among whom some may offer you his wealth and spend it for your sake in hope of recovery from his disease, but do not turn away from anyone of this kind.
Let your caution be greater than your desire and enthusiasm, and do not proceed with anything of that kind unless you are certain of the outcome that is pleasing to God, and use your knowledge and warning in all treatment of your patients for their ultimate safety.
For you have in that a means to gain praise, glory, mention, and commendation. May God guide you, my sons, and not forbid you the truth and success; for that is in His hand, there is no god but He.
And I have divided this chapter into sections based on what has come before in the book of fractures, from ancient times to the present day, so that you may easily find what you seek from it if God wills.
The First Chapter.
Treatment of the water that accumulates on the heads of children.
This disease often affects children at birth if the mother has pressed their head without care, and it may also be caused by a hidden cause that is unknown.
And I have not seen this cause in anyone except children, and all those I saw among them died soon after; therefore I did not see the point of treating it. And I have seen a child whose head was filled with water and his head increased in size every day. Until the child could no longer sit up on his own due to the size of his head and the moisture increasing, until he died.
And this moisture is either gathered between the skin and the bone or gathered under the bone on theomentum, and the treatment in that case is if the moisture is between the skin and the bone and the swelling is small then it is necessary to cut a slit in the middle of the head, about two inches long, until the moisture drains, and this is the shape of the incision.
If the moisture is greater and the swelling is larger then make it two crossing slits in this shape:.
If the moisture is under the bone and its sign is that you see the stitches of the head open from every direction and the water recedes if you press it gently with your hand to the inside and it is not thick, then you should cut in the middle of the head three cuts like this.
And after the cut, all the moisture will come out, then you should tie the cuts with the cord and thread, then you should wash it from above with wine and oil up to the fifth day, then release the bandage and treat the wound with lint and ointment, and do not leave the head tied in moderation, and feed the patient with all dry food little moisture.
Until the part heals and recovers, another way of cutting is to look where the bone of the tumor appears and the gathering of water, because it may be in the back of the head more or in the front or in the right or in the left.
So aim at the place where you saw the tumor and the accumulation of water, then cut as much as you can and be careful not to cut veins lest bleeding occurs and the patient dies from that bleeding with purging of moisture.
The Second Chapter.
Cutting the two veins behind the known ears, called the Hassasin.
Whenever a sharp attack occurs to the eyes or to the chest, and if that does not respond to the treatment of medicine, then inform the treatment in that case is cutting these two veins.
So if you want to cut them, then you should shave the patient's head with a razor, then roughen the place with a coarse cloth so that the vein appears, then tie the patient's neck with his own cloth, then look for where the sweat glands are and their two locations that lie behind the ears, which may not be hidden in most people.
Then learn them with ink, then cut them with a blunt instrument into pieces to the bone and it should be done from the side of the head. If you wish, insert the instrument under the vein and push it up with the cuts and the length of the cuts should be about two fingers thickened.
If the artery is severed, blood will exit in a pulsating manner and flow forward for a distance. If the artery does not become visible to the touch, it is necessary to estimate its location by the ear after three fingerbreadths, then apply the tourniquet and cut to the bone, which must be.
Blood will flow for a distance of seven or eight fingerbreadths on the midline, and perhaps more or less depending on the strength of the patient and the fullness of his arteries. Then you look at the wound; if there is anything left of theomentum on the bone, cut it off.
So that a hot abscess does not form, then close the wound with a thread of torn cotton and treat it with ointments until it heals.
The Third Chapter.
Cutting the arteries in the armpits.
If a person has chronic or acute inflammation of the armpits due to sweating, heat in the muscles, severe headache, or similar conditions and was treated with various medical treatments without success, then we have tried in these cases to ligate or cauterize the arteries in the armpits as we described.
And the method of ligation is that you shave the patient's armpits and approach the visible artery in the armpit, for it becomes clear to you from its pulsation and only conceals itself in some individuals.
Or when the patient is severely chilled, and it conceals itself from you, then have the patient flex their neck by themselves with their cloth, and then you search the place with a piece of cloth or treat the place with warm water until the artery becomes clearly visible. Then take the ligature that matches its shape. Then take the ligature and gently strip away the skin until you reach the artery, then insert it into the artery and pull it upwards until it comes out of the skin and frees itself from the fatty tissue that surrounds it from all sides; if the artery is thin, tie it off with the end of the ligature. Then a portion is cut off from it, as much as the ends part and constrict, without causing bleeding; for if it is not cut or severed, the blood will not cease to flow then one should remove seven or eight ounces of blood up to three.
If the artery is large, it should be stitched in two places with a strong double thread, either of silk or of the fibers of the papyrus tree, so that putrefaction may not set in before the wound has healed, and bleeding occurs.
Then cut off as much of the tissue between the stitches as possible, do that at that time or later, and if you wish to smooth it out against the bone with a fine knife until its edges are trimmed, so that this action is identical or better as we said.
Unless the patient has a fever or is irascible, because the ligature helps to dry up the pus, and it will be more useful; then after sewing the arteries, the wound should be filled with lint and compresses placed on top of it, and after healing, it will be treated with bland medicines that promote flesh growth and with plaster until it is cured if Allah wills.
If bleeding occurs during your procedure from the artery, hasten to cut it off either with a ligature or by filling the area with lint and tightening your grip until the blood stops; if nothing else works, press your finger until the blood congeals.
And cool the area with cold water until the inflammation subsides and becomes firm as it should, and what is easier and less complicated than sewing an artery is to smooth out the skin with this fine-knife after the two areas have been dressed with medicine.
And bring it down firmly until it reaches the bone and the skin becomes separated in two places so that what is between its edges does not adhere to this ligature at all, and this is the appearance of the knife.
The cutting edge of the two knives is similar to the two small points except that it is less sharp than the knife very much because if they were as sharp as the knife, cold would reach them faster and flesh would not be cut quickly. If there is some thickness in them, heat will stick to them.
I cut the flesh quickly, and this work is better than all works and lighter and easier. And let it be between the two knives a thickness like the width of a finger.
The Fourth Section.
Treatment for persistent hot tears that flow to the eyes.
If the tears are persistent and the flow is from the veins on the skull's surface outside, and nothing has been benefited in treating it with medication, and I have seen the patient's face had darkened. And he feels in his forehead a buzzing like the buzzing of ants, and his eyes are swollen and wet, with their eyelids thickened and puffed up from the intensity of the tears. So those who treat it resort to this work and call it the "treatment by knife", which is that one orders the patient to shave off the hair on his forehead.
Then a cut is made on the forehead, three parallel incisions of equal length along the forehead, each incision being about two fingers long, parallel to the length of the nose in the middle of the forehead, and the second one slightly off from the movement of the muscle that is in the temple, and the third one on the other side.
And you must take care not to cut the arteries that are on both sides, and keep your hand away from connecting the jawbones. After each incision, there should be a distance of three fingers' width, and with you having many pieces of absorbent sponge or gauze ready to soak up the blood.
Then the sharp instrument is inserted into both sides as shown here. From the incision that is above the eyebrow to the middle incision and stripping all the skin in between with the peritoneum on the bone, then do the same from the middle incision to the third incision, and this instrument will be extracted. And another instrument, called a sharp Sckinniya from one side and a blunt one from the other side, this is its form:.
And its sharp side turns upwards towards the muscle attached to the skin, and its blunt side turns towards the bone, and it is pushed until it reaches the middle incision, and with it all the vessels that descend from the head to the eyes are cut off, without reaching the outer skin.
Then do the same in the middle incision to the other incision, and after a reasonable amount of bleeding, clean up the places where the blood is clotted, then roll up a cotton thread and place it on each incision with a ligature that has been soaked in wine, vinegar, or oil.
So that a hot abscess does not occur, and on the third day, the ligature is loosened and much soap is used with cold water, then it is treated with balsam ointment and rose wax, and all as surgeons treat wounds until it heals, if God wills.
The fifth chapter.
Treatment of bleeding and suppuration into the eyes from within the head.
When someone experiences severe and prolonged suppuration, and you see from him two small eyes that are inflamed and dimmed, and his eyelids are ulcerated and the lashes have fallen out. And there will be severe and intense headache deep in the head, accompanied by a continuous cough, and knowing these symptoms that those materials and suppurations come from many thick veins, and the best treatment for this is to have the patient tilt their forehead and then make one incision in the middle of the forehead.
And there will be severe and intense headache deep in the head, accompanied by a continuous cough, and knowing these symptoms that those materials and suppurations come from many thick veins, and the best treatment for this is to have the patient tilt their forehead and then make one incision in the middle of the forehead. I raise it slightly to the exposure and begin with the incision from the left cheekbone to the right cheekbone, making the incision to the bone, and keeping your hand away from the moving muscles of the cheeks when chewing. Until the bone is exposed and all blood has been removed with a sponge.
I separate the incision with cotton or a linen strip, then tie from above with the thread and wet it with wine and oil so that a hot abscess does not form. When I have cleaned it and saw that the hot abscess has been destroyed, I should scrape the bone until the flesh begins to grow.
Then I treat it with the dried arrangement that promotes flesh growth, like taking two handfuls of barley flour and four parts of calabine, mixing them together to form a poultice, and using it for promoting flesh growth in such wounds.
The Sixth Section.
Treatment of what falls into the ear.
All that falls into the ear is one of four kinds: either a metal stone or a semi-stone like iron and glass, or else a plant seed like mustard and sesame and the like, or else something liquid such as water and vinegar and the like.
And if it is an animal, when something like a pebble or the kind of pebble that does not increase in the ear falls into the ear, then receive the sun's rays on the ear. If you see only the pebble, wet it with rose water or safflower oil and try to remove it by moving the head or using a syringe. And stop the nostrils when the sneezing comes after placing a bandage of linen or wool around the ear and stretching the ear upwards. Many times it will come out with this treatment. If it does not come out, then try to remove it with a soft cotton swab like this one.
If it emerges with a gout and not, then try to take it out with a thin, light, and slightly curved forceps. If it does not come out by that means, then make a tube from copper and insert the end of the tube into the ear canal.
Seal what is around the tube with a thick wax and grease, lest the wind have a way out except through the tube. Then pull it with your breath, pulling strongly and frequently, for it often comes out by that means. If it does not come out as we described, then take some from the fat of the ibex or the well-prepared grease which is used to catch birds, and place it in the tip of the rod.
After wrapping a tight thread around it, then insert it into the ear canal gently after the ear has dried from moisture. If it does not come out as we described, then proceed to incision before the abscess forms or suppuration occurs.
The prescription for incision is that the surgeon should make an incision in the cheekbone or cheek first, and bring forth blood according to his strength. Then, with the patient sitting between your hands, turn their ear upwards and cut a small incision in the origin of the ear at its lowest point.
And the incision should be crescent-shaped until it reaches the bone, then remove it as much as you can with instruments. Then sew up the incision quickly and take care of it until it heals.
And if the thing that has fallen into the ear is one of the grains that grows and swells, try to remove it as we described. If you are unable to extract it, then take a thin and fine forceps in this shape.
And try to cut that kind of grain that has fallen into the ear with it, and do so only if you are certain that that grain has become attached to the ear canal until it becomes small pieces, then remove them with a blunt forceps or a thin thread or by probing.
As we mentioned, it facilitates its removal. As for the water entering the ear, it is necessary to use a syringe with calomel first and fill his ear with some cotton wool while he is reclining on that ear where the water is. If it comes out like that.
Unless, he takes many small stones, smooth as glass, and warms them slightly with fire. Then the syringe enters one of them into a hole in his ear and treads on the same foot from that side, striking with another stone on the stone which is in the ear.
And he does not stop doing that with one stone after another until all the water comes out. And sometimes the water comes out when you take a piece of ice or feather, and enter one end into the ear, and hold the other end by fire until most of it is burned, then repeat with another feather.
He does that several times until all the water comes out or pulls it out with a tube, as mentioned earlier in the stones. And if the animal inside is small, like lice and the like, treat it as mentioned in the division, and then.
If it is a large animal, it becomes apparent to the sense of touch. Try to remove it with a hook and a pincer, and make it easier than all that which settles in the ear. And if there is an ascaris worm produced in the ear, after treating it as mentioned earlier in the division on the topic of worms, and your treatment does not succeed.
Then it is necessary to look into the ear in the sun. If something of the worm appears to you, remove it with a hook or a fine pincer. If nothing appears to you from it, take this tube and shape it accordingly.
Narrow at the bottom and wide at the top, and enter the thin end into the ear as far as it can be inserted by the patient. Then squeeze it strongly several times until all the worms come out. If it does not go out, wrap around the tube with wax as you mentioned earlier in the stones.
If you do not remove what we mentioned, use the forceps that we mentioned and which were tried by the pioneers in killing worms. You will find this in the treatise on forceps. Your poultices and medicines should be applied to the ear with this instrument; its shape is:.
As you see, it is made from silver or bronze with a small hole at the bottom and a wider one above. If you want the projectile inside the tube to be made of solid bronze, if you prefer take a reed, wrap it tightly around its end with a strong thread.
Then you put the oil, pulp, or what you want from these medicines into the tube and it is in the ear. Then you insert the reed with the thread from above and squeeze it gently with your finger until the oil flows into the inner ear and becomes apparent.
In the patient, and let what you poured into the ear be slightly warmed by fire. And beware that whatever is in it is not extremely cold or hot, for the ear cannot tolerate that.
The Seventh Chapter.
In the Treatment of Excess Earwax.
Some children may emerge from their mothers' wombs and ears without being perforated.
And also, some people may have an obstruction in the ear canal due to a wound or flesh that has grown there. This obstruction can be deep in the ear canal and not visible to the eye.
And also, some people may have an obstruction outside the ear canal a little and visible to the eye. That which is in depth of the ear and not visible to the eye is usually difficult to cure, but that which is visible should be placed with the patient's ear in the sun. And look at it. If you see the obstruction appearing, open it gently with a thin knife; its shape is:.
The edges of it will be in some places slightly limited, and the rest of the incision smooth on both sides so that it does not hurt the ear. If the swelling from fat has grown inside the ear canal, then take hold of it with a gentle probe and cut it off with great care until all the fat is removed.
If the swelling is deep in the ear, take a gentle and smooth spoon, heat it slightly in the fire, then insert it into the ear canal. If you feel the swelling with what the patient feels as heaviness of hearing, then remove it gently.
And beware of not cutting the ear canal, then insert a thread into the ear according to the size of the hole, and have it stay in the mercury ointment for some days until you are sure that the wound has healed or take a thread, wet it with water, and sprinkle powdered alum on it.
And use it, if you see the ear has become inflamed and hot, then take out the thread and replace it with another one that has been soaked in rose resin until the inflammation subsides, then treat it until it heals.
If bleeding occurs, soak a sponge or cloth in cold water and apply it to the ear, and use the rest of the treatment that stops the mentioned bleeding in the chapter on hemostasis.
The Eighth Chapter.
In the treatment of pustules that appear in the eyelids.
These pustules that appear on the eyelids can be wet or dry, so take hold of them with a forceps or a probe and cut them off with scissors from their roots, then apply powdered alum to the place.
If blood flows from it, cauterize it with a gentle lentil-shaped caustic and dress it well after cutting, for it is often cured if something remains of its roots; and if you burn the roots with fire, it will not return.
The Ninth Chapter.
Treatment of the Running Cold in the Eye Passages.
Often something like a cold is exposed in the eye passages in its intensity and firmness.
And it is called a cold, due to the gathering of thick moisture in the upper and lower eyelids. The treatment for this is as follows: if the cold appears on the surface of the eyelid and moves towards each direction, it is an easy case, so incise it with a lancet.
Then cut it gently from all sides until it is free, then attach it with a suture and cut it off. If you cannot cut it off except after the eyelid has been cut through, do not harm the patient. If the incision is large, sew it up and treat him until he recovers.
And if it is small, do not worry about it because the ointment will heal it and cover it. If the cold leans towards the inner surface of the eyelid towards the inside, turn the eyelid and attach the cold with a suture without needing to incise, and cut it off from all sides.
And if the eyelid is cut through, do not worry about it. Then wash the eye after cutting off the cold with salt water and treat the spot with what heals until the patient recovers.
The Tenth Chapter.
Treatment of the Stye that Appears in the Eyelid of the Eye.
The stye is a swelling that occurs in the layers of the upper eyelid, and it is more common in children. It weighs down their eyes and exposes them to nightsicknesses during the day and they are unable to look at the light of the sun. So that tears rush to them.
And therefore they lean their faces against them always and sleep on it, and their eye passages will be moist under the eyebrows, having been blown up with the stye, and visible to the naked eye. When you compress the place with your fingers, you will feel the stye between them, and the treatment is for the patient to put his head in your hand.
Then take a piece of cotton cloth, prepare it, and make from it a thread. Make a circle on the circumference of the suture material as much as it surrounds the swelling from every direction. Then place it upon it and compress with your fingers from every direction to gather the swelling in the center of the circle.
Then cut in the middle of that moisture with a blunt instrument, cutting it transversely and not making the incision greater than the one found in the wound. If in depth, then you should cut through all the skin until you reach the swelling.
In most cases, the swelling will protrude from the incision in the form of a white fatty piece. You attract it with a cloth that you wrapped around your fingers outside and as you turn your hand to the right and left until it is freed. Be careful not to increase the incision lest the blunt instrument touch the eye and cause harm to it.
If the swelling does not appear to you in the first incision, then it is necessary to increase the incision slightly gently until the swelling appears. Then attract it as we said and immerse a cloth in vinegar and water, placing it on the place and binding it with gentle force. Some people crush salt.
And place it in the depth of the incision so that what remains of that moisture dissolves. Then treat it until it is clean. If a warm abscess forms in the place, treat it with padded dressings until it is clean.
The eleventh chapter.
In cases of eye inflammation.
If an excrescence grows in the eye's eyelid, exceeding its natural path under the natural eyelids and ointment, then it harms the eye and causes various diseases such as constant tearing, eyelid relaxation, whitening, and thickening until that becomes a reason for eye loss.
Eye inflammation occurs in four forms, either by burning with fire or by a strong medicine as mentioned earlier in the chapter on cauterization, or it may be by cutting and stitching or by papyrus as I remember.
You should place the patient's head on a block, then turn the eyelid with your left hand. If it does not turn, then insert a needle into it from below the eyelid and guide the needle through the thread from above, making sure that is near the hair itself and pull the thread up onto the eyelid.
You turn the eyelid back, then cut into the inner eyelid without cutting the excess hair using a thin needle from the larger conjunctival sac to the smaller one. Then you thread the string and place a small cotton pad or gauze under the eyelid. Finally, you tie it off with thread.
Like the shape of an aspen leaf, except that it should be according to what you want from lifting the eyelid because people differ in that. Some of them need you to cut a piece from the eyelid according to how relaxed the eyelid is.
And some of them need you to cut less, according to how relaxed the eyelid is. Then you cut with a needle along two lines that you have marked and start from the larger conjunctival sac to the smaller one, and the single incision should be near natural hair like the thickness of a reed.
Then you insert the forceps into one corner of the skin, then remove it all. Then you close the lips with a thread and a fine wool needle and wipe away the blood and secure what remains of the threads on the eyebrows with some stuck things if.
If you want to do that, or else don't bother. Then the stitching and threads will remain for about three days or four, then treat it. And if you want, leave the wound without stitching and treat it with what dries and tightens because the eyelid rises when the wound is closed and the stitches are better.
So this is one way of suturing that the early ones mentioned, except that it has a burden on the patient and it is from good work and no danger in it. And another face in suturing also is to learn the shape of the eyelid like an aspen leaf shape as we described. Then the eyelid is raised by three fingers which are spread apart or gathered according to this figure:.
Then what remains of the eyelid is cut with a small scissors according to this picture, in measured cuts:.
If you are unable to hold the fingers and your hand does not fit, take a needle with thread and insert it into the middle of the shape, and another thread near the larger curve, and another thread near the smaller curve, and gather the threads with your fingers in measured steps, then raise your hand gently.
And lift the skin as we described, then gather both sides of the wound with stitches and treat it until it heals. If a hot swelling appears when you cut or incise, apply the lint compress and similar soothing ointments.
And if the lower eyelid also turns, it is necessary to use what we mentioned of cutting and stitching and cauterizing with fire or hot medicine, or cauterizing with fire or hot medicine more strongly and gently on the sufferer than in the former case.
Cauterizing with papyrus is done in this manner: you turn the eyelid and make a cut inside as we described, then make two or three small strips, their length equal to the length of the eyelid and their width less than that of a finger.
And the ends of these strips are cut off on both sides, where the threads hold fast, then bring them together gently with what remains of the eyelid, and pull the strips tight from both sides tight, and leave it for a few days, until the tightened skin dies, decays, and putrefies.
Until it falls off by itself, if delayed, cut it with a papyrus knife then treat it until it heals. If the eyelid does not rise and the lashes do not fall out, this is the form of the strips that are made in this shape and size exactly:.
The Twelfth Chapter.
In raising tangled hair from the eyes with a needle.
If it is one hair or two, the work to be done on that is to take a thin needle and insert into it a thread of fine silk, smooth then gather its ends and tie them with a very gentle knot, and let the length of the thread be about an inch.
Then pass the other end of the thread into the fold and tie it if you wish, then place the needle at the top of the stone and let it be near the sun so that the work can be seen clearly, for it is a delicate matter; then insert the needle with the fold into the excess hair.
And pass it through the eyelid with a wheel until it emerges above the natural hair, then pull the thread up to the fold and insert into that fold one or two or three hairs at most.
Then pull it with your hand until the hair comes out with the fold in the eyelid along with the natural hair; if you pulled the fold and the hair did not come out with it, pull the fold down with the thread that you had tied into it until the fold emerges from the upper hole.
Then place the hair in its place and pull it until you do that, until it rises to the upper hole and you see it with your eye; then release the fold and thread and bring them out and close the eye and leave it closed for two or three days until the hair takes its place and flesh grows on it.
If the hair is short, either add a long natural hair to it so that it rises with it, or leave it until it grows longer after some time; then raise it.
The Thirteenth Chapter.
In the treatment of the swelling that occurs in the upper eyelid of the eye.
The wound that is exposed to this cloth is called Arnibiya and it will be either natural or secondary. The secondary one will be from a wound's abrasion, laceration, or bruising, etc.
The method of treatment is to cut open that abrasion and separate its edges, then a strip of linen will be placed between them and tied until it heals. It should not be treated with things that dry up and constrict.
If you do that, the wound will become worse than it was. Instead, use things that promote wetness like aloes and slippery elm with water that has been used to wash a camel's hoof. Mix it with something from the ointments and smear it on the wound and treat it with it.
The key to treating it is to apply everything possible so that it does not adhere to its original condition, and this treatment we mentioned is only part of healing the wound, not returning its shape as it was at first.
The Fourteenth Chapter.
In the treatment of a wound that is in the lower eyelid.
This wound that is from the top edge is called the true Arnibiya and it will be either natural or secondary. The secondary one will be from a wound or laceration or bruising, etc.
The method of treatment is to take a needle with a doubled thread and insert it into the flesh, then pass it from the left edge to the right edge until the thread appears on both sides of the flesh. Then stretch the flesh upwards with the needle and cut it off with a broad knife.
If the shape of the eyelid returns to what it should be, and otherwise, take a spatula and place it on the site of the laceration, turn the eyelid with it, and cut two incisions in the inner side of the eyelid. The edges of the incisions will be at the tips of the cuts that you made until they meet to form an angle. Until it comes together, its shape will resemble this shape:.
And it is the Greek letter lambda, then that flesh is removed as much as the sharp side of it is below what is next to the eyelid, then the scattered parts are gathered with two stitches sewn with a thread of wool and it is treated with the medicines mentioned earlier until it clears up.
And if the scar is exposed from a cut or seam or cleft, it should be cut with a simple incision without shaving the eyebrows also as mentioned earlier, then it is divided between the lips with a poultice as mentioned.
And in summary, the treatment of a scar whether it is above or below should be done according to what appears to you about the condition of the scar, for it may be different in its appearance, and the craftsman will work out the plan in any way that is possible.
Until its shape returns to its natural state or approaches it, and the same disease will guide you as to what is suitable for it in most cases.
The fifteenth chapter.
In the adhesion of the eyelid to the membrane or the conjunctiva.
This adhesion may expose many people to the eyelid above adhering to the white of the eye, preventing it from moving easily and hindering its natural actions, so it is necessary that a small portion be inserted under the eyelid.
And raise it up or extend it with a needle, then cut the adhesion with a soft cutting tool so that it is not a severe cutting but rather like a gentle removal in order not to disturb the patient when working and for the cutting tool to slip out and injure the eye slightly, and your cutting should be like skinning off that adhesion.
And wait until the eyelid returns to its natural state and the adhesion is completely cleared, then wash the eye with salt water or sprinkle in it a mixture of saffron dissolved in water, then separate between the eyelid and the eye with a cotton swab.
She places a wet cloth soaked in egg white over the eye and after three days, she uses damp dressings until it heals.
The 16th Chapter.
In cutting the vertebrae and removing the flesh from the malar bones.
The vertebra is either a nerve vertebra, which resembles a hard, thin reed, or non-nerve vertebra, which resembles white solidified moisture. If iron touches it or if you take hold of it with forceps, it breaks off.
And if a forceps does not hold, and both types begin from the larger malar bone until they gradually spread little by little to cover the nose and prevent light and eye movement. The procedure for cutting it is that the operator puts his head in a vice.
Then he opens his eyes and raises the eyelid with your hand, then you take hold of the vertebra with a slightly bent forceps and stretch it upwards, then you take a needle and insert a horse or cow hair and a strong thread into it, bend one end of the needle slightly and implant it in the middle of the vertebra.
And you push it through with the needle, tie the vertebra with the thread and stretch it upwards and peel off the side of the vertebra next to the pupil as if you were spreading it with the hair until its end, then cut the rest at the base of the malar bone with a fine scissors or small knife and leave the natural flesh.
So that the flowing of tears does not occur. And you can stretch the vertebra with the forceps alone or with thread as we said, then peel off with a smooth file at the end which is its shape:.
And take care not to touch the file with the conjunctival membrane, and a festering will occur, which will lead to swelling of the pupil. Then, after cutting, you apply something like powdered salt or cinnamon powder to the eye and leave it for another day then treat it as needed until it heals.
If the ingrown toenail is not sensitive and cannot be entered with a needle or a ligature, this type of ingrown toenail is often treated with medicines and then removed as I described in the classification, and if you want to cut it open, open the toe's skin.
Take a thin, soft, blunt scissors with a weak edge on this shape:. And remove the toenail with it from above, gently if you see that it is loosening and falling apart, only scrape what remains in the toe's skin with a razor blade or a red or black file or powdered salt, and close the eye until another day.
Then, redo the treatment on it until all of them are gone, except if you find a red lump in the eye; leave it and treat the red lump until it heals, then redo the treatment on it with the scraping until it is healed, and as for the flesh that has peeled off.
If the peeled off flesh hurts the eye severely, tie that peeled off flesh with a ligature and cut some of it off, but do not be excessive in the cutting lest bleeding occur, then scrape with a red or black file until it heals.
The Seventeenth Chapter.
In cutting the excrescence and what grows from the excess flesh in the toe.
It may grow in the eyes of some people, red flesh that accumulates until it covers the nail or approaches or overflows onto the eyelids and sometimes the eyelids turn outward and resembles a crimson rose.
And the treatment for this is that the patient places his head in a vice, then opens his eyes and plucks out all of that red flesh with the appropriate forceps.
Or grasp it with a pincer or a cloth, then cut out the first piece and so on until you have removed all of it by cutting, taking care not to harm the eye while working, and your cutting instrument will be either the scissors we described for cutting toenails or a small pair of clippers. The ways by which you will extract it from what its picture is in this chapter.
If the cutting is complete and all redness has gone, treat the eye with pounded salt or put a crimson thread or something similar in it from the medicines, and hold on the eye from outside a piece of white cloth to prevent warm swelling.
If some redness remains and the blood is profuse and you fear warm swelling, leave the eye alone and treat it with what calms the swelling, then return to it in its work until it clears. Similarly, do likewise with any excess flesh that appears in the eye of this kind.
Unless it is necessary for you to avoid treating every weak eye by the natural method or by exposing it to work with iron, and not let your hand intervene in any of these actions until you see that member is capable of that action.
The Eighteenth Section.
In extracting the eyeball.
The ways are red veins that form on the eye, preventing sight and making the eye worse with the passage of time. So you should look first, if the eye where the way is strong and there is no other disease except for the way.
Then the extraction, which is that you should order the sufferer to put his head in your lap, then tie those veins with one or two threads according to your skill and let the threads be pliable in this shape:.
or be two double threads in one body like this shape:.
Then extract those veins with a fine scissors, gently and massage the blood sometimes after a while until you see the eye where those veins have gone out of it and the bleeding has stopped, and take care not to hurt the eye at the edges of the scissors. And do your work half a day when facing the sun.
You ensure greatly in your work, lest you cut off anything other than those arteries. When you finish, only apply the green or red ointment to the eye, so that it eats up what remains of the path. If you cannot remove it all at that time, stop the eye with something that soothes the pain of the eye.
Leave it for some days until the pain subsides and the warm swelling abates, then perform the operation on it in this manner, eye to eye, until this appearance of the cauterizing instrument is gone from it.
Leave it [and the head of the patient should be in the lap of the pupil and the other to absorb the tears, with a straight view towards the front and back of the eye, and you] the original intent is that the eye is opened with fixed or triangular incisions, grasped by the pupil.
Tight and the head of the patient should be in the lap of the pupil and the other to absorb tears, with a straight view towards the front and back of the eye, and you as you please start with the incision from above the eye or from below it; and the first is to remove two flaps at the top of the eyebrow, one at the end and the other at the beginning.
And you grasp it between the navels and the pubes, then tie two strings from under them, then grasp it between the kneecaps and the ankles, and pull your hand with a gentle pulling until you see that all the paths have risen; cut off from the smaller side to the west, whether by scissors or by a fine forceps.
And the flesh will open on its surface and you will clear all the paths until it rises above the gum, and do not cut off the drainage, for tears and blood will pour upon you.
Then cut with the scissors what is excess above and below until nothing remains except in the conjunctiva; for if you can lift it from the conjunctiva, scrape off with the flesh, that is better, and it may be suitable for some people.
If he cuts it, it will become swollen for a few days and the patient will experience pain and warmth around the tumor then work can be resumed on it.
The Nineteenth Chapter.
In returning a splinter to the nose.
The physicians call a splinter Nassoora, if it is treated with the caustic or with harsh medicine as described earlier and it does not clear up, then there is no remedy for it except to cut into the tumor when it becomes soft and extract all the moisture that is in it or pus.
Until the bone is exposed, then if the bone is exposed and you see decay or softness in it, scrape it with this instrument as shown:.
And it is called the head of the file, made from Indian steel, and its head is rounded like a scraper that has been engraved with fine carvings similar to those on a rasp or a plane. Then you place it at the site of decay in the bone, then turn it between your fingers as you apply gentle pressure until you are certain that the decay has been removed.
And do that several times, then pack the site with dried and binding medicines. If you bind the site and new flesh grows in it and bleeding stops for a period of forty days without any further development or accident occurring.
And know that it has cleared up, otherwise there is no remedy except to return the Nassoora to the nose's hole in this manner, which is to expose the bone again with steel or harsh medicine. If the bone is exposed, then take a charred stick as shown:.
The end of the chisel is triangular and its handle is conically curved towards the tip as you see. Then place it on the bone itself, being close to the eye socket and not too far from it, then turn your hand with the charred stick until the bone is pierced and the patient feels it.
If the patient finds relief when he holds his hand on his nose, then at that time, pressure should be applied to the location with adhesive and dried medicines as I have taught you. If the flesh swells and the place hardens, what was previously protruding outside will return to the nose, making it easier for the sufferer if Allah wills.
The Twentieth Chapter.
In the Return of the Eye.
If the eye has its full vision and there is no defect or diminution in sight, then it is necessary for the sufferer to relax, then separate in the socket, then place a pad in the armpit without condition and massage with a thin cloth.
Then place a poultice on the eye made from aloe, wax, myrrh, and assafoetida, and bind the eye from above with the dressing for many benefits. The recipe for the benefits is to take a lot of burning linen, fold each strip into four thicknesses and make many of them.
Then place one on top of another, as much as the eye needs, and bind it with a strong cloth tie. Then massage the face gently without condition, then remove the pad and leave the eye bound for a day and a night.
If the bandage relaxes during that time, it is necessary to tighten it again. Then remove the bandage after a day and a night as we said. If you see the eye has returned, but if not, redo the dressing, remedy, tightening, and massage until it returns.
The Twenty-First Chapter.
In Cutting Off the Vines.
If a hernia appears in the vine-like tissue, then it protrudes and bulges outside the eyelids like a grapevine shape, disfiguring the human appearance, so I will describe how to deal with it.
And it is that you enter a needle into the root of the vine-like tissue from below to above, then enter another needle with a double thread from the side and push it through, leaving the first needle as is.
Then cut the place where you tie the double thread and bind some cloth around the needle, and pull it tight. Then take out the needle and put a wet wool on the eye, and let it stay until the threads fall off with the cloth, then treat the eye accordingly.
Until the wound heals, and the cloth may be tightened from all sides in a circular motion until the eye swells up. Then wrap it with a thin bandage that reaches to the bottom of the eye, letting the white discharge flow down and the eye settle into its place, then tighten it until it heals.
The Twenty-Second Chapter.
In treating the cataract.
This affliction called cataract is a thick fluid that accumulates in the eye, resembling water flowing forth, and the purpose of treatment for it is to have the patient sit upright on a chair, then take hold of his head with your hands from both sides.
And move him until you see the cataract come down to the bottom of your eye, then stop and it will not budge, and light will pass through and the patient will see things as he used to, and if it does not come down as we have described.
And otherwise, sit the patient in front of you, then take a thin bandage and split it above the conjunctiva little by little at the point where the cataract is attached to the conjunctiva in the eyelid until the matter comes out.
If it comes out, pour warm water into the eye that you have mixed with honey or boiled rue and honey, then treat it with all of the treatment until it heals.
The Twenty-Third Chapter.
We have mentioned the types of water in classification and which ones are suitable for caustics with an explanation, so take it from there on the basis of truth. Then it is necessary for the patient to sit between your hands raised opposite the light near the sun.
And bind the healthy eye with a bandage tightly, then lift the eyelid of the affected eye with your left hand if it is the left eye, or with your right hand if it is the right eye.
Then place the tip of the caustic near the corner of the eyelid, with a gentle stroke in the same direction as the smaller part of the white of the eye. Then push the caustic with force and rotate it with your hand until it enters into the white of the eye and you feel the caustic has reached something empty.
And it is necessary that the caustic reaches as far as the depth from the white to the end of the pupil, which is the edge of the eye. Then the caustic will be seen by the observer in the same direction as the sight of the eye due to the clarity of the conjunctival membrane, then the caustic will reach up to the place where the water is.
Then tie it down to the bottom once or twice, so if the water comes out of its course, the patient will see what opened up in front of him from that and the caustic is in his eye. Then he settles a little bit, but if the water rises again, then lower it again without the caustic coming out.
If it has settled and not risen, then take out the caustic gently and rotate it with your hand little by little. Then dissolve in the water a small amount of pure Andarani salt and wash the eye from inside. Then put on the outside of the eye all of it, either wrung or moistened.
With grease and white of egg, and bind with it the healthy eye. And as for us and the people of our time, we put on it crushed camphor with white of egg. But if the caustic does not allow entry into the eye due to its hardness, because some people have very hard eyes. The surgeon should take the one called al-burid whose picture is this:.
He should puncture the constricted part only and not be concerned with the puncturing, but rather approach the affected area gently, then insert the catheter as we have mentioned, and when you complete your work prepare a pillow firmly for the patient to rest on his back in a dark room.
And he should refrain from all movements and coughing, and make his food whatever its natural consistency is, nor move his head to the right or left at all, and let the dressing remain on him until the third day, then take him out of that dark room and test his sight.
And he should have things done to him, then remove the dressing on the seventh day, and it is not permissible to do that during treatment or after catheterization at your time, but rather you should avoid that before the water rises quickly with severe swelling.
If a hot swelling appears, then you should remove the dressing before the seventh day and take care of that which calms the swelling until it subsides, then you can release his sight and cover his face with a cloth to train his sight from underneath for some days while he is in that dark room then.
He should exit the room gradually and conduct himself according to his needs, and know that the catheter does not dispense with observation in this case therefore he will proceed with the work, and I have been told by some Iraqis that one of them mentioned that he makes a flat catheter in Iraq that absorbs water.
And I have not seen anyone in our country make that nor read it in a book of the early authors, and it may be an innovation, and this is a picture of types of catheters to stand on their ignorance:.
It is made from brass in particular, and its end will be like this one with a triangular tip that is sharp.
The Fourth Twenty-Fourth Chapter.
In the treatment of nasal flesh growth.
It may grow in the nose various excessive flesh, some resembling many spider legs, and some that is cancerous, hard and inflamed in color, and some that is soft not inflamed in color.
And if the flesh is not inflamed or cancerous, then the doctor should sit facing you with the sun ahead of him, open your nostrils and insert a pincer into that flesh, then pull it out and cut off what he has grasped with a sharp pointed forceps from one direction.
Until you learn that all the flesh has gone, if there remains something that you cannot cut off, then remove it with one of the fine instruments gently until nothing remains; but if bleeding occurs or a hot abscess appears.
So treat it as necessary, or if it is one of the malignant growths, begin to apply a poultice until the bleeding stops and all the flesh goes away; then insert into the nose after cutting off something, either pure water or a drink; for if the nose opens up and moisture flows from it into the throat.
And know that he has been cured, unless moisture does not penetrate as it should, then know that inside is a growth of flesh on the top of the bones which have become covered with callous and the instrument was unable to cut into it; therefore take a thread of flax that is somewhat thick.
And tie many knots in it and make between each knot the length of a finger or less, then the doctor should insert one end of the thread into his nose with a mordant or to the extent that he can after having made it like a bowstring and pull out the breath until it reaches the turbinate bone.
And it comes out of his mouth and often children do this when writing, which is something that makes it easy for whoever intends to, then gather the two ends of the thread, one that has come out of the mouth and the other that remains in the nose.
Then you will use spreading the meat with the knots that are in the thread, doing so until you know that the meats have been cut by the thread knot. Then remove the thread and insert it into the nose after wiping away the blood, having drunk it in the medicinal ointment, do this for three days or more.
Until the ointment eats up all that remains of the meat, then insert the last thing in the nose a lead tube for some days until it heals. If need be to treat further, use this.
And this is an image of the catheter by which fluids and medicines are dripped into the nose:.
He places beforehand or copper like a small candle holder open at the end and similarly its channel.
And if you want, make the tube closed like a pipe and smooth out the catheter's handle.
It has a handle at its end as you see, which is grasped when melted with wax or whatever juices or flowing things you want.
The 25th chapter.
In the polyps that grow at the tip of the nose.
Many times a polyp grows at the tip of the nose and becomes large and increases with days until its appearance is unpleasant.
Therefore, it is necessary to cut it at its first appearance and remove the whole thing then apply medicine to the place either with caustic or with a burning substance that takes the place of cauterization. If cutting does not take place until it becomes large, then look, if it is hard and calcified like the color of old bone.
So do not expose it to iron, for it is a cancerous tumor and many times I have seen that after cutting this tumor a great deal of evil has befallen the owner. And if the tumor is soft and yielding, not like old bone, I have also seen that the cutting can take place in its entirety. Release the abscess and incise it without caution or hesitation, treating the place with what dries and constricts until it heals.
The Twenty-Sixth Chapter.
In suturing the nose, lip, and ear. If the connection is severed due to a wound or something similar, know that whenever separation of connection occurs in one of these parts, it is rare for work to be done there except in some people.
When one of these things is presented to someone, look if the wound is clean and full of blood, then gather the edges of the wound with suturing and treat it until it heals. And if the separation of connection has separated its lips and each lip became sound in itself, then it is necessary to remove the outer layer of skin from each lip until it becomes even.
Then gather the lips together with suturing and tighten it, and apply to it powdered myrrh and rosewater, and put on top a small amount of unguent or other adhesive substance, and leave it fastened for two or three days then release it.
And change the dressing and leave it until the sutures fall away on their own, then treat it with ointment until it heals. The method of suturing is to gather the separation of connection either with a needle as we described in suturing the abdomen, or with thread as I explained to you there.
The Twenty-Seventh Chapter.
In removing the swelling that appears on the lips.
Many people may have in their lips small hard tumors that resemble some of them like the seed of the cress and some of them are smaller and larger, so it is necessary to turn the lip and cut around each tumor and tie it with a ligature.
And cut it from all sides then fill the wound after cutting with powdered white lead until the bleeding stops and rinse with vinegar, salt and treat the places as needed to constrict until the wounds heal.
The Eighteenth Chapter.
On Cutting Away the Excess Fleshy Mass in the Gums.
Often a fleshy mass grows on the gums, which the ancients called "apulus." It should be tied with a thread or held with a forceps and cut off at its root. Then let the bleeding cease, and then apply powdered alum to the place.
or one of the dried and hardened excrescences. If that flesh returns after treatment, it often returns again; cut it off a second time and cauterize it, for it will not return afterwards.
The Nineteenth Chapter.
On Fixing the Teeth with Iron.
Tartar may accumulate on the surfaces of the teeth, both inside and outside, as well as between the gums. It can become rough and foul-smelling, and eventually spread to the gums, causing decay.
Then the patient should sit before you, with his head in your lap. You will remove the tartar and tooth that appears to you covered with it, down to the bone, as well as the yellowish, greenish, or whitish deposits, and so on, until cleanliness is achieved.
If what is on it from the first tartar falls away, and not, then you will repeat the tartar removal another day, and a third day, until you reach your desired goal. And know that the tooth requires different forms of treatment, many shapes, according to what appears in your work.
In order that the tartar which is removed from inside the tooth, and the tartar which is removed from outside the tooth, and the tartar which is removed between the teeth may be different in form. And these are many forms of treatment that you should have all prepared.
The Thirtieth Chapter.
On Pulling Out Teeth.
The wisdom of the tooth should be treated with all care and attention, and its pulp should not be exposed. There is no going back once it has been exposed because it is a noble substance, even if it is necessary to expose it.
It should be ensured that the toothache subsides before attempting to extract it. The patient is often deceived by the toothache and thinks it's in a healthy tooth, so he extracts it, then the toothache doesn't go away until the sick tooth is extracted; we have seen this happen many times with barber-surgeons.
If the toothache subsides in its exact place, then it is necessary to surround the gum with a forceps that has some strength until the gums are cleared from all sides, and then move it slightly with your fingers or fine forceps at first very gently.
Then grasp it with the two large forceps, grasping well, and the patient's head between your knees as if he were not moving. Then pull out the tooth straightly, lest it break; if it does not come out, then take one of those instruments and insert it under him from all sides gently, and rock him back and forth just as you did at first.
And if the tooth is perforated or split, it is necessary to fill that hole with a cloth and cover it tightly with a thin edge so that it does not open up when you pull on him with the forceps, and it is necessary to grasp around the gum from all sides firmly.
And conserve your effort so that it does not break and some of it remains, causing the patient even greater pain than his initial toothache. And beware of doing what foolish barber-surgeons do in their haste and eagerness to extract, without using what we have described.
Many afflictions befall people, the gravity of which is less than having a tooth broken and its roots remaining intact or partly. And if some of the jawbone is excised as we have seen repeatedly, then it is to be rinsed with water or wine and salt afterwards. If bleeding occurs from the site, many times this happens and a clot forms in that place.
And if that does not help you, then the caliper which moves the tooth or is used to pull it out should be smooth and well-shaped. The shape of these large calipers is as follows:.
It should be as you see, with thick handles so that even when grasped they do not bend or flex. It should be made of Indian steel or well-crafted iron, with the edges rounded and at the tip some teeth fit into each other to grasp firmly and tightly.
And the edges can be shaped like a mallet, so it will also be strong and firm.
The 13th chapter.
In the excision of roots of teeth and the extraction of broken jawbones.
If a root remains after extracting the tooth and it is broken, then it is necessary to apply fat or grease to the site for a day or two until the site becomes numb, then you can enter with the gauze or calipers. which resembles the edges of a bird's beak and is called blerja, and this is the shape of the calipers:.
It should be made like a mallet from the inside or like an esculaf, and if it does not come out with these calipers, then you should dig into the root and expose all the flesh with a file, then enter the instrument which resembles a small awl, and this is its shape:.
Shortening the tip is slightly thick and should not be pierced, lest it break. If the origin protrudes in this way, otherwise use these other instruments in this shape, the first resembling a triangle on the side with some thickness:.
Image of a gentle triangular shape:.
And we also use this instrument with the two prongs, in this shape:.
And besides those instruments and tools mentioned earlier in the chapter on wounds, we also use this instrument that resembles a large pair of pincers, in this shape:.
The triangular side, with some thickness on it, lest it break, and be non-pierced. Know that instruments for wounds are many, as well as all other instruments, and the skilled craftsman can invent tools for himself according to what his work and diseases demand themselves.
Because some diseases were not mentioned by the ancients, and their instruments varied in type, therefore if a bone in the jaw or one of the bones of the mouth breaks or is affected, search for it in its place with one of these instruments or forceps that have been mentioned in extracting roots.
And we also use this shape:.
There is some thickness in it, slightly, to stabilize the bone so that it does not slip away until the bone comes out, and we treat the place with the suitable medicines for that. If the bone has a slight putrefaction, remove it from its putridity and smoothness until it is clean, then treat it until it heals.
The 28th chapter.
In the treatment of wounds that have spread to other areas.
Wounds that have spread to other areas, if they deviate from their natural course, are spoiled by this; especially when it happens in women and children. It is necessary to examine the wound, if the abscess has developed behind another abscess.
And if it cannot be spread out nor cut off, then remove it, and if it is stuck to the last molar, extract it with this instrument as shown.
And it is like a small crooked file, and let it be made of Indian steel, very sharp on the end, and let your cutting edge be worn away in many days because of the hardness of the molar, lest you dislodge another from its place; but if it is ready to be extracted by force, then extract it with a cold pumice stone as shown.
It will be all of Indian steel, and the file edge will be very fine, like a cold pumice stone with which one files the point of an awl; it will temper the molar little by little in many days gradually, lest it fall out then it will be worn away later and cleaned with some cloths.
And if the molar has been broken and some of it is causing the tongue to be pained when speaking, then it must be tempered also until the roughness of that break is gone and it becomes even and smooth, lest it continue to pain the tongue and corrupt the speech.
The Thirty-Third Chapter.
On binding moving teeth with silver wires or gold wires.
If the anterior teeth are exposed and move and stir due to a blow or fall, nor can the sufferer bite onto anything he eats, lest they fall out and he has not found relief in any medication.
The trick is to bind it with a gold or silver thread, and gold is better because silver tarnishes and becomes brittle after some days, while gold remains forever as it was, not exposing itself to that; and the thread should be of medium thickness in the rigidity and stoutness according to what is suitable between the teeth.
The picture of binding is to take the thread, enter it between the healthy molars, then weave it on both sides of the thread between the moving teeth, one or more, until the weaving reaches the healthy molar on the other side.
Then return the suturing to the area where it started, and pull your thread gently and wisely until it does not move at all, with the tension of the thread being at the roots of the wounds so that it does not slip. Then cut off the excess thread with scissors and join them together, wrap them around a wad, and hide them between the healthy tooth and the movable tooth.
So that the tongue may not be injured, then leave it like this tightly secured as much as remains, if it should come undone or lose its tension with another thread, and so enjoy it forever. And this is the appearance of the wounds and the arrangement in two healthy teeth and two movable teeth as you see:.
And the tooth or teeth may return to their place after they have fallen and become connected as we described, and remain. And only a skilled craftsman can do that. He may also take a piece of cow bone and make it into the shape of a tooth and place it in the position from which the tooth has gone. And he tightens as we said, and remains, and enjoys that.
The Fourth Chapter and Thirty-Third.
In cutting the ligament which is exposed under the tongue to prevent speech.
This ligament that is exposed under the tongue may either be natural, with which a person is born, or it may be secondary to an injury that has healed.
The operation in this case is to open the patient's mouth and his head in your lap, raise his tongue, then cut that nerve ligament with a scalpel until the tongue is released from its hold. If there is some stiffness and complication due to an injury that has healed, insert a hook and split it with the scalpel until the ligament breaks and the knot unties.
And beware that the cut is not too deep in the flesh, lest you cut an artery there and expose bleeding. Then rinse the area with rosewater or vinegar and cold water after cutting, then place under the tongue a strip of linen which the patient will hold each night.
Unless it happens again, if bleeding occurs, place a compress of powdered pumice on the place. If the blood overpowers you, use a sponge to stop the bleeding. Then treat it with the rest of the treatment until it is cured.
The 35th Chapter.
Removing the Toad that has Developed under the Tongue.
It may happen under the tongue a tumor resembling a small toad that prevents the tongue from functioning naturally and perhaps grows so large as to fill the mouth. The treatment is to open the patient's mouth towards the sun and look at the tumor.
If you see it as a tumor with a bluish color or black hard, and the patient has no sensation of it, do not approach it because it is cancer. But if it leans towards whiteness and contains moisture, insert a fine probe into it, cut it open from all sides.
If the blood overpowers you while you are working, place powdered pumice on it until the bleeding stops, then return to your work until you have removed it completely, and then rinse with vinegar and salt.
Then treat it with the rest of the treatment that is suitable for it until it is cured.
The 38th Chapter.
Treating a Tumor of the Tonsils.
And whatever grows in the throat from any other tumors may appear inside the throat as glands that resemble the tonsils if you treat them with what was mentioned in the division but they do not heal.
And look, if the tumor is hard with a bluish color and little sensation, do not approach it with iron. And if it is red in color and its origin is thick, do not approach it with iron either, fearing bleeding, but leave it alone until it ripens, for it may either break down or burst on its own.
If it is white in color and curved, and its original shape was thin, then this is what should be cut, and the procedure is to examine before operating, whether the tumor has become completely quiescent or has decreased in magnitude.
Then the patient sits facing the sun with his head in your lap, and it opens its mouth and takes a servant between your hands, and you tie its tongue down to the bottom with this instrument.
You make it from bronze or copper, thin like a razor. If you have tied the tongue down with this and the tumor becomes apparent to you and falls under your sight, take a hook and insert it into the tumor and pull it out as far as possible without pulling anything from the peritoneum.
Then you cut it with this instrument, its shape resembling a pair of pincers, except that both ends are bent in the opposite direction, very sharp. You make it from Indian steel or Damascus steel.
If this instrument is not available, then cut it with these forceps, its shape resembling this.
Sharp on one side and not sharp on the other, so after you cut one tumor, cut the other in this same type of cutting, then after the cutting, wash the patient with cold water or vinegar water.
If bleeding occurs, wash with water that contains the shells of almonds or the leaves of asafoetida or something similar to stop the bleeding, then treat him until he recovers. And if there are other tumors in the throat besides the two, cut them according to what I mentioned for cutting the tumors, whether it be so.
And I treated a woman who had a tumor that had grown inside her throat, pressing against the epiglottis with little sensation, almost blocking the airway, and the woman was unable to eat or drink water.
The woman had been near death if she remained for a day or two and the tumor had risen from it two branches until they emerged onto her nostrils. She then hastened with urgency, inserted into one of them a needle, then drew out a healthy piece.
Then she cut it off where she had reached from the nostril hole, then did that with what emerged from the other nostril hole, then opened her mouth and compressed her tongue. Then she inserted the needle into the same tumor and cut off some of it, and only a slight bleeding occurred.
Then the woman's hoarseness subsided, and she hastened to drink water then returned to eating. And we did not cease cutting off that tumor repeatedly over a long time, until it was reduced to what was taken out, and so it continued with her.
Then the swelling and tumor inside the throat subsided, so it stopped increasing. Then it was cured from that side, and I do not know what Allah did with her afterwards.
The 27th Chapter.
In Cutting a Laryngeal Tumor.
That which is called a uvula, if the discharge flows down to the larynx and becomes swollen and white, then it is called an elongation; and if it is thick at the bottom and rounded, then it is called a uvula. If treated as mentioned in the section on classification, and the treatment does not succeed.
And I saw the hot tumor that subsided from her and was thin, so it is necessary to cut it. And there was not a part of it that was thick and rounded, nor had it any length, and it was red or pale or black or without sensation, so it is necessary to avoid cutting it.
And in it, there is deceit for the patient. So if you see it on the characteristics I mentioned from its whiteness and length, then make the patient sit in the sun's heat and compress his tongue with the instrument that was described earlier, then insert the needle into the uvula.
You attract it downwards and cut it with one of the two instruments mentioned in cutting the tonsils, and it is necessary that you do not cut off more than what has increased beyond its natural state without excess because if you cut off more, you will harm the voice and speech.
Then, after cutting it off, you use what we described in cutting the tonsils and treat it until it heals. If the patient is reluctant to cut it off, then you should use cunning on him without fear or caution, and the cunning is that you put the patient's head in your lap.
Then you hold the patient's tongue with the instrument we mentioned, then take from the sharp water we described in the chapter on cupping and knead it with a spatula not extinguished, making it neither thick nor thin, and fill the container with it, and this is its shape:.
Its end, where you put the medicine, should be like a spoon bowl, and you place the instrument with the medicine on the tonsil itself, and the patient lying on his side, so that the saliva may flow from within his throat into it, lest something should flow down to his throat and harm him.
Then you grasp the medicine with your hand and squeeze it onto the tonsil for half an hour until you see that it has darkened and the medicine's effect has ceased, and if you wish to take a thread, then wrap it around the end of the spoon and dip the thread in the medicine.
And you insert the spoon with the thread into a tube from above until the thread sticks to the tonsil, and do that repeatedly until you achieve what you want in cupping, then leave it alone because it will become dry and fall off after three or four days, if you need to redo the medicine, make it again.
And after cupping, wipe around the tonsil with a thread soaked in oil and absorb what's left of the medicine, then gargle with cold water and treat from outside with poultices and from inside with emollients until it heals, this type of treatment is safer than cutting and further away from fear.
And it also treats the wound with what is softer than K and cutting, treating with vinegar on this form. It takes henna, safflower, satureja, and aloes, as well as sage, balm, and similar herbs. Then all of them or some of them are gathered in a measure and steeped in vinegar.
And it is steeped and the measure is prepared with the fat of wisdom, and there is a hole in the middle of the cover. A utensil fashioned on this form is made from silver or bronze.
And the end of the vessel that contains the remedy is inserted into the patient's mouth until the vapor rises to the wound on the tube until the wound is satisfied, then it is repeated on it several times until it is healed. And beware not to make this treatment at the first appearance of the swelling.
For it often increases in the swelling, and it is not right to do that unless the warm swelling subsides. If this instrument is not available, take a reed and fix an eggshell on its end so that the patient's mouth does not burn.
Because the eggshell prevents the heat of the vapor from burning the mouth, and this is one of the good treatments with safety.
The 28th Chapter.
In removing thorns and what is stuck in the throat except that.
For it is often that a bone or a sharp thorn or something else gets stuck in the throat, so it is necessary to remove from it what appears and falls under one's gaze after the tongue has been pressed with the instrument towards the sun.
So that you may see what is in the throat, and what has not appeared to you and is hidden in the throat. Therefore, it is necessary for the patient to vomit before food enters his stomach, for perhaps the thing stuck will come out with the vomiting or the patient will swallow a piece of meat or the root of a plant.
He takes a piece of stale bread or a soft sponge from the sea and wraps it around a thread, then swallows it. If it reaches the site of the swelling, he pulls the thread quickly, repeating this process.
It often becomes stuck to the swelling or bone and comes out. If it does not come out as described, then use a tool made of lead in this shape:.
It will be a little thicker than a thread, and at its end, there is a groove that the patient puts into his throat gently while raising his head upwards and takes care not to touch his epiglottis so as not to cause him to cough and push out the bone or swelling, or the doctor inserts it by hand.
And the patient's insertion is better because he knows the location of the growing thing and pushes it down or pulls his hand with the tool up, all according to how he prepares himself until it comes out.
The thirty-ninth chapter.
In the extraction of the nascent calculus in the throat.
If the calculus has not been cured by what we mentioned in the treatment with medicines, then look at the patient's throat when he is in the sun after he has gargled his mouth with the instrument that I described to you.
If your sight falls on the calculus, pull it out with a small wire or a thin and firm thread. If you are not able to, then take a cleansed tube and insert it into the patient's throat near the calculus, then insert a heated sword into the cavity of the tube.
He does that several times and the patient tolerates water all day, then takes a filled cup of cold water, opens his mouth in it, swallows it little by little, and moves his hand in it from time to time.
If the pustule falls on a place where it is touched by water, then if it does not come out as we described, it will fill with pus and blood through the instrument which we described in the chapter of treatment of the skin; do that several times until it comes out.
The method of treatment in the syringe is to take a certain amount of warm wax, cover it with a cloth having a hole in the middle, then insert one end of the instrument into that hole and put the syringe on the finger, sealing its mouth so that nothing comes out until you know that the syringe has reached the patient's throat.
If the pustule falls on a place, then if it does not come out, return to the syringe several times and be patient for thirst; eat salt and onion, and do not drink water. It is necessary that it comes out by this method. And this is an image of the instrument with which the pustule is drawn from the throat when it falls on it as seen.
And it resembles calipers, as you see, except that it has this curvature which enters the throat and its ends resemble a bird's beak with roughness like the cooled metal if it pressed on something and did not leave it.
Another instrument is used to compress the tongue, which is a wide iron ring that can accommodate the mouth above the tongue. It enters the mouth standing on its side, keeping the mouth open without the patient's will and not allowing him to remove it at all until it is removed.
Description of the instrument by which the mouth is opened in this manner exactly.
The Forty-Fourth Chapter.
He makes speech in the bosom of ulcers and splits them.
Ulcers are many in kind, scattered according to what is mentioned one by one in this book, and they differ in their bosom and splitting from two aspects: one type of ulcer itself and the substances it contains.
The second type from before the positions where it happens in the body because the tumor occurring in the head is not the tumor occurring in the seat and the tumor occurring in a fat location is not the tumor occurring in a joint each one has its own rule of action.
And among tumors, some should not be excised except after the pus has matured and is complete, and some should be excised while still in its nascent stage like tumors that are near joints.
Because if the tumor occurs near a joint and persists until it affects what is around it, it may damage ligaments or nerves of that joint, becoming a cause for its disability or the tumor being near a main organ.
Because if you delay excision until it has matured, you will harm the main organ or be near the seat; then excise it newly and not completely mature, because if it is allowed to suppurate, it will perforate into the inside of the seat and become a source of abscess.
And it will become in a place that does not heal, and it is necessary to learn when to excise tumors that have matured completely, which is when the pain of the tumor subsides, the fever goes away, the pulse weakens, and the warning signs appear.
And it is necessary to expect excision at the lower part of the tumor if possible, so that it becomes easier for drainage to flow down or in a more superficial part of the tumor and be more swollen, and the excision should go along with the length of the body if the tumors are in the hands and feet.
And positions of muscles, tendons, nerves, and vessels, and in general in all flat places that do not have a bend to them, but if it bends then let the excision be according to that position, and if the tumor is in fatty locations then it is best to leave it alone.
Until his swelling subsides as we mentioned, you will find that if you open it before that, excessive bleeding will result from it, and many abscesses and suppurations may occur. Some tumors may form on the surface of the body as needed by the organ.
It is necessary to use a small incision in small tumors, and a wide incision or multiple cuts according to the size of the tumor. There may be some tumors that require scraping the skin and cutting off if it has become like a shred.
And it may happen that it becomes like a flat surface in some cases, similar to what is seen in many flaps and incisions, and from it there may be a cut with three angles, or one which is cut off in the shape of a mulberry leaf.
And from it there may be use of circular incisions and crescent-shaped ones, and similar ones. And if it does not have a head like smooth and flat tumors, then only a small incision is necessary. If the tumor is large and has accumulated for a long time and is bleeding, then do not proceed until all the pus comes out at that time.
But take some of it out, then tighten the tumor until another day, and then take some more pus out. Do this repeatedly in stages until all of it is out.
And especially if the patient is weak in strength or a pregnant woman or a young child or an elderly man, the vital spirit often dissolves with the sudden exit of pus. So it may happen that the patient dies and you do not feel anything. Be extremely cautious about this matter.
And after cutting open these tumors, it is necessary to clean the wound and inspect it. If the wound of the tumor is small or if there is only a simple incision, use the lint made from flax or cotton. And if the tumor is large and there are many cuts from the incision.
It is necessary to insert a thread into each seam until some of it reaches the other, and if the tumor has been cut from the skin or scraped off, then it should be covered with cotton wool or linen flannel without moisture and tied up for three days.
Then remove it and treat it as needed with ointments until it heals. If bleeding occurs during your treatment, use cold water and vinegar after soaking a piece of linen in them and apply it to the bleeding site several times.
If the bleeding persists, it is necessary to use treatment and remedies as we have described in many places of this book and in the classification. If you are during winter and the place of the tumor is very sensitive, then anoint the remedies with wine and hot oil.
And place it on the site. If you are during summer and the sites are warm, then soak the remedies in water and oil or wine and oil, all of which should be cold. Then, if it is the third day as we said, the tumor should break open and be cleansed.
And use for its treatment what is similar until it heals. This is what you need to know about the treatment of tumors in general, and as for the detailed method, I have mentioned each tumor how to treat it briefly and clearly.
The Forty-Ninth Chapter.
On the incision of tumors that appear on the skin of the head.
There are small tumors on the skin of the head, which are a type of scaly growths that have their own conditions like those found in chicken's eggs, and there are many kinds among them, some of which are fatty and others that contain moisture similar to pus.
And among them are those that contain moisture similar to discharge and pus, and others that are hard and calcified, and all of them do not pose a danger in cutting and removing them unless a blood vessel is encountered.
The operation in this case is to incise it first with the instrument that resembles its shape, which is called the "mudass", until you learn what it contains. If what it contains is moistness, then incise it with a slight longitudinal incision following this shape:.
And start the incision from line ~b~ to line ~c~, and if the moisture has been released, then remove the sac that was containing that moisture, and cut it off entirely, leaving not a single thing behind. For many times, it returns if something is left.
Then immerse a thread in the white ointment if it is available, or else in salt water, and fill the wound with it. Leave it until the next day, for it will consume what remains of the sac. Then apply the thread with the ointment again and again as needed.
Until you are certain that there is nothing left of the sac, then treat the wound with ointments until it heals. And if the tumor contains fatty substance, incise it in this manner:.
Incise it with a suture, and split the edges of the wound on either side. Remove it from all directions, exert your effort in bringing out the coagulum that contains it. If an artery opposes you, do what I described to you later. And likewise, do the same in the tumor if it is adhered to the incision.
And the treatment is exactly as I mentioned, and the incision on a tumor that is adhered is easier because it has little blood and moisture. And some of these tumors found in people's heads may not have any moisture with them, which is why I incised.
The head of an old woman, and I found the tumor to be as hard as solid stone, with a grayish white color that would not bend even if someone tried to break it. And none of the other tumors occurring in the head were like this one, except for those that appear on the heads of young boys.
When dealing with the origins of the ear, cut them all into simple incisions and make its edge from its edges so that the material can be inserted downwards. Then treat it according to what is suitable for it.
The Forty-Second Chapter.
In the incision on pigs which are exposed in the neck, these tumors are often exposed in the neck and under the armpits and in the armpit areas and may be exposed all over the body, and some of them may arise from others.
And each pig is in a special sac belonging to it, just as with the uterus and head tumors as we described, and types of these pigs are many, some petrified, some containing fluids, and some are malignant and do not respond to treatment.
And I have not seen one in a good condition when touched, and it was apparent to the eye, almost like the color of the skin, moving towards every direction, not attached to the neck's nerve or ligament or vessel, nor was it concave. It is necessary to cut it with a simple incision from top to bottom of the body in this shape from line ~j~ to line ~b~.
And peel it off from all sides and stretch the skin flaps with one or two sutures or many sutures as needed, just as we said about head tumors, and bring it out little by little, so that it is on the neck without cutting a hair or nerve, and let the surgeon not be too rough.
So that your hand does not become accustomed to cutting or disturbing the patient, and you cut what is not needed, if you cut a hair or vessel and stop working, then put powdered alum or some of the astringents that stop bleeding in the wound.
And bandage the wound and leave it until the swelling subsides, and the wound calms down and becomes firm again. Then you should attend to your work until it is finished, then search with your little finger if there remains any, and then cut and clean another piglet.
If there is a large vessel in the origin of the hare, it should not be cut from its source. Instead, it should be bound with a double and tight thread and left until it falls off on its own without causing harm. Then, dress the wound with cotton wool that has been soaked in the Egyptian ointment, and treat it.
And if you cut the hare entirely, it should be gathered and sutured from its edge after making sure that there is no remaining slack, except for the thickness of the vessel.
It should be directed towards its source and base, and stitching as we mentioned, and whatever hares may have purulent discharge, you should bathe it slightly where you see the place of suppuration, and make the bath below what we said.
Then, use the poultice with Egyptian ointment and similar things to eat away what remains of the corruption until you see the wound has healed by the medicated emollients for the flesh until it is clean.
The Third Forty-First Section.
In the laryngeal opening from a tumor that occurs inside the throat.
The ancients mentioned this incision in the larynx and I have not seen anyone in our country who made it, and this is their custom. As for those afflicted with asthma, they should avoid incising the larynx as it will not benefit them.
In order that all the orifices and lungs may be free, and as for those who have a hot tumor in the mouth, throat, or tonsils, if there is no affliction in the trachea, it is necessary to use incision of the larynx to escape from the obstruction which is caused by suffocation.
It is necessary if we want to do so, that we incise the larynx under three circles of the trachea or four small cuts across in what lies between two circles, as much as the incision is in the diaphragm not in the cartilage and this position agrees with the incision.
Because it has no flesh and the vessels of blood are far from it, if the doctor is cautious he should stretch the neck skin with a ligature then cut the skin until he reaches the jugular vein, avoiding the vessels of blood if he sees anything.
Then he should cut the peritoneum as we described, and verify that the jugular vein has been severed by the sputum that comes out with it along with the respiratory distress and loss of voice; and he should leave the wound open for a period of time until the fear of suffocation is over, then collect the edges of the wound from the skin.
And he should draw it out alone, without a bone, then use medications that promote flesh growth until it heals, said the author of this book, the explanation of this entire speech which we have mentioned is only if they see the patient has closed his throat due to one of these tumors mentioned.
And the patient was on the verge of death, and he was concerned that his airway would be obstructed, so they went to the trachea section to allow the patient to breathe at the wound location for some breathing and escape from death; but they were ordered to leave the wound open until the disease subsides and its form is three days or so.
So they were ordered to suture the wound and treat it until it heals; and what I myself saw was that a servant took scissors and sent them to her throat, cutting off some of the bronchial tubes, so I was summoned to treat her and found her as lifeless as one being slaughtered, so I exposed the wound.
I found the blood that came out of the wound to be minimal, so I knew she hadn't cut any major veins or arteries; and breath was coming out of the wound, so I stopped and sutured the wound until it healed, and nothing happened to the servant except for a slight hoarseness.
The wound returned after some days to its best condition, so we say that incising the larynx is not dangerous.
The 44th Chapter.
In the incision on the tumor that is exposed in the oesophagus from outside and is called oesophageal papilloma.
This tumor which is called oesophageal papilloma is a great one on the color of the body and it is common in women, and it comes in two types.
Either it is natural or it is acquired, and if it is natural there is no remedy for it, but if it is acquired it will be in two forms, one resembling a fatty cyst and the other resembling a tumor that occurs from the entanglement of an artery and in its section there is danger. It is not proper to expose it to iron at all, except for what is small of it, and if you explore and examine it with the probe, you will find that it resembles a fatty cyst and it is not connected to anything from the vessels, so cut it like you would cut on fatty cysts. And remove it with what is inside the sac if it is in a sac, otherwise gather all of it and then treat the place as required.
The 45th Chapter.
In the incision on fatty tumors.
Fatty tumors are numerous in kind and I have mentioned all of their types in the classification, and it is necessary to distinguish between fatty tumor and abscess as they are confusing, so I say that an abscess comes with heat and fever and terrifying pains until the suppuration subsides. And the suppuration continues until then fever and inflammation subside, and a fatty tumor is not accompanied by heat or fever or pains, but it is enclosed in a sac-like envelope which is its special container and it is on the color of the body and it begins like a boil and becomes like a swelling and larger and smaller.
This abscess is of two types: either fatty or containing moisture. The colors of the moisture are numerous as mentioned in the classification, so if you intend to treat the abscess, you should first inspect it and examine it with the instrument called the madis, as shown in the chapter that follows this one.
The measure of the tumor, then take out the madis and look at what comes out in its wake. If liquid that has a certain color comes out, cut it open with a small incision as mentioned in all abscesses. And if no liquid comes out after taking out the madis, know that it is fatty.
Cut it open with a well-shaped incision, as I have taught you. Then tie it up with sutures and remove the skin from all sides gently. Preserve the abscess intact if possible along with the tumor.
And if the abscess bursts open while you are working and you cannot remove it intact, then remove it in pieces until nothing remains. For if something remains, the abscess will likely return to its original state more severely.
And if it bursts and only a small amount remains, then stop the bleeding by applying some of the sharp and caustic remedies and tighten the wound. Then put something soothing on top to calm down the hot abscess and treat it with all the treatment until it heals. If the abscess is large, mark its edges and treat it as necessary.
And if a vein, whether artery or not, obstructs you and bleeding occurs, immediately apply the powdered dust to the site and leave it compressed for two or three days until the wound heals and the heat of the blood subsides. Then return to removing what remains of the abscess.
The 46th chapter.
In images of instruments.
What are found in the wound and its vicinity are the forms of injuries, which are three kinds: major, intermediate, and minor.
A form of injury, great.
A form of injury, middle-sized.
A form of injury, small.
It is made of iron, tempered and square in shape, to hasten the entrance into ulcers. And these are the forms of probes, and it is called ice. And they are three kinds also: great, middle-sized, and small. A form of probe, great.
A form of probe, middle-sized.
A form of probe, small.
It is suitable for searching with it the ulcers, wounds, abscesses, and cavities as to what is inside them from bones and other things. It is made rounded, polished, smooth like bronze or Chinese copper or iron or silver, and the best one is that which was made from bronze.
And probes can also be made from black lead, and it is suitable to use it to explore the cavities which have a curvature so that it can follow the curve, and they are also three kinds: long, middle-sized, and short.
According to the need of each cavity, it makes its thickness according to the size and narrowness of the cavity. A form of probe from black lead, great.
A form of probe from black lead, middle-sized.
A form of probe from black lead, small.
Forms of forceps, and they are many kinds because there is simple one with a single claw and it is three kinds: great, middle-sized, and small. And there are blind forceps, which are three kinds. And there are forceps with double claws, which are three kinds. And there are forceps with covered double claws. And there are three kinds and among them are the forceps with three claws, which are three kinds. And all these kinds are needed each one in its place. A form of simple forceps, great. Image of a simple saw in the middle:. Image of a small simple saw:.
Image of a large blind saw:. Image of a middle-sized blind saw:.
Image of a small blind saw:.
Image of a large saw with two handles:. Image of a middle-sized saw with two handles:. Image of a small saw with two handles:.
Image of a large saw with three handles:.
Image of a middle-sized saw with three handles:. Image of a small saw with three handles:.
And these are the images of the scalpels which cut and remove tumors, and there are three kinds among them, some large, some middle-sized, and some small; Image of a large scalpel:.
Image of a middle-sized scalpel:.
Image of a small scalpel:.
Its edges which cut are limited and the other ends are unlimited, but I made it so that one can assist with removing the tumor when afraid of cutting a vein or nerve, so that the patient may find some relief from the discomfort they experience when removing the growth.
And these are the images of the forceps, and there are three kinds among them, some large, some middle-sized, and some small; Image of a large forceps:.
It is made of copper alloy that can be shaped to fit and on one end it resembles a broad spoon with two layers, at the top of which there is a hidden scalpel blade resembling a bird's tongue, which goes in and out as you please.
Images of the retractors which are placed between the fingers when excising tumors, and the patient does not feel them, and there are three kinds among them, some large, some middle-sized, and some small; Image of a large retractor:.
Pictures of the instruments with which blood is cut, and they are three types because some are large, others medium-sized, and others small, Large surgical instrument picture.
It is made of copper or bronze, rounded to the length a little as you see it, and it reaches to the wrist. It is necessary for these types of instruments to be with you, large and small, so that you can cut blood quickly when needed, and when medicine is not available.
But you do not use it to cut blood in every part of the body, rather you use it in the fleshy parts such as the muscles of the thigh and leg and arm and breast and abdomen and like organs.
And instruments are made from these small ones that resemble pomegranate seeds as seen in this picture.
It is used to cut blood if it flows from a wound or when an artery or vein is cut, and instruments are made from these that resemble this picture.
Seventh Forty-ninth section.
In the treatment of men's breasts.
Which resembles women's breasts, and some people's breasts may become swollen to the point of resembling women's breasts, and it remains ugly. Therefore, whoever dislikes that should cut into the breast with a crescent-shaped incision in this shape.
From line B to line C: Then remove all the fat, then fill the wound with medicated oil, then sew up the edges of the wound with suturing and treat it until it heals. If the breast descends and relaxes to its natural state like that of women.
It is necessary to cut two crescent-shaped incisions in its upper sides, each resembling a half-moon shape, connecting each one to the other at their ends until the larger line encircles the smaller one as seen in this picture. From line ~b~ to line ~c~, then remove the skin between the incisions, take out the fat and use what we mentioned of suturing and instruments as needed until it heals.
If you are unable to cut what needs to be cut due to the patient's distress or because of bleeding, then fill the wound with cotton soaked in ointment and leave it until the remaining fat is consumed, then treat it until it heals.
The 48th Chapter.
In the armpits under the arm.
These tumors under the arm are of a hard scirrhous nature, contained in a sac, and some of them contain fluids; as for those that contain fluids, it is necessary to incise it with a crescent-shaped cut in this manner.
From line ~b~ to line ~c~, if all the contents of the tumor have been drained, fill it with wool and leave it until another day, then remove the wool.
And treat it with the ointment suitable for that until it heals, if the tumor is of the type of scirrhous tumors, then incise it as we mentioned in the chapter on scirrhous tumors, whether the wound extends to where pus forms, and use the poultice as we mentioned earlier.
The 49th Chapter.
In the incision of the tumor that appears before the artery or vein and is called aneurysm.
If the artery is injured and the skin above it becomes inflamed, often a tumor will appear from that, and also in the vein, where swelling and a tumor may occur.
And the signs that indicate whether the tumor and swelling are from an artery or a vein, if it is from an artery, the tumor will be straight and collected in the depth of the body, and if you push on the tumor with your finger, you can feel it as if it has a pulsation.
What is before the vein will be a tumor rounded on the surface of the body, and excision on these tumors is hazardous, especially those in the armpit, nape, and neck, and many places in the body. It should therefore be avoided with iron treatment.
And what is in the extremities or head should also be avoided, as to swelling of the artery it should be incised on the skin with a longitudinal cut then open with probes and remove the artery and free it from adhesions.
Until it is exposed then an awl is inserted underneath and passed through to the other side and the artery is tied with a double thread in two places as I have explained to you in the ligature of the two arteries that are in the groins, then it is pressed at the place between the ligaments until all the blood that is in it comes out.
And the tumor is removed then the treatment that produces pus is used until the ligaments are loosened, then it is treated with the appropriate ointments until it heals.
If the tumor is before the incision of the vein, then you should grasp with your hand as much of the tumor as possible along with the skin, then insert an awl below where you grasped and pass it through with a double thread until it comes out on the other side. Then bind the tumor tightly with a good tie as I have mentioned to you in binding the knot on both sides of the thread, lest the threads should come loose, then insert another awl with another thread underneath the entire tumor where the first awls intersect.
And tighten your threads in four places, then cut the tumor in half until what is inside comes out, then cut off the excess skin and leave what remains bound, then place a poultice that has been moistened with vinegar and oil upon it. Then use the treatment that is by poultice and ointments until it heals.
The Fifty-Fifth Chapter.
In the swelling which occurs from twisting of the nerve.
Just as the swelling occurs in the artery and vein, so too does it occur in the nerve if a blow occurs or excessive fatigue takes place, or something similar, and it is more frequent in places of the arms and legs.
And in every place where the joints move, it is a swelling that resembles the color of the rest of the body and it usually does not cause pain; if pressure is applied with great force, the patient feels numbness and the swelling is not gathered deep in the body.
But it is under the skin and moves in all directions, not going to the front or back; as for what occurs in the joints, it should not be treated with iron, because it may cause inflammation, and as for what occurs on the head or forehead.
Then cut the skin with a scalpel, if the swelling is small, grasp it with forceps and cut it from its base; but if it is large, ligate it with a thread and excise it, then remove it and gather the wound with stitching and treat it until it heals.
The Fifty-First Chapter.
In cutting off pustules that occur in the abdomen.
Some people may have many of these pustules in their abdomens and other parts of their bodies, which are called "futriyah" because they resemble the root of a plant; its stem is thick and it has turned into a large or small size.
And I have seen a man with pustules in his abdomen that resembled the shape of a plant, without any difference in their white and thin origin; they had turned into a mouth-like opening and had become hollow, and moisture was always dripping from them; I cut them off and weighed them at around twelve or sixteen ounces.
The operation in cutting it is to look. If the patient is wet and the color of the abscess is white, thin-skinned at its origin, then cut it with a broad forceps and have your cauterizing instrument in the fire, for often much blood flows when cutting it.
Then take hold of the blood if it flows, and cauterize it. If you see the patient groaning and frightened by the cutting with iron, take a strong cord made of lead and bind it to the abscess in its present state and leave it for two days then increase the binding of the lead, so that you do not stop binding the lead.
Whenever you intervene in the abscess until it breaks and falls away from itself without effort, if the origin of the abscess is thick, then when cutting some fear and hesitation are necessary, especially when it's in the abdomen; but it may be possible to cut half or part of it.
Then cauterize it so that it does not recur, then treat it until the wound heals. And beware of exposing a cut abscess which has little sensation, rough appearance; for it is a cancerous tumor and we will mention cancer after this.
The Fifty-Second Chapter.
In the treatment of varicose veins.
The varicose veins are caused by many factors, either from the rupture of the membrane on the abdomen which emerges from it or from the intestine as it appears in all the folds, or from blood that arises from a vein or artery, as previously mentioned, or from wind that becomes constricted within.
If it is caused by the rupture of the membrane and the emergence of the intestine, then the tumor will be of a color similar to that of the body and will be soft without pain and will appear in different positions. And if it is caused by the emergence of the intestine, then its position will be with what we described earlier in a greater difference. If you compress it with your fingers, it will disappear and then return, and sometimes there may be a lump and it may become very large when entering the bath and extreme tiredness; and if it is due to moisture, then it will be soft.
The wound does not swell if you press it with your hand, nor does it increase or decrease; if it is from blood, then with these signs the tumor appears as black; if it is from flesh, then the tumor becomes firm and stays in one place.
If it is from the wind, then its touch is soft; and as for that, you should look. If the swelling of the sore comes from blood vessel or vein or wind, you must abstain from treating it, because there is fear and pain as I informed you in the chapter where I mentioned the tumors that occur from blood vessels and veins.
If the swelling of the sore comes from the anus or private part, you should order the patient to hold himself and stand upright with his legs stretched out then apply medication all around the sore. Then order him to lie down before you on his back, then grasp with a broad forceps around the sore in the place where you applied the medication, then extend the middle of the tumor upwards with a large needle, and tie the place of the ligature with a strong cotton thread or silk.
And the ligature will be loosened, then open the middle of the tense tumor above the ligature and insert your index finger and feel; if you find something, take it with the ligature and push it into the abdomen. If you find a private part, extend it with a needle.
And cut it off, if a vein or artery prevents you, then bind it with a ligature and return to your work, take two needles and insert strong threads into them and enter the needles into the ligature that you made around the tumor, two pieces of which you have completed, then pull the tumor in four places on the needles.
And if you wish, remove the needles and leave the place until the tightened flesh putrefies and falls off by itself or breaks down, then treat it as needed with ointments until it heals, if the swelling of the sore is from flesh that has grown there.
If there is moisture, it is necessary to drain the swelling as we mentioned and remove the blood or moisture found in it then treat the area with what alleviates it.
The 53rd chapter.
Treatment of cancer.
We mentioned in the classification types of cancer and how to treat it with medicines and warning against treating it with iron lest it ulcerate and we mentioned the cancer that occurs in the womb and warned against treating it.
And the ancients mentioned that when cancer is in a place where it can be completely removed, such as the one that occurs in the breast or in the thigh and similar organs, it should be excised entirely, especially if it's small and newly formed. However, if it's advanced, it shouldn't be approached.
For I have not been able to cure anyone of it and I did not see before me anyone who reached that, and the treatment in it if it is in a place as we said to proceed then ease the patient from the black fever several times and dissect it if it's in an artery with clear filling.
Then the patient will be able to work in it and then receive into the cancer a cauterizer that is suitable for him, then remove it from all sides with the skin on pursuit until nothing remains of its roots and leave the blood flowing without cutting it quickly.
But squeeze the area and express all the thick blood with your hand or with what you can from instruments, for if it hinders you in the work a great flow of blood may occur from cutting a vein or artery, so stop the bleeding until it stops then treat it with other treatment until it is cured.
The 54th chapter.
Treatment of abscesses.
We mentioned in the classification types of suppuration and how water gathering is, and signs of each type and its treatment with medicines, and that which is treated with iron is only the pustular type alone and does not approach the purulent or the bloody type at all.
If that is a battle, then you have treated this type of abscess with medicines and your treatment did not succeed. Look then, if the patient has weakened in it or there is another disease besides the abscess such as being with.
Coughing or diarrhea and the like. Then refrain from using iron, for it is harmful. If you see the patient having abundant strength, not having another disease besides the abscess alone, and he is neither a child nor an old man, then direct your action towards him to make the patient stand before you. And a servant behind him compresses his belly with his hands, and pushes the water down to the lower back side, then take a needle that is hooked like this:.
Limited on both sides, long and limited at the end like a hook, except that there is some fat little bit so as not to harm him when working into the intestines and then if the abscess arises from the direction of the intestines.
It is necessary to separate by the incision from the swelling as much as three fingers down along with it above the anus, if the abscess arises from a liver disease, then your incision should be on the left side of the swelling by three fingers, if it arises from a spleen disease, then the incision should be on the right side of the swelling by three fingers.
And it is not necessary for the incision to be in the side that the patient wants to lie on, lest the pus flow into that weak place. Then puncture all the skin with the instrument, and then insert the instrument into that incision and raise your hand.
With the needle between the skin and the membrane, as if you are peeling it, and what you peel off is the amount of a claw or similar. Then puncture the membrane until the needle reaches an empty space which is the water space, then take it out and insert another instrument like this into the opening.
She is a tube-like thing made from a thin reed, manufactured from tin or copper or smooth wood, having a small hole at the bottom and three holes on the sides, two of them facing one direction and one facing another as you see.
And he may put its end like a reed pen on this shape:.
For its upper part has a ring; so if the instrument reaches the water, it is let down from its place on the instrument, and drinks from the water in moderation at that time, because if you drank more than necessary at that time, perhaps the patient would die due to dissolution of his vital spirits.
Or he may be wrapped in a cloth that is close to death, but drinks from it according to his strength and what the condition of the patient indicates from the pulse's strength and good color, then the instrument comes out and holds back the water, that being held back from its place.
Due to the skin that holds the hole which is on the membrane, which I told you to cover it in this way, then the instrument will be repeated another day if you see the patient capable of that.
And it also comes out from the water a small quantity, doing that for some days and you are in charge and take care not to err, so that there is no more water except a little; if you weaken the patient and leave too much water, he will be affected by being buried in hot sand.
And the patient should be wrapped in a lot of wool in the bath and sun, pouring vinegar on his thirst and treating him with dried medicines until he recovers, and then dressing his stomach, liver, and spleen after the water has come out as I described earlier.
The 50th Chapter.
In the treatment of children who are born and have an abnormal location of the urethra, or a narrow opening or in the wrong place.
Some children may come out of their mother's womb and uterus not pierced; therefore, it is necessary to pierce him from the moment he is born.
With a thin thread on this picture:.
Then you place a thin leaden pin in the hole and tie it and hold it for three or four days, so that when the child needs to move away and go to the toilet, you take it off and put it back; and if you do not use the lead, the urine that flows to the spot may not leave him.
And as for those whose opening is narrow, it is treated with lead as we said, for many days until it expands; and among them are those who have their opening in an unnatural place, that is, at the end of the womb, so he cannot urinate ahead.
Until he raises his penis with his hand up and is not born, for the sperm cannot reach the womb properly and it's a very bad reason; and the method to do that is for the patient to lie on his back.
Then you stretch the penis with your left hand, stretching it strongly, and cut off the head of the penis with a sharp knife or a very thin thread, as if you are cutting something to make its middle resemble a womb, so that the opening is in the middle as it should be.
And take care to prevent bleeding during your operation, for it often occurs and you should stop the bleeding by cutting off the blood vessels and treat the wound until it heals.
The Fifty-Sixth Chapter.
In the swelling that appears in the abdomen, womb, and private parts, and in gangrene and union of the abdomen with the womb.
This swelling often appears in the penis and is a manifestation of severe inflammation, and it can be good or bad; the good one should be tied with a fine ligature.
Cut it until it is clean, then wrap a thread soaked in the Egyptian ointment around it. Then treat it with the date palm ointment until it heals. But if the wound is foul and has a greenish color, one should use camphor after cutting and cleaning it.
If the wound is in a swelling that has not been incised and some of it is from within the swelling and some from outside, then one should remove the part from within first, until it has formed a scab. Then treat the part from outside.
Because if you treat them together, the swelling may burst. Also, in women and in swellings there may be blackness and corruption. Therefore, one should remove all that has turned black and corrupted or has corrupted.
Then smear it with honey after that, along with crushed and pounded almonds and saffron. Then treat it with the rest of the treatment until it heals. If bleeding occurs, use camphor with a circular compress in this form:.
If camphor is beneficial for both conditions, namely bleeding and wound if it becomes gangrenous. If the swelling and its contents have become stuck to the membrane at some point, then one should insert a lead tube into the urethra to drain the afflicted part.
And this sticking occurs in the one whose swelling is healthy and has not been incised, and may occur because of a wound or ulcer. Then it should be removed with an instrument that scrapes and loosens it until the bond breaks and the swelling is freed from all sides.
If it is difficult to distinguish them through exploration, then one should remove something from the swelling and the membrane. The membrane is thin, so it may tear easily. Then separate the membrane and the swelling with a thin piece of gauze that has been moistened in cold water so that they do not stick together also.
Then he treats with a tightening drink until it is restored.
The 50th chapter.
In cleansing children and treating what befalls them from error.
Circumcision is nothing but the separation of connection, just like all other surgeries; except that since it is an act that we do with our own will and use specifically on children, therefore we must establish the best practice in it.
And the easiest way to safety, I say that the earliest ones did not mention circumcision in anything of their books because it was not used in their laws and we acquired it.
Through experience and because I found the majority of craftsmen and barber-surgeons using cleansing with musk and myrrh, and using forceps and bandage with thread and cutting with a saw, and I have tried all these methods.
So I did not find anything better than cleansing with myrrh and bandage with thread because the cleansing with musk is often accompanied by skin damage, for the skin of the foreskin has two layers, so perhaps the upper layer was cut off while the lower layer remained.
So it becomes necessary to cut again and there is renewed pain, and the cleansing with forceps does not ensure that the tip of the foreskin is not cut off because it may enter its hole, and as for the cleansing with a saw, perhaps the skin will peel off and your work will be spoiled or the boy's skin is naturally short.
Many are born like that and do not need cleansing, and I have seen this, and as for the cleansing with myrrh and bandage with thread, experience has revealed its advantage because the forceps is proportionate to the cutting so that the edge above is like the edge below.
So when you have flexed your hand in accordance with the two edges and cut to a single measure at the same time, the thread will almost form a wall around the foreskin from all directions without any error occurring, and the face of the work is first to calm down the boy.
And especially if the person understands a little that you tie the thread only in his urethra and leave it until the next day, then exhilarate him and rush towards him with all your might, and he will accept it from himself, then stop it between your hands standing upright.
And he should not be sitting and the forceps should not be in your hand or under your foot, nor should the boy's eye fall on it at all, nor on anything of the instruments. Then you put your hand into his urethra and blow on the skin and remove it upwards until the head of the urethra comes out.
Then you remove from it what accumulates inside the hair, then tie the learned place with a double thread, then tie below it slightly a second knot, then grasp with your thumb and little finger the lower knot firmly and cut between the two. Then lift the skin up quickly and bring out the head of the urethra, then let a little blood flow as it is better and lessens the swelling of the urethra, then mop it with a wet cloth, then sprinkle ash of burnt pumpkin over him, for this is best I have tried or the most skilled craftsmen also find it excellent.
Then lift the skin up quickly and bring out the head of the urethra, then let a little blood flow as it is better and lessens the swelling of the urethra, then mop it with a wet cloth, then sprinkle ash of burnt pumpkin over him, for this is best I have tried or the most skilled craftsmen also find it excellent. Then apply the poultice made from egg white cooked in rose water, perfumed with rosewater and rose oil, to him from above, and leave it on him until the next day, then treat him with the rest of the treatment until he is cured.
And this is the picture of the forceps suitable for cleansing:.
The forceps should be straight and not bent, with the teeth of the spring securely attached. The length of the blades should be equal to that of the handles. As for the mistake that occurs in cleaning, it may be that you invert all or some of the inner skin when cutting, so it is necessary to pull it back from your hand with your thumb before the place becomes swollen.
You cut it level, if you cannot grasp it with your fingernails then pull it out with a forceps and cut it. If it has been three days and the swelling under the armpit remains inflamed and warm leave it until the inflammation subsides and then remove it gently.
Cut it as you see fit, and be careful not to cut at the head of the urethra. For if you cut anything from the head of the urethra, it will cause no harm, but bind it with what we mentioned in the chapter on ligatures.
And if you cut more skin than necessary and it shrinks above, that will not cause much harm. Bind it with what we mentioned until it heals.
The 48th chapter.
In the treatment of retained urine in the bladder.
The retained urine in the bladder is due to obstruction by stone or solid blood clot or mucus or a growth and so on. If you treat this as described, using the types of treatment mentioned in the classification.
And the urine does not flow and I see that the obstruction is due to a stone in the urethral opening, so it is necessary for the patient to sit on his heels, then have one leg ride on his back, stretch out his belly to his back, and grasp the stone himself as much as possible.
Then the urethral opening will be forced to push the stone back and the urine will flow. If it does not flow as mentioned and the situation worsens on the patient, then it is necessary to use the device called a catheter, which has this shape:.
It is made from a smooth, thin material and is shaped like the tube of a bird's feather in length about a finger and a half long. It has a narrow funnel at its head, and the direction of flow is taken by taking a twisted thread and binding it well with wool or cotton at one end.
The thread is inserted at the bottom of the catheter and is tied with a ligature if anything remains of the wool, so that it enters the tube and seals it like a seal. Then the catheter is smeared with oil or fat or egg white and the patient sits on a chair.
He relaxes his bladder and urethra with moist poultices or oil and lukewarm water, then the catheter enters the urethra gently until it reaches the origin of the urethra, then the urethra bends upwards towards the sacrum and pushes the catheter inside.
Until the urethra bends and the catheter is pushed inside until it reaches near the prostate, then the penis inclines downwards and the catheter is inside, then push it until it reaches the bladder and the patient feels that something has been reached.
And this is done in this order because the passage through which urine flows there bends, then the thread is pulled with a little force by the wool, so that the urine follows the wool, then it is taken out and the patient urinates, and the catheter is repeated.
Until the bladder is emptied and the patient feels relief.
The Fifty-Ninth Section.
How to Drain the Bladder with a Syringe.
The instruments suitable for that purpose are made from cloth or fine wool, having a long tube on a leather or wood base and intended to squirt water and medicines, which is called the syringe, and this is its form:.
It is made from cloth or fine wool, having a long tube on a leather base, all of which except for the end where it is stopped, has three holes: two on one side and one on the other as you see.
The hollow position in which the projectiles are placed, they will be as full as if nothing were to fill it up until something of moisture is drawn out and if something is pushed in, it will move away after the manner of the foam that the oil is thrown on the sea in naval battles.
If you want to drain the moisture from the bladder, you will insert the end of the catheter into the moisture and then draw it up with the projectile, so that the moisture is drawn into the hollow of the catheter, then enters its tip into the urethra, as we described in the chapter on catheters, and then pushes the moisture away with the projectile.
For that moisture to reach the bladder on the spot until it is felt by the patient, and this is also a gentle tamponing of the bladder.
It is made from linen or esparto, its upper part resembling a small pipe and below it is a strap in which the ligament is placed, then you take a donkey's bladder and put into it the moisture that you want to use to tampon the bladder, then tie it tightly with a gauze thread.
And warm that moisture slightly over the fire, then insert the tip of the tampon into the urethra, and then pull your hand on the bladder with the moisture tightly until the patient feels that the moisture has reached the bladder.
If you do not have a bladder, take a piece of parchment and make a circle from it, then pierce it all around its circumference, then insert a tightly wound thread into one of the holes as you would spin it, and then gather the circle together like gathering a carpet after putting what you want of moisture, ointment, and water into it.
Then tie it to the device and make it work as you made with the bladder, using your hand until the moisture reaches the bladder.
The 30th chapter.
In removing the calculus.
We have mentioned in the division the types of calculus and its treatment with medicines, and we have noted the difference between the calculus produced in the kidney and that produced in the bladder, and its signs; and we have also mentioned the type of calculus which is treated by hand or by incision.
And it is the bladder calculus, particularly that which sticks in the urethra; and I will describe this with a clear explanation and abbreviation.
I say that the bladder calculus is more exposed to boys, and one of its signs is that urine exits from the bladder like water in thickness.
And it appears with gravel and causes its passage to be difficult, and many times it protrudes and spreads along with the swelling in most of them. It is easy for boys to get rid of it until they reach fourteen years old, but it is harder for the elderly; as for young men, it is moderate between that.
And what has the greatest calculus needs the easiest treatment, while the small ones are contrary to that. If we proceed to treatment, it is necessary first that the afflicted one be injected with an injection that expels all the gravel from his urethra, for it may prevent the existence of the calculus when searching.
Then the afflicted one is taken by his legs and lifted, shaken downwards to make the calculus fall into the bladder or pulled from a high position several times; then he is seated before you standing with his hands under his thighs so that the whole bladder inclines downwards and is searched.
And search for it from outside; if you feel the calculus in the space, proceed at that moment to cut into it; but if it does not fall under, then take the little finger of the left hand, if the afflicted one is a boy, or the middle finger.
If the boy is uncircumcised, then you enter it into his foreskin and search for the stones until they fall under your finger. Then, little by little, move them towards the urethral opening, and finally press on them with your finger and push them outwards to the place where you want to make the incision.
And you order a servant to compress the urethra with his hand, and another servant to extend his right hand towards above and his other hand to stretch the skin underneath towards the position where the incision will be, then take the curved needle which has this shape.
And you make the incision between the glans and the frenulum, not in the middle but next to the left iliac fossa, and the incision will be on the same stone; your finger is in the foreskin, and you press it outwards so that the incision from outside is wide and from inside narrow as much as possible for the stones to come out.
Not larger, for fear that the finger in the foreskin may press on the stones at the incision and they come out easily; and know that there may be stones with angles and curves that make it difficult to remove them.
And some of them are smooth, resembling the pomegranate, and curved, making it easy to remove them; but if any of them have angles and curves, you should stretch the skin a little in the incision. If they do not come out like this, then you must take hold of them with a firm grip, the tip of which is like a rounded reed.
So that it does not fall off from you, and if necessary, enter a fine, pointed instrument underneath it; if you cannot manage it, then slightly widen the incision. If anything of blood overflows, stop it with an absorbent material.
If there are more than one, then first push the large ones into the urethral opening, then make an incision on it, and then push the small ones after that; you do the same if there are more than two. If they are very large, then know that you should not make a large incision because you risk causing hemorrhaging in either case.
Either he will die or the urine will continuously flow because it does not adhere to the wound whatsoever, but try to push it until it comes out or bends in a fracture with pincers so that it comes out completely.
If you have finished your work, wash the wound with vinegar and water, and bind it firmly. Then, place a wet compress made of oil, wine, or fat and cold water on top of it to calm the hot swelling. The patient should then lie on his back and the bandage should not be loosened for three days.
If it has festered, wash the area with much water and oil. Then, treat it with the white ointment and the balsam ointment until it heals. If an additional hot swelling appears in the wound, like the blood freezing in the bladder or preventing urination, and you recognize this from the blood coming out with urine.
Then, put your finger into the wound and bring out that blood because if it remains, it will lead to the decay of the bladder and its inflammation. Then, wash the wound with vinegar, water, and salt, and apply each type of treatment suitable for it until it heals.
It is necessary during all the treatment times to bind the thighs together and compress them to fix the medications placed on the area. If the stone is small, it has formed in the urethra, and it has become stuck there and urination has been prevented from flowing out, adjust it as I have described before it reaches the scrotum.
I have often spared by this treatment the need for an incision, and I have tried that which is as follows:.
A triangular tool with a sharp point, fixed in wood, then take a thread and bind it to the urethra under the stone so that it does not go back to the bladder. Then, enter the edge of the instrument into the urethra gently until the instrument reaches the same stone.
You direct the catheter with your hand in the same stone a little, a little, and you insert it until it reaches the other side. Then, urine flows from its source. Then, you press your hand on what remains of the stone from outside the penis, for it breaks apart and comes out with the urine, curing the patient.
If this treatment does not appeal to you as an obstacle that prevents you from doing so, then tie a thread under the stone and another thread above the stone, then cut on the stone in the same penis between the two ties, then bring it out.
Then loosen the tie and clean out the stagnant blood that has accumulated in the wound. And it is necessary to tie the thread under the stone lest it returns to the bladder, and the other tie above so that if the thread comes undone after the stone has come out, the skin will return to its place and cover the wound.
And therefore, it is necessary for you if you tie the upper thread to lift up the skin above so that it returns when released and covers the wound as we said.
The 21st Chapter.
For removing stones from women.
Only rarely does a stone develop in women, and if one of them has a stone, it is difficult to treat it and many obstacles arise. One of these obstacles is that the woman may be a virgin, and another is that you do not find a woman who would expose herself to a doctor.
If the woman is a virgin or one of those related by blood, and the third obstacle is that you do not find a woman who is skilled in this craft, especially with her hand, and the fourth is that the location of the incision on the stone in women is far from the location of the stone so it requires an incised opening.
And in this there is danger, so if necessity demands it, you should take a skilled female doctor or rarely find one; and if she is not available, ask for an unmarried physician as a companion or have a woman who is knowledgeable about women's affairs or someone who gives some indication in this craft.
Open the woman and order her to make all that she is ordered to do by examination of the stones first. This is so she looks if the woman is a virgin, then it is necessary for her to put her finger into her private parts and examine the stones. If she finds them and presses them under her finger.
Then order her to be split, if she is not a virgin. If she was and was not a virgin, then order the midwife to put her left hand on the woman's bladder and press it gently while examining the stones.
If she finds them, then it is necessary to draw them out from the bladder opening down to the extent of her strength until they reach the root of the thigh. Then cut her there at the junction of the middle and outer areas of the perineum by whichever side seems easiest for her and feels the stones in that area.
And her finger should not be removed from the stones, compressed under it. And let the incision be small at first, then insert the probe into that small incision if she feels the stone and increase the incision to the extent that she learns that the stone is coming out of it, knowing that types of stones are many.
Some are small and large, rough and smooth, long and rounded with a stem. Know their types so you can deduce from that what you want. If the bleeding is heavy, leave it in the crushed spot for a moment until the bleeding stops then return to your work.
Until the stone comes out, and consider with yourself from the instruments you mentioned in extracting stones for men to assist you in your work. If the bleeding is heavy and you know that it is from a severed vessel, apply the lint to the spot.
And secure it with linseed, securing it tightly and leave it as is without moving it or removing the stone. Perhaps the woman will have died then treat the wound. If the bleeding has ceased after some days and the area has softened, return to your work until the stone comes out.
The Twenty-Second Chapter.
In the incision on a water-filled bladder.
The water-filled bladder is the accumulation of moisture in the white serous sac that lies beneath the skin surrounding the testicle, and it is called the epididymis, which may have a special lining prepared by nature towards one direction from the testicle.
Until one thinks it is another testicle and lies between the skin surrounding the testicle and the white serous sac which we mentioned, and that is not except in rarity, and this water-filled bladder arises from weakness exposing women to it, and this matter settles on them, and may expose itself through a blow on the women.
And this moisture has many colors, either being yellowish or red blood-like or dark reddish or white watery and it is most commonly found, and the signs by which it can be recognized.
Where the water gathers, it is when in the white serous sac which we mentioned, the swelling becomes slightly elongated towards length like an egg shape and the testicle does not appear because the moisture surrounds it from all sides.
And if the moisture is in a special lining for it, then the swelling becomes elongated towards one direction from the testicle.
And for this reason, people assume that it is another testicle. And if the moisture is between the skin surrounding the testicle and the white serous sac, then it falls under touch. And if you want to know the color of the moisture, scrape off the swelling with a square piece of cloth which we mentioned earlier, and whatever comes out afterwards is what is inside it.
And if we turn to treatment by iron, it is necessary that the doctor order the patient to vomit if he can do so and after seeing his body full then lie down on his back on something slightly elevated, and put many cloths under him, and you sit at his left side.
The servant is ordered to sit on his right-hand side, extending the penis towards one of the sides of the scrotum and towards the direction of the navel. Then he takes a broad retractor and cuts the skin of the scrotum from the middle to near the anus.
The incision becomes straight and parallel to the line that divides the skin of the scrotum in half, until it reaches the white peritoneum. It is peeled away and one must be careful not to cut it. The peeling should be more towards the side that adjoins the egg more, and the peeling should extend as far as possible.
Then the peritoneum is opened wide and filled with water, and all the water is emptied. Then the edges of the incision are separated with forceps, and the peritoneum is lifted upwards without touching the skin of the scrotum, and it is cut as far as possible, either in one piece or in small pieces.
Especially on the thin side, for if you do not make it long enough, you will not prevent water from flowing back. But when you have finished cutting the peritoneum, then turn it back and gather up the edges of the skin of the scrotum with stitching.
Then treat it with the treatment of other wounds until it heals. If the testicle has been infected by another disease, then you must ligate the vessels in the scrotum to prevent bleeding, then cut the testicle from the scrotum and remove it, and then treat it as we have described.
If the fluid is collected on both sides, know that it is a hemorrhage. Cut the other side as you did in the first one, whether it takes one or two operations, and then wipe away the blood.
And enter the incisions with lint that has been soaked in oil or rose water, and make it from outside with another piece of lint that has been soaked in wine and oil. Then spread it on the testicles and navel, and put above a folded cloth which is the wrapping. Ties it from above with the strap that has six arms on this picture:.
Then two garters are taken, sewn and stuffed with the uncarded wool on this example, and the arms which it is tied with are made of cotton or moist wool and gathered together by pulling in a belt and one arm takes hold of the saddle to the back.
And the second takes hold of the hip, and the two arms are on the thighs from below, and the remaining two arms are on the thighs and gather all the pulling together in a belt, and this garter can also be made with leather instead of sewing with iron.
And it is that you take a thin skinning knife, and cut with it the scrotal skin as described until the white membrane covering the water is exposed, then take another knife on this picture:.
And it resembles the Greek eye, then you tie with it that membrane and keep guard until all the moisture comes out, then stretch the membrane with the ligatures and remove with a knife the containing layer and cut it according to what is possible until you extract all of it and preserve it from the egg so that the fire does not touch it.
And know that this work is safer and farther from bleeding blood and better than the operation with a knife, if you are obstructed in cutting or sewing or a hot abscess or bleeding blood or something else then you should treat each case as it arises according to what has been mentioned.
If the patient is weak and does not tolerate this work due to its difficulty, then use a poultice as I described, and if he recovers according to what we have mentioned from the signs.
That the garter is watery, so it is necessary that the patient sit on a high chair then wrap the swelling at its base with a broad bandage and make the opening wide enough for all the water to flow out, then put on the place cotton and tie it.
Leave the open wound with a trickle of water, then treat it until the wound heals. If the water flows out when you press on it, but not because of that, it is due to the white membrane obstructing the mouth of the wound and preventing the water from flowing out.
So then it is necessary to insert an ostrich feather or the instrument that extracts the pus which was mentioned, or add a little to the opening of the wound.
And know that the water may return and gather after six months or so. If it gathers, apply to the same condition and defend oneself's days.
The Third Part.
In the cut on the fatty flesh and its treatment.
Know that the cut on this fatty flesh is from the wounds that lead to death in most cases. Therefore, we leave it and spare oneself from it, and I mention the treatment of it and types of tumors.
I say that many tumors occur in the bodies which are composed of female parts and this occurs from many causes either from a fiery surplus directed towards the female parts or from an injury and the color of the tumor is like the color of the body and there is no pus.
And the tumor may be a swelling and sometimes the tumor may be dry, having no redness or sensation, and it may be due to the thickening of veins and their distension as was mentioned earlier or from the distension of the arteries. Whatever is due to the distension of veins will be known by the breaking down of the tumor.
If you squeeze it with your fingers and it should not be exposed at all. And as for the one that is due to the distension of the arteries, then nothing breaks down from it when squeezed with the fingers. This type can sometimes burst open and affect all the flesh.
And this is by cutting the scrotal skin, then stretching the membrane up and extracting it from the white peritoneum, and releasing the spermatic vessels and tying them, and cutting the spermatic cord after having freed it from every direction of the membrane. If the membrane has become entangled with the growing flesh.
Remove the egg and cut it, if there is connection between something from the peritoneum or between the vessels, then remove all that connection and cut it into circular pieces.
If the flesh has grown in the place of adhesion which is behind, then it is necessary to cut all of it and remove the egg as we said. If your work is done, wash the wound with wet cotton and rose water and wine, then treat it with the rest of the treatment until it recovers.
The 46th chapter.
In the treatment of the uterus with a polyp.
The polyp is a tumor that has some twisting and resembles a bunch with relaxation of the women and difficulty for the sufferer in movement, exercise, and walking. In the treatment of this disease from abscesses, it is similar to what was mentioned earlier.
But it is necessary to mention the action taken by those who came before, and I say that it is necessary for the sufferer to sit on a high chair then pull down with gentle force towards the pubes then grasp the scrotal skin with your fingers along with the vessels which are near the penis.
And have someone else hold it tightly and stretch it strongly then cut with a broad and sharp knife a slit along the vessels until the vessels are revealed then peel it off from all sides as I mentioned to you in the treatment of the veins in the limbs then insert an arrow with a doubled thread.
And tie it in the first place where the polyp was exposed and also tie it at its end, then cut it in the middle a slit standing upright along the length of the body and remove what is accumulated inside from the impurities.
Then treat the wound with the treatment of other wounds that you want to produce in order for the vessels that nourish one of the testicles not to be cut off, and there is no harm in doing so. For if the polyp is exposed to all the vessels, it is necessary to remove one of the testicles along with the vessels lest the egg go without food. Before cutting the vessels they become flaccid and are of no use to you.
The 47th Chapter.
In the treatment of gallbladder inflammation.
The occurrence of this gallbladder is from a gap that appears in the omentum extended on the abdomen, about two-thirds of the way down from the belly button, and the gallbladder issues forth from that opening into one of the iliac veins.
And this opening is either from a tear in the omentum or its extension, and these two types of causes occur due to various reasons such as a blow, strike, scream, lifting something heavy, and so on. And its signifier is that if it occurs from an extension of the omentum, it happens gradually over a long period.
And it does not happen suddenly and the tumor is situated in a direction towards the depth before the omentum compresses the gallbladder. And its signifier is that if it occurs from a tear in the omentum, then it happens at first with great pain all of a sudden and the tumor appears differently under the skin nearby.
And that is due to the gallbladder's exit and its fate being directed outside of the omentum. And sometimes it exits with a stone, which is called gallbladder inflammation with stones, and it may be accompanied by a foul odor. And if the bile collects in the gallbladder and becomes stuck there, it will cause the patient's demise.
Because it occurs with severe pain and choking, especially if it is constricted. The treatment of these ailments by iron [instrument] is hazardous, so one should beware of falling into this. The method to be followed is that you should instruct the patient to bring back the gallbladder to its inside cavity by hand, if he wishes to return.
Then he will lie on his back between your hands and raise his legs. Then stretch the skin that is above the navel up and cut all of the scrotal skin along its length, then insert instruments into the opening as needed to open it.
The incision will be made to the extent that the egg can come out of it, then strip the membranes that are under the skin of the testicles until the white hard membrane is exposed from all sides. Then insert your thumb into what follows the egg.
Between the white membrane under the skin of the testicle and the second membrane, release the adhesion that is behind the testicle. Then bend your right hand into the inside of the skin of the testicle, and with this, stretch the white membrane upwards with your left hand and lift the testicle with the membrane towards the incision.
Have the servant stretch the testicle upwards and release, then you release the adhesion behind it completely. And inspect with your finger to make sure there is nothing twisted in the white hard membrane. If you find anything, push it down into the abdomen below.
Then take a needle with a thick thread that has been twisted from ten threads and insert it at the end of the membrane under the skin of the testicle which follows the incision. Then cut off the ends of the thread until there are four threads. Then wrap some of it around the other, tightly, and tie with the membrane we said is under the skin of the testicle as a strong knot from two sides. Then also tie the ends of the threads together tightly until nothing from the vessels that nourish them can reach it. So that it does not become a hot swelling, and also tie another knot outside the first one, about two fingerbreadths away from it. And after these two knots, cut off from the membrane under the skin of the testicle as much as an ounce.
So that it does not become a hot swelling, and also tie another knot outside the first one, about two fingerbreadths away from it. And after these two knots, cut off from the membrane under the skin of the testicle as much as an ounce. And cut off the rest all around and remove with it the testicle, then make a incision below the skin of the testicle as we described earlier, and let blood flow from it as well. Then use the wool soaked in oil and put it in the wound, and use the knot that we described.
And it may cause the white peritoneum, which we mentioned after cutting, to bleed excessively. Therefore, one should leave the ligament until it falls off itself. But if it does not fall off quickly, then let it be soaked in hot water and handle it gently until it falls off.
Then the wound is treated with all the treatments of wounds until it heals.
The 66th chapter.
In this kidney, I have not seen anyone dare to treat it with iron. And the early ones mentioned that one should make as we described in the case of the kidney with a calculus, by tying off the vessels after incising them below gently.
Then one should incise in the middle and treat the tumor as it opens, until the vessels are tied off and the wound is treated as we mentioned until it heals.
The 77th chapter.
In the hernia that is in the scrotum.
The hernia in the scrotum may bulge as we mentioned, and nothing from the intestines will descend to the females, unless it does descend slightly and returns at all times.
But if the time passes and the tear in the peritoneum increases, until the intestines and testicle descend into the scrotum and expose that part of the peritoneum which is in the scrotum as we mentioned. For then the peritoneum stretches and shrinks, and the place bulges out and protrudes, and its treatment is with sutures as we have described.
And it may be treated with iron on this condition, and that the patient lies on his back between your hands, then incise the place of the hernia, the warm swelling, to an incision three fingers wide, then tie off the peritoneum under the skin.
Until the white fascia is exposed which lies above it, take a rod and place it on the position that comes from the fascia and pin it to the depth of the abdomen then sew up the two positions that come from the fascia on the end of the rod and tie with each other.
Then tie off the end of the rod and do not cut the fascia at all, nor touch the ovaries or anything else as I have informed you about treating intestinal hernias, then treat it with surgical treatment.
If the sutures are cut and the wound is cleaned until it heals, then the fascia will contract and the defect will not increase.
And this method is better in this position because it is closer to safety.
The Eighth Section.
In Relaxing the Scrotum Skin.
The skin of the scrotum often relaxes in some people without the flesh inside it relaxing, and its appearance is unpleasant. Therefore, one who wishes to treat it should instruct the patient to lie on his back.
And he should cut all the relaxed skin on top of the thick skin, then bring together the edges, and if you wish to sew it first with three or four stitches and secure the stitching, then cut what is between the stitches.
Then treat it with the treatment of other wounds until it heals and the sutures are removed.
The Nineteenth Section.
On Castration.
That castration in our religion is prohibited.
Therefore, I should not mention it in this book of mine, but I have mentioned it for two reasons: one is that a physician may be asked about it and should know its treatment; the other is that we often need to castrate some animals for our own benefits.
The castration of donkeys and similar animals, I say that it occurs in two ways: either by incision or by cutting and splitting. The one that occurs by incision is done as follows: we sit the animal in hot water until its genital area becomes relaxed and soft and tender.
Then you will caress it with your hand until it becomes loose and does not feel any sensation when touched. As for the castration by cutting and splitting, it is necessary to hold the animal and carefully remove the scrotal skin with your left hand, then tie the testicles and cut each one open in a single incision.
Until the testicles emerge, then cut them off after sloughing them and do not leave any part of the membranous sac except for the thin membrane that is on the vessels. This method of castration is better than the one done by incision.
Because castration by incision may leave some of the epididymis behind, which could cause the animal to become unruly and refuse to be ridden, then treat the wound until it heals.
Seventieth chapter.
Treatment of a hermaphrodite.
The hermaphrodite occurs in men in two types: one is that it appears as a mass or swelling in the scrotum, resembling a woman's genitalia and covered with hair, from which urine may flow from the part that is in the scrotal skin.
And in women, there is one type that occurs above the vulva on the perineum, resembling small testicles of a man, projecting outward, with one resembling a male penis and the other two like female genitalia, and treatment for these three types.
The two types of men and the single type in women should have those excess tissues cut off until their effects are eliminated, then treat them with the treatment for other wounds until they heal. And as for the second type of man from whom urine flows from the part that is in the scrotal skin, there is no treatment or remedy.
The Seventieth Chapter.
On cutting the clitoris and the flesh resulting from the women's vulva.
The clitoris may increase in size beyond its natural condition, so that it is repulsive and ugly to look at; and in some women, it may even spread like men's genitalia, becoming suitable for coitus.
It is necessary that you grasp the clitoris with your hand or a forceps and cut it off, without lingering in the cutting, especially not at the root, lest blood flow be exposed.
Then treat the wound with surgical treatment until it heals, and as for the flesh that grows, it is flesh that grows in the womb until it fills it.
And sometimes it may emerge outside like a tail. And therefore some of the ancients call it the "tail" disease, so it is necessary that you cut it off just like the clitoris, and treat it until it heals.
The Eightieth Chapter.
On treating intestinal blockage.
Intestinal blockage is when the woman's vagina is not well-hemmed or the opening is small and is either naturally formed with childbirth or adventitious; and the adventitious one is caused by an abnormality that has developed, which is either from excessive growing flesh.
Or a narrow or thickened scar and it can be either in the depth of the womb, or on its sides, or above or below and prevents from coitus, childbirth, and menstruation, and sometimes even menstruation; and recognition of that is by observation from the patient.
If the blockage is apparent and close, then if it's not apparent, examine it with your fingers or a probe; if the blockage is from a narrow scar and is close to the vulva, begin to dilate it by placing something similar to a thread on the vulva, then place the tips of your fingers from both hands together.
The woman lies on her back, stretched out. Then she takes the two forceps and breaks through the thin membrane with great strength until it opens and the swelling subsides. She takes a linen cloth, dips it in oil, and places it on the spot. The woman must do this every day so that the spot does not become inflamed again.
If the membrane is thick and tough, it should be cut with a broad knife resembling an aspen leaf. If the swelling is of flesh and has grown into a lump, tie it off with ligatures and divide it; make sure you have medicines that stop bleeding without causing harm, such as calomel, opium, and frankincense mixed with white chalk.
Then use a wide lead tube so that the wound does not become inflamed quickly, hold it for days and use a wick made of dry linen. Then treat with the remaining treatment until it heals, and if there is a growth of flesh again in the womb, cut it off in this way.
Unless it is a cancerous tumor, the cancerous tumor that is in the womb does not respond to iron at all.
The Third Seventieth Chapter.
In the treatment of hemorrhoids, piles, and red pimples that appear on the vulva of women.
As for hemorrhoids, it is an inflammation of the mouths of the veins until a lot of blood flows out constantly. If the hemorrhoids become severe, they will turn into piles, and we have mentioned their types, signs, and symptoms earlier, and we are mentioning them here.
What can be treated and what cannot be treated, I say that hemorrhoids and piles if they are deep in the womb and do not show on the surface then there is no treatment with iron. And what appears on the surface of the womb is the one that is treated.
Women should enter the cold room, then wet the abscesses with a sponge or a rough cloth and cut them off from their roots. Then she should apply it to the area where bleeding occurs from one of the vessels that stop blood flow without delay.
Like senna and chicory and similar things, then she should lift her legs to the wall for an hour, then lower them into cold water. If the bleeding continues, seat her on a mixture of sammaq, raman shell, and affus and similar things. Then take barley flour and mix it with honey and vinegar.
And apply it to her back. If the bleeding stops, then bind a compress with the firmest cloth and breast-band without exception. Then take a rag and immerse it in pomegranate juice or yarrow juice or mulberry leaves with affus drink and apply it to the area.
If the swelling subsides, apply an ointment to the area until it heals. As for the red boil, it resembles the heads of heshah which is rough-looking, so cut off what appears on its surface according to what was mentioned in abscesses and treat it until it heals.
The 74th chapter.
In the womb of the abscess that appears in the uterus.
The uterus may expose many types of tumors such as cancer, hardened tumor, ulcers, abscesses, eaters, nodules, piles, fissures, and boils, and I have mentioned all these diseases and their types and signs in the classification.
It is necessary to mention in this chapter the hot tumor that appears in the uterus if it is one of the tumors that gather over time, how its womb should be treated with iron. It should be inspected carefully because if the tumor's pain is sharp at first with swelling and inflammation and fever.
I saw him red if passion falls upon him, so do not hasten to calm him down and treat him as is suitable for his temperament until these symptoms cease. Then it is necessary that the woman sit on a chair with two seats and lean against her back.
And she brings together her legs to the lower belly and makes them apart, and straightens her arms under her hips and binds them with a suitable band.
Therefore, then the midwife sits to the right side and uses the instrument that opens the cervix which is shown later, and it is necessary if you want to use this instrument to measure the depth of the woman's uterus so that what enters from the instrument is not more than the depth of the uterus.
The uterus will be injured if the instrument is more than the depth. Therefore, it is necessary to put a stopper on the rim of the cervix to prevent the entire instrument from entering the depth of the uterus and it is necessary that the loop which runs in the instrument should come from above.
And you hold the instrument and the servant directs the loop until it opens the cervix. If the placenta appears and is touched by the hand and its edge is thin, then it is necessary to cut it at its head with a broad finger, if the time has been exhausted.
Then it is necessary to put a thin, well-soaked thread of rose water or green oil with some turpentine in the wound and bring the thread outside through the incision in the cervix and secure it from outside on the uterus and on the perineum a clean, well-soaked linen cloth moistened with boiling vinegar.
Then it is treated after two days with an ointment that is suitable for that until it heals.
And the uterus and wound may be washed by being poured with water and honey, then with boiling water or a long sedge, then it returns to the ointment, if the placenta is hidden inside the uterus.
It is necessary to refrain from treating it with iron, but rather treat it as mentioned in the division.
The Seventy-Fifth Chapter.
On the Instruction of Fractures: How to Treat Living Wounds if They Emerge Out of Their Natural Shape.
It is necessary for the midwife to know first of all the natural shape of birth, and its signs; if you see the woman bending down and struggling to breathe in deeply.
And the baby will come out quickly. Know that this birth is in its natural shape and the baby's head and umbilical cord will be coming out with it, or hanging from its navel; if you see these signs, then it is necessary to press on her belly so that the baby can come out quickly.
And if it comes out with its head first, the umbilical cord will come down with it and be cleansed of those impurities in a good cleaning. And as for any birth that is not like this, it is to be condemned as unnatural; for the baby may come out on its feet and hands before its head and feet.
And it may come out with one hand or one foot, or its head and hand, or all of them at once; or perhaps it will turn over on its back and so forth from these condemned shapes. Therefore, the midwife should be attentive to all these things and beware of mistakes and errors.
And I explain each shape in detail and how to proceed with it, so that you can deduce from this and act accordingly. If the baby comes out headfirst, which is the natural birth, and it presses hard on the woman and makes her labor difficult, and I see her strength has weakened, then I sit her down on a chair and order the women to support her.
And I apply a warm compress to her womb and wet cloths, then the midwife enters between her fingers with a small pair of scissors and cuts the umbilical cord or separates it with her finger until what is inside it is drained out, and then she presses on the woman's belly until the baby comes down.
If it does not descend, then the woman should be injected with camphor mixed with rosewater, and afterwards, she should wash herself and blow her nose with kohl. Then she should hold her mouth and nostrils shut; for if the child emerges, its hands will come out first. If they do, it is necessary to gently guide them back in a little at a time.
If it does not enter, then the woman should be placed on a stool and her legs raised upwards. Then she should shake the stool on the ground, and the woman should hold tightly to prevent herself from falling during the shaking. If the hands do not enter and the child is dead, then cut them off and draw out the rest of the child.
Or tie its hands with a cloth and draw them out gradually. If the child emerges on its legs, then push them upwards first, and then turn the child slightly until it is straight. Then take one of its legs and gently stretch it slowly.
If they emerge to the thighs, then order her to wash herself and blow her nose with kohl. For it emerges. If it does not emerge as we have described, and all else fails.
Take camphor, rosewater, and honey mixed with liquid gum arabic and beat them well in the mortar. Then pour it into the woman's vulva and lower abdomen, and then sit her in lukewarm water until the membranes reach.
If you see that it has descended below, then make a poultice for her from myrrh and have her bear it. If she bears the poultice for an hour, then sit her on the stool, then blow her nose with kohl and shut her mouth and nostrils, and gently massage her lower abdomen. For the child will emerge from its passage, emerging on its knees and hands.
If he emerges in this state, then occupy his hands a little, a little. Then the woman lies on her back and lets down her legs to below while she is cramped on a bed and clasps her hands. Then press gently above her abdomen a little, a little. Then take out what is under her legs from the bedding until it is positioned at the bottom. If the fetus does not come out, take her legs altogether and move them with a strong movement. Then press gently above the pubic bone a little, a little until the fetus ascends above. Then the attendant puts in her hand and helps the fetus a little, a little.
And order the woman to undress until the fetus comes out. The coming out of the fetus is opposing and stubbornly grasping one of her hands, grasp her hand firmly if she cannot grasp it back then make the woman stand up and let her walk. If she cannot walk then let her lie down.
Her bed and shake her legs strongly then use the instrument which I described from the obstetrics. If she takes it, sit her down on a chair then treat the hand and settle the fetus into its natural shape and make the woman sneeze and order her to undress until it comes out.
The exit of the fetus on its back with its hands stretched out and its face towards the back of its mother, it is necessary for the attendant to grasp the hand of the fetus then turn it a little, a little and place it gently. If it stands up, carry it on her bosom as we described from the ointments and obstetrics.
Then order her to move a little, a little. If she does that, sit her down on the chair and order her to lean towards the right side. Then order her to undress and make her sneeze with the cumin because it comes out, the exit of the fetus standing upright on its side.
If it descends to the mouth of the womb in this state with the placenta, tear the placenta with your fingernails until it is freed from moisture. Then, if it has attached itself to the face or neck of the fetus, cut it away from the sac lest it strangle and die. Then push the fetus into its place until it is properly situated.
And order the woman to undress repeatedly, for it will exit easily, an exit like that of twins or many fetuses. Know that twins are often born and sometimes three or four are born and they live, except in rare cases. And as for five, it is something outside nature, they do not live at all.
And surround them, even if they are many, with a single placenta and separate into compartments by a partition between them, connected to each sac of one of them. And it may exit as a single fetus exits naturally easily, or they may exit in a condemned manner as we have described.
So if some of them are difficult at birth and become as we described in unnatural shapes, handle them gently and do what you do with care and attention to each shape according to the means that lead to safety.
He has mentioned what is formed in the womb of fetuses and they fall, sometimes one, sometimes two, three, four, five, six, seven, or more than ten. And I have seen that a woman gave birth to seventeen all at once, each one formed thus.
By the reckoning of the All-Knowing, all this should be in the knowledge of the midwife, so that she may face such a case one day and meet it as is required.
The Seventieth Chapter.
In the Delivery of the Dead Fetus.
If you have treated the dead fetus as I described in the treatment, and it does not exit, and you are compelled to act by hand, then look carefully. If the woman is strong and has no signs of complications that might cause harm to her, then the woman should lie down on a bed on her back.
The head will be tilted downwards and her legs will be elevated, and a servant will hold it from both sides or bind it to the bed so that its body does not move when the child is born.
Then he moistens her vulva with wet compresses, with the juice of the fig tree and henna, and with the powder of flax. Then he anoints the midwife's hands with these compresses and ointments. Then she inserts it gently into the womb, demanding a place where the amniotic sacs from the child will fit in, and the corresponding positions for that.
Observe, if the child is transverse and tends to descend on its head, then the amniotic sacs are inserted in its eyes, or in its shoulders, or in its mouth, or in its throat, or under its chin, or on its neck, or in the nearby places near the armpits, or under the breast.
And as for if it descends on its feet, in the lower part of the back and middle armpits. It is necessary to grasp the amniotic sac with the right hand, bending it between the fingers of the left hand, and then insert it gently into some of those places which we mentioned.
Until it reaches something empty, then another or third amniotic sac is inserted opposite to it, in order that the traction be equal and not incline to one side. Then it stretches evenly, not only straight but also moves towards all directions.
So that it comes out easily, like a tooth being extracted. It is necessary between these moments to relax the traction, if one side resists, then the midwife should anoint some of her fingers with the ointment and insert them from that direction to rotate it, if some of the child comes out, then the amniotic sacs are moved to other places.
She raises it slightly while doing this until the child comes out entirely. If one arm comes out before the other and cannot be returned due to its being bent, then she should wrap a cloth around it and pull it until all of it comes out, cutting it off.
When the delivery is in the wrist or arm, then do this also in the other hand and in the legs. If the head of the fetus is large and pressure needs to be released during exit, or if there is water accumulation on its surface, then enter between the fingers with a pointed forceps.
And use it to part the head, and let out the water or to pull it with the instrument called the retractor which will be shown with the other instruments in the book that follows this.
And do the same if the head of the fetus is large by nature, then use it to part the skull or to retract it with the retractor as we said, and then pull out the bones with forceps. If the head has come out and presses on the thorax, then use it until the moisture inside the chest subsides.
And if the chest then joins, whereas if it does not join and there is no passage for the exit, cut accordingly as you can. If the lower abdomen is warm or has a boil, then bind it until the moisture subsides from it.
And if the fetus is on its legs, then pulling it out and bringing it to the mouth of the womb is easy. But if it presses against the belly or chest, then pull it out with a cloth that you have wrapped around your hand and tear open the belly or chest until what is inside subsides.
And if you have removed all the organs and pulled out the head, and it has stopped, then let the left hand enter through the opening of the womb. If the mouth of the womb is open, then insert your hand into the neck of the womb and pull out the head with your fingers, then bring it down to the mouth of the womb using forceps or two forceps.
And if the mouth of the womb has joined with a warm swelling, then do not force it, but rather when that happens, use wet and fatty substances to lubricate it, and apply compresses and sit in the waters that are warm and moist.
If the fetus is on its side, then if it can be straightened let what we mentioned for the living fetus be used. If this is not possible then cut and remove, leaving nothing of the placenta inside at all. Once you have finished treating it, use what we mentioned from the treatment for hot tumors that occur in the uterus.
If bleeding occurs, let it be treated with the cold water and use the rest of the treatment. And I have seen a woman who had given birth to a dead fetus in her womb, then conceived again over it.
Then the other fetus also died. After a long time, an abscess formed in her uterus and became swollen until it burst open and discharged pus. I was called to treat her and treated her for a long time without the wound healing, so I applied some strong poultices over it.
Then a bone emerged from the site, and after some days, another bone emerged. I was amazed by this because there is no bone in the abdomen; I deduced that it was from the bones of the deceased fetus. She searched the wound and extracted many bones from the skull of the fetus.
And I continued to follow this until she extracted many bones from her, and the woman was in excellent condition. And she lived for a long time with a slight discharge coming from the site, and that is why I came here to record this rare case.
Because it contains knowledge and assistance for what the treating physician may attempt with his own hand in treatment.
The 77th Chapter.
In which are depicted the instruments needed for extracting the fetus.
Picture of a forceps with which to open the cervix:.
This instrument which is used to open the book, whether it be one forceps or two at the ends of the wooden handles, except that this forceps should be softer than the other and made either from ivory or boxwood, each piece being as thick as two fingers.
The two rods are directed towards the finger, and their length is about a quarter of a shibr. In the middle of the wood pieces, there are two guides made of the same type of wood that have been inserted into them. Their length is half a shibr or slightly longer, and their width is about two fingers or slightly more, and these two guides.
They are the ones that enter into the uterus to open it with them when you manipulate the little pincers, another shape of a tool like that, softer and lighter.
It is made from ebony or beech wood in the shape of a calipers, except that it has two guides at its end as you see, where each guide is about a quarter of a shibr long and two fingers wide, and when you want to open the uterus with it.
Then the woman sits on a mattress, stretching her legs apart between her thighs. Then you insert these two guides slowly into the uterus and you hold the end of the tool below her buttocks. Then open your hand with the tool as you do with calipers, as much as you want to open the uterus. Until you make it open as you want, another shape of a pincer is mentioned by the first one.
The shape of the device that pushes out the fetus.
The shape of the forceps that pulls out the head of the fetus.
It is similar to the scissors, with teeth at the end as you see. And it can be made in a shape like calipers on this form, with teeth like the saw that cuts and divides.
The shape of another syringe.
The shape of a hook.
This hook has some thickness so that it does not break when pulling out the fetus with it, The shape of a hook with two handles.
The shape of two broad forceps to cut the fetus.
All of these tools are many in kind and prepared by the craftsman, making his work faster and more elevated among people for their need, so do not despise any tool that is at your disposal since you will undoubtedly need it.
The Eightieth Chapter.
In the extraction of the placenta.
If the placenta is stuck after childbirth, it is necessary for the wet nurse to hold herself steady, then blow on it and pull your hand on her mouth and nostrils. If it comes out like that; otherwise, take a portion.
And make a hole in the cloth, put open herbs like papyrus, senna, wormwood, balm, sage, and myrrh, all these medicines or some of them, and immerse it in water and carry it on fire. Then place a silver tube on the hole in the cloth, one end in the mouth of the womb.
And grasp it until the steam reaches the bottom of the womb, then blow as we said. Then the placenta will come out quickly. If it does not come out after this treatment, order the midwife to dip her left hand in sesame oil or the fat of a goat's hoof.
Then put it into the womb and search for the placenta. If she finds it, grasp it and pull it out slowly, slowly until it comes out. If it is stuck in the depth of the womb, insert your hand as we described, and if you find the placenta, pull it out slowly, slowly with caution.
So that the womb does not drop when pulled strongly, but it is necessary to pull it gently towards the right and left sides, then increase the pulling force. Then it will come loose and be freed from attachment. If the mouth of the womb is constricted, we have described the treatment by blowing, the treatment of the cloth, and the herbs.
If it does not come out with all that we have described, then do not force it again. But it is necessary to bind what has come out from the womb to the woman's thigh and anoint it with the quadrangular ointment. Then it will loosen after days.
The wound heals and comes out except that if it festers, then it will smell bad to the stomach and head and this affliction is likely. Therefore, a corresponding decoction should be used.
Therefore, some of the ancient ones have tried decoctions of pomegranate and dry figs, a picture of the instrument with which a woman uses to cause menstruation and childbirth and so on:.
It is made from lead resembling a syringe or it is made from bronze, and the thin end is placed in front while the wide end is put on the fire and incense is burnt over the coals, holding it until that incense goes out and it is replaced again.
The 69th chapter.
In the treatment of an unopened hemorrhoid.
Many boys are born and their hemorrhoids are not opened, which has been closed by a thin membrane; it is necessary for the midwife to pierce this membrane with her finger, otherwise she should cauterize it sharply and beware of damaging the muscle, lest it be affected.
Then she wraps it with a moistened wool cloth in wine and oil, and treats it with ointments until it heals. If she fears it may become blocked, she should insert a lead tube into the wound for many days and remove it when the child needs to defecate.
And also the blockage of a hemorrhoid may be exposed from a wound or abscess; it is necessary to cut open that abscess and then treat it with what we mentioned earlier in terms of treatment and remedy.
The 80th chapter.
In the treatment of abscesses that occur below.
The abscesses that occur below are a complication and thickening that occurs near the hemorrhoid, either from outside or in one of its directions, and it can be one or more abscess.
If that complication is resolved, an opening will occur and a white or thin pus-like fluid may emerge. It could be connected to the rectum and vagina, and it may not be connected. The connected one can be recognized by what comes out of it during defecation and flatulence when using the enema treatment.
Perhaps a intestine will emerge from it, and there could be sinuses if it is connected to the bladder and urethra. It may also be connected to the hip joint and the anal opening. And what is known about the sinuses that are connected to the anus, but not others.
Enter your index finger into the anus and insert a thin probe made of copper or iron into the sinus, if there is no inflammation. If there is inflammation, then insert a probe made of leaden thread or a hair from a horse's mane.
Until you feel the probe or hair with your finger, if you don't feel it at all and nothing comes out of the opening, neither feces nor flatulence nor intestine as we said, then know that it is not connected, and proceed with the treatment.
And if the sinus is connected to the bladder or the urine stream, its indication is the flow of urine from it and its resistance to being obstructed by medication. And if it is connected to the hip joint or the anal opening, its sign is the reach of the probe to that location.
If there is no inflammation to the bone and there is pain on one side, with pus flowing out of it constantly, and no treatment is effective nor does it respond to an ointment, then all these sinuses that are connected will not be cured at all.
And the treatment for it is futile trouble for those who ignore her, but as for what is not connected and not chronic, I hope she will be cured by iron as I have described and tried, which is that you should lay the patient on his back between your feet.
You should lift his leg up and tilt his thigh towards his abdomen. Then, insert the bronze or lead instrument into the navel until you reach where the instrument ends. If the patient feels it near the seat bone, then you should insert your index finger into the seat bone.
If you feel the instrument with your finger, and it has protruded openly without being felt between your finger and it by flesh or fat, then you should certainly know that it has penetrated. Do not tire in this case, as it is not causing harm as we have said.
And they say that it heals in some people in the rarest cases, and from the treatment that is expected to benefit him, you should place a thin cloth on top of the navel as mentioned before, and insert it into the navel until it reaches near the seat bone. Then repeat this two or three times.
until you know that all those excess fleshy things resembling a bird's quill have been burnt, then treat him with an ointment-filled probe in the fat until those fleshes that were burnt come out, and then treat him with soothing ointments if he is cured.
And if not, he will never be cured with anything else. And as for if you inserted the instrument and it did not protrude to your finger that is in the seat bone, and there was a thick layer of flesh or fat between them, and you saw the navel afterwards on the surface of the skin, then cut the skin from the beginning of the navel. And you move the incision along with the instrument, while it is in the navel, until you reach the end of the instrument's tip and the instrument becomes loose and falls, then cleanse those fleshy things resembling a bird's quill, and leave nothing behind.
Then treat him with soothing ointments until he is cured. If bleeding occurs and hinders you from cutting those fleshes, then do what is best and hasten to cauterize it with fire or a strong medicine, for cauterizing with fire gathers two good conditions: burning those excess fleshes.
Cutting the blood and draining the moisture, then treat it with the moistened poultice in tallow or sulfur mixed with oil until it coagulates the place and brings out that burnt flesh in coagulation. Then treat the wound with ointments and medicaments suitable for solid tissue.
And it is the medicines that contain binding and draining, for if it congeals, then he is cured and there will be no relapse. If the suppuration has reached the depth of the wound and is away from the surface of the body, then insert your finger into the wound and explore with it.
If you feel the edge of the wound and there is a membrane or flesh between it and you, and it is close to the exit, then the only thing to do is by way of hope and expectation, and one of three methods should be used, either to dry it as we said.
Or else to cut it until you reach its bottom, so that you can insert the poultice and treatment close by; but do not persist in cutting lest you cut the surrounding muscle and cause the patient to pass stool involuntarily, then treat him as we mentioned, and perhaps he will be cured.
Or else to pierce that membrane and scrape it after having cut it close to the wound as we said, either with a curette or another sharp instrument, then clean all that burnt flesh in the incision until you can explore it.
Then fill the entire wound with gypsum, including the incision and upper mouth, until it is closed and only the suppuration remains open inside the incision, which will be less of a burden on the patient, and the suppuration may remain in this state.
And if you insert the curette into the suppuration and it is on one side of the incision, towards the surface of the body with the skin and the girdle of the incision, then take a curette with a perforated end like an awl's point in this shape:.
And insert a thread, which is loose, of five threads or thereabouts, then insert the instrument with the thread into the navel until it reaches its base, if it is swollen in the vicinity of the seat from inside nearby.
Then withdraw the thread from that hole by putting your finger in the seat and withdrawing one end of the thread, and join both ends together and pull them tight and leave it for a day or two. Whenever the thread cuts into the flesh, tighten it tightly until the flesh between the threads is cut off and falls away, then treat the wound until it heals and closes.
If the navel is not swollen, then push it gently as much as you can, but do not do that for the muscle lest you cut it, then do with it what we mentioned until it heals.
Image of the lancet-like scissors that cuts through the navels is very sharp and on one side is not sharp in order not to cut what does not need cutting as you see.
The Ninetieth Chapter.
About the hemorrhoids that bleed and their excision, and treatment of fissures.
The hemorrhoids will be two types: either they will be inside the seat resembling red pimples or like bunch grapes and there will be small and large ones, and blood will always flow from them.
And it will be one and many, and outside the seat on its edges except that this one which is outside the seat is usually dry, flowing with yellow water or a little blood, always, and it will be like the color of the body.
And the treatment of those that are inside the seat is to order the patient to purge and evacuate until the seat opens up and the hemorrhoids appear, then hasten and tie them with a thread or grip them with your fingernails, then cut them at their roots; if the thread does not hold due to its wetness and relaxation.
Remove it with a rough cloth or a piece of moistened bread or grasp it with your fingers then cut it and leave some sharp edges on the cut so that it can take the shape of a kidney or wrap it as mentioned in the chapter on kidneys.
Then treat it with the remaining treatment until it heals. If the seat does not open up for exit, irrigate the patient with an injection containing a little vinegar to wash what is in the seat and facilitate exit when the patient becomes irritated. Then arrange the excrescences that have come out of the seat accordingly.
And it is that you take hold of it with your fingernails or tie it to a string and cut it, then treat it as we mentioned until it heals. And if one dislikes cutting with iron, it is necessary to use its thread in this manner: to take a loose thread and insert it into the needle.
Then pull the excrescence upwards and thread it with a needle on the other side of its origin, wrapping the ends of the thread below the needle as it is obstructed and pulling the excrescence tightly. Then tie the thread and withdraw the needle. Do that to all the excrescences and leave one not to be threaded.
So that excess blood may flow out, then place a cloth soaked in rose water or quince juice on the seat and put it there. Tell the patient to remain still, then leave him until the excrescences fall off. When they have fallen off, treat them with ointments and all treatment until he heals.
And as for the treatment of fissures, it often presents with thickened skin and stubbornness. If medicine does not take effect, it is necessary to debride it with a file or your fingernails until it becomes soft and the upper crust that prevents it from healing falls off.
Then treat him until he recovers as it is fitting, if he does not recover then repeat the treatment with even greater force than the first time until the wound becomes good and is healed, then treat him because he will recover.
The second eighty-first chapter.
In the treatment of reversed and non-reversed arrow wounds, and dry abscesses and ulcers.
The arrow is a circular knot on the body's color resembling the head of an arrow, which occurs throughout the body, especially in the groins and feet, and causes pain when walking.
It is necessary to cut around the arrow and grasp it with a knife or forceps, pull it out from its source then treat him, if you wish to treat it as described in its chapter. And as for the dry abscesses, one of them is a small rough knot, swollen and rounded above the surface of the body.
And it often occurs on the hands of children, and its treatment is to swell the abscess and cut it or lacerate it with a silk thread or a hair until it falls off, and if you wish to treat it by fire or with sharp medicine.
And the reversed and non-reversed abscesses can be lacerated with the instrument I mentioned in the treatment of the ulcer, but as for the nodule, it is also a small swollen knot on the surface of the body that goes deep into the flesh, and if it gets cold, it becomes like a numbness similar to a sting from an ant.
And it can occur in the entire body, and most often occurs in the hands. Its treatment is to take a tube from an ostrich feather or a strong vulture's feather, shape that tube around the nodule until its circumference is enclosed by the tube, then turn your hand with the tube until you cut around the nodule.
The wound will be deepened in the flesh and the tick will be removed from its origin, and if you wish, you can do that with a copper or iron tube on this picture:.
It will be at the top of the tube, a stopper not to be opened, so that the fingers may grasp it and open it, and if you wish, you can crush the tick as described earlier in the chapter on ulcers in the book.
The third and eighty-ninth chapter.
In images of the tools used for injections in cases of constipation, diarrhea, and quinsy.
The syringe can be made of glass, or from silver or copper hammered or pounded, and it can also be made small or large according to the users of this device. So the one used in treating young children will be small, and those with narrow or constricted intestines will have syringes very thin, large syringe picture:.
The top of the syringe where the ligature is attached will be wide on this side, with a barrier where the ligature is attached as you see, and the lower end which enters the intestine will be smooth and rounded to the rectum in one side having two holes and on the other side one hole.
The width of the hole will be as thick as a reed or slightly thicker, and the ligature which is made to receive medicines from an animal's bladder or a goat's gallbladder will be made in the shape of a small basket, its diameter being a finger.
And it will have many holes as it spins, with a thickness of a finger between each hole, then a tightly twisted thread from a yarn of ten threads or so will enter those holes and gather the ligature like a basket. So when the medicine is put in, it will be tightly tied at the top of the syringe between two stones, then injected with this. This is a picture of the ligature and hole:.
How to treat swelling by filling the bladder or scrotum with medicine, as long as possible, while avoiding excessive heat or cold, then have the patient lie on his back and elevate his legs above.
And a cloth or mattress is placed under him, then the tip of the catheter is anointed with oil or egg white or gallnut sap or something similar. Then it is inserted into the rectum gently, and a servant grasps the cord in both hands and tightens it with great force until all that is in the catheter is released into the bowel.
Then the catheter is removed and the patient elevates his legs against the wall. If the medicine causes the patient to move, let him be left in that position as much as possible. And if he sleeps all night, it will be more effective for purging. If the catheter is inserted in a case of diarrhea and hasten its exit, then the catheter should not be removed until the discharge has ceased.
If there are piles or painful ulcers in the rectum, then the catheter should be very soft and smooth, like the ones used to catheterize children. This is a picture of a soft catheter attached to its skin.
The Fourth and Eightieth Chapter.
In the Treatment of Wounds.
I mentioned in the classification of treatment what relates to incisions, and here I will mention its treatment by hand and with medicine on a complete basis. I say that wounds differ according to the thing on which the wound is located and according to the location where it occurs.
The things on which the wounds are located are many, such as a rockfall or sword cuts or knives or arrow stabs or wooden splinters and so forth from many things.
And as for the wounds according to their locations on the body, such as those that occur on the head or neck or chest or belly or liver and so forth from other organs.
And I shall describe the treatment of some wounds to make them a measure and a law for all wounds. And I begin with simple head wounds, especially because complicated ones will be mentioned in the third chapter of this book.
I say that if a simple wound occurs on the head, and there is no bone fracture, then if it is from a stone or something like it, and the skin has been pulled back only, and the wound is large and I fear for the patient's danger of developing a heat abscess, then I proceed to apply the gauze compress to the area. And do not delay in doing that, and remove from him as much blood as his strength allows, unless a stopper prevents it, especially if the blood flowing from the wound is small and the stopper is opposite the injured side.
And warn the patient against fullness, drinking, and heavy eating, if a stopper prevents it. If not, let him reduce his food and not approach meat or drink, and apply to the wound a warm poultice soaked in rose water alone or with wine that is strained.
And if the heat abscess is prevented, apply to the wound some of his own blood if it is still wet and has not been affected by the air that I will describe to you shortly. And if it has been affected by the air, apply to it some ointments.
Until the pus drains, then treat it until it heals. If the wound is large and from a sword cut or something like it, and his lips have not united with the edges, then suture him together as I will describe in suturing abdominal wounds.
If the skin has been exposed to the bone and adhered, but its connection is only a short distance, then cut it off, and treat the wound with medicines that will form a firm flesh in place of the skin. And order the patient to eat food that contains strength, such as heads and entrails and things like them.
If an abscess occurs on the skin and is not attached to the bone, cut away the entire abscess and wash it with water. Then treat it. If in this wound there is a blood vessel or vein bleeding and the bleeding does not stop with medicines, search for the blood vessel.
If it is not inflamed and has not spread, excise it with a scalpel and tie it. If necessity demands it, and what we have mentioned does not benefit, let it bleed until the blood stops. If these wounds are small and superficial, treatment can be easy and simple by applying this powder to them while they are still bleeding.
Before the air changes it, take a part from the frankincense, two parts from the myrrh, and three parts from the powdered or unpowdered gypsum. Grind everything together, sift it, and fill the wound with it, tightening it well until it adheres to the surface well.
And it is held in place by the blood. Then, tighten it from above with the lint and leave it alone until it heals, as long as there is no suppuration. For, it will not be freed from the medicine until it has recovered. This can also be done with just gypsum if frankincense and myrrh are not available.
And this action can also be done with gypsum in many large wounds, as long as you put it correctly and tighten it well, and the wound is still fresh with blood, not having been affected by air. But if it has been slightly affected by air, especially during summer time.
There is no meaning in applying this powder as we mentioned, by placing some ointments on it or by covering it with a poultice made from barley flour mixed with water and honey until it forms a scab, then treating it with the rest of the treatment until it has recovered.
And as for if a break occurs in the bone near the wound, and it is slight, extract it with forceps. I mentioned the treatment of head fractures earlier, in what concerns surgery of the neck. If the wound is in the neck, there is no difference in the treatment between this and a simple head wound.
If he has cut a cord from the neck or a vein, then if it is a cord, there is no remedy except to avoid treating it by applying a compression as tight as possible like a snare and a bandage and similar things because they harm the nerve and stretch it.
And nothing cold should be placed on the wound whatsoever, because the essence of the nerve is cold and it is connected to the brain which is the most noble of organs, and what treats it with gentle medicines like the calamine lotion washed in sweet water repeatedly or with rose ointment and tettina.
If it is washed with water and all the metallic stones on this condition and ointments, but if the wound is large, use suturing or bind his lips with bandages then treat it until it heals.
If the wound has a cavity and a hollow forms in its bottom where pus has accumulated, then if there is a vein in the wound and blood flows from it, stop it or bind it or compress it as necessary.
If the wound has cut some or all of the gullet's rings and the ligaments, then bring together the edges of the skin with suturing on a thread, not touching the gullet but smoothing it and returning it to its natural shape, then tighten it tightly and leave it for some days.
Then treat it with ointments that contain astringent and drying properties until it heals, if the wound has affected the bone, remove the bone flaps, if there are fragments of bone, extract all or as much as possible, and leave the rest alone until the wound heals and eases out.
If the wound is fresh, apply the powder that we have described to it, if it becomes infected and becomes foul-smelling, treat it as will be mentioned in its place, regarding thoracic surgery and between the shoulders.
If the wound is from a spear or knife and you see its pus, look. If the breath comes out of it when the patient exhales, then know that it is a battle wound. If not, if it is fresh with her blood and there is no pus, do not put in it any dressing at first nor tighten it lest the blood be trapped inside it.
Then it will go to the heart and kill the patient. But put in it a powder that is attractive and dissolve it twice a day. If you do not have a powder, put in the mouth of the wound a clean thread to absorb what comes out from it and let the patient sleep on the wound.
Let alone what gathers in it, and if the wound has been three days or more and there is no inflammation, no bad pulse, nor difficulty of breathing in the patient, and you see all his conditions are good, then know that the wound is sound and treat it with poultice and all other treatments until he recovers.
If his recovery is delayed and the pus persists, know that he has become gangrenous and treat him with what precedes from stitching. The patient on the wound let alone what gathers in it, and if the wound is in the chest or back, treat him as mentioned earlier regarding suturing.
If it is large or covered with scabs, if it is small, if it has affected the bone and cut off fragments from it, then search the wound and begin to remove those fragments if they are clean. If they are not clean, leave them until.
The wound will be cleansed, and it will facilitate their removal. As for other wounds that occur in other organs, the treatment of them is as mentioned earlier.
The 78th Section.
In the wound of the belly and the exit of the intestines and their suturing.
The tear that is exposed to the belly may be large, small, or medium-sized. The large one may cause the intestines or several intestines to protrude and thus their insertion and suturing will be more difficult and arduous.
The small hernia is also difficult in another way, so it must be redone and the intestine if it does not precede its entrance into its place from hour to hour becomes swollen and thick, so it is difficult to enter. Therefore, the best type of hernia is the medium-sized one, because it is not as difficult with regard to returning the intestine as it is in these two types.
Know that sewing the abdomen is on four faces, and the two stitches are general for sewing the abdomen and for sewing other wounds of the body, and the other two stitches are special only for sewing the abdomen.
And I will describe it to you one by one with explanation and clarity, so I say: if the wound is small and something from the intestine has come out and it is difficult to return it, then this is due to one of two reasons: either because of the smallness of the hernia as we mentioned, or because the intestine has been blown open beforehand by the contraction of air.
So if that is the case, it is necessary to soften it by immersing a wet sponge or cloth in warm water alone or having it steeped with dill, saffron, and myrrh, and then wrapping the intestine around it until the swelling subsides.
And it may be done by the drink that contains opium, and this is better than water alone for resolving the swelling. So if you see the swelling has subsided, then wash the intestine with warm water that has been cooked with rue or baker's yeast, because this facilitates its entry with less effort.
And if it still proves difficult to return it after this treatment, then cut the hernia slightly with the instrument used for cutting arteries. The first treatment is better than cutting, but when necessity and the lack of means demand it, this is what must be done. This is a picture of the instrument:
The direction of the instrument is one-sided and crooked, while its other end is not limited. The thin part is not like a thread but rather slightly curved and it is an instrument that resembles a small scalpel as you see it. If the wound has been enlarged and the intestine has entered, then it must be returned to its natural shape.
And if you can position it according to its special nature, it is better. But if the wound is wide and is in the lower abdomen, then the patient should lie on their back and lift their legs higher than their head. And if it is in the upper abdomen, they should lift their head and chest higher than theirs.
And also, if the wound is in one of the sides of the abdomen, make your intention and purpose always the side where the surgery is to be done higher than the other side. And so it is necessary to use this method in great operations and middle-sized operations.
And as for small operations, position it according to what you are able to do, then prepare beside you a trusted servant who will hold the entire wound with his hands and bring together its edges, then uncover it gradually for the task of suturing.
And this is the general characteristic of suture, which is that you take a needle or several needles according to the width of the wound, then leave on one side of the wound the thickness of the toe and insert one needle without entering any thread into its skin edges. With the edges of the peritoneum which is underneath the skin from inside until it reaches that side and you have brought together the skin edges and the peritoneal edges, becoming four flaps, then pull with a double thread around the needle on both sides completely until the wound edges come together tightly.
Then leave the thickness of a finger also and insert another needle, then tie it with thread as you did with the first needle, and continue to do that with as many needles as you need until you have freed the entire wound and the needles are moderate between thickness and thinness.
Because very thin needles are cut through flesh quickly and it is also difficult to enter the skin, therefore it is necessary for the needle to be moderate in thinness and thickness, and one should not insert the needle into the edge of the skin too closely.
Unless the flesh is dried quickly and the wound is closed before it becomes inflamed, nor should you remove the stitches also, lest the wound be prevented from healing. Then cut off the ends of the sutures so that they do not cause pain to the patient when he sleeps, and make a swab of torn cotton cloth from all sides to hold the ends of the sutures.
And leave it until you learn that the wound has healed. This type of suturing with a needle is most suitable for small wounds, as it can often be sufficient to suture them with one or two needles or something like that.
Or the second type of suturing is when you bring together in one operation the four edges, namely the skin and peritoneum edges, with a moderately thick thread on a needle, making it tight or loose as needed, then when this has been done with this needle, take up the needle from the side where you started with itself.
So that the thread is tied from above the wound, making the suturing according to the sewing of eggs, which pulls with it the goods, and leaving between each suture a thickness equal to the tip of the little finger, and this kind of suturing is known to everyone.
And with this suturing, I treated an operation that was exposed in a man's abdomen, who had been injured with a knife and the incision was more than a palm's width long, and he had come out from his bed after two palms of the midsection, and the incision was in the middle of the belly.
I then removed his stitches after he had stayed outside the wound for 24 hours, and the wound healed in about 15 days, and I treated him until he was completely recovered and lived many years, behaving in all his affairs, and doctors would say that he would never recover.
And it is a wonder that I did not treat him with ointment, since I was in a place where there was no medicine; so I would put two layers of gauze on the wound during the day and would have it washed with honey water until it healed.
And as for one of the special kinds of suturing, I recall Galen's statement that it begins with sewing on the skin and the needle enters from outside to inside. If the needle has penetrated the skin and the aponeurosis intended to be straight in the entire length of the abdomen.
I left the edge of the peritoneum on the side where I inserted the needle and it penetrated the other edge from inside to outside, in the other edge of the membrane. If it has penetrated, then I penetrate it again in this same edge from outside to inside.
And I left the edge of the peritoneum on this side and inserted the needle into its other edge from inside to outside, and it penetrated along with me in the peritoneum to the edge of the membrane which is in its place until it penetrates all of it.
Then I also began from this side, with it and its edge matching the edge of the peritoneum in the other side. And I pulled out the needle from the skin which is near it, then returned it to that skin and matched the edge of the peritoneum in the other side with this edge of the membrane.
And I pulled it out from the skin which is in its place, and do that again and again until you have sewn all the incision on this model. The overall characteristic of this suturing is to suture like a tailor sews fabrics for garments.
That it sews the peritoneum once on one side with the edge of the skin, and leaves it once on the other side until it is free. As for the second special kind of suturing which Galen also mentioned, this is his word exactly.
And it is that you sew it on the model as the healers gather each part to its counterpart by nature, so they join the edge of the peritoneum to its other edge and the edge of the membrane to its other edge, and this will be as I have described for you.
The needle should be inserted into the subcutaneous fold close to you from outside and pushed in until it reaches inside, leaving only the subcutaneous tissue and then bringing it back out. Then insert the needle into both subcutaneous folds and bring it back out again also.
And push the needle in from inside to outside into the other subcutaneous fold on the opposite side. This method of stitching is better than the general easy stitching mentioned earlier, as Galen says. Some people say that the stitching of the abdomen can be done with two needles. And that is by inserting a thread into both and starting with one needle entering from you and exiting at the other side, then bringing in the other needle from the opposite side to exit from you, just like the suturing of the skin.
And know that a tear in the middle of the abdomen is harder to suture than any other place, and as for treating the wound, its treatment is like that of all wounds. So if you found the wound fresh with blood before the air had reached it, and washed it, drew its edges together, and secured it well, then apply lint to it.
If the wound has been exposed to air, then apply some ointments that will help it dry out and drop its threads, so that the subcutaneous tissue and skin may adhere together. Then treat it like you would any other wound until it heals.
If you don't have any medicines, then apply lint to it from the beginning and change it twice a day as I told you until it heals. For most cases of simple wounds, you won't need any further treatment. However, if you fear that the wound may be affected by the main organs in terms of pain.
It is necessary to dip a linen cloth in moderate warm oil or rose ointment and place it around the area between the armpit and groin. If he feels pain or swelling in his abscess, then many times that indicates that it should be purged with black cold tea.
Especially if the putridity has reached the intestines and become an opening into his abdomen, and know that what is thick from the intestines is easier to cure, and what is thin is harder to cure.
And as for the intestine known as the caecum, it does not accept healing from surgery at all, that being due to the abundance of its vessels and their thickness, and the tenderness of its contents and its proximity to the nature of the nerve. And if what protrudes from the wound is a caecum and reaches it fresh, I will restore it according to the restoration of the intestine itself, regardless.
If it passes some time and it turns green or black, then it should be ligated with a thread above the area that has turned black in order not to expose bleeding, for there are vessels and sinews in the caecum, then cut what is below that ligature.
And make the ends of the thread attached from below the incision outside it, in order to facilitate removal and extraction when the caecum falls and the wound is closed, mentioned the wound that appears in the intestine; and if a breach appears in the intestine and it is small.
It may be possible in some people because I saw a person who was wounded in his abdomen with an arrow shot and the wound was on the right side of the stomach; it became an abscess that produced stool and wind, so I treated him without having any hope for his recovery. I did not stop until he was cured and the place had healed, but when I saw that the place had healed I feared for the patient's sake that a bad accident might occur in his abdomen; so it did not occur at all and he remained in his best state. It is true that he eats and drinks and has sexual relations and enters the bath and feels good in his service, and some of those who have experience say that when an injury appears in the intestine and it is small, one should suture on this condition.
He takes the large ants, their heads. Then he gathers the lips of the wound. Then one ant is placed from it, its mouth open on the lips of the wound. If it catches hold and tightens its mouth, cut off its head; then it will stick and not come undone. Then another ant is placed near the first one.
And he continues to do that with several ants as much as the wound requires, then he returns it and sews the wound; for those heads remain stuck in the abdomen until the abdomen is healed and there is no sign of any disease. It is also possible to tie the abdomen with thin thread.
The one who is separated from the animal that is tied to it after entering the needle, which is that he takes a part of this thread from the animal and then ties another thread made of thin and twisted flax to its end, then enters that thread into the needle. And in it, the thread of the animal is sewn with it, then returned to the cavity. This stitch from the ant and the thread is only by the path of desire and hope.
And as for if the tear is large and wide, especially if it is in one of the intestines that are tightly packed, there is no way out nor recovery at all.
The 68th chapter.
In the treatment of croup and goiter.
Know that every wound or swelling, if it is old and has become a ulcer and has not healed and kept discharging pus constantly, is called croup and goiter, and we call it croup.
It has a white, hard, and fibrous appearance without pain, like the hollow of a bird's feather.
And because of this, some people have called it "feather", and sometimes it can be wet and constantly discharging pus, and at times the moisture may stop, and this moisture can be abundant or scanty, thick or fine.
And I mentioned in the division when mentioning wounds that every ulcer which does not heal and does not grow flesh in it is due to one of nine reasons, one of them being either lack of blood in the body or its obstruction, or because there is hard flesh inside it and on its edges preventing good flesh from growing. Or it may be because the ulcers are many and gangrenous, or because the ulcer is putrid itself and the substance that nourishes it is faulty in its nature, or because the treatment is not in harmony with treating it, or because corruption has occurred in the region of a type of plague, or because there is something specific to the region.
Or it may be because the ulcers are many and gangrenous, or because the ulcer is putrid itself and the substance that nourishes it is faulty in its nature, or because the treatment is not in harmony with treating it, or because corruption has occurred in the region of a type of plague, or because there is something specific to the region. As shown in the city of Zaragoza, where it is difficult for diseases to heal and for tumors to recover their natural state, and there may be one or several bones, and I have pointed out all these causes and their signs and treatments with medicines in the division.
And here it is necessary for me to inform you about the treatment of abscesses and catarrhs that occur through manual work, know that abscesses can occur in all parts of the body from which some abscesses end in great ulcers or sinews or nerves.
or to the intestines or to the bladder or to the kidneys or to a rib of the ribs or to a vertebra of the vertebrae or to a joint from the compound joints such as the hand and foot, and some that proceed to a principal organ and so on.
So, as for these abscesses in this regard, they are among the difficult diseases to heal that do not accept treatment and effort, unless it is one of those abscesses that does not reach these places I mentioned and you hope and strive to treat them.
And I wanted you to know this, so take a probe made of copper or iron if the abscess runs straight and probe it with it, and if the abscess is inflamed, probe it with a thin lead probe because lead softens its substance.
When entering and turning towards the incision, if the nodule has multiple openings, you cannot distinguish them with a probe. Therefore, choose one opening from them and irrigate it, as the moisture that flows into it will spread to the other openings and flow.
Then investigate the situation from any angle you can, to know if there is bone or nerve, or if the nodule's base is distant or near, or if it has one nodule with multiple openings, and take into account all that by the extent of your intelligent observation, and exist in the presence of pain when you touch the location with your finger.
And likewise with the signs and causes of the tumor, so if you have observed all that and verified it as true, then proceed to the treatment with confidence, and look into it, if.
The nodule is apparent, near or in a safe location, far from a joint or nerve or vessel or vein, or one of the places I mentioned to you. Cut into the nodule as previously described and remove what is inside it, including any swelling, rotten flesh, and excessive fat.
And what grows inside it from flesh or pus and so on, and treat it until it is healed. If the nodule has a distant base and is straight, then it is necessary to cut into its depth as far as you can, then remove all its rotten flesh.
Then use the medicated linen in sharp medicines and put it into the base of the nodule that you reach with iron, do so repeatedly until that medicine eats away all that remains in the base of the nodule from rottenness.
Then apply it with ointments that cause healthy flesh to grow until it is healed. If it does not heal with that, follow what I previously described. If the cause of the nodule is bone and you are certain of that, then cut into it and remove what I told you to remove, unless something prevents you from doing so.
Flesh or nerve or main organ as we said, if bone is exposed to you and has some decay and blackness then scrape it off until its decay goes away, then treat it with what cures it until it heals. If it does not heal and pus accumulates as was the case.
Know that you have not reached all the removal of decay, so uncover everything on it again and scrape off its decay with your utmost effort then apply treatment, if it heals otherwise know that that decay is far away from the other decay, so uncover everything on it again.
And scrape off its decay with your utmost effort, if the decaying bone is small and can be removed, then remove it with fine forceps that are suitable for that.
If the bones are many, scrape off removing all of them and do not leave anything, exert your utmost effort. If something from the ligaments hinders you without causing harm to cutting it, cut those ligaments and release the bones if there is flesh there and free the bones.
If it is not possible for you to remove the bones at that time, carry what can be removed and leave it alone for some days until what surrounds those bones from the flesh and ligaments becomes putrid and keep the wound so that the gap which you cut in your work does not come together.
But apply to it a compress made with moistened sulfur powder mixed with oil or a compress made with Egyptian ointment or one of the green ointments, for if those ligaments become putrid and the bones heal, it will be easy to remove and extract them.
If it is a single large bone like the tibia or femur and so on, and what decayed was only its surface, scrape it off thoroughly until that blackness and decay goes away then apply treatment to the wound. If what decayed was a large part and the decay had reached the bone's marrow, then it must be spread out.
Cut off all the affected part to where the decay ends, then treat it until it heals. I inform you that an ulcer had appeared on a man's leg to serve as an example and help in your treatment, this was a recent case.
About thirty years old, an illness appeared on his leg due to a movement inside the body which affected the leg and caused swelling and a large tumor, without any external cause; time passed with the mistakes of doctors until the tumor opened.
And many substances flowed from it, and his treatment was poor until the leg became gangrenous and multiple openings appeared, all discharging pus and bodily fluids; for two years, a group of doctors treated him without any skill in their craft.
Until I was summoned and I saw his leg and the substances flowing from those openings in a great stream; the man had wasted away his body and his color had turned yellow; so I inserted the probe into one of those openings, and the probe reached the bone, then I searched all the openings.
And I found that some of them were discharging into one another from all sides of the leg; so I made an incision on one of those openings until I exposed some bone, and I found it decayed, blackened, and putrid, and had eaten away to the point where the opening reached the brain; then I released what was revealed to me.
And I was able to remove the decayed bone; and I think that there is no other decay in the bone except what I cut out and removed, and indeed it has been eradicated; then I covered the wound with medicated dressing for a longer period, but it did not heal; so I returned and exposed the bone again above the initial exposure.
And I found the decay connected to the bone, so I removed what appeared to me also from that decay; then I applied dressing to it, but it did not heal nor come together; then I exposed it again and again cut away a piece of bone after another, applying dressing until I had cut away about a palm's breadth.
And I extracted it with its membranes, then treated it with medicines and the inflammation subsided quickly and he recovered. This repetition was necessary in his operation and incision due to his weak condition and lack of endurance and fear of death upon him because excessive bleeding would occur to him at all times, resulting in a complete recovery.
And a hard callus formed at the site of the bone, his condition improved in his body and his strength recovered, he was able to move about freely without being affected by this affliction whatever, unless there was a broken bone in some part of the body that had fractured.
It is necessary to splint him in this manner, and to take a bandage and tighten it at the end of the fractured bone, then order someone to lift him up and tie another bandage from thicker cloth than the first one.
Then bind him to the flesh underneath the bone and stretch his end so that the flesh is drawn down, while you uncover the flesh at the place you want to splint lest the flesh be injured by the saw; place a board or plank firmly under the bone from below.
Because if you do that, the saw will not be prevented from cutting the rotten bone; it is necessary for the splint to be placed a little above the site of the rot lest there be a cavity in the bone and it does not appear on its surface for feeling, so you would have to splint him again.
If the bone is rotten and not fractured, but some part of it is connected to another part, and the rot is in its middle or in some part of it; then uncover the flesh from all its sides altogether, then place the board from below, then splint him from the first side where the rot is.
If you have finished splinting him, then splint him from the other side and let it be a little away from the rot as we said; if the rot is in a joint, cut off the rotten joint itself and splint the bone where it connects to the other side.
If the corruption is in the connection of two bones, then there is no remedy except excision. If the corruption is in the flesh of the hand or leg, then the matter is very difficult to treat; however, you should scrape away the corruption as it appears to you, strip it bare, and purify it in any case you can.
And with what remedy you can be successful, when it does not resist you, vein or nerve; and know that the saws and forceps for cutting these bones are numerous according to the position of the bones, their setting, thickness, roughness, size, and flexibility. Therefore, you should prepare a tool that matches each type of work for that work.
And know that the work itself can guide you to the type of tool you need if it is with a long experience and knowledge of the arts of this profession, because one who has mastered the craft and seen many cases of diseases. So it may occur to him what tools he needs for each disease, and I will illustrate for you in the end of this chapter several instruments.
You make them examples to follow and measures to measure by, with a picture of a saw:.
Picture of another saw:.
Picture of a small saw:.
Picture of a large saw:.
Its head is in the shape of a screw cap and its tip is in the shape of an escalpel and it is suitable to use with joint heads if they are decayed or large, Picture of another small forceps:.
Picture of a broad forceps:.
It is made with its top curve and blade from iron, and its handle from a wood conical block, Picture of a forceps with a cavity:.
Simple last picture:
Simple picture of the extremity's end:.
Simple small picture resembling the incision:.
Last small picture cut off:.
And the extremity is like a thread that acts in many places of bone, simple picture suitable for what has been cut from the bones:.
A triangle with sharp edges, made of Indian steel, and all that has been mentioned of the instruments and cuttings should be made like this, simple picture:.
The 77th Chapter.
In cutting off limbs and dispersing bones.
The limbs may become gangrenous either from an external cause or from an internal one, and if you treat the corruption with medicines and the treatment is not effective and you see the corruption spreading in the member without anything stopping it.
So it is necessary to cut off that member up to where the corruption has reached, in order for the patient to be saved from death or great harm which is greater than losing the member, and a sign of its condition is that the member becomes swollen until you think fire has burned it.
Or if it becomes gangrenous after becoming black, until that gangrene reaches what is next to that member and takes hold of the whole body; then act promptly to cut it off, and likewise if the cause of the corruption is due to some poisonous creatures such as the sea scorpion or serpent or tarantula, etc.
If the corruption or gangrene is in the tip of the finger, then cut off the finger and do not let the corruption spread to the hand; likewise if it has taken hold in the hand, then cut it off from the wrist and do not let the corruption spread until it takes hold in the arm's bone.
Therefore, if you take in the arm, cut the arm at the shoulder joint itself. If it is permissible for corruption and seeing [the injury], take towards the nape of the neck; do not cut the nape at all, because that would be the death of the patient, and use instead another treatment according to one's ability.
And also do the same with the leg, if corruption is taken in the toe, cut the toe at one of its joints. And if it is taken in the calf of the leg, cut the leg completely; and if it goes up to the knee, cut the thigh at the joint of the knee.
And if the corruption has reached above the knee, there is no remedy except to leave it and have the patient succumb to death; or, as an alternative, cutting off the limb or spreading it apart, by pulling a bandage at the bottom of the place where you want to cut and another bandage above it.
And have one servant stretch the single bandage down, and have another servant stretch the upper bandage up, and strip away the flesh between the bandages with a broad knife until all the flesh is exposed; then cut or spread it apart, and make sure to place a rag from all sides.
So that the saw does not touch the correct place and expose the patient to excessive pain and burning; for if bleeding occurs during your work, cover the area quickly or apply some hemostatic substances on it, then return to your treatment until you have finished.
Then bind the wounded limb with a bandage suitable for it and treat it until it heals; and I inform you that this is an example of what happened to a man on his leg, exactly as I described to you, which was that it turned black with burns resembling fire.
And that corruption was the first thing to happen to his toe until it spread throughout his entire leg; and as the man saw the corruption advancing in the limb with great pain and burning, he cut it off at the joint, and healed.
When a long time had passed, that corruption appeared on his thumb, specifically the index finger. He came to me and I treated it with the medication I carried in my hand after cleansing his body. The pus did not subside and made its way into the next finger.
Until the corruption spread to his hand, he summoned me to amputate it. I refused, hoping that the pus would be drained and fearing death for him if his hand was cut off, since the strength of the man was at risk of collapsing. He then gave up on me and returned to his town.
I was informed about him that he had his hand amputated in its entirety and recovered. I narrate this story to serve as a warning for cases of this disease, and as an example to be referred to and acted upon.
The 88th chapter.
In the treatment of abscesses and how to inject them with medicines.
If a tumor occurs in some fleshy organs and the duration of the tumor continues until it reaches its term, then bursts or becomes inflamed and all that was inside comes out and the place remains empty like an vessel.
And the skin on it became like a piece of cloth, having shrunk and not being greatly affected by its corruption to reach bone or nerve or ligament. From this it deserves to be called an abscess, and should not be called a boil unless it prolongs its duration until the corruption affects something from these organs.
Therefore, it is called a boil or a carbuncle. Its treatment is to cut off all that skin as it forms and especially if it has shrunk and become like a piece of cloth, having confirmed that it does not adhere to the place due to its corruption.
If the skin clings and has not reached that degree of corruption, and there is a thick layer of flesh covering it which should be treated with injection, look at the abscess; if it is large and the pus flowing from it has a bad odor, inject it with the Egyptian medicine.
What is this: oil, fat, honey, and ginger, all equal parts, gathered together in a vessel and cooked over the fire until the medicine thickens and becomes like the consistency of honey. Then take what you need from it and mix it with water and honey, and inject it into the wound, and hold the mouth shut and leave the medicine there for two hours.
Then remove it by rinsing, and do the same for several days until the wound is clean and free of odor. And if this medicine is not available, inject with ash water, which is obtained by pouring water on cypress or beech tree ashes.
Then wash it and inject with it until you are sure that the wound is clean. If not, then inject with the medicine water or ash water mixed with a little crushed ginger.
Or inject with honey and wine mixed together, because honey cleanses and washes, and wine adheres to the wound, especially if the wine has a property of constriction and contraction. Then do this several times until you are sure that the wound is free of its corruption, and then inject what nourishes the flesh within it.
Like taking from the ointment and mixing it with wax, red wine, and constricting drink or injecting it with some medicines and other ointments whose properties we have mentioned in the chapter on ointments. If the mouth of the wound is narrow and does not accommodate the injection tube.
Then widen it slightly with iron or put in a curved needle into the medicine ointment or siccative ointment until it is wide enough. And also, if the mouth is too wide, then bring its lips together by stitching and leave only as much open as the injection tube can enter without excess.
And also, if the mouth of the wound which discharges pus is elevated upwards, then cut it in a lower place so that the pus flows down below, because if the pus accumulates in the depths of the wound, it will prevent the flesh from growing within.
If you cannot open the abscess towards the bottom as you wish, then establish the part so that pus can flow from it easily according to what is suitable for you and make sure that nothing of the pus stays there at all.
And as for the medicinal paste that is placed on the abscess from outside and how it should be put on it, then take some of the medicinal paste suitable for what you want and spread it on a linen cloth so that the cloth covers all the abscess. Then cut with a needle next to the mouth of the abscess a hole slightly wider than its mouth, then spread some of the soft paste on another cloth to the extent of the hole and put it on it in a way that is separate from the mouth of the abscess so that pus can come out from it, nor remove the large cloth except afterwards.
Several days, and as for the one on the mouth of the abscess, it is the one that you should remove every time to let what has accumulated in it come out from it and to know whether what flows out from it is much or little or putrid or not putrid.
And also, examine the location of the abscess itself whether its owner feels pain in it or not, and whether there is a tumor or not, if your treatment goes on like this and you see that the matter that comes out from the mouth of the abscess is slight.
So know that the abscess has stuck or almost stuck, then release it on the third day or tomorrow, and when you have released the wound, replace the cloth with another one and renew the paste, if after a long period pus comes out from the abscess in a thin state, do not despair of its draining.
So cure is near because there are people who delay the growth of flesh in their wound, and some of them are contrary to that, if pus comes out from the abscess after many days but not putrid, know that the abscess has not stuck together, for if the abscess delays its sticking.
The treatment of his case is to increase the drying of medicines, so that they are in their substance moist and in their power dry, like the ointment made from almonds. If an addition has been made to it, it should be increased by the amount of the excess. What cures more with it is to take the ointment made from almonds.
And it is resolved with sweet honey and it is poured over him, then mixed with it, and he uses it. If the ointment made from almonds is not available, he should take beeswax, if crushed until it becomes a paste, or take myrrh, sandarac, and galangal, grind them all together and mix them with honey while it is on the fire. Then it is spread on a cloth and tied around the wound or anointed with honey that has been boiled until thickened, and the medicines are mixed on top of it, and a cloth is placed on top and tied.
And he may use in the same manner safflower, Galangal root, and fine Coriandrum leaf, either singly or together, grinding them and sifting them and mixing them with honey as described, and using it. If the wound is slow to heal from this treatment, then know that there is corruption within it.
And if it has affected the bones or any of the hard nerves or ligaments, the treatment of Nasturium should be applied as previously mentioned.
The ninth and eightieth section.
In the treatment of ulcers, diseased tooth, and excised extra finger, as well as splitting the fingers together.
The dais is a thick flesh that grows under the thumb of the hand or foot, and may grow in other fingers; if it persists and its treatment is neglected, it will become swollen and hot with pus.
Or it may decay and putrefy until it eats away the base of the tooth, or perhaps all of it, or reach the bone so that it has a foul odor and the tip of the finger becomes swollen and is discolored like a bruise; if you have treated it as described in the chapter but your treatment was not effective.
It is necessary to cut off all the dead flesh that grows from the nail with iron, then to cauterize the wound afterwards. As for this, it is very beneficial. However, if the bone is healthy and the nail is also healthy.
And the angle of the nail had pushed the flesh inside and was making it shrivel up. It is necessary to place a thin reed under the angle of the nail that pushes the flesh, lift it up and cut off that flesh gently.
And it places on the remaining flesh the burning and caustic medicines until all of it goes away, then it treats it with ointments until it heals. However, if corruption has affected the bone, it is necessary to cut off that bone and remove it, for it will not heal as long as there is corrupted bone present indeed.
If you see the inflammation and corruption advancing in the finger, cut it off at one of its joints as previously mentioned, then treat it until it heals. If the nail is struck or injured and severe pain occurs in it, it is necessary to ligate the wound first.
Then cut the nail with a sharp and angled incision from top to bottom, and take care not to reach the flesh underneath the nail. For if you do that, it will cause severe pain in the wound and lead to excessive flesh growing in the area, then treat the area with what soothes pains.
And as for the extra finger that grows on some people's hands, it may be entirely fleshly and may have bone in some parts and nail in other parts, and there may be growth in some of its base at a joint of some fingers.
Or its growth may be at some joints of the finger and that which grows in some joints of the finger does not move, and that which grows at a joint of the finger may move, if it is only flesh cut it off easily, by cutting it at its base with a broad blade.
What grows in the joint's origin is difficult to treat and should be neglected, and what grows on the finger near one of the ligaments must first be cut off a rounded piece to the bone then the bone should be spread with one of those appropriate instruments.
Then treat it until it heals, and as for the adhesion which exposes some of the fingers to each other, this often happens and is something that occurs in human birth and can occur when a wound or burn and the like happens; then one should cut through that adhesion.
Until the fingers return to their natural state then place between them a thin piece of silk or gauze soaked in rose oil so that they do not stick quickly and spread apart, or make between them a thin lead plate until the place heals as it should.
And similarly, if there is adhesion between some of the fingers and the hand, cut through that adhesion as it presents itself and adapts to the shape of the member.
The Ninetieth Chapter.
Regarding amputations.
The varicose veins are twisted, hard, and full of blood clots that occur in most parts of the body and more frequently in the legs, especially in those who are soldiers, cavalrymen, and porters; therefore it is necessary to use the bedpan from the black cloth several times with great force.
Then tie off the patient's leg, and as for treating it with iron, there will be two methods: one is to cut and drain the black blood, and the other is to let out the sweat and drain it completely; as for cutting, the calf or first part of the leg should be wrapped in hot water.
Until the thick, foul blood is drained then tie off the patient's leg from above to below his knee with a bandage then cut through the sweat in one place or two places or three wide cuts.
Then drain the black blood with your hand from below the leg up to above and from above down until it comes out of the amount you see as sufficient or what the patient can tolerate, then tie him and advise him to avoid nourishments that cause the black hemorrhage and repeat the purging and bleeding.
When the veins fill up and that affects the patient, but if he is relieved, then his leg will be wrapped in a cloth and he will soak it with hot water until it becomes red and sweaty or exercises vigorously.
If it does not come to a boil until the member is warm, then cut the skin on both sides of the sweat track from end to end, either near the knee or at the ankle, then open the skin with scissors and scrape away the sweat from all directions until it becomes apparent to the touch.
And when it appears, you will see it red and pus-like. If it has been cleared of the skin, you will also see it like a thread. Then insert your finger under it until it rises up and comes out from under the skin, then tie it with a smooth, blind cord, then cut another incision next to that one, about three finger widths.
Then scrape away the skin from over the sweat track until it appears, then lift it up with your finger as you did and tie it with another cord as you did at first, then cut another incision or many incisions if needed.
Then cut it and divide it at the end of the incision near the ankle, then pull it out and cut it until it comes out from the second incision, then pull it up to the first incision and do that until you pull it out from the third incision above all the incisions, and when it is all out, cut it.
If it does not consent to the attraction and the flow, then introduce a needle with strong thread doubled and tie it and attract it, and place a marble under it and bend your hand towards every direction until it comes out and take care that it does not break off; for if it breaks off, it will be very difficult on you.
And it enters on the affected part a bitter substance, so if you have extracted all of it, place a cloth moistened in wine and vinegar or rose water and oil on the site of the incision and treat it until it heals; for if the wound has folds with twists to its sides.
And if it is not straight as we said, then you must cut along its folds and the positions of its twists at each direction, then tie it with ligatures until it is completely covered, and take care when cutting along it that you do not cut the vein or injure it, for it will be very difficult on you and preserve your effort.
Picture of the needle with which the ligature is cut.
Picture of the blind suture.
It should not have a knot like all ligatures and not be sharp-tipped lest it cuts the vein, and be thick and smooth in its curvature, for if it is thin it will cut the vein at its width, but it should have a thickness as we said.
The Ninetieth Chapter.
In the wound of the median vein.
This vein is produced in the legs in hot countries like Hijaz and Arab lands, and in hot countries with a low fertility and perhaps it appears in other parts of the body not in the legs and is caused by putrefaction that occurs under the skin.
Just as it happens inside the living bodies, the worms and putrefaction and abscesses and boils that are produced between the skin and flesh, and the sign of the beginning of this vein appearing is that a severe inflammation occurs in the leg then the area swells up and then the vein begins to emerge from that swollen area.
As if it were the origin of a plant or animal, then when its tip appears, it is necessary to wrap it on a small piece of lead weighing from one to two dirhams and tie it and leave the lead suspended from the leg.
Whenever something emerges from it to the outside, wrap it in lead and tie it. If it becomes too long, cut some of it and wrap the rest. Do not cut it from its origin before everything has emerged, because if you cut it, it will shrink and enter the flesh, causing a boil, abscess, and foul sore at that place.
Therefore, it is necessary to take care of and pull it out slowly, little by little, until it emerges from its entirety and nothing remains in the body. Sometimes, this purulent discharge can be up to five spans long in some people.
I was told that it had emerged to a man of twenty spans, and if it becomes cut off for you while treating him, insert a piece of linen into the abscess and cover it with a poultice wrapped around the body until everything contained in it is evacuated. Then try to clean the area with medicines for some days.
Then treat it with the treatment of tumors. This purulent discharge may have many roots, especially if it appears in a joint or in the leg itself, causing multiple openings and each opening discharging a branch that is treated as we mentioned earlier and as was previously described.
The second ninetyth chapter.
In the section on the vermiform appendix which is produced under the intestines and is known as the cause of bovine illness.
This disease is known in some of our countries as the cause of bovine illness, because it often afflicts cattle; it is a small worm that develops between the skin and fat and spreads throughout the body, rising and falling.
It becomes apparent by sensation when it moves from one part of the body to another until it bursts; where it bursts in the skin, a spot forms and it emerges and takes shape as an abscess, like the discharge of worms or parasites in the abdomen.
If she (the tumor) settles in the body and rises to the head and reaches the eye, perhaps it will open there and come out, destroying the eye. Many times that happens. If you want to treat her and remove her, that can only be done when she settles and becomes palpable.
It is necessary to tie what is above her and below her with a good strong band, then cut into her and remove her. If she sinks into the flesh and you do not find her, carry out an excision at that spot by fire until she is burned, and it is expected that the damage to the eye will be as we said.
If you see her having become in the head near the eye, tie below her on the forehead a good strong band, then cut into her and remove her. It is necessary for the patient to take care of purging his body with gentle medicines for bad humors and to beware of nourishments that foster corruption.
The Third Ninetieth Chapter.
In the incision on the patient known as Nafir.
This disease which is called Nafir in our country is a pain that appears in some organs, then transfers from organ to organ and I have seen it as I described to you.
I was called to a woman who was ill in some village, and I uncovered her arm, and showed me a slight puffing in the vein of the arm. When an hour had passed, I saw that puffy spot moving with the pulse like a worm climbing up to her shoulder as fast as it could be like a burning coal.
If it moves from place to place, the pain will cease from that spot and settle in the shoulder. Then I sat for an hour, and it spread throughout her body until it reached the other arm. Then she told me that it is moving all over her body as I saw.
I was amazed by the speed of its transmission from member to member and I had not seen this disease with my own eyes in such a form except that I saw a group finding pain transmitting from member to member, and I did not see it with my own eyes as I saw it in this woman.
And I did not attribute that except that the woman was a Bedouin, her body rough and exposed vessels, from here the feeling appeared in this transmitted wind, and it was necessary for it not to appear according to this measure among those of refinement and bodies smooth and hidden vessels.
So if you want to treat it and the patient feels pain, then what appears before you as we described should be tied over him and under him with a bandage and cut into him until that congested wind exits and the place is cleared.
If you do not see it with your own eyes, then treat it by flapping the body and what drives away the winds and disperses it like the astringent and the saponaceous and similar medicines.
The Fourth Ninety-Fourth Chapter.
In the Ejection of Arrows.
The arrows may differ according to their types and according to the places they occur in the body. As for their difference according to their types, then there are large ones and small ones, some glazed and some unglazed, some with three corners and some with four corners.
And some have lips and some have splinters. As for those that occur according to the organs they affect, then there are two types: either the organs are main ones like the brain, heart, liver, lung, kidneys, intestine, bladder and similar organs. Therefore, if an arrow falls on one of these organs and the signs of death that I have described to you appear, then it is necessary to avoid extracting that arrow from there because death will overtake its owner in most cases. When these bad signs do not appear to you and the arrow is not hidden in the cavity of the organ, then take it out and treat the wound. And if there are signs from the brain and an arrow has pierced it and passed through the bone and wounded the pericranium which is on the brain, then it will cause a severe headache, nausea, and dizziness.
When these bad signs do not appear to you and the arrow is not hidden in the cavity of the organ, then take it out and treat the wound. And if there are signs from the brain and an arrow has pierced it and passed through the bone and wounded the pericranium which is on the brain, then it will cause a severe headache, nausea, and dizziness. And redness in the eyes, and red tongue, and trembling and confusion of mind, and a fit that may occur once or twice, and perhaps blood may come out from the nostrils or ears, and perhaps speech may be interrupted and the sound may disappear. And pus-like fluid may come out from the wound, like the juice of meat.
So if these signs appear to you, then stop treating the patient and do not remove the arrow if it has not been removed. And as for the signs of the arrow, if it is in the heart and is near the left breast and you feel that it has pierced something solid rather than something hollow.
Perhaps the arrow will move like a pulse and black blood will flow from the wound, followed by numbness of the limbs, cold sweat, and a faint. Then you should know that death is inevitable, and as for the sign of the arrow, if it has pierced the lung, bloody froth will come out from the wound.
And the vessels near the neck will swell, and the patient's complexion will change, and they will breathe rapidly and high-pitched, asking for cold air. If the arrow has pierced the diaphragm that is in the chest, then it will be close to the small lungs and there will be great breathing with severe pain.
And the patient will groan and all the organs of the lower back will move. If the arrow has pierced the liver, then severe pain will follow, and black blood that resembles the color of the liver will come out from the wound. And if the arrow has pierced the intestines, perhaps something not digested will come out from the wound.
His case is apparent, and if a missile pierces the abdomen, it breaks through and something comes out from the wound or incision or bowels and there's no hope in treating it nor extracting the missile. If the missile hits the bladder and urine comes out.
And if something comes out from it to the outside and the pain increases on the patient, know that he is doomed. And as for other organs such as the face, eye, throat, shoulder, arm, lower back, thigh, leg, and similar organs, take charge of the most grievous matter.
Not until the missile does not encounter a vein or an artery and is not poisoned, and I inform you of some cases I have seen regarding these missiles in order for you to learn from them, that being said, there was a missile that had lodged in a man's eye socket at the base of the nose.
So I extracted it from him on the other side under the earlobe and he recovered without any harm to his eye. And I extracted another missile from a Jew who had lodged it in the corner of his eye beneath the lower eyelid, and the missile was hidden except for its small tip that stuck in the bone.
And it was a large arrow from the king's composite, four-armed iron, smooth and without feathers. The Jew recovered without any harm to his eye. And I extracted another arrow from a Christian's throat, and it was an Arab arrow.
And it had feathers, and I cut into him between the ribs and found that he was in his throat. So I manipulated it until I extracted it, and the Christian recovered. And I extracted another arrow from a man who had lodged it in his abdomen, and we determined that he would have died from it.
So when thirty days or so had passed and nothing changed with his condition, I cut into the arrow and examined it on him and extracted it and he recovered without any harm. And I saw a man who had an arrow lodged in his back, so the wound became inflamed over him.
When seven years had passed, the arrow emerged from its socket in her thigh. I saw a woman who had been struck by an arrow and lodged it in her abdomen; the wound had healed and the arrow remained unchanged, causing her no harm in anything she did naturally.
And I saw another man who had been struck by an arrow in his face; the wound had healed and he felt little pain, and there were many like this. And I extracted an arrow from a soldier of the Sultan who had it lodged in the center of his nose, slightly leaning to the right.
And the arrowhead was gone. I was summoned to treat him three days after the arrow struck him, and I found the wound caused by the arrow very narrow. I probed it with a fine probe, but did not feel anything; he felt numbness and pain under his ear on the right side from the split.
I suspected that numbness was from the arrowhead, so I applied a poultice with strong drawing power to the site; and I hoped that it would become swollen and the sign of the arrowhead would appear. I made an incision on him, but nothing happened in the site indicating that the arrowhead had reached there.
I continued to apply the poultice on him for many days, but nothing happened. Then I sealed the wound and left him in that state until he felt the arrowhead one day inside his nose; he informed me of it. So I put a sharp and caustic medicine on the wound for many days.
Until it opened and I explored it; I felt the thin end of the arrowhead that was stuck in the bone. Then I increased the opening of the wound with that sharp medicine until we saw the tip of the arrowhead clearly, and for a period of about four months, it remained with me.
Then, when the wound had opened up and I was able to insert probes into it, I grasped it and manipulated it; but it did not respond to being removed. So I continued to manipulate and prowl around him with various instruments until I finally grasped it one day with a tight grip as depicted at the end of this book.
And the doctors used to say that his nasal cartilage would not heal, so I sewed it up and the wound closed and the patient recovered completely without any harm at all, and I will tell you how I extracted some arrows as a measure and evidence of what I did not mention.
Because the details of this craft and its subtleties cannot be grasped by description nor contained in a book, but only the skilled artisan measures little against much, and infers new practice and new tool from what is present and absent, and extracts a novel solution in strange cases.
If it goes out from this craft, I say that the arrows come out from the members where they are lodged in two ways: either by being drawn out from the place where they entered or else from the opposite side. And those that come out where they entered.
Either the arrow is protruding in a fatty place and it draws out and comes out, unless it resists leaving its current position, then you should leave it alone for some days until the fat surrounding it hardens and makes it easier to draw out and remove, and similarly if it lodged in bone.
And if it does not come out, leave it alone for some days and then try to draw it out and move it every day until it comes out. If it still does not come out after some days, you should drill around the arrow in the same bone from all sides with a fine awl until you widen the opening for the arrow, then pull it out.
If the arrow is lodged in the skull and has penetrated into one of the cavities of the brain, and some of those symptoms I mentioned appear from the patient, then stop drawing out the arrow and leave it alone for some days until its condition becomes clear.
Removing the arrow and taking it out, if it was deeply lodged and did not respond to removal, use the pincers around the arrow as I described to you, then treat the site until it heals, but if the arrow has hidden in a part of the body. And if the sensation is absent, search for it with a probe. If you find it, pull it out with some suitable instruments. But if you cannot do so due to the tightness of the wound and the arrow's distance in the body cavity, and there is no bone, nerve, or vessel obstructing it.
Split it open until the wound widens and you can remove the arrow until you pull it out. If it has ears, hold onto them and free the surrounding flesh from all sides by any means possible, then grasp if you cannot manage to free the flesh in breaking the ears and splitting them until you are freed.
And if you attempt to remove the arrow in any location, use your fingers with tweezers to all sides until you free it and be gentle as much as possible so that the arrow does not break and become difficult for you to pull out, but if you cannot do so within your time.
Leave it alone for a few days until those surrounding flesh wastes away, then try again because it will be easier at that time. But if bleeding occurs, use the treatment mentioned in its place, and conserve your effort from cutting a vein, nerve, or artery and use cunning.
By any means possible, free the arrow and be gentle, slow, and steady as I described to you, and it is necessary for you to use when pulling out the arrow that you make the wound in the shape it was in when the arrow struck, for it is better.
If you cannot do that, use whatever shape you can, and as for the arrow that emerges from the other side, either it has produced something outside or else you will find the tip of the arrow by touch near the skin and see it protruding.
Split it open and make the incision as wide as can be accommodated by the calipers, then pull it out, for it becomes easy to remove. If it is stuck in the bone, stretch your hand around it until the point touches the bone and widens its space for itself, then pull it out.
Unless, let it be for a few days until it comes out. If the splinter is there, push it with it. If the splinter has fallen and you want to use the instrument, insert the tool into the cavity of the abscess then push it with that.
If the splinter is hollow, push it with an instrument that enters into that cavity, for the splinter becomes easy to remove by doing so. If the splinter is poisoned, it is necessary to remove all the flesh in which the poison has spread, if you are able to do so, then treat it as suitable for that.
If the splinter is located in the chest, belly, bladder, or flank and it is close to what can be reached with a probe and you are able to split it open, then split it open and beware of cutting a nerve or artery and remove it.
Then close the wound if it needs sewing, and then treat it until it heals. The appearance of calipers that draw out splinters:.
Its ends are like the beak of a bird, made as if it were a mold, when it grasps the splinter or something it has not left. And it can be made in big and small and medium sizes, all according to the size of the splinter, its smallness and the width and narrowness of the wound.
Appearance of the hollow instrument:.
Appearance of the solid instrument:.
This is a solid instrument, like a rod, which makes it easy to enter into a hollow splinter and push it.
The Fifth Ninety-Fifth Chapter.
In the Lancing of Veins.
The veins which are usually lanced in the body are thirty; among them, in the head, there are sixteen; those two behind the ears known as the pterygoid veins and the two in the temples known as the frontal veins.
And the vein standing in the middle of the forehead, and the one at the tip of the nose, and the jugular veins that are in the neck, and the ones that are in the upper and lower lips, these veins being known as the saphena, and the ones beneath the tongue.
And as for the veins that are lanced in the arm and hand, they are five; one of them is the cephalic vein, which is on the brawny side and is commonly known as the head vein, the median vein, which is compounded from a branch of the basilic and a branch of the cephalic, and is commonly known as the body vein.
And the basilic, which is situated in the brawny side and is also known as the elbow vein, and is commonly known as the belly vein, the arm ligament, which is situated on the bend, which it clings to, and which appears above the elbow in a clear manner, with its extremity.
And it is the vein that is between the popliteal and tibial, having two branches; in the leg and foot, there are three veins: one under the knee joint from the brawny side, the second saphenous and its place is at the ankle from the brawny side, and the femoral vein and its place is at the heel from the brawny side.
And in the other leg, there are three veins like them; as for the two veins behind the ears, their lancing is beneficial for chronic fevers and pleurisy and pneumonia, and bad headaches of a chronic nature, and how to lance them is as I have described.
He should shave the head of the patient and smooth out his nape in the place where the hair grows thickly, then he should strangle the patient's neck with a cloth until the veins appear and their positions become visible behind the ears in the two low places on the head. He should then search for them with your finger and when you feel their pulse under your finger, that is where you will learn by injection.
Then he should take a thin suture, which is known as the nashl, and insert it under the vein in the skin until the suture reaches the bone. Then he should lift his hand with the vein and skin up and cut the vein along with the skin into an unbroken length of two bent fingers.
Or he should release the amount of blood that you want, then tie them off with ligatures and leave them until they heal. As for the two arteries in the temples, it is beneficial to ligate them to relieve chronic headache, stubborn migraine, and persistent redness, and to stop sharp, stabbing pains directed at the eyes.
And how to ligate them as I described to you is that the patient should bind their neck with a cloth until the veins appear clearly and it becomes evident under your finger where their pulse is, and when that happens, you will learn by injection. Then you should lift the skin from above the vein up to the forehead with your thumb.
And then you should insert the thin suture from below and lift the vein up above, cutting it off like I did with the other veins, and release the amount of blood that you need. Then loosen the patient's gagging and put your finger on the vein at once.
Then you should put a thread and ligature on it and tie from above tightly and securely, and leave it until it heals. As for the vein in the forehead, its benefit after ligating the temporal arteries is to relieve chronic facial problems such as pimples, wounds, and persistent redness.
How to stop bleeding on what I described, suffocate the wounded person's neck with a cloth until sweat appears, then take the instrument called the "axe" and this is its form:.
She places the notch at the end of the axe on the same sweat, and strikes from above with a comb or something else near it, and lets the blood flow into the vessel she wants, then loosens the wound's constriction and tightens it until it heals.
And it may be opened with a broad retractor, except that the retractor should not have a sharp edge like all retractors, but rather a slightly broad edge and should be divided into sections for correction because the bone is nearby, so the retractor might break if it is thin.
As for the veins that are in the orbits of the eyes, their benefit is to remove eye problems such as jaundice and redness and pimples, and other face diseases. As for how to ligate them, it is by suffocating the wounded person's neck with a cloth, then dividing them, while you are standing on his head, and the ligation should be done towards the length slightly with a small broad retractor.
If the site is not fatty, then if the retractor is thin, it might break. Then you send for what you need and put a thread on them and tighten them for one night then loosen them. As for ligating the vein of the nose, its benefit is to remove severe fever.
And severe headache and face diseases such as red swelling that appears in the nose, especially if it is chronic. And how to ligate it: by suffocating the wounded person's neck then grasping his nose with your left hand and taking a thin long retractor.
And push it into the middle of the nostril itself, between holding the nose straight because the vein does not appear to be felt there then the blood flows from its source. You should hold your retractor slightly and send for what you need, then bind it at night because it will soon congeal.
And as for the boils, their benefit is to abscess them due to constriction of the breath and beginning of leprosy and black skin diseases that appear on the surface of the skin like black spots, eczema, and bad sores, and how to abscess them: the surgeon should tie a bandage around the patient's neck below them and stand on the patient's head.
And the patient sits on a chair, then the sweat is loosened to the top and bound loosely, and then blood is let in moderation or as needed, then done with the other sweat, and the bandage is removed.
And the two sweatings are bound tightly so that the patient does not choke, and leave it overnight because the wound will heal, and as for the sweat of the armpits, their benefit is to abscess them after the sweatings have been bound, because they remedy mouth ulcers, bad gums, and bad sores, and split lips.
That which is in the nose and its vicinity, and how to abscess them: the patient sits before you and binds his neck with a cloth, then turns his lips and looks at the two sweatings that one of them is on the right side of the lip and the other on the left, and determines from their color.
And also, the vicinity of both has blackened and gangrenous sweatings that you cut them off in pieces, unless it is difficult for you to determine what they are, then aim at cutting off the larger one and excise it, and do the same with the two sweatings on the lower lip.
And as for the two sweatings under the tongue, their benefit is to abscess them after the sweatings have been bound, for the ulcers that are in the throat due to plague and mouth diseases, and how to abscess them: the patient sits between your hands in the sun, raises his tongue and looks at the sweatings under it from one side as black and from the other side as black.
Split them and preserve, do not consider cutting into them, because beneath them are vessels. Indeed, sometimes bleeding may occur from those vessels. As for the three arteries that are severed in the arm, it is customary to divide them among people, and their division will be in two directions.
Either pierce with a broad cypress or olive wood needle to the joint, or cut with a scissor-like instrument and it is called the "nashl". [And this is its form], Form of the broad cypress needle.
It will be broad as you see, so that it may be suitable for opening the visible and prominent vessels that are filled with thick, dark blood. And this is the form of the olive wood needle.
And this needle is narrower and has a finer point, suitable for dividing the vessels that contain thin, bloodless fluid. And this is the form of the Nashl instrument.
This Nashl which is suitable for cutting and has types, broad and narrow, according to the capacity of the vessels also and their tightness, and one may judge by this about others, and it is well-known among craftsmen.
And as for the Basilic, which is one of these three arteries, the benefit of dividing it is that it draws blood from the ulcers that may be under the armpits and neck, what follows the chest and abdomen. It is necessary for the divider to beware when dividing it and to be cautious with its edge because beneath it are vessels, so if he erred and increased in making the incision, he would cut that vessel.
If bleeding occurs, it is necessary that it not be divided with a piercing instrument but rather be divided with the Nashl. If the Basilic does not appear clearly, then one should avoid it and adjust to another or request some of its part.
Expose the place of the arm with a bandage, for it is clear and can be cut with the surgical needle as we said. If you want to uncover it again in its original state, then it is necessary before tightening the arm that you locate the position of the pulse, then learn it by marking.
Then bind the arm and cut the vein in a mannered way with the surgical needle as we said, and make sure that the blow falls away from the place of the artery. And when you see upon tightening your bandage inflation in the place where you had learned by marking, then that inflation is the swelling of the artery, so avoid it.
If you see blood at the incision flowing like a baby's urine and it is thin and red, then know that it is from the artery. Then act quickly, place your finger on it for a long time, then remove your finger. If the blood stops flowing, it often stops and tighten the arm.
And leave it, and warn the patient not to neglect it, and let him be on his guard, without disturbing him for several days until he recovers. If the blood does not stop and you are troubled by him and a remedy is not present, then cut the artery if it appears to you, because its ends will contract and the blood will stop.
Or take a piece of linen, cut and divide it into two equal parts, and fasten one part firmly to the place of the vein with a bandage and splints until another day. If the blood stops or else, stop the bleeding by doing what was previously mentioned about applying compresses that arrest hemorrhaging, and cutting off the blood is not difficult in most cases.
For a small wound and the bandage being able to bind in the arm, inform him. And as for the large vein, it is advantageous to uncover it so that it does not attract blood from above the head and below the body to the place where it is composed of a branch of the basilic and a branch of the cephalic as we said.
The surgeon should make sure that the patient's head is above his wound, for if it is not, and a bone is under it, then if the bonesetter makes multiple incisions and hits the bone, numbness will occur in it and may never recover at all. This bone often shows itself to the sense of touch.
If it is hidden in some people and is thin, not visible, then you should make an incision on the head and avoid the bone as much as possible. If there is a groove between two bones, cut the groove lengthwise, but if it is the occipital groove, the benefit of the incision is that it draws blood from the head.
It is beneficial for eye diseases, and it is necessary in this case to cut him; namely, to cut him with a groove made by the olive oil bonesetter or the broad basil bonesetter because it is safer for all vessels because there is no artery or nerve under it.
Unless he should avoid with the bonesetter only hitting the head of the muscle and seek the tender spot, and it does not harm him even if he is not hit in the first blow; but it may swell in some people if it is not cut in the first attempt.
But that swelling does not harm him, and as for the manner of cutting and its complications, and what should be done to correct it, first of all you should know that the incision is either used only for preserving health.
And either it is used for diseases, and that which is used for preserving health and its continuity and prevention of the occurrence of diseases, then the incision should be in one of the three vessels in the arm, namely the occipital, the cubital, or the basilic vein, and the incision should be at the beginning of spring if signs of swelling appear.
And the incision should be on Sunday or Tuesday, after three hours of daylight. As for the incision used in diseases, it does not have a limited time but whenever necessity and urgency demand it, day or night.
In every hour and in every age, it is not fitting for boys to be circumcised until they reach fourteen years old. Nor should the elderly who have passed sixty years of age be circumcised, if one decides to do so for any reason.
It is necessary to purify his foreskin with a soft brush before circumcision, if there is much thick hair stuck to it, so that it does not cling to the skin during circumcision and cause harm to the main organs. One should not circumcise the drunk, the intoxicated, or those affected until that state has passed from them.
And one should also beware of circumcision after the time of menstruation, and childbirth, and old age, and excessive sexual activity, and exhaustion, and exercise, and staying up late, and fasting, and all that affects physical or psychological strength, then look at softening the tissues before that if the blood is thick.
With foods, drinks, and medications if possible, then he enters the bathhouse, unless prevented by something or agreed to some exercise, so that the blood is clarified and makes his foreskin relaxed in the morning as we said, and he intends to free his mind of all bad psychological states that day.
Like worries, anger, fear, and all bodily states such as exhaustion and excessive sitting, sexual activity, and the like, and prepare his surroundings with things that people are accustomed to using in their daily lives, such as perfumes, scented oils, and music, and so on, each person according to what is possible for him.
Then the circumcisor sits on a cushion that is higher than the one the one being circumcised sits on, then he extends his arm and touches the foreskin with his hand twice or three times, then he tightens the ligament with the aid of an assistant and wraps it twice or three times, and this should be done moderately.
Because the tightening is not moderate, it will either prevent blood flow if excessive or if relaxed also prevent blood flow. Then after the tightening, it is necessary that the surgeon ties all his fingers together with some cloth.
Until the veins swell and become palpable, then he will clean the excised skin with a gentle old oil especially. Then he will place his ring finger of the left hand on the same vein under the site he wants to cut, so that it does not run away from the blow. Because there are veins that constrict like a bowstring when incised, and there are those filled with air. When the surgeon puts his knife on them, they sink below the knife and deceive it, so that the vein does not open up. And if it does open, then only opens narrowly.
Therefore, the surgeon should be cautious and careful in all these matters. Then he will lower his knife. If the vein opens at that spot, then it is good; otherwise, he will do it again once more under or above that place with a gentle touch, unless the site becomes inflamed.
If the site becomes inflamed or festers, he should leave it for a day or two and not tighten the dressing. For perhaps this would bring about a warm abscess and he will not be able to enter the bath, then he can resume the incision if he likes. If the incision was small and the blood flow was thin.
And if you fear that the amount of blood you want will not emerge, then repeat the incision in the same hole, making sure it is straight and slightly increasing the opening. Do this gently before the site becomes inflamed, for many people's sites become inflamed when the opening is small.
And if you see that it has become inflamed, do not touch it at all. For it will not benefit you and only cause harm. Instead, apply some old oil to it, for it facilitates blood flow and is better in this situation than the oil itself or any other ointments, so too.
Use olive oil in all cases of bloodletting for veins when there is difficulty in bleeding. And he may use treacle and shichonaya if one of them is placed on the spot, then the blood will coagulate and dissolve if it is thick.
If a swelling occurs at the site of bloodletting and it is large, often it happens especially to those who have not bled except this time or if the vein has been opened slightly. Then, take a wet sponge soaked in warm water and salt, and apply it for an hour; then it will dissolve.
It is necessary to do that after the blood has come out completely from the vein or another vein. And if something of blackness or greenish color remains in the place for days, it will not harm; but if you wish, then apply some patience and salt dissolved in water.
Or something of woodruff extract and the like. And often a lump or swelling occurs when bleeding the saphenous vein, then place your hand on it. If you find that it becomes inflamed when you touch it, then that is a bad abscess; beware not to put anything from what we mentioned on it.
It may be that blood from an artery flows out, but stop it with a ligature to make the place firm again, then treat it with other treatments until it is cured. And it is necessary to let each person's blood according to his strength and as much of the prevailing color appears in the blood.
If the blood is black, let it come out until it turns red. And if you see that it is thick, send it out until it coagulates. And if it is sharp, send it out until its sharpness passes. And it is necessary for someone who is full and strong to have the blood removed all at once.
To expand the incision in bloodletting and for the lancet to be wide. And if someone is weak, then do the opposite of that. And it is necessary to remove it in phases and the puncture should be narrow. The best thing to use in bloodletting is to be a curved, bent, or split one without a spike.
This wound from the incision is free from bleeding and cutting of a nerve, it is more secure and safer than the incision by the side or length. Whoever uses it at the time of the incision should give him something to eat beforehand, namely bread soaked in rosewater or mastic.
If it is inflamed and the blood has been removed three or four times, and if his temperament is rough, he should take before the incision some bread soaked in wine or in a drink flavored with honey mixed with rosewater, or in the good drink of orange blossoms.
If the hemorrhage occurs during the incision and its cause is the excessive flow of blood, it is necessary to give him water of meat and the thin drink of orange blossoms to drink, and to use the application of camphor and to bind his chest with it, and to use everything we mentioned in the chapter on hemorrhage.
Whoever is from vomiting, and as for whoever wants to alleviate his arm and stop his blood again, it is necessary for the one whose incision was due to excessive vomiting and whose strength is weak that he should stop the bleeding little by little according to his power over several consecutive days.
And as for whoever wants to alleviate his arm and stop his blood again, and whose body is strong, then he should do so after seven or nine hours from the first incision. And if he wants to draw the blood away from his body towards the opposite side that was affected, it is necessary to go to him on the second or third day.
And as for whoever has a lot of blood in his body, which has heated up and been inflamed, and has caused fever, it is necessary that the blood should be removed from him all at once, and a great quantity of it should be taken out, and the incision should be widened until the hemorrhage appears after being accustomed to all the conditions of the incision. And to place your hand on his pulse when the blood is flowing, lest death occurs instead of the hemorrhage, for it often happens that way if the incisor does not understand and forgets, nor should he intend to alleviate the arm and stop the bleeding again.
And the mouth of the artery is closed and the exit of blood is obstructed, so that one must press upon it with force or twist with strength. For that would be very bad, either to leave it until it clears up again or to remove the blood clot from the mouth of the artery with a surgical instrument that had frozen in place.
Or apply something of salt that is dissolved in water to it, or apply some of the white antimony or shikhzinaya and press upon it gently until the blood comes out. If the artery has become inflamed, leave it as it is.
And do not touch it until the swelling subsides. If necessity requires releasing the blood again, then either release it above that location or in the other arm or in another artery.
And as for tying off the arm, it is tied off in place of the aqualung and basilic vein if they are not found or are hidden because it is composed of them. And how to tie it off, that the surgeon puts his hand into hot water until the ligament becomes red and the artery appears clearly, then ties above it with a bandage with moderate tightness.
Then tie off the artery with a slight bend, neither too much to one side nor too long, and make the opening wide. And tie it off above the wrist crease slightly. If bleeding does not cease, put the arm back into the basin of hot water and let the blood flow in the water.
Until you have satisfied your need. If you are in the summer days, you may dispense with putting the arm back into hot water again. And more so that makes the blood flow in hot water in winter time. And tying off this artery is safer than all arteries. Because there is no artery or nerve beneath it. And as for tying off the saphenous vein from the right hand, it is beneficial against liver disease. And how to tie it off: wrap the wrist with a bandage or your hand after putting it in hot water until the vein becomes swollen.
Because there is no artery or nerve beneath it. And as for tying off the saphenous vein from the right hand, it is beneficial against liver disease. And how to tie it off: wrap the wrist with a bandage or your hand after putting it in hot water until the vein becomes swollen. It is well-known that the wound will become inflamed then be clarified a little and if it is not cleaned thoroughly, it will not harm the patient. One must be careful not to insert one's hand into the incision because under it are nerves of the fingers and the location is near the bone, then return the hand to hot water.
Leave the bleeding to continue and let it run its course because if you do not wash it in hot water, the blood will clot at the pores and cease flowing. When you have stopped the bleeding as much as needed, place a linen cloth soaked in saltwater on the pore so that it does not become inflamed quickly.
You should do the same with every narrow vessel, and as for the benefit of purging from the left hand, it is beneficial for liver troubles. And you do the same in purging as you did in the second one, whether or not, and as for purging the saphenous vein, its benefit is for diseases that are below the body like those of the womb.
And lingering cases of menstruation and kidney troubles, chronic wounds of the thighs and legs, and similar diseases. And how to purge it: he should enter his leg into hot water and have someone massage him there until the veins appear then draw out above the ankle joint with the company and the vein in its position at the heel visible towards the instep.
And it branches out into many veins on the man's leg, so purge it in the widest branch of them or at the ankle when they are together, for that is better and safer. If you purged it on the face of the leg then take care not to touch the nerves that are underneath on the face of the leg.
Make the purging with a slight twisting as if you want to stop it and let the incision be a channel. If the bleeding is difficult to stop, then make him sit in hot water and let the blood flow until it subsides. If the purger does not succeed in purging the pore on the first attempt.
Let the incision be made a little above, for the place is safe and there is no danger if one takes care of the nerve as we said. Likewise, do the same with the sciatic nerve in the other leg, whether right or left. And as for the pudendal artery, it is in its place as we said, at the acetabulum on the wild side.
The benefit of making an incision in the hip joint is that if it was caused by hot blood, and how to make the incision is for the surgeon to enter quickly and grasp the leg from the hip to above the ankle with four fingers wrapped in a long thin cloth; otherwise it will not be apparent.
If it appears, then make the incision on whatever condition it may be, either by making a flap or cutting off a piece; for the place is safe, and in most people it is extremely thin; if you do not find it.
And if it does not appear at all, then make an incision on some of its parts; this is what appears in the back of the foot towards the heel and instep, and take care of the nerves and let out as much blood as you want.
Then release the tourniquet and apply a ligature to the incision site, and secure it; for it will soon be healed.
The Ninetieth Section.
In Lancing and the Method of Using It.
The lancets may be made of bronze, wood, metal, or glass. The lancing is on two sides: one side being the lancing with a scarifier and the extraction of blood, and the other side being the lancing without a scarifier.
And this lancing without a scarifier is on two sides.
Names of the regions: the foreheads of the necks, and they are the two sides of the neck altogether, names of the mandibles, name of the collarbones, name of the pubic bones on the hollow of the backside, names of the groins, middle of the arms, names of the shanks, names of the heel bones.
Bloodletting is only for drawing blood from the superficial veins embedded in the flesh, and because of this, the strength does not fall like falling phlebotomy nor should bloodletting be done with fire or without fire in any of the diseases that are caused by overfilling until the body has released everything.
If need be, we have used bloodletting in every case of disease or before it becomes an habit, we have done it at the beginning, middle and end of the month.
And it is that some people, if blood becomes abundant in them to the point where they need to be bled through phlebotomy, find heaviness and headaches. Some of them find swelling and redness on their face, head and neck. Some of them find pimples on their face and groin and darkness and clouding in their eyes. And some people find hardening at the site of bloodletting.
And some of them find their laughter increasing, and some of them find the taste of blood in their mouth, their gums trembling and bleeding profusely. Some of them find their sleepiness increasing, and some of them see in their sleep blood, redness, wounds and similar things. Whenever we saw anything like that.
And especially if it is in the middle third of the month, we were ordered to perform bloodletting two or three hours after sunrise. As for the benefit of letting blood from the forehead, it benefits from heaviness in the head and water flowing to the eyes.
But it is necessary for that to happen after the body has purged itself, and this bloodletting may be an alternative to the cupping of the jugular vein. And one should beware of using it from someone whose brain is cold or who has a headache, because it can harm him greatly.
Therefore it is not fitting for the elderly to use this treatment and those who have in their head diseases that are cold, and those who have been addicted to them and they have caused forgetfulness.
Therefore it is fitting that the barber be instructed to lower his hand slightly below the jugular vein in order to avoid causing forgetfulness, and as for cupping on the head, it is a substitute for bleeding of the saphenous and femoral veins.
Therefore it is beneficial for the following: asthma, shortness of breath, wheezing, coughing, and fullness. And it is fitting that cupping on the head be raised slightly because if it is done below, it will cause weakness in the heart and stomach.
And as for cupping on the ears, it is beneficial for headaches that occur in the head, fever, and earache, and difficulty breathing. It is a substitute for bleeding of the saphenous vein. And it is fitting that the barber be instructed not to deepen his hand in this place so that he does not cut a blood vessel and cause bleeding.
And as for cupping under the chin, it is beneficial for ulcers in the mouth and corruption of the gums, and similar diseases that occur in the mouth. And it can take the place of bleeding of the jugal veins which are in the cheeks. And as for cupping on the shoulders, it is beneficial from palpitations that occur due to fullness and heat.
And as for cupping on the abdomen of the groins, it is beneficial for what benefits from bleeding of the three veins: saphenous, jugular, and femoral. Because it draws blood from all those hidden veins that are in the flesh, and draws out those hidden veins from other thicker ones until it reaches the three thick veins.
And it is fitting that the barber be instructed not to penetrate deeply into the place because the location is narrow and has nerves and blood vessels under it. And as for a single cupping on the pubic bone, it is beneficial from hemorrhoids and wounds of the lower area.
It is necessary to order the surgeon to make the splint large and of copper, because the position requires great force; perhaps the glass splint may break, and it should be reinforced with many layers. And as for the leg splints, they should be reduced in size very clearly.
Because it draws blood from all the body and benefits chronic pains in the kidneys, wombs, and bladder; it relieves menstruation and benefits boils and eczema; and takes the place of cupping and purging instruments except that it exhausts the body greatly and causes faintness in most people. And the splints for the lumbar region are nearly as beneficial as those for the legs.
The manner of placing the splint is that you first put it empty and then apply moderate pressure; do not prolong the placement of the splint, but rather place it quickly and remove it quickly to allow the discharges to reach the position in a steady manner, and continue to repeat this process until you see the position reddening and opening.
When the redness of blood appears, then you should apply and repeat the pressure gradually, gradually, and then look at the condition of the body; if anyone among people has thin flesh and permeable pores, it is necessary to apply one splint only, not another, lest the position becomes spoiled.
Order the surgeon to widen the splint and deepen it slightly, and adjust the pressure gently and with a light touch; if there is thick blood, it is necessary for him to apply twice: in the first instance, he should open up a path for the thin blood and its moisture, and in the second instance, he should strive to extract the thick blood.
If the blood is very thick, he should repeat the splint a third time to achieve the goal; in general, if we want to extract a little blood, we are satisfied with one splint, but if we want to extract much blood, we apply more splints, and if it is determined that the blood is thick.
It is necessary to make a deep incision and the moderate depth only up to the skin, what should be used from the ointments when placing the prosthesis and water and what the patient should beware of, as for him whose skin is thick, hard, coarse, and with narrow pores.
It is necessary to grease the areas of the prosthesis with open, sweet, and dissolving ointments, whereas if it is in the time of summer, like the ointment of the pomegranate, or the ointment of the violet, or the ointment of the sweet dates, or the ointment of the gourd.
And as for if it is in the winter, like the ointment of the narcissus or the ointment of the jasmine or the ointment of the balm or the ointment of the safflower and so on. If the skin is thick and cold, then the ointment should be the ointment of the dragon's blood or the ointment of the henbane or the ointment of the pan or the ointment of the sarsaparilla and so on.
If the patient has pores that are wide and fat flesh, then it is necessary to abstain from ointment. These people should wash their prosthesis after circumcision with rose water or cold water or fox grape water or gourd water or donkey's milk and so on. As for those whose blood is very moist.
He washes his prosthesis with vinegar or asafoetida water or sarsaparilla and so on. As for those whose skin is thick, he washes his prosthesis with old wine or dragon's blood water or sarsaparilla decoction or balm and so on. And it is necessary to beware of the circumciser in a bathhouse and after a bathhouse.
It is necessary to use it after leaving the bathhouse for an hour or two, and it is not necessary for anyone to sleep after circumcision. What is necessary for the patient and the circumciser to prepare before and after circumcision.
If one examines, then if the abscess or swelling is a suppuration and the prevailing condition of his blood is a tendency towards inflammation, it is necessary that he takes the cooling remedies such as pomegranate, henbane with vinegar, chicory, senna, jalap and similar ones. He should make his patient's diet consist of bread and goat meat in small quantities and dates and like things.
And if his temperament is cold, it is necessary that he drinks the honeyed drink and the myrrh or jalap water. He should take the moderate aromatic wine which is between the old and new. He should be ordered to eat little food and make his food consist of bread, chickpeas, wheat, and white pigeon, and it is necessary that the drink on the day of cupping and purging is more than food.
And it may be necessary to give some people in certain circumstances the theriac of the farook or the musk medicine or the shiltha before cupping and purging, or after it, to strengthen the main organs and refresh the blood. And it is not permissible to give them emetics.
And as for the unconditioned cupping, it is the one that is placed on the liver, spleen, breasts, abdomen, lumbar region, and the position of the kidneys because these organs cannot tolerate the condition on them. Rather, it is intended to draw blood from organ to organ.
We place the cupping on the breasts in a case of dropsy or we use it to expel cold air from an organ. Just as we place the cupping on the abdomen and lower back, because it relaxes the organ, warms it up, and takes away the pain in order to analyze that air.
It is placed on the kidneys if there is a blockage or stone, in order to draw it out and perhaps open up the blockage or dislodge the stone from its place. And it does the same thing when placed on the liver and spleen if there is air congestion within them. These cuppings may be used empty with vinegar only.
And it is used with fire, and it is used filled with lukewarm water in cases of inflammation, that the dressing may be large with hot water alone or with water that has been cooked with some herbs suitable for that.
Then it is placed filled on the place, grasped, removed, and repeated as needed, and this is the picture of the dressing that is used with fire:.
Its width is the length of two opened fingers as we have drawn it, and its depth is half a finger's breadth. Next to it, on about half of its length, there is a small hole, just enough for an instrument made of Chinese copper or yellow copper with thick ridges.
The surface is flat and smooth so that it does not harm the part when placed on it, and in its center there is a raised groove made of copper or iron where the candle with fire is placed. This dressing can be made larger or smaller according to the diseases.
The method of using this dressing with fire is that you light a wick from cotton or a small candle and place it in the middle of the metal tube which is in the center of the dressing.
So that the fire rises up towards the bottom of the dressing, lest it burns the patient's body. Then it is placed on the part and a finger is placed on the hole we mentioned until we grasp the dressing when needed, and then remove the finger.
And the steam comes out through that hole, and the dressing is removed from its place. Then the wick is taken away on the face and returned if needed. As for the dressing used in case of inflammation with water, it does not have a tube or hole.
And it is used by filling it with water and placing it on the part only, and this is its picture:.
This is a wound that whenever it was large would take up much water and would be better.
The Seventieth Chapter.
In the Commentary on the Urolith.
The urolith is only used in most cases for organs that cannot be treated with a dressing either because of their small size like the lip and palate and so on or because the organ is exposed from flesh like the finger and nose and so on.
And the manner of using it is to take from the urolith that is in the clear, sweet water of the springs then leave it a day and a night in the water until it becomes dry and there is nothing left inside it. Then cleanse the body with cupping or bloodletting, then wipe the affected organ.
until it becomes red, then put a poultice on it. If the swelling subsides, leave it; if not, wash the place with vinegar and water in abundance, massage and compress, but if bleeding continues after the swelling has gone down and that is a flow, soak a flax cloth in cold water.
and put it on top until the flow stops. If there is too much blood, sprinkle powdered alum or ochre or something like that from the folds of cloth until the bleeding stops or place it on the affected area with half a poultice.
and leave it until the poultice sticks to the affected area, and the bleeding stops. If need be to use another urolith, do not reuse that one if possible; but if the urolith refuses to stick, wash the place with fresh blood.
or prick a needle in the affected area until something comes out of the blood, then put it on; if it feels something from the blood it will stick to the place. If you want it to come off, sprinkle something on it like sulfur or salt or ashes; it will fall off onto the place.
The Third Chapter.
About Setting.
This chapter also deals with the means and methods required in the art of medicine, which are setting fractures and breaking occurring in bones.
Know, my sons, that even the ignorant doctors and the common people may claim to have knowledge of this chapter, those who have not read a single line or looked at an old book in it.
And because of this reason, this art has become non-existent in our land, and I have never seen anything good in it. And I have gained from it what I have gained through my extensive reading of the works of the old authors and my diligence in understanding them, until I extracted the science from it, then I persisted with experimentation and practice throughout my life.
And I have put everything that is contained in my knowledge about this into drawings for you in this chapter. And I have tested it after presenting it to you, having simplified and condensed it to the utmost extent, making it clear and explicit, and illustrating it for you with many pictures of the instruments used in it.
So this is an addition to clarity, just as I did in the previous chapters, and there is no power except with Allah, the Most High.
The First Section.
In this section and chapters, we will deal with the matter of breaking bones, and it is necessary to present them before we start mentioning the broken and dislocated parts one by one; therefore, in the beginning of this chapter, we will mention the general principles and sections. You must first understand them and grasp their truth, you and anyone who is eager to learn this noble craft, except for you.
I say that whenever one of these occurs, namely a fracture or dislocation or sprain or fall, it is necessary to rush first to stop or calm or treat all of them. If there is not a hindrance to that, such as weakness of power or something having happened like that with a child or an old man extremely urgently or the time being very hot or very cold indeed.
Then he should limit his food to cold vegetables, poultry, and game, and forbid drinking and fatty meat and excess in eating, and every food that fills the veins with blood until if the swelling subsides and there is no expectation of fluid accumulating at the site.
Then the patient should return to his original routine. If the broken bone is set, then the patient should eat foods that nourish him with abundant fat and thick food, containing what is like lentils, rice, heads of cabbage, and cowpeas. And eggs, fried fish, and thick drink, and the like. For it is by this regimen that the consolidation of the fracture is faster and better. And know that fractured bones if they are in men who have grown old or are elderly cannot be reconnected to their natural state again.
The cartilage of their bones and its brittleness, and it may be reconnected and reunited as it was in the bones of young children. But nature produces on the fractured bone from all sides something like a glue, thickened and adhered to it, binding them together until they become attached to each other.
until it becomes in a state of great strength and solidity, just as it was at first, until nothing prevents him from doing his actions.
And for this reason, it is necessary to make the patient's food consist of nourishing foods with strength and thickness as we said. And know that fractures differ in their types according to the difference in members, because a fracture of the tibia bone is different from a fracture of the skull bone, and a fracture of the chest bone is different from a fracture of the back bone.
And similarly, all the members are different from each other, and we will mention every kind of bone fracture, explained in its own chapter separately, and also there may be a difference in the type of bone fracture itself.
Because it may be a non-displaced fracture without fragments, and it may also be a longitudinal fracture with fragments, both loose and not loose. And the fracture may be accompanied by an open wound or laceration in the skin, and the fracture may be slight.
And for each type, there is a special trick in setting it, as will be mentioned separately in its place. And what characterizes a bone fracture are its deformities, deviations, and appearances to the touch, and it becomes apparent when you palpate it with your hand.
So when there is no visible deformity, and no tenderness or palpable abnormality when examining the bone with your hand, and the patient does not experience much pain, it is not a fracture, but rather a bruise or a slight sprain, and one should not manipulate it at all.
But rather, apply to it the medicines that will be mentioned later, which suit the situation, then gently splint it. And know that if a bone is separated and divided into two without fragments, except that each part has become detached from its owner.
So you should hasten to set it and straighten it before a hot swelling occurs, if a hot swelling does occur, leave it for a few days until the swelling subsides, then set it in any way you can with care and skill.
And know that setting and straightening it is easier when there are no fragments, then proceed as will be mentioned later. If the bone has fragments, it is necessary to extend the fractured limb from both sides by hand or foot.
If the member is small, then by your hand; or with two cords; or with one cord and your hand. And let the position of the member be on a level with its natural shape until if the broken bone's extremity protrudes, then reform those excrescences in their places as much as you can manage with skill and gentleness.
Strive to bring no pain or discomfort to the injured part with your action, nor any swelling. Strive to join one bone to its fellow in the best possible arrangement, and at that time touch them and feel them by hand; if you see anything contrary to nature, correct it and adjust it according to your ability.
And beware of strong traction and powerful pressure, as many ignorant people do, and often their actions cause heat or numbness in the member, as I have often seen with my own eyes.
Then, firmly secure the member after adjustment and skillful setting, and ensure it remains at rest and calm. Warn the injured part not to move it during wakefulness or sleep, nor when it is changing or becoming distorted, nor when it is relaxing, nor in all its movements, until it is fully healed, so that the member may regain its natural state without pain.
And that is because, when the injured part feels pain or discomfort in its settled state, it should be moved to a different position where it does not feel pain, and with that, ensure that its settlement is level and straight.
So that a deformity does not occur when it is set, and as for the manner of setting the broken member, I will describe it to you as I see fit. Know that broken members differ in their size, largeness, and thinness, so that what was small among them, such as the arm or finger or shin and similar things.
So it is necessary for the splints to be soft and flexible, but what was rough among them, such as the thigh and back and chest. Therefore, it is necessary for the splints to be firm and hard because the broad bandage is required for the large member and tightens it from all sides with equal pressure, without any defect or gap.
Then it starts after freeing yourself from cleaning to apply the matching color. In a straight line on the spot of the fracture, then start wrapping the bandage on the same spot three or four times according to what the limb deserves, and tighten your hand slightly with the bandage then take it up to the upper part of the spot of the fracture.
By tightening less than what you tightened at the broken spot, then step back a little from the fracture with the wrapping and loosen the tightness slightly until you take something suitable from the correct position, then take another bandage and wrap it also on the broken spot.
Wrappings, then take the wrapping to the lower part of the fracture, and let your action in tightening and loosening be as we mentioned in the first upper wrapping, and put between the wrappings what matches the deformity of the fracture.
If there is deformity, then do not put anything in it; then wrap another bandage over it, and settle on these tight wrappings of yours if there is no swelling or heat in the limb.
If there is swelling or heat, then apply what calms that inflammation and goes away with the swelling, and leave it for a few days; then tighten wrappings over it at that time, and let the wrappings be from halves of split reeds prepared with wisdom or be from willow wood.
which is made from cypress or palm fronds or linden or mulberry and the like, as long as it is available; and let each wrapping be of this kind and shape exactly.
Except that the wrapping placed on the fracture itself is thicker and wider a little more than the other wrappings, and as for the length of the wrapping, make it according to what is suitable for the broken limb in terms of its size.
Then tighten the bandages with another strap according to your initial tightening, then bind from above with the tightened threads as we mentioned earlier, so that your tightening is more on the break site. And whenever you are away from the break, the tension is less.
And the threads should be of medium thickness and firmness, and they should be made of fresh white cotton, because if the threads are coarse like what I have seen some inexperienced people do, using loose cotton strips, which is a great mistake.
Because the tension goes beyond moderation and the coarse threads are also not suitable, because you cannot achieve what you want with them, and it should not be less than a finger's width between the bandage and the strap.
If the patient complains of the edges of the bandages after tightening in the correct places, then place a soft or woolen padding underneath to prevent any discomfort from it. And if the break is accompanied by an injury and a tear in the skin, we will deal with that separately.
And know that not every broken bone should be bound with bandages from the first day, because if the bone is large, it is not necessary to put bandages on it except after five or seven or more days, according to your precaution against the occurrence of phlegmon.
And this is the quality of dressings that the ancients used to apply to breaks, fractures, and sprains, a general and concise dressing that cures the break and suits most temperaments, especially children and women, because it is not affected by heat or cold.
And this is that you take the dust of the millstone, which sticks to its walls when the grinder is moving, and knead it as it is, without mixing it with white of egg, making it neither thick nor thin, then using it.
Description of the last poultice that binds fractures, luxations, and contusions. It is taken from mashes, ladanum, aqqaqiya, rasana, maghas, and sakk, each one ten dirhams; from mirrah and sabar, each one five dirhams; from athel, twenty dirhams; and from Armenian or Roman clay, twenty dirhams. All of them are ground together and mixed with athel water or egg white if the patient's temperament is hot. Then this poultice is used, for it is a good composition that quickly sets broken bones right and is suitable for most people in moderation.
Description of the last poultice that is also effective for fractures and contusions. It is taken from maghas, mashes, and white opium, each one ten dirhams; mirrah and sabar, each one five dirhams; aqqaqiya, six dirhams; Armenian clay, twenty dirhams. All are ground together finely, mixed with water or egg white, and used.
Description of a poultice for joints and bones that have strayed from their places, and relieves the pain and swelling associated with them, as well as bone fractures. It is taken, washed wool dipped in vinegar and cooked oil, which is then placed on the affected area. This poultice does not have the power to set broken bones.
But it is excellent in relieving inflammation and driving away pains, especially. Description of the last poultice that sets broken bones right. It is taken, pomegranate rind and berberis leaf, all ground together, and mixed with water. Description of another poultice, brief, used when a bone fracture occurs suddenly.
And when you want to analyze the remaining inflammation, take from each of opium, papain, and gentian root, a small portion. Grind all together finely, mix with vermilion if the limb is not swollen, otherwise mix with ginger water or plain water, and use it.
Description of the last poultice, stronger in purging than the first one, used when a hard tumor appears during the inflammation of the bone. It is taken from the root of the mastic plant, and the bark of the willow tree, and henbane, and the crown of the king's herb, and marshmallow, and gentian, each a part from each one.
All of these are crushed and mixed with vinegar or sweet water or liniment, each according to the warmth of the part and its tranquility. And as for Galen, he did not mention in his book that it should be placed on a broken member when setting it.
Except for the malleable substance made from beeswax and oil, which should be of a medium consistency between hardness and softness. And as for Galen, he thought that when setting it, things with fibers in them should be applied to the broken member along with something warm such as myrrh, storax, and cinnamon, and so forth.
Description of a poultice that is good for weakness and pain. It is taken from the gall, dates, human hair, whether old or new, and mastic, and salt, crushed and sifted and mixed with it, and applied to it. And as for the amount that should be left on.
Then it is dissolved and he looks, if not a pain nor swelling nor movement of the broken bone from its place, then do not dissolve it for many days, but if it happens in that place severe swelling or anguish or inflammation.
Then act quickly and dissolve it at that time, do not delay that at all, and remove the poultice from it. Then take a soft cloth or sponge with gentle moisture, immerse it in lukewarm water, and wash the place until the swelling subsides and the pain subsides, then leave the member to rest for a moment.
Then apply to it the moistened wool immersed in vinegar and oil or rose ointment, and bind it on for a night until you are certain of the warm swelling subsiding and the inflammation of the member going away and the pain ceasing, then return it to gentle traction and light dressing, but do not pull it tight like your first one.
The wound will be healed until it is completely cleared, if you see that the swelling and redness and pain and coughing and all symptoms have disappeared and you resorted to applying a poultice and wrapping it up as I did initially, whether or not something has happened in the affected part.
Do not remove it except after three days or four or five or seven, and sometimes twenty, each according to what appears to you from the condition of the part as we said, until if the bone is broken and the flesh approaches healing upon it.
Add also at that time in the wrapping more than your initial wrapping, and add also to thickening the patient's food as mentioned earlier. If you see the place of the break has dried up and is worse off than it should be, know that the nourishment is being prevented from reaching it.
Then bathe it with lukewarm water at each time you remove it, and do so every three days. Reduce the wrapping slightly, for this act brings nourishment to the part and it will heal quickly. As for what charlatans from among the practitioners of bone-setting may do by breaking the part once again.
For if it does not heal as it should and instead heals crookedly, that is a great error on their part. Even if it was correct, I did not see any of them mention it in their books or practice it, nor did I see the slightest effect from it. And the right thing to do is not to perform it.
The Second Section.
On the Fracture of the Skull.
The types of fracture on the skull are numerous and its shapes are different, and its causes are various. Some fractures may occur due to a blow with a sword, and it may be that the bone is broken entirely until it reaches the peritoneum which is underneath the bone. As it does in wood.
Therefore, this type of fracture is called a "qudumi" fracture. Alternatively, it may be that the sword has cut off some of the bone and only exposed its surface without penetrating to the end, and this type of fracture is called absolute excision. The wound from these two fractures may either be large or small.
And there is a fracture that is brittle or cracked, and its cause is a blow with a stone or falling on a stone or something like it. This fracture may either be penetrating to the point of approaching the membrane beneath the bone, or it may be on the surface of the bone.
And the wound from these two fractures may also be either large or small. And there is a fracture that is hidden in the bone in the scalp and it is a slight crevice.
Therefore, this type of fracture is called a "shahri" fracture. And there is a fracture that may occur from a fall or hitting a stone and the like, which enters into the surface of the bone and becomes displaced, as if it were silver that had been struck, and part of it would enter inside.
And that is more common in the wet bone of children's skulls. And there may be fragments, both exposed and unexposed, and we will mention the treatment for all of this in its place, and we will familiarize ourselves with all these types of fractures by examining them.
And searching it with probes and removing the rotten flesh from it. As for the shahri type, it is recognized by exposing the bone, scraping it clean, and applying a poultice to it, because the fracture appears black. As for the treatment of the fracture, first one must observe the symptoms of the patient.
For if you see from his symptoms something that clearly indicates fear, such as diarrhea, prolonged urination, loss of consciousness, speechlessness, coma, and severe fever, and also a change in the eyes' appearance and redness and similar signs, then do not approach the patient nor treat him, because death is certain to occur with these symptoms in most cases without fail.
And if you see signs that do not alarm you and pray for his safety, then take his treatment, for that is when the wounded person comes to you in the first days of injury, and it was during winter.
It is necessary that you make an effort to remove the bone before the fourteenth day in any case, and if it's during summer, then hasten to remove the bone before the seventh day, lest what is under the bone become putrid and those signs we described are exposed.
If the bone fracture has reached the membrane covering the brain and is accompanied by a bloody discharge, then you must cut off the damaged portion as I have described to you, which is to shave the head of the wounded person.
And you should uncover the bone on any side that is accessible to you, and according to the shape of the wound and what is hidden from the patient. And if you find bleeding or a warm swelling when you uncover the bone, then respond accordingly as it demands.
And this is by filling the place with a moistened cloth in wine and rosewater, and greasing it with verdigris, then closing the wound until the swelling subsides and bleeding ceases. Then take up the task of setting the bone and extracting it, which will be done through one of two methods.
The single method is that you cut the bone with a thin, narrow saw, and this is its shape:.
Then you use another saw after this saw, which is slightly wider than it, and this is its shape:.
Then you also use another saw, which is even wider than the second one, and it is necessary that you have several saws of different widths, some being longer than others and some shorter, and they should be extremely sharp at their tips, made of Indian steel or good iron.
And use the file to strike on the saw, so that the head is not shaken and injured. If the bone is strong and hard, then it is necessary to drill around it before using the saw with the drill called "non-sinking" drills, which we have mentioned as "non-sinking" drills, but they are not non-sinking.
Because it does not exceed the boundary of the skull to what is behind it in order that there may be a curved margin for the awl on what is before his head, resembling a band or small circle preventing it from sinking and exceeding the thickness of the bone.
And it is necessary for you to take many of these awls, each one suitable for the thickness of that bone, until you are prepared for every skull and awl, regardless of its length or shortness, equal to the thickness of that skull. This is a picture of three types. From large to small awls:.
And as for the method of drilling around a broken bone, it is that you place the awl on the bone and turn it with your fingers until you know that the bone has been penetrated, then move the awl to another place and make each hole about the thickness of a reed or somewhat thicker.
Then cut with the scissors between each hole and do that as gently as you can, just as we said, until you remove the bone either by your hand or by something else from some of the instruments I prepared for that.
Like the file and fine pliers, and it is necessary for you to beware of everything lest the awl or scissors touch anything from the fatty tissue, if you have loosened the bone and freed it from the fatty tissue, and extracted it.
And smooth out any roughness that remains in the bone with another instrument similar to the scissors, except that it is necessary for it to be finer and softer than all other scissors; if there remains anything of the small bones or fragments, then take them gently with what you have of instruments.
Then treat the wound after that with lint and ointments which will be mentioned, and as for the other side of the work it is a very easy matter far removed from peril, as Galen said and praised greatly, this is his word. You must first uncover the bone fragment from the location where the break is more severe and prominent, even if it means exposing this piece of bone under this curved edge, as shown here.
The curved piece is smooth and does not cut anything, while the sharp part has its edges bevelled in length as you see. The curved piece should rest against theomentum and the face of the sharp part should be in the bone, then strike it from one side.
With a small hammer until it cuts all the bone gently, as you turn and while you are safe from the membrane, nothing terrible happens and even if the doctor is unaware of people or gives them permission or is asleep.
If there is something necessary for the bone from the membrane in some places of the bone, then scrape it away with the curved edge itself and release it gently, as it will release without harm or fear.
And if the bone break has not penetrated to the membrane and what remained of the bone is its face and there is roughness and splinters left, then it is necessary to scrape off that roughness and remove those splinters with a chisel, taking various measures from it so you can use it in each place where it is most suitable and best for what guides your work.
And the same broken bone and its shape, and it is necessary to use in scraping off first the thickest of the chisels then the thinner ones and continue doing so according to need until you arrive at using the finest and smallest of them all.
And as for the small, hairy cracks and fine breaks, it is necessary to treat each one with a remedy according to what leads to its healing, and this is something that does not hide from anyone who has any knowledge in this craft, and we have described and explained in the great breaks.
If the membrane remains exposed when you remove the bone, it is necessary for you to take a piece of cotton cloth according to the size of the wound and immerse it in rose water and place it on the mouth of the wound then take another piece that is folded or quadrangular. And immerse it in syrup and rose water, and place it on the first cloth, making sure to do so with all possible delicacy lest you burden the membrane, then use it over a broad bandage without pulling it tight except for as much as is necessary to hold the wound.
And leave it with this treatment for a day or two until the boil is broken and then open it up, and use after that the medicines that are mixed together like roots of sasanum, fine powder of kersen, small powder of kondor, and zirand, and so on, making sure to make a poultice from these medicines.
And apply it to the wound as it is, and in general use a medicine that can dry out and not inflame, and make an effort in treating your wound so that it is clean, without pus or suppuration, nor let the discharge accumulate at all.
Because the discharge, if it accumulates on the membrane of the brain, corrupts and spoils it, and what happens to the patient is a great affliction; and it may also expose itself in a sinus of the skull when the bone is laid bare, especially if neglected in its treatment.
And if the surface is black, look upon it with a sense of resignation, for if such symptoms appear in the patient as we have mentioned, know that he is doomed to perish; and even if the blackness has occurred due to a medicine that was applied and was capable of producing this effect.
So it is necessary for you to take a part of honey and three parts of rose water, and mix them well together, then soak a cloth with this mixture, and apply it to the sinus, and treat it with various treatments until it heals.
The Third Chapter.
In setting the nose if it is broken.
Know that the nose does not break except its upper portions altogether or one of them, because they are cartilaginous, whereas the lower part is bony and does not break; rather it yields to the blow, bending and deforming.
If one of its halves is broken, it is necessary to insert the little finger into the nasal passage and push that break from inside with your pinky and index fingers from outside until the nose returns to its natural shape; do this gently and take care not to cause harm or pain to the sufferer.
If the break is in the upper part of the nose and you are unable to reach it, you should set it with a slightly thickened piece of marrow; if the break is on both sides, do the same; and begin setting it on the first day after the break.
If possible, and not otherwise, then after the seventh or tenth day when the swelling has subsided, you should insert a thread of linen into the nasal passage if the break is in one side, or two threads if it is in both sides.
And let the thread be thick to fill the nasal passage, and some of the earlier surgeons have said that you should grease it with fat and change it every day, but I do not see this as necessary; rather, you should grease the thread with white of egg mixed with saffron.
Then you should leave the thread until the bone sets and the cartilage hardens, and if necessary, you can insert into the nose where the thread is located a pair of goose quill tubes after wrapping them with linen, so that it may cause the break to be more secure and prevent the sufferer from breathing.
And this is not necessary if you wish to do it or if you wish to make the threads, but if there is swelling in the nose during your work and a hot boil forms, then bind the nose with cerates or with a cloth moistened with vinegar, oil, and turpentine, or with something of the diachylon ointment.
If a warm abscess is not drained, it should be closed from outside with fine cotton and Kandur threads, which we have mixed with egg white. Then place a thin linen cloth on top without binding the nose to anything at all. If the nasal bones are broken in small fractures.
Or it may burst, in which case it should be cut open and extracted with the appropriate instrument. Then stitch the incision and treat it as necessary with soothing ointments. If an injury occurs inside the nose, it should be treated with lint and use lead tubes. Until he recovers.
The Fourth Chapter.
In repairing the fractured jawbone.
If the lower jawbone is broken and there is no wound nearby, but it has been broken from outside only and not in two places and does not reach inside, knowing how to do so facilitates.
It is necessary that if the break is in the right section, to insert the thumb of the left hand into the patient's mouth and similarly if the break is in the left section, to insert the thumb of the right hand and lift the break from inside to outside gently.
And with your other hand from outside the bone, control it to smooth it out. If the jawbone has broken in two places, it is necessary to use a spreading motion on both sides until it can be smoothed out. If it has occurred in the teeth, elevate.
Or it may scatter, fix what you have loosened with a thread of gold or silver or silk, then place a splint on the broken jawbone, put on top of it a gauze and put on the gauze a large tight cast or a piece of leather shoe equal in length to the jawbone. Then bind it from above according to what appears to you, and make sure it holds together so that it does not come apart. Command the patient to rest and quietness and make their food smooth and easy. If you think something has changed in shape on one of the faces, attend to it on the third day.
Then bind it from above according to what appears to you, and make sure it holds together so that it does not come apart. Command the patient to rest and quietness and make their food smooth and easy. If you think something has changed in shape on one of the faces, attend to it on the third day. Then, what is attached with the dust of the stone should be cleaned with powdered white or fine flour after removing the stitches from it and placing a moist compress on the swelling. As long as that swelling remains stuck to it and has not changed for bone, leave it alone.
It should not be taken off until the fracture is fully healed and the bone is sturdy. Often this fracture becomes sturdy in three weeks, but if during that time a hot swelling appears, use what we mentioned repeatedly to reduce it until that swelling goes away.
And as for a fracture accompanied by a wound, if the bone fragments or splinters have separated and the flesh has begun to form, gently extract those fragments with what is appropriate for removing them from the instrument. If the mouth of the wound is narrow, widen it with a retractor according to your need.
Then, if you have removed those fragments and there is nothing left, draw the wound open if it is wide, otherwise place one of the ointments suitable for that on it. And close the wound until it heals.
The Fifth Chapter.
On the Repair of the Scapula if it is Fractured.
The scapula is more prone to fracture from the front than from the back of the shoulder blade, and its fracture can occur on one of three surfaces; either it breaks and splits into two without fragments being present, which is easier to repair.
Or it may occur with fragments, which is more difficult to repair, or it may be a fracture accompanied by an open wound; the procedure in this case is as follows: if the fracture is not accompanied by a wound, have two servants assist you, one holding the scapula that has been broken and the other pulling the cord towards the other side.
Then, shape the fracture with your fingers until its shape is as it should be and there is no prominence or irregularity; if you need to pull more, place a ball of cloth or wool under the shoulder blade.
The bone will be according to your need and the clavicle will stretch and rise and press the ball with your hand until the fracture aligns as it should. If you cannot pull the tip of the clavicle outwards because it has become deep, then the patient should lie on their back.
And a pad of medium thickness is placed under the patient's armpit on the bone, and the servant presses the armpit downwards until the clavicle bone in the depth rises up, and then the fracture is healed and straightened with your fingers.
If you feel that a splinter of the clavicle has fractured and is moving, then it is necessary to cut into it and carefully remove that splinter. If the splinter is lodged in the bone, then use one of the saws that I have prepared for this purpose. After which is placed under the clavicle the device that keeps the diaphragm, which is a wooden or metal instrument, and this is its shape:.
It resembles a spoon without any obstruction, and its width is according to what you need from the size of the bone, and as for its length, it is also according to what enables you to work, and let it have two ends, one wider and the other narrower.
If the incision of the wound which you made when removing the bone splinter is wide and you fear the inflammatory swelling, then sew up the edges of the wound. If the incision is slight or you fear the inflammatory swelling, then fill in the wound with the incision and the sutures according to the extent of the incision.
If there is an inflammatory swelling before the incision, then apply a poultice of rosewater and vinegar or wine on it, and place it on. And as for setting the bone if it is not accompanied by a wound or incision, it is that you place on the bone a dressing made from wheat flour mixed with egg white. She places the linen cloth on him, then places a ball under his armpit if needed. Then she takes a long veil that is about a palm or so in width. She holds a folded gauze on the wound and the bandage, then takes a thin slab of board. It will be three fingers wide and in length as well. Then she inserts it into a kerchief, then inserts that kerchief with the bandage into the place on the veil where the fracture is situated. She tightens the veil over the fracture as one wraps. And she wraps it around his neck and under the healthy armpit and the sick one's armpit, and returns it several times to each side as you see fit, and how tightening holds the fracture firmly in place, which is not hidden from you.
And take note that the bandage should not be removed from the fractured bone. Therefore, the patient should be checked every day; whenever the bandage has become loose and you see that the dressing has moved, fix it and tighten the bandage. Then make the patient lie on his back and place a small pillow under his healthy armpit at night.
So that his arm rises with it from his side, so that the fracture of the shoulder blade is lifted to the height of the neck or else he ties his arm to his neck. And the bandage should not be loosened unless something happens in the place such as a pustule or swelling within twelve days.
Then renew the dressing if you see that necessary. And wrap in a binding manner, leaving it until the fracture of the shoulder blade is consolidated and becomes firm, and it strengthens and grows even stronger over twenty-eight days. And it may be that for some people, this takes less than that.
The Sixth Chapter.
In the treatment of a shoulder blade fracture. The shoulder blade rarely breaks in its wide part, but rather its edges, so when it does break or is fractured in one place and not elsewhere, and you recognize this by touch, then according to what the shape of the fracture is, form it accordingly.
Healing it and setting it in its natural shape by any means possible, then take dust from the road with white egg whites and smooth linen, place it above a folded cloth, then put on a wide bandage made of wood.
Make it soft according to the shoulder's shape, all of it or a little wider, if there is swelling under the bandage in any part of the shoulder, adjust that swelling with smooth linen until the bandage lies flat, then pull from above with a long scarf.
Pull it tightly and secure the bandage so that it does not move from its place, and loosen the wrap every day; whenever the wrap slackens, tighten it again and reposition the bandage if it has moved. Let the patient sleep on his healthy side, and the shoulder will heal in twenty days.
After one or twenty-five days, if this period has elapsed, then loosen the wrap and you will be safe; for it is a bone that will not be fractured nor broken. If a splinter of bone appears and was hidden under the skin, cut into it and remove it. And do as I mentioned regarding a broken collarbone from treating the hot swelling if that happens.
The Seventh Chapter.
For Repairing a Broken Rib.
The chest may break in the middle and a little of that is exposed, as for its edges they are more likely to break and become disjointed; one of its symptoms if it breaks in the middle is that it will incline towards the bottom, exposing him to severe pain, difficulty breathing, and coughing.
Perhaps the rib will be exposed by blood and the fracture in the bone will not be hidden from feeling, and its treatment is that the patient should lie on his back and a pillow should be placed between his shoulders, then his arms should be bent and brought together to compress the ribs, and the dressing should be applied to all sides where it can be done.
Until the shape of the bone is restored as it should be, then place a dressing on it and wrap it with linen. Place a splint made of sedge or willow and similar materials on top of it in the sand after wrapping it in a cloth. Then tie it tightly on the broken bone so that it does not come loose, and wrap the bandage around to the back several times and tighten it firmly. Then inspect the bandage at all times, and whenever it relaxes, tighten it again.
And if necessity demands it, when eating or defecation exposes the area or causes pain or swelling, then resolve to remove the dressing and treat what appears according to its treatment, then replace the dressing if you see fit. And thus apply pressure until it is healed.
The Eighth Chapter.
In the repair of ribs if they are broken, know that breaks in the ribs occur only in the hard areas which follow the back and its edges from the front, and it is exposed to view for the reason that they are grooved and knowing this do not neglect to feel with the fingers during examination.
And repair it by molding the break with fingers on the correct side until the shape is restored as it should be, then dress and tighten the broken bone with a splint if necessary. If the rib fracture is bent inward, it exposes itself to great pain and discomfort.
And it is as if a tree branch were exposed, for the bone exposes its lining and also experiences difficulty in breathing, coughing, and profuse bleeding, which is a difficult case to treat, and the ancients have resorted to many remedies.
Some of them have said that one should make the patient's diet produce belching and flatulence, so that the abdomen is relieved, and the break is pushed outwards, and we dislike this lest it lead to a hot abscess. If it has not occurred, then it increases and confirms it.
Some of them said that it should be placed on the spot tightly then washed with strength, and it is similar to a test except that it fears that the tourniquet might pull the spot loose due to its weakness. Some of them said that the spot should be covered with wool that has been soaked in hot oil.
And it becomes a swelling between the ribs until it is full, and then the bandage is level if it is wrapped around evenly. Then the patient is treated with treatment of abstinence from food and medicine, unless the patient's pain is severe and cannot be tolerated. And the bone will be covered with a membrane, and it is a painful and frightening thing, and we are afraid for the patient. Therefore, we must incise on the spot and uncover the broken rib, then we will insert the instrument that holds back the pleura which I have described earlier, and carefully cut out the bone and remove it.
Then we will sew up the edges of the wound if it is large, and treat it with ointments until it heals. If an abscess appears during that time, hot poultice should be applied to the spot and the patient should be treated with what calms the abscess from within also.
And he lies on his side where sleep weighs heavily upon him until it heals.
The Ninth Chapter.
In the treatment of fractures of the back and neck.
As for the bones of the neck, if a fracture occurs and it is rare that it does occur, but more common are contusions, and also the vertebrae of the back, if such a thing happens to someone and you want to know whether it will heal or not. Then look, if you see that his arms are stiffened and numb and motionless, and he is unable to move them or stretch them or bend them, and even if you tickle them or pinch them with a needle he does not feel it and does not find pain in them, then know that in most cases it will not heal and he is lost.
If he is operated on and feels relief in the bone and flesh, know that the marrow of the bone has been cured and the patient will recover with treatment. If a thorn in the back resembles that and you want to learn whether it too will be cured or not.
Then look at his legs, for if you see that they have relaxed and a similar thing has happened in them as happened in the arms. Then, when he lies on his back, wind and stool will come out without his volition. When he lies on his stomach, urine will come out without his volition. And if he lies on his back and wants to urinate, but is unable to do so, know that he is doomed and do not bother treating him. Unless something like this does not happen to him, the matter will be less severe. And the treatment for what has happened is to try to cool the hot tumor.
That you put rose fat alone or with fried egg whites on the afflicted area, and apply it three times a day until the hot tumor subsides. Then, take one of the strengthened poultices that have been soaked and bind it to the place, and order him to remain calm and quiet.
And he should not sleep except on the side where he does not feel pain, until he recovers. If there is a fragment or something that has broken off from the bone near the wound, then it is necessary to cut open his skin and remove that bone. Then, if the wound is large, you should gather its edges with suturing and then treat it with ointments until he recovers. If the last vertebra of the tailbone is broken, it is necessary to insert the index finger from the left hand into the cleft.
And set the broken bone with the other hand as much as you can and get it into place, then put on a poultice and bandage if needed, and bind him.
If you find a broken bone in him, split it and extract it and treat the wound with treatment as mentioned earlier until it heals.
The Tenth Chapter.
In Setting Fractures of the Hip.
Whatever breaks the bones of the hips, if it does break, then the breaking is that they splinter at their extremities and split along the length and bend inward and expose themselves to ulcers and pain in the place and stiffness and numbness in the leg from where the fracture occurs.
And set it straight by your hand on him until you see the shape of the fracture, if the fracture is only in his extremities then straighten out that fracture according to what appears to you from the alignment until it resembles its natural shape.
If the fracture is in the length or has bent inward, then place the patient on his stomach until you can set that fracture, if you have straightened it out, then wrap him with a compress and put a splint made of wood or skin on him and secure it tightly.
Do not fear for him the movement of the fracture nor the removal of the splint, and make sure to keep an eye on the swelling from the wounds as long as it is needed until the tightness becomes even and instruct the patient to sleep on his back or his healthy side, if there appears a hot abscess.
Stop providing it with a dressing and set him straight until the hot abscess subsides, then wrap him with what subsides as mentioned earlier and then return to setting him and securing it as it should be, if something breaks off from the bone or splinters at its extremities, do not remove it.
And do not touch it, but straighten it out from outside as we said and leave the splint on until it heals.
The Eleventh Chapter.
In Setting Fractures of the Arm.
The humerus is what lies between the shoulder and the head of the shoulder. If it is broken, repair it on one of two sides.
And bind it at both ends with ligaments, then suspend it from a high place and let the patient sit on a stool. Then, take his broken arm and place it on the stick until its elbow becomes stuck in the middle of the curve of the stick, then suspend something heavy over it.
Or, have a servant hold it down below, then the doctor will adjust the break with his hands together until the break is in its proper place, and the other side is to have the patient lie on their back and his hand tied to their neck with a ligament.
Then, order two servants to set one above the break with his hands and another below it, and have each servant stretch in his direction. And if you want the pull to be stronger, tie a ligament underneath the break and another on top, and have both servants stretch in their directions.
If the break is near the shoulder joint, then the ligament should be placed under the armpit and another under the break towards the arm. Similarly, if the break is near the arm, then the ligament should be placed on that spot and also on the arm itself.
Then, adjust the break gently without force until the break is in its proper place and has become well-set. Then, bind it if there is no inflammation. But if there is inflammation, leave it bound for seven days and apply a poultice of wet wool soaked in vinegar and rose water.
until the inflammation subsides, then bind it. The binding method is to place a dressing on the break, then wrap a new cloth around it, and then bring the arm back onto the shoulder itself and place the hand open on the armpit.
Apply traction and tension to the arm and shoulder so that the arm replaces the splints if there is no obstruction preventing this from happening and nothing has changed regarding the broken bone. If you fear that something will change, use the splints.
And it is to place a splint on the break itself that is wider and stronger than any other splint, making sure there is an extra finger's width between each splint, with the length of the splints according to the break, adding three fingers from all sides.
Then apply the tension I mentioned at the beginning on the splints.
And it is to make your traction stronger where the break is.
And whenever the break is not recent, if you see that the splints and traction are as we said when you first applied them to the limb from its time, then do so.
And if you fear inflammation, leave the traction and splints off for seven days as we said, then check the bandage every three days so that no swelling, puffiness or impeded nutrition occurs in the place due to excessive tension; all of this will be as we described.
And if you are confident that nothing of that sort will happen, do not remove the bandage except after many days, and have the patient sit on their back with their hand on their stomach and place a woolen pillow filled with moderate fluff under the shoulder.
And check at every time of day and night lest the shape of the broken limb be distorted or the bandage become loose; all of this with your effort, and make the patient's food according to what we mentioned, being gentle at first until the bone is strong.
It is necessary to strengthen his diet, for it is the habit of the shoulder and leg that they heal in forty days; then it is necessary to remove it and use a bath, and treat with ointments suitable for this purpose, if the break is severe and swollen.
Do not remove the bandage from him for fifty days or for two months.
The Twelfth Chapter.
On Setting Fractures of the Arm.
The arm is composed of two bones and is called the ulnae. One of them is small, it being that which lies next to the elbow, and the other is large, it being that which is situated underneath the small one from below. Perhaps the largest ulna alone will be fractured, or perhaps the small one alone will be fractured, or perhaps they will both be fractured together.
When the small upper ulna is fractured, its setting will be easy and its healing will be quicker. But when the lower ulna is fractured, its setting will be difficult and its healing will be slow. And if both bones are fractured together, then if it is the upper small one that has been fractured,
Then the physician should make his splint gentle and easy at first until it sets, if it is the large ulna that has been fractured. If both ulnas are fractured, he should make the splint even stronger.
And it is necessary that the shape of the hand be placed when setting, with the splint extended on a pillow, and the thumb above all the fingers, and the little finger below all the other fingers, and the ring finger standing upright upon itself.
And let the pillow be beneath him in elevation so that the ring finger does not suffer discomfort.
Then a servant will stabilize the arm from below either with his hand or with a bandage, and another servant will do so from above in like manner. Then the physician will set the bone until it is restored to its best shape possible. If there are fragments of bone, he will remove them.
He will set each fragment in its place, to the best of his ability. If a fragment appears and it is exposed and does not have skin over it and you do not hope to set it, then cut through it on the suture that we mentioned earlier. If the fracture is with an open wound, then he has opened for him a door.
Treatment for that is taken from there, if a swelling appears in the first stage of suppuration and heat, then apply a poultice with the pounded calamus root mixed with rose water and white beeswax to be of medium thickness between the skin and flesh, and bind it tightly until the swelling subsides.
If the calamus root is removed, prepare a poultice with the powder of wheat and white egg whites, then apply the bandages. The bandage that is placed on the fracture itself should be slightly looser and stronger, and know that in most cases, six arm bandages are needed.
The fracture was in one bone or in two bones together, then make your binding tighter and stronger on the spot of the fracture. Whenever you turn the bandage above or below, make it slightly looser as mentioned earlier in the first chapter.
The bandage that wraps around the fracture should be a soft, moist cloth not too stiff. The thread that binds it should be from a special type of silk, medium thickness between flesh and fat as we described, and bind the part and the ligament after days.
If something needs to be corrected like a sore that appears on the part, it should be soaked in warm water until the sore subsides. Then, leave the part unbound at night for it to rest and then resume binding.
If the binding has relaxed and the bone has moved or is about to, correct that completely. Also, look at this: if the nourishment cannot reach the part due to excessive binding, it should be loosened slightly and left for a few days until the nourishment reaches it then bind it again.
If nothing appears that we mentioned, it should not be taken off except after twenty days or so. Then, suspend the patient's hand from his neck and let his arm be moderate, taking care to restrain his movements and make him sleep on his back.
Know that this fracture of the arm is healed in thirty days or in thirty-two, and perhaps in twenty-eight days, all according to the temperament and strength.
The Thirteenth Chapter.
Healing of Fractures of the Hand and Fingers.
Indeed, the fingers and joints of the hand are rarely exposed to fractures but frequently to ulcers, so when they are exposed to a fracture or ulcer.
Then the patient should sit with his legs raised and a chair in front of him on level ground.
Then he should place his hand on it stretched out, then the servant of the broken bones is brought and the doctor sets them straight until they are well aligned. Then a splint should be placed above to the extent of the position.
And I have wrapped it in a linen cloth. If the fracture is towards the bottom, towards the palm of the hand, then make a ball shape from the linen and instruct the patient to grasp it with his broken hand, then tie it with a long linen cloth.
And let the splint be of leather, soft and pliable, so that it will conform to the flexion of all the hand, and tie it as needed. If the fracture is towards the outside, then make a splint above and another below in the hand, so that the hand may be open and standing upright.
Then the bandage should be carried as the hand turns, and it should be bound between the fingers with a strap. If the fracture affects one of the finger joints, then if it is the thumb, set it straight as needed, then bind it with the hand, and if you wish to make a small standing splint to support the fracture.
And it should not be moved. If the fracture affects other fingers, such as the middle finger or the ring finger, or the little finger, or the pinky finger, then set them straight and bind with the adjacent healthy finger, or bind all of them together on the palm, which is better, or place a small standing splint on it.
As we have said in the confusion and observed when you bind it and move away from the hot tumor, meet what is necessary when something happens as previously described.
The Fourteenth Chapter.
In setting a broken thigh.
The femur is often broken and proves evident to the sense because it moves forward and backward; and its setting is by pulling a band above the break and another below it, with the patient lying on his face.
Then each band is stretched by an attendant to its place, according to this proportion; if the break is in the middle of the bone, but if it is near the origin of the femur, it is necessary to pull a thin band either from wool or something similar.
At the origin of the femur, up to about the hip, the reduction should be upwards and the other band below the break; likewise if the break is near the knee, then the band should be near the knee so that the reduction is downwards; and then the doctor smooths out the bone with both his hands until it returns to its natural shape.
And the bone is brought together well, and then it is necessary to apply a dressing and traction; unless there is a hot tumor in the limb, for if there is one, leave it alone for a few days until the hot tumor subsides, and then return to its treatment.
And if it is necessary to traction, then wrap a strong and wide linen cloth around the break two or three times and leave some of it overhanging, then flex the leg until the ankle comes to the origin of the ligament; and pass a long thread between the thigh and leg near the knee from below and make the ends of the thread emerge from above on both sides.
Then turn the excess of the cloth around the leg and thigh, then place on the thigh at the same location as the break small linen cloths and make one band from them over the shin bone; and fill in the gap between the thigh and leg with a thin layer of linen to level out the traction.
Then start by pulling the strong parts from the middle to the site of the break three or four times, and with each binding at the site of the break, make your pull weaker, gentler, and shorter.
Then proceed to the ends of the thread that you had inserted between the thigh and the leg, and bind it to what follows from the splints above. Then pass the thread down to the other end until it reaches the ankle, and pull on both ends as well with the splints from the other side.
So that the bandage does not move from its place, then leave it to settle on him as long as there is no pain, swelling, puffing or similar things; if anything of that sort happens, hasten to correct it and adjust what has happened according to what we have mentioned repeatedly.
If there is a splinter in the bone that protrudes, it is necessary to smooth it out if you can, and if not, cut through it and extract it, and treat the wound as has been mentioned before until it heals. This break may sometimes be pulled from the thigh without using splints with the leg.
As we mentioned in the case of the spine and arm, except that this type of splinting does not expose him to disability or paralysis if you splint it alone without adding the leg, but his owner will be disabled forever.
And know that the thigh takes 50 days to heal or a little more or less, all depending on individual temperaments and other circumstances.
The fifteenth chapter.
On the breaking of the kneecap.
The kneecap is rarely exposed to a break, but it is often exposed to bruising; if it does break, it will either split or become separated into its parts, and this may occur with an injury or without one.
All of that should be done with a sense of touch, and set it right by repositioning the parts that have become detached with your fingers until they come together and adapt according to what is capable of setting and gentle handling, then apply a compress and place a rolled gauze on it if necessary.
And tie it from above the corresponding wound, then follow all the conditions that we described in other fractures, such as feverous swelling and the like, by matching each obstacle with what is suitable for it until it is cured.
The Sixteenth Chapter.
In Setting Fractures of the Leg.
The leg has two bones, one thick and called the tibia, and another thin and called the fibula, and they are exposed to various types of fractures that occur in the bones of the arm. And therefore, its setting is like that of the arm's, whether it is a simple or complex fracture. If both bones are broken, the leg becomes twisted in all directions. If the thin bone is broken, the leg becomes twisted forward, and if the thick bone is broken and it occurs from below, this is something that will not be hidden from you.
So use the compress and setting, and bind the bandages according to that, whether it is not except that if the leg's fracture is a severe one with many fragments, then the compress should be less and thinner, and take great care in its setting.
And in the leg's treatment, there is something additional to that of the arm, which is that when you have set the bandages and finished all your work, take two splints made of cedar wood, like those used for flattening rooms that are placed between the cracks of boards or are made from palm leaves or similar things.
And choose from them what has a thickness slightly and is not too thin, and let its length be the same as that of the leg from the knee to the ankle. Then wrap each one with two cloths wrapped around it, and place one on the leg and the other on the opposite side.
To be from the knee down to the foot, then bind the two straps in three places on either side and in the middle. With this binding, the leg will not incline to the right or left and will be well supported. A groove made of wood can also be used along the length of the leg.
And it is placed in order to preserve it from movement, and even more so if there is a special wound with it. Then, examine the leg every day and take great care about swelling or puffing or anything else. So when something of that happens, treat it as needed until it heals. And the leg will heal in thirty days or so.
The Seventeenth Chapter.
On fractures of the leg and fingers.
However, the ankle does not usually fracture. But the leg bones may fracture, and also the fingers rarely fracture, and more often they become inflamed.
If the leg bones fracture and you see those bones overlapping, then let the patient put their foot on the ground straight as they are standing, then come and place your foot on what has risen from those bones, then press down and align it.
until it returns to its place, then take the dressing and the bandage from above and put it under the sole of the foot, making a small pad with two flat surfaces, then pull tight the bandage firmly after wrapping it with cloth and everything else that is needed.
If three or four days have passed, then loosen the bandage because you will find that the bones are set and no longer broken or splintered, and do as you see fit. And if some of the fingers are fractured, then set them and align them according to what I described to you in setting hand fingers.
Then make a splint for the fractured finger along the length of the finger, and let it be slightly wider than the finger. Then place this board under the foot as I described to you and pull tight firmly, if what is broken is two or three or more bones.
Make a splint for each toe with a strip of linen cloth, measured according to its size. Bind the splint at the bottom of the foot and let each end of the splint project outward from the anklebone to secure it well.
You should not forget to apply all that we mentioned to you regarding the fractures and the symptoms we mentioned, and be prepared for each case as it demands.
The Eighteenth Chapter.
In the fracture of the woman's pelvis and the upper bone of the leg of the man.
When a woman's pelvis is fractured, lift her up and then bend her slightly towards the back. Then grasp from behind and insert the linen cloth into her pelvis until it fills it and becomes like a ball.
Then shake the woman and gently lift her pelvis slightly, for that linen cloth will come out until it becomes like a ball at the entrance of the pelvis and returns to its original shape. Then place a pad on her back, so when she wants to urinate, remove the linen cloth gently until she does.
And bring it back in the way you first inserted it, then return to her original pad. Do this for seven days or so, for it will heal. And if you wish to take a poultice, bind a tube-like thing on her mouth and insert all of the poultice into her pelvis.
Then blow into the tube with force until the poultice swells up inside the pelvis, for the fracture will return. Then wrap it in linen cloth and keep her like that for as many days as we described until it heals. And if a man or woman's femur is fractured, this is used to treat it.
And treat it as we described for the pelvis, and do not hide from you what is correct in these rare fractures that rarely occur, especially for one who has some experience and understands this book well, because the fracture itself will guide you in most cases.
On the correct path in setting and splinting, I understand. And if a man is broken, one takes a falcon's fleshy wing and enters it into the member, then places a cloth on it and wraps it tightly and leaves it for three days or so until it heals.
The nineteenth chapter.
In setting fractured bones with an open wound.
It is necessary for whoever encounters a fracture with an open wound, especially if the bone is large like the femur or the humerus or similar, that you begin by cleansing it from its pus according to the conditions of cleansing which we have mentioned.
If the wound is bleeding blood, it is necessary that you begin to apply a poultice of powdered alum if something else is not available, then take up setting the fracture on that very day itself and do not delay.
If there is not a hot abscess, then do not set the fracture. But if there is a hot abscess, then leave setting it until the ninth day until the abscess cools down, and do not approach it at all on the third or fourth day, for it will be afflicted with bad consequences.
If the fractured bone protrudes outward and is exposed on the skin, it is necessary that you try to reduce it and smooth it out with your hands gently and slightly. And if you are not able to reduce it and smooth it out with your hands, then use this instrument which is made of iron, its length being about seven or eight fingers. And apply it according to the extent of the wound.
And therefore it is necessary for the doctor to take four or five of these instruments according to his need from each type of fracture, and they should be tempered so that they are slightly thick so that they do not bend when pressed upon during work.
And it should be sharp on the end, with a bend at its tip, and the upper part should be thicker and the lower half much thinner, like this:.
It is called by the Greeks Pirym. They want a small splint, so it should be made into a sharp point at its end that is affixed to the end of the bone and pushed forward with one thrust until the bone returns and comes to some stability, then the edges of the break are aligned with each other.
If the broken end is thin and the instrument does not take hold of it well, then it should be cut off so that the instrument can grasp it. If one cannot restore the bone as we described earlier, then cut it to the length of the fragments we mentioned.
Or spread it with one of the splints as much as you can, then scrape off what remains on the bone from the roughness and ragged scales. If after setting the bone, the patient experiences severe and painful swelling, know that the bone has not returned to its natural position.
If you can restore it to its natural position, then do so, for you will be benefiting the patient with great benefit. After you have finished setting the bone, immerse a cloth in a black binding liquid, especially if it is summer, and do not apply any ointment or grease to the wound.
So that putrefaction and corruption do not occur, then use the bandages when you have finished setting the bone, and leave the wound open, allowing it to be rinsed with a sponge in folds as much as the wound requires.
And beware of all danger that you should bind the wound with the break, for many ignorant doctors have done so and caused harm to their patients either by death or by gangrene or putrefaction. Let your binding be soft and gentle, unlike the binding of other breaks.
If the wound is foul or large and you fear some of the bad symptoms that we have described, and the patient experiences severe pain in the area, do not bind it with bandages. Instead, make folds from hard cloth where the bandages would be and bind him with them.
If it happens after a day or two and you see the wound starting to form pus, then remove from it the cloth that you put on it with water. Then use the lint and ointments that we are accustomed to using for wounds like the quadruple ointment and similar ones, and it is necessary for you to loosen the bandage.
And you should inspect the wound every day, morning and evening, until it heals and closes. And it is necessary for you to place the limb in a position so that the pus flows out easily downwards. If the wound has been like this for many days without the discharge ceasing or diminishing, then know that there are small bone fragments.
And it is necessary for you to search the wound with a probe, and if any of those small bone fragments are uncovered, remove them and extract them. If any of them are not uncovered and are causing the limb to move awkwardly and causing pain, then form in pieces and remove each piece as much as you can.
If an inflammation, suppuration, or another type of decay and corruption appears on the wound, it is necessary for you to treat each one of them according to its kind with the treatment that is described in its chapter.
And what you should be prepared for and keep in mind is if a major bone, such as the femur or the humerus, is broken and lying on the limb like that, do not attempt to pull it out or remove it. For many times death results from that, but leave it alone until it settles on its own, perhaps after twenty or thirty days.
So then treat the wound if you see a place for treatment, and otherwise leave it alone.
The Twentieth Section.
In the treatment of complications that arise in the aftermath of some fractures.
This complication often arises in the aftermath of bone fractures, especially those near joints, and it may deform the limb and perhaps prevent the limb from performing its natural functions.
If the complication is watery, then use medicines that constrict like sabar, luban, mur, anazonroot, and aquaqia, and others, by taking some or all of these and kneading them with a constrictive drink or egg white or vinegar.
And apply it to the complication in a gentle and firm manner, and hold it there firmly for many days then release it and repeat with another one until the complication goes away, God willing. Or, take a well-made lead plate.
If the lead has a special quality that can expel everything inside the organs, and if the complication has hardened and increased and necessity urges its removal, then cut it off from above and excise the resulting piece or reduce it with some forceps until it goes away and treat the wound until it heals.
The Twenty-First Section.
In treating a fracture if it has healed and the limb then remains weak in its original form.
If a bone fracture has healed and the limb then remains weak afterwards, it is usually due to many reasons. One of them is either excessive loosening of the bandages and binding it in a way that does not befit, or excessive tightening until nutrition cannot reach the limb, or excessive stretching and flaccidity, or excessive movements at an improper time, or lack of blood in the patient's body and weakness.
And the treatment for that is to nourish the patient and condition his body so that blood flows abundantly in him, using a warm bath and entering joy upon him and happiness and similar things, then apply linseed oil on the limb to attract it with abundant nourishment or prolong its stretching with lukewarm water. until food flows in him and he returns to his natural state.
The Twenty-Second Chapter.
In the treatment of broken bones that have become distorted and cannot be straightened as they should.
When a member appears to have been set right after its fracture, but has become distorted or bent out of shape due to the broken bone or became entangled and therefore its appearance is marred. Unless the member has not deviated from its natural function, one should not accept the claim of anyone who claims to break the member at its head. Many ignorant doctors and practitioners have done so in our country.
And this action is highly censurable, leading to a great and dire affliction. But if the distortion and entanglement are fresh, then one should immerse it in water that has been cooked with the marshy herbs like the leaves of the knotweed, its stalk and royal crown, and similar things.
And it is bound with the plastered herbs like the carefully prepared diakhielon, or else takes the juice of the knotweed and strikes it with chicken fat and camphor oil and binds it with that, or takes the sweet fig and crushes it with dove's droppings and similar medicines which are called "breaker of the immobility".
And the entanglement will be loosened by the constant and gentle stroking with the hands, and the movement of the member in all directions at all times. If the distortion has become severe and hardened and necessity demands its treatment with iron.
So it is necessary to make an incision above and release the connection of the bone, and cut off what remains of the entanglement or bone with a curved instrument, and use care in that with effort and attention. Then, the wound should be treated as has been mentioned earlier until it heals.
The Twenty-Third Chapter.
Dislocation is the exit of a joint from its place, which hinders movement and disfigures the member, causing severe pains and suffering to the patient. Whenever a dislocation occurs, one should immediately proceed to reduce it.
He should not delay it at all, for if he delays, the area will swell and it will become harder to reduce the dislocation. Therefore, one should not delay nor stir nor stretch until the swelling subsides, as it often causes severe tension and suffering to the patient.
But if that happens, one should begin by applying a poultice to the patient, then leave it until the swelling subsides slightly. Then, one should wash the member with warm water and oil, and gently reduce it, treating each joint as described in its place.
And I have also organized the chapters on dislocation according to what has been mentioned earlier regarding fractures, from the upper body to the lower.
The 24th chapter.
In the treatment of dislocation of the lower jawbone.
The two jawbones hardly ever move except in rare cases, and when they do, it is either slightly out of place for a short time or completely dislocated to the point where it becomes immobile. until it goes up to the chest, causing the patient's saliva to dribble and preventing them from holding their jaw or speaking clearly. As for a slight dislocation, it often returns to its original state with minimal effort.
And as for a complete dislocation, one must hasten to reduce it quickly and not delay at all. This is done by having an attendant hold the patient's head and the doctor inserting his hand into the socket of the jawbone on the affected side if the dislocation is on one side only.
He enters all of them together if the jawbone is from both sides and all his fingers are outside, he aligns it with them and orders the patient to open his jaw and let it go in order to move towards each direction, and the doctor aligns the jawbone and pushes it until it returns to its place.
If it is difficult to return them and especially if both jawbones are involved, he uses the compress with hot water and ointment until it becomes easy to return them, nor should their return be delayed as we said. If they have returned and stabilized and fit together, and the patient has not been troubled, then he applies a dressing of lint with bandages made from wax, fat, and red ochre.
Then he binds it with a gentle bandage, and the patient sleeps on his back, with his head raised between two pillows so that he is not moved to the right or left, nor does he try to chew anything, but rather makes his food liquid.
Until the pain goes away and the jawbone is set, he should eat what he wants, and use that gently without forcing himself to open his mouth when eating, drinking, or speaking until the jawbone is set and restored.
If the jawbones are difficult to return if they have been dislocated at some point and do not return to their places, many times this causes headaches and perpetual dizziness and sometimes the patient's stomach may become inflamed or may vomit repeatedly until he dies, so if you see that, know that it is a fracture.
And many times death occurs to him within ten days.
The Twenty-Fifth Chapter.
In the setting of the occipital jawbone and the neck joint.
As for the occipital jawbone, it does not dislocate from the inner side due to its connection with the chest and can dislocate outward and this is indicated by sensation, and setting it requires that the patient lie on his back and extend his arms.
Then you press the area with your hand firmly, for it will return. Then you put on it the poultice and remedies and tie it up. As for its part which is connected to the shoulder and joins with it, it should not fall off except in rare cases. If it does fall off one day, it should be replaced and arranged as we mentioned earlier and as circumstances permit.
Then you put on it the poultice and remedies and tie it up, and instruct the patient to maintain rest and quiet until they recover. By this same treatment, the part of the shoulder will return if it has also gone out of place.
The Twenty-Sixth Chapter.
On Setting Right the Shoulder.
Know that the shoulder dislocates in three ways: one is that it dislocates towards the armpit downwards, the second is that it dislocates towards the chest, and sometimes it dislocates above the shoulder, which is rare.
It does not dislocate behind the shoulder or ahead of the nerve, but rather more commonly it dislocates downwards towards the armpit, especially in those with loose ligaments because it dislocates quickly and reenters quickly.
And as for those with strong ligaments, it is the opposite, namely that it dislocates slowly and reenters slowly. As for some people who get a blow or fall, the shoulder becomes swollen and hot, so one may think it has dislocated, therefore one should examine it to be sure of its state.
Then you proceed with its treatment, and if the dislocation is towards the armpit downwards, you will find a clear difference between the displaced shoulder and the healthy one. You will also find that the top of the shoulder is deformed and under the armpit when touched, as if it were an egg.
The surgeon cannot lift his hand to his ear nor move it in all the movements, and likewise if he inclines towards the chest or upwards then you will find that evident for the patient does not hide.
And this jaw can be set if it is fresh or the surgeon is young, and he makes a servant lift his hand up then you place your finger under his armpit and raise the joint by force up to its place and the servant raises his hand and stretches it up.
Then he brings it down below, and it will return quickly. If it does not return as mentioned and the jaw has been in this state for many days, then the surgeon should bathe in hot water and use a poultice that relaxes and soothes like cooking the roots of saffron, senna, and crown of the king in water and use it.
Then the surgeon lies on his back and puts a soft ball under his armpit, moderate between looseness and tightness, then the doctor places his foot on the ball and takes the patient's hand with his own and stretches it down.
And he pushes the ball with his foot, then it returns to its place. If you wish to reduce it in this way, have a taller man stand beside the patient and hold him from the side, and enter his arm under the patient's armpit and lift his armpit up until the patient is suspended in the air. And another servant pulls the patient's hand down towards his stomach, and if the patient is light, it is necessary to suspend something else to hold him steady, for then the jaw will return to its place, and it may also return in another way.
And it is that you concentrate on a long piece of wood, the top being circular like a potter's wheel, not too thick nor too thin, then you put it under the patient's armpit after having placed a linen cloth over the top of the wood and the patient standing along the length of the wood.
Then he extends his hand down on the other side and stretches his body also from that side with force, so that the joint returns to its place quickly. If it is difficult to return it as we mentioned earlier, then use this treatment: take a stick about two arm lengths long. And present it, as far as four fingers, and thicken it, to the extent of two fingers, so that it has a circular head to make its entry into the depth of the armpit in this shape.
Then he binds it to the circular head with a soft cloth so that it does not hurt the splint. Then he sets it under the armpit and stretches his entire arm and hand on the stick down, and binds the stick to the shoulder, forearm, and hand.
Then the arm is placed on a board. Stretch with the side and stretch the hand down, leaving the rest of the body hanging from the other side, so that the joint enters its socket. If it has entered in any way possible, then a moderate-sized ball of wool should be placed under the armpit.
Then he takes the prepared poultice from the emmer flour with myrrh and egg white, and applies it to the entire shoulder as it turns from above. Then he tightens the ball from under the armpit tightly, and binds the poultice with a bandage from above, and hangs his hand to his neck.
And he leaves his hand still for seven days, and it is necessary that the patient's food be a little scanty until the member gets strong, so that it is faster to heal. Then after seven or five days, he exercises with movement, and if it remains firm and does not ache, then it has recovered.
If the joint keeps dislocating many times due to moisture or another cause, then it is necessary to use in this case the poultice made from three saffron threads as mentioned earlier in the chapter on poultices. If he has done all of this and removed the bandage after seven days, but the joint does not remain stable.
The swelling subsided and pressure was applied to it repeatedly, but it did not stabilize and fell back down. And you were unable to lift it up again. Know then that the nerve in the neck of the joint has been severed or stretched or relaxed. Know at that point that the joint will never be stable in its place ever.
And as for the jawbone that is directed towards the chest and breast, and to the back of the head, it is treated by pushing and stretching with the hands until it returns. The same method of treatment and therapy is used in it until it is cured. If a swelling appears after the cure, it becomes inflamed in the member and slows down in its movement.
Let the healer use warm compresses repeatedly until that swelling subsides and returns to its natural state.
The Twenty-Seventh Section.
In the Treatment of the Shoulder Jaw.
The shoulder joint dislocates quickly and also returns quickly, and it dislocates in all directions, especially forward or backward, and its dislocation is not hidden from you because it occurs under the sight and under the touch to any shape that dislocates.
And if you align the dislocated shoulder with the correct one, it will be clear to you by a visible explanation of the joint's dislocation and the arm will not be able to bend or move with the nape, and it is necessary that you hasten and return the jawbone to its place before a hot swelling appears.
For if it appears with a hot swelling, it is difficult to return it and perhaps it will not be cured at all, especially if the jawbone dislocates backwards, for it is more severe than any kind of dislocation and causes much pain and suffering, and often death follows it.
And if it is possible for the jawbone to return, have a servant stretch out his hands and arm with both arms relaxed and the doctor's hand from above the shoulder and underneath, and he pushes the joint with all five fingers or by the base of his palm until it returns to its place.
What if the jaw is to the front? Then return it by bending your hand once until it hits the base of the curved bone which is next to it. If the jaw does not return, use strong and powerful pressure and stretch the arm straight.
And the surgeon also holds his arms straight so that it does not slip when stretching, then bends his arm in every direction after wrapping a cloth or bandage around his hand, and if the doctor starts to clean the joint with ointment, it will be an aid in dislocating the joint easily.
Then the joint is pushed strongly until it returns, and after its return, a dressing should be placed on it that contains compression and drying with white of egg, tied tightly and the arm should be suspended from the surgeon's neck and left for some days.
Then loosen it, if the joint remains in its place, untie the bandage from it and leave it, but if you see that the joint is not firm, reapply the dressing and bandage and leave it for some days until it becomes firm then loosen it. If a swelling occurs after the joint's return and loosening.
And if there is stiffness in movement, let him use moisturizing in the bath and gentle massage and stroking until it becomes soft or put a fat kid's skin on the joint then bind it and leave it on for a day and night then remove it and enter the bath, and if he sweats, make the joint sweat moderately.
Then reapply it to him once and twice and three times, along with entering the bath, until it becomes soft, and if you want to put cow's fat wet and thick with oil on him and tighten it, do so several times, for he will become soft and return to his original state.
The 28th Chapter.
Treatment for a dislocated shoulder.
The shoulder of the hand often dislocates and returns; returning it is easy, except that one must hasten to return it immediately when it dislocates before the place becomes inflamed or a warm abscess forms.
Returning the dislocation is to place the afflicted shoulder on a board, and have a servant support it with his hand; then the doctor places his hands on the joint's prominence and pushes until it returns; however, one must see if the dislocation has moved to the back of the hand.
The patient should place their outer hand on the board at the time of retraction and return; if the dislocation is protruding to the front of the hand, then let them place their inner hand on the board so that the doctor's hand falls on the same prominence of the joint; then it returns immediately, otherwise reduce it with a poultice for the abscess.
And do not repeat it, for it is not tolerated and the joint will remain on its dislocation unless days pass; otherwise, nothing will harm the patient except if the hand becomes stiff and they are unable to grasp anything.
So then learn that the nerve is cut or crushed, and there is no remedy for it except to apply a poultice; sometimes it may benefit and sometimes not. If the shoulder returns, then wrap it with the poultice we described and apply it and leave it for five days.
Then release and exercise the hand; if its movement is impeded and there is something wrong with it, then soften it with warm water and massage several times until it relaxes.
The 29th chapter.
Treatment for a dislocated finger.
Fingers can dislocate in every direction; when a finger dislocates towards the front of the palm or back of it, straighten the finger and push the dislocation with your thumb until it returns; then tie the tip of the finger and suspend it towards the direction to which it dislocated.
Keep her two days then release her and stretch her until she straightens up according to her day. If it is at night, tie her back to the same description; do not let her go by day and train her with movement and tie her at night. Do that for a few days until she strengthens.
And you do the same with her if she stretches to the palm of the hand, tie her back to the same side and do the same with her as you did at first until she recovers. And you do the same with her whenever she stretches to any other direction.
The thirtieth chapter.
Treatment of a fractured back vertebra.
When a fracture occurs in any of the vertebrae or the neck, and the complete breakage or many fractures occur out of place, there is no treatment for it because death hastens to the afflicted person.
And the sign of that is that the afflicted person's excrement exits without his control, and he cannot hold it, and often some of his limbs become paralyzed, either his legs or his arms or one of them, and if one vertebra goes out of place, many times it does go out.
And it may go out of place in four directions, and the one that goes back is called a hernia. And as for its treatment, you must look; if the hernia occurred from habit, then there is no treatment for it whatsoever, but rather, if it occurred due to a fall or blow and the like.
I have mentioned earlier various treatments with lengthy speech, but most of it does not bring much benefit. And I have simplified what is little from much that they came up with in my approach to the meaning and explanation, and I have corrected the device contrary to what they showed and explained.
I say that the hernia which occurs in front of the chest has no remedy and cannot be cured, nor is it treated from there. And similarly those occurring to both sides. But what is specifically treated is the one that occurs in the back with what I have described, which is that you make the patient lie on his stomach.
On a platform near the wall and spread beneath it a damp cloth so as not to hurt his chest. Then place a wooden board standing upright in a hole in the ground at one end of the platform towards his head, and another board at the other end of the platform towards his feet.
And a servant holds the board, making sure it is not stable in the hole, and another servant holds the other one in this manner. Then wrap him on his chest and under his armpits with a soft and tight cloth, and stretch the end of the cloth to the board that is at his head and tie him in it.
Then bind him with another cloth above his knees, above his ankles, and at his calves. Then gather all the straps together and tie them to the other board that is at his feet. Then each servant will stretch towards their side the strap without the boards moving from their fixed positions there.
Unless they are not stable as we said, and the physician puts his hands on the knot with force until it returns or places a piece of wood on it. Then he leans on the wood by his feet until it returns. If it does not return with this treatment, then take a board that is about three arm-lengths long.
And dig in the wall, which we said should be near the patient's place, and enter the end of the board into it. Then place the middle of the board on the fulcrum, and the physician puts his feet on the other end and pulls tightly until the knot is tightened.
And returns to its place, and if you wish to make it with a pulley that is grasped by hand, which is to insert into the ground at the patient's head in the end of the platform two boards each arm-length long, and also at his feet in the other end of the platform two boards.
And let it be that between each board there is a gap of one span, and make in each board a hole where the pulley will run, and secure all the wood to the ground so that it does not move at all, and enter a straight stick which is the pulley that winds up the strap in the holes of the two boards.
In its side, a hole was made that had been secured with a stick of a foot long to which it was bent and in the two other bones like that, then the bandage is pulled tight at the chest opening in the tube at his head and the bandages were tightened at his legs in the tube at his feet.
Then he stands by each tube attendant who bends his hand with the bent thing that bends the tube and the doctor adjusts the opening as we have mentioned, and this is a picture of the tube, the cannula, and the patient.
Then after the swelling subsides and the position is adjusted, it is necessary to apply a dried dressing with egg white, then the poultice, and place on top of the dressing a splint that is three finger-widths or so wide and as long as takes the place of the opening.
And on some of the correct stones, then it is bound with the bandage that is necessary and the patient uses gentle food until they recover, if there remains some hardness in the place at the end of recovery, it is necessary to use medicines that soften and relax along with the use of the splint that we described for a long time.
And it may be used in that a lead poultice, and there may appear hardness at the end of the vertebrae so that one thinks it is calcification and it will be an excessive bone that has formed and do not expose him to this treatment for perhaps death may occur.
The thirtieth chapter.
In the treatment of a stiff back.
Know that the joint of the back and the joint of the neck are exposed to only flexion, and not exposed to what other joints are exposed to, such as slight dislocation and sinking, and the joint of the back is separated into four directions.
And that is because it flexes towards the inside and outside, and towards the front and back, and more so towards the inside and less so towards the front or back, and a sign of its flexion towards the inside is that if you place the patient's healthy leg alongside their affected leg, it will be longer.
The knee will be more bent than correct, and the healer cannot bend his leg at the armpit, and the position that follows the armpit and is marked by us beforehand will have arrived there.
And the sign that shows on the cheek towards the outside will be against these signs, and the sign that shows on the cheek towards the front it will straighten his leg to its full extent except that he will not bend it without pain; and if he aims at walking he will not be able to do so in front.
And he will hold his breath and tremble at the armpit, and when walking he will tread on the heel; and the sign that shows on the cheek towards behind is not to bend the knee nor be able to straighten it before bending the armpit, and his leg will also be shorter than the other.
And the armpit is relaxed, and the head of the thigh will be at the position of the nipple, marked by us; as for the types of this sign, it is that if the sign has been old with its owner and he did not try to correct it and remained in his state, then there is no treatment whatsoever.
So it is not suitable to expose him, and as for what sign has been new and of any kind from the four directions of the sign, then go ahead to bend the joint and extend it inside and outside and move it right and left, perhaps.
He will return and not require anything else from the treatment, but if he does not return like this then it is necessary to prepare a strong assistant with one hand, to extend his leg from below either by hands or by a band that binds on his leg above the knee, and another assistant to support him from above.
By having his hands enter from under his armpits then pulling with a soft band on the origin of the thigh and another assistant holding the end of the band, he will be supported either from in front towards the armpit to the ankle or from behind towards the back.
All of them will be treated in one treatment until the patient raises his body from the ground and remains suspended, for this type of treatment is common to all four types, unless the jaw returns as we mentioned earlier; otherwise, each type requires its specific treatment.
As for his specific treatment, if the jaw is pushed inside, it is necessary for the patient to lie on his healthy side then wrap a bandage around the upper part of the thigh between the head of the femur and the position underneath the armpit.
Then the bandage is stretched upwards from the armpit to the higher part of the body towards the shoulder, and another servant takes hold with his arms and grasps the thick part of the upper thigh and stretches it out strongly, causing it to return to its place.
And this type is easier than all other types of treatment that involve setting this member, so if it is difficult for you and does not respond to entering into this type of treatment at all, then it is necessary to bind the patient's legs with a strong bandage loosely on the ankles and knees.
And it will be so after each of them for the amount of four fingers, and the upper leg will be stretched more than the other one by two fingers, then the patient will be suspended on a headrest that is in the house and he will be lifted from the ground by an arm's length.
Then you will order a strong servant to grasp the upper thigh and another servant to support the patient, and push the other servant who is grasping the thigh with force, then the joint will return to its place quickly; as for his specific treatment if the jaw is pushed out.
Then the patient should lie on the bed according to what we described in the owner of the bandage, and the bandage should be tightened on his upper thigh particularly and on his chest, then two wooden boards should be placed at his feet and another at his head, then an additional wooden board should be placed in the middle of the bed securely.
To wrap her with a damp cloth so that the patient does not feel pain, lest the splint be between his thighs and it will slide down when he walks, then each attendant goes to his side and the doctor adjusts the bandage by hand, if he returns.
Unless, place a board on him and secure it as we mentioned earlier in the chapter, whether or not he lies on his sound side; if the fracture is to the front, then stretch the patient's leg once and have him lying in this exact position on the mat.
And the doctor puts his right hand on the upper part of the limb then presses it with the other hand, while keeping the pressure extended downwards to the knee level; if the fracture is to the back, then the patient should not be made to extend below.
And he is elevated on the ground, but should be placed on something hard, as well as his foot being bent outwards according to what we mentioned, him lying on his face and the bandages tightened.
As we said earlier, it is necessary to use the pad on the board also on the position where the joint has emerged, if the knee joint returns as it should and its return is not hidden from you, which is that the patient's legs are stretched.
If you see them settled and the patient grasping and straightening his leg without difficulty, know that the limb has returned as it should; then bind the thighs together and apply the cast with a bandage tight enough not to move the knee in any direction.
The patient is required to rest for three or four days, then remove the bandage and cast and apply another one; if you see them even in strength, know that the fracture has been stable, and allow the patient to walk, but if you notice something of relaxation.
Return and bind it with him and strengthen him according to the first strengthening, and leave him also three days then dissolve it and slow down walking on it until it gets better if Allah wills.
The 22nd chapter.
Treatment of the knee fracture.
The knee fractures in three aspects, one to the inside and one to the outside and one to the bottom, namely to the back, but not to the front at all. The sign of its fracture is that the patient should bind his leg to his thigh.
If it does not stick to the thigh, know that the knee is fractured. Bind all its faces. The patient should sit down and stretch out his legs if he can do so; then have someone sit behind him and hold his waist and bend him slightly backwards. Then you sit on his thighs.
And lean your back against his face and place his leg between your legs; then grasp his knee with your hands and interlock them between your fingers on his knee, then bind his knee strongly on both sides with your hands, while another servant holds out his leg until the knee returns to its place.
And the sign of its return is that the leg becomes attached to the thigh without force, then bind him and attach the leg to the thigh, then tie them up altogether with bandages for three or four days then release them. And he should not use except a little walking until he gets better.
If it is difficult for you to return it as we described, and otherwise, use the strong extension with the bandages that I mentioned earlier in treating the ankle until it returns.
The 33rd chapter.
Treatment of the ankle fracture.
The ankle may swell slightly and fracture completely or partially, and its fracture can be either to the inside or outside. The sign of its fracture is that you will see the ankle swollen bulging towards the direction it has fractured.
The treatment of its removal is easy to reverse and it is to support it gently with the hands and arrange it until it returns. As for its cure if it becomes complete, then the patient should sit down and have a strong servant hold him from behind in the middle.
Then take your right hand and grasp the top of his foot, and with your left hand, grasp the bottom of his foot at the ankle, then pull the foot towards you with your right hand, then twice with your left hand, then stretch it with your left hand and push the sole of the foot with your right towards the leg without force.
You do that twice as we described, then push the sole of the foot towards the leg in the third time while you pull on the anklebone. If it returns to its normal state within one or two times like this and you see the foot is even, but if not, then redo the work on it because it will return.
If it refuses to return as we described, then lay the patient on his back on the ground and have him flexed and fixed firmly so that he falls between his thighs, and a bandage is wrapped around him lest the patient be hurt, then the strong servant will hold his thigh.
Then the other servant will stretch out his hand or tie him with a strap around the man's neck, then each servant will stretch in the opposite direction of the other and the splint will be placed between the patient's thighs to hold him lest his body slide down when stretching, then the doctor will arrange the jawbone with his hands.
And the other servant will grasp the healthy leg from below, for the jawbone returns quickly. If the jawbone returns and you see its correctness, then take the bandage and wrap it tightly with straps and secure the foot with a strap down, and be careful of the nerve that is above the ankle from behind.
Unless the bandage is tightened strongly upon it, then it will heal. Then leave it for two or three days. If the bandage relaxes, tighten it again and release it on the third or fourth day. The patient should abstain from walking for forty days.
If he hastens to walk before this period, it will not be safe for him and his wound may spread and spoil; then treatment will not be accepted afterwards. If a hot abscess appears, it is necessary to use what we described earlier in another place of the treatment and compression until it goes away.
The 34th Chapter.
Treatment of a broken finger.
It is necessary to straighten what has been bent, by a gentle movement without force, which is not difficult but rather easy. If the break is in some of the bones on top of the foot, then the patient should place his foot on a flat spot on the ground.
Or on a board, while he is standing like walking. Then stand you and put your foot in what remains of those joints, then bend it with force until it returns to its natural state and no deformity appears in that place.
Then place a board under the sole of his foot, so that the whole foot is on it and has two ends. Then tighten it strongly and tightly for three days, then release it and keep him from walking for many days until he recovers and treatment becomes safe with Allah's will.
The 35th Chapter.
On the types of breaks that occur with an open wound, or with a fracture, or with both together.
Whenever something like that happens and its treatment and repair are delayed, it often results in death.
Therefore, it is not suitable to treat something like that unless the one treating is experienced in the craft, having spent many years learning, being gentle, compassionate, and cautious, without being impulsive or reckless, and only uses medicines at first that calm hot abscesses, and entrusts the patient.
For the sake of God, except for what I hope for in terms of safety from harm with the sickness being mild and some expectation is seen in it, then redress it from your time at the beginning before the hot tumor occurs.
If the member returns as I wished, then use the treatment that soothes hot tumors and treat the wound with what is suitable for it from dried ointments. If the jawbone is broken and fragments of bone have appeared, then remove them. And conform to that which we mentioned in simple illnesses as previously mentioned in their places.
And strive with all your might and cleanse yourself of entering the path of wickedness as previously mentioned and my advice to you, for that will preserve your soul and safeguard your reputation if God wills.
