O you, very dear son, I have completed this book that is the essence of medical knowledge together with its fulfillment, and I have finished it through its explanations and declarations. And it came to me in a vision that I would complete this treatise with you, which is part of the work by hand, that is to say "surgery".
And because the work by hand is practiced in our region and spread throughout everywhere, it is excellent in science and capability, and is not delayed from its force but only the small descriptions in books of the ancients that hands have moved. And because of this, there has come error and vanity, and intentions are closed up, and science is removed.
Or me seems that I will vivify it together with the order of this physician according to the way of exposure and declaration and of the abbreviation; And I will come together with the forms of the caustic tools, and of the other instruments of the work, with the setting of the declaration and preparation of it, as is fitting.
And for this reason, because there are no good hands masters found in our time, is the art of medicine extended. And he who deals with it must master the science of anatomy, as Galen says, as far as he knows the shape and arrangement and separation of the organs, and has knowledge of bones and nerves and veins and the number of bones, and the movement and flowing veins and resting veins, and their source.
And for this dist Icopra that it does not hurt with the non-existence, and hurts with the work a little. and mainly in the art of hands.
We tell you in the introduction to this book that he who is not knowledgeable about the things previously said should guard himself so that he does not make a mistake and harm men.
before I have wanted many times of these who meddle in this science, and if they abandon themselves to this science and to no experience.
I saw a foolish man who cut an abscess on the neck of a woman, and he cut the arteries at the base of the neck. because so much blood came out that the woman died in his hands.
And I saw another foolish man who treated a stone in a man's neck, and the stone was large; he brought out with it a piece of the bladder, and the man died within three days.
And I have also been called to treat it with a lever, and I saw the condition of the patient and the size of the stone; and if he treated it properly, he would not die.
And I saw another foolish man who took in care an earl of our land who had a broken leg, and with the break there was a wound;
and the foolish healer bound up the break over the wound with a tight bandage, and left no salve on the wound, and so he left it; and thus he finished.
and he ordered that he not remove it;
And it delays so that the leg was all stretched and the foot and came to perdition.
I was called to come to him, and I hurried to come to undress the leg; and when I undid it so was at peace and did not feel any pain.
But all ways corruption had already been confirmed on that member, and he could not heal it;
and the corruption did not cease to spread through the member as long as the members were completely lost.
And I saw another miracle, that is, an abscess that was putrefied and then inflamed by the evil of its own nature.
For chalc, when it is purred with melancholic humor, will not come to touch it unless it is in a favorable position where one can completely remove what is corrupted.
And for this, dear children, you are required to know that the work of hands is divided into two divisions: which means, namely, that it has danger in many dispositions;
and I will show in each of the books of this book where there is fear and danger.
For you are required to keep them so that the evil eye cannot speak ill of you.
If you take your weapons in harmony, and undertake your patients lightly but firmly, and make use of the better way, so that through the grace of God you come to salvation and are saved.
and leave the probable illnesses of great suffering.
and hold your weapons back from that which makes you doubtful, and have faith that you may come from this world to glory.
Galien wrote some of these admonitions: Do not take up the care of a bad illness, lest you be called a foolish healer.
I have devised this treatise according to III chapters.
The first chapters are about fire cauterizations and medicinal aqueous treatments, and the order of the limbs;
and the forms of instruments, and the ironing of cauterization, and all that is necessary in the work.
The second chapters are about sizing and drilling, and suction cups and wounds, and extraction of arrows, and similar things;
and this is the order of the chapters and the forms of instruments.
The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and torsions and similar things;
and here are ordered the parts of a pig's foot, and the forms of instruments.
Thus we remember the work; it is necessary that I give the quality of the aid and the harm of each color.
I say that the qualities of help, and harm, are the most distant word and subtle science and secret answers;
and many wise men would speak about it, and agree with what is said;
and I am satisfied with few words, because I shorten the length.
I say that cautery helps universally in all complexions or it has matter, except for two complexions: that is to say, a hot complexion with matter and a dry complexion without matter.
In a hot and dry complexion together with matter, there is none that would say that cautery is not of great help; and the other said the opposite: that cautery does not help with the disease that comes from heat and thirst. For nature's fire is too hot, and should not be used to treat any disease caused by heat or thirst;
and it says that those who say the opposite are wrong: cautery does great help for hot and dry diseases which come in men's bodies. For when you compare the body of the man and his moisture to the complexion of fire, you find the body cold.
And I agree with this word. For I have not found it once by experiment.
And any road, should not interfere but those who have tested it themselves, and who know by long experience the action of the ointment of cauterisation, and the diversity of complexions in men, and their temperaments and causes of their diseases, and their responses and the space of time.
For we have no fear of other complexions, either by cold or moist diseases. And all this should come together and agree with the fire cautery.
And know, children, that fire cautery will help in healing if there are secretions and of greater good than medicinal fire cautery.
For fire is simple, and it comes only to the member that is cooked, and it does not harm another member in any way.
The burning remedies come from one member to another in moving away, and bring to the member great pain and injury in healing. and so the disease occurs.
Fire for its height and because of the goodness of its substance does not cause this, unless there is an excess.
And I have found it by experience and because of the length of service and study that I have put into this art, and it is based on the truth of things;
and I apologize for the length of the speech, because it does not please me that I should reveal the secret of fire, which is hidden in the work, and the quality of the art, how it drives away diseases from the body, as the philosopher says in demonstrating; receive it in your thoughts.
And know, son, that they should be made at certain times and be performed with prayer.
And I say that cauterization is appropriate at all times, because the harmful things resulting from it are overcome by the aid of cauterization; and most often cauterization is for necessary and urgent pains that cannot be endured until the time that greater injuries do not come to the member.
And I never thought, son of a bitch, like they do in fucking hell. For the disease that is cured by fire has no return. and serve it thus:
and serve it thus: but it is not as they fuck, because cauterization is only a type of medicine that changes the appearance of the skin and dries up the fluids that cause pain, and its effectiveness depends on the swiftness of its application, on its virtue and prowess.
And it is possible for the disease to return according to the patient's complexion and the location and effectiveness of the medicine.
And these excesses are accumulated in him through the acquisition of meat and similar things, unless cauterization is administered at the right time or place, where there is an accumulation of excess fluid and moisture due to pain, and similar things, and the pain does not return. but this did not happen.
And many people do not know that fire cauterization is one of the last resorts of medicine, and it is clear;
but they do not believe that cauterization is worth anything after medicine, but their intentions are wrong, and cauterization is the last resort of medicine for when we cannot administer any other way of treatment in any disease, so let us administer the cauterization, and it is worthwhile.
Therefore, it is clear that cauterization is the bloodletting of medicine, not according to the intention of the foolish, but
The ancient ones said that gold cauterization tools are smoother than those made of iron, and they only mentioned the quality of gold and its high purity;
and they said that the color of the cauterization does not cause irritation, but this is not true because I have tested it, and I found that it does in some people;
and gold cauterization is worth more than iron, as they said. And wherever you heat the gold instrument, you are not as hot as it is when it is heated by the color of gold, and it is sometimes cooled.
and if it is overheated. if it is burned. and thus enough impediment.
Or you may order this chapter of the heart to be read just as soon as possible, so that the vision may be easier to find.
The olive oil cautery is good for a moisture and cold on the skull, and because of many humors that descend from the head through the hair, and through the ears, and for many dreams and pain in the teeth and pain in the throat, and especially for all diseases that come from cold such as paralysis and lameness and apoplexy and similar illnesses.
The form of this cautery is that the patient be purged by a solu and then rub the head of the patient.
And then place it on a cross between your hands and put your hands over his neck;
afterwards, place the root of your palm on the root of his nose between his two eyes; and then place your two fingers, if it bleeds a little, heat the fire that is called "oliver," of which this form is: And put on the ink-mark, and make your hand come down and come out little by little in turning. then lay your hand in peace, and feel the bone I a small part. and if you do not see it, then begin again the cautery as far as you see the bone as I told you;
after take a piece of silk, and put it wet and soft cotton inside, and put on the mark, and leave it three days;
then put over the cotton dry wax; and leave it as long as it is hot enough to be bone; then heal the wound of the ointment which is called 'tetrarchafarmacon', until it is healthy.
And say the old man that as long as the wound stays open, it will smell more. and so that help is given.
And they said that one should let the fire cautery burn so long that a part of the bone is burned, and then resect what is burned from the bone, and be healed.
and so that the other can be cauterized as much as possible on top of it, and pressed so strongly that the humor is forced out as much as a woman puts in her vagina to prevent the flow of fluids.
and we must leave the wound open for a long time; afterwards, one must heal and support.
And these two ways of cauterizing do not seem good to me in any way or another, except that in some people there is a possibility of fear;
and it seems to me that I should leave it as it is;
because the head is weakened by continuous solutions of this nature, as we have witnessed in other members;
and even when the head of the sick is weak by nature, and the first look at the cauterization is safer and more gentle for me, and from that I carry out the whole treatment in a way that saves and heals;
When in all the head comes chronic pain, and lasts a long time, then the patient must use herbs and pills which are called "cochier", and head purgatives and oils and poultices; and if they make the fire cautery that we have said above, and it does not work. Take care that the patient's head is of strong nature, and that he is not too cold; then cauterize it with fire a little less than what we have said above. Afterwards make the fire cautery on each horn of the head up to the bone, as we have said above, and make the fire cautery where it is called "vesselz"; and put them in places where vacuum cups are placed; and adjust your hand so that you do not see the bone at all: The patient feels an intense amount of pain in this fire cautery compared to others, and I will not speak further about it.
And it is necessary that the cornet cauterizations be thinner than those with which we cauterize the top of the head, and this is the form:
Dou cautere dou chief When sudden pain in one part of the head appears and extends to the oil, and the shoulder is cleaned with medicinal alcohol, and the other treatments I mentioned in the section on diseases are performed, then none of it helps. Therefore, perform the cauterization in two ways: with medicinal alcohol and fire.
The cauterization with medicinal alcohol is performed by pressing a piece of wood onto the shoulder, and then removing it twice, and then applying the alcohol to the skin in such a way that you can remove the wood without pain.
and when it has been reset, if the bandage and restraint are good and left like this for 12 hours; and then unbandage and treat with garlic extract, and leave the wound like this for 2 or 3 days; and then put cotton dipped in butter on it as long as it can become dry again.
After the treatment with ointment until it is healed;
and if you see which of the curative medicines I have written or any other treatment for burning.
The fire cautery if it is according to this manner. Heat the cauterizer with this shape:
And is called "close" for the head is made in the form of a cloak or it has a small hole of cuirasse, and in the middle to a small appearance;
and sets it on the painful place, and holds your hand and turns the fire slightly, so that half of the heat from the cure is burned;
and hold my hand so that the artery does not burn, which is far away, and runs a lot of blood.
After putting cotton in place with thread, and keeping it in place for three days; then I put cotton that is wet in the wound, and then I treat the injury with ointment until it heals;
and if you want to cauterize this headache with the cautery that is called "cultellare", do it at the tip, and be careful not to cover the artery in this headache that is not old.
of migraine
When you treat a headache as we have said before in the division of diseases, and do not benefit from it, and see that the cautery that is called "cultellare" in front of the medicine and does not sufocate it, then it is necessary to heat the cautery that is called "cultellare" until it is white;
and so thus on the shoulder a line of half a foot long, and with your hand once, and pull it so that you do not cover the artery and come no closer than the bone;
and so also on the jaw that moves when chewing, and let it rest only so that the muscle moves and not the spasm comes to the disease, and guard against the blood flowing from the artery when it is cut, or if it has a great fear and least understood, and who is not learned and proven; and leave the work half done;
but I will tell you how to stop blood when the artery is cut, and I will show you at what place it occurs in this book.
And if you see that these fire cauterizations do not suffice to the disease, and the patient is suffering, cauterize it in the head as well as we have said, and cure the wound until it heals;
and if you see, administer the cautery that we have said or the chapitre for the extraction of the artery, with the cautery that has II knives; and this cautery is better than that and more helpful.
for the pain of ears from cold
When pain in the ears comes from cold, and medicine or other treatments we mentioned in the division do not help, then this cautery which is called "poins" should be used, whose form is:
After poking all around the sick ear, or around the two of them where the pain is in both, and you distance a little from the root of the ear then because you have found the place of pain; and it has ten points poking around each ear;
After healing the place as long as it is healthy.
of the mouth torture
The torture that must be healed by cautery is not stronger than those that move with a flux, as we have said in the division of diseases;
and do not make any cauterization of doubt that comes from thorns and poison of netherworld.
When you treat this pain of the throat, which is moved by the fluid of the yore and by the purgations of the head and gargling, and that does not cease, then it is necessary that you cauterize the patient with three cauterizations: one at the root of the ear, and another a little further back from the temple, and the third at the junction of the two lips;
and place the cautery in the healthy part, and make a cauterization on the top of the ear just above the horn of the ear, and another one a little way back from the temple; and leave the cautery in place until half of the burn is burned;
this is the form of the cauterization:
And this is the form of the scalpel that we have described before, but it is a little finer and it is necessary that the blade be a little thicker;
After care, let him be as I have said before, until he is well.
When apoplexies are old and you treat them in this way as we have said, and they do not benefit, and the patient has no fever, then make four fire cauterizations: II. On the two horns of the head, and I cut off the hair, and I make a hole in it which is called "vessel", as we have said before, and then cauterize the mouth of the stomach;
and let him be cured as we have said before.
of limestone
This is a disease that gives the patient great years and pills that hurt the brain;
After cutting off the head of the patient completely, and placing on his occiput the dye of mustard which is written or treated with dyes for plasters;
and this is the way of the cauterization: If I do so as I have said.
If he is well thus, it is good. and if he is not well, give him three fire cauterions to the top of his head while descending as far as the collarbone, and leave two inches of space between each cauterization;
and the surgeon does so as with the others, and if he sees it move, and the patient suffers, give him one cauterization in the middle; and if that is not enough, two others on top of the two horns, and the surgeon as long as he is well;
and let the cauterization be called 'oliver', as I have said before.
It is necessary that the head be cleaned of years and of what we have said above;
after he has washed the head of the sick person, then give him a cauterization to the top of his head and to each of the two horns, and one behind and three in the spine of the neck;
and if you have more need of it, and the heart is moist and the patient suffers, and the disease is severe, then do four fire cauterizations on the spine of the back; and let it be as long as the top of the curl is burned, and raise your hand; after the cure as long as he is healthy, and let be the cauterization which is called 'olive' that we have said above.
of epilepsy
For the fire cautery, one should only use it on those who are feverish, and first moisten the scalp and perform other treatments we have mentioned in the chapter on treatment when the patient is severe and suffering from heat-based medicines.
And if it is a child who cannot endure the pain, then do gargling and chewing with bone meat often;
after he has eaten a meal in the middle, and I do one cauterization according to what we have said above, and I do cauterize on the neck, and on each horn; and if the patient is severe and suffering, then do cauterize as I have said to one who has paralysis and softening of the spine and neck, and let the olive cauterization be done according to the way I have said.
If the patient is blind, then perform the fire cautery according to this manner:
When due to melancholy there are excesses or corrupt moisture and thick fluid, then lou cauterize partly with the fire cautery as we have said to one who has paralysis.
And if due to melancholy the excesses decline into melancholy, and the patient's body is moist, then he drinks something to cleanse the brain, according to what has been said in the division about it.
After the head of the sick person. Then I make a turban of fine linen, also as a circle, and put it on the head;
and I place the sick person so that they are comfortable, and well held together from all sides;
Then present the linen bandage, and be sure to use old butter of sheep's milk; and the fire is hot, so that it may not harm him if he drinks it; Then empty the circle inside the turban, and leave it to cool;
and do this to the sick person every week with good care, until they are well.
And if you see fire cautery, make many punctures all over the cauterization.
This method of cauterization hardens the skull slightly;
and then put on wet cotton in butter and sheep's milk fat.
of the eyes When it comes first the eyes by the signs that I have said in the division, then begin and do drink to the patient a thing purifying the skull, and warding away all moisture, and let it sweat or bathe many times while fasting.
Then instruct him to raise his head, and make a cauterization on the head, and do two cauterizations on the temples if he is able to stand it without pain, or one cauterization if he cannot stand it but can still move his head;
and bandage all the cautery all the veins and arteries that are outside of the curb, and let the cautery be long according to the width of the temple;
and guard against the corruption of blood, and if you see too much blood coming out, stop it with a cloth so that it can be stopped with what power you have.
And I will teach you how to cauterize the arteries in extraction and incising, how to stop it;
and never do you make a cautery or hate it outside of the two bones behind.
and it is seen that it is a cold and flaccid superfluity, then make the cautery I mentioned at the beginning of the descent from the eyes: I cauterize my head, and I cauterize on the two temples, and I cauterize where the hair grows on the two bones; and if there is more need, if the cautery bleeds slightly above the brow, then cauterize it again with a small cautery.
When you treat it according to what we said in the division, and it does not benefit, then only drink three times of bad wine. After he has raised his head, and makes a cautery in the middle of the olive oil cautery; and make two cauteries on the cautery called "clavilis" on the two brows, a little shaved;
and be careful of the artery so that you do not cover it.
And this is the form of the cautery that is called “clavis”:
When the paper of the oil is softened by disease and moisture, then the cautery of this cautery that is called "olive". for this is the form:
And if you see, make two cauteries on the two brows as long as the eyebrows are;
and do not leave my hand free until such time as the third part of the paper is burned, according to the way that I have said.
dou poil qui point l’oil No sooner had the hair of the loins been converted to the parched state, and having pricked them, we made the cauterization according to two ways: either with fire, or with fiery medicine.
For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
When they have grown and are equal, then place the patient in your care; after signing on the paper of the hairs a figure which is also like the furrow of the palm, and is the beginning of the sign to prick the hairs;
then dip cotton in egg white and musk root emulsion over the oil, then heat the cautery so that it is this shape:
After cauterizing on the shape you have marked little by little several times, so that the wound heals in place;
and the sign of the health of the work is that you see the paper withdraw, and the hairs stand up to the point of the oil;
then take your hand away, and leave it like this for three days, then dip cotton in butter as the cauterization heats up; After the cauterization treatment until it is healthy.
And if after this come the hairs, and the paper is softened then start cauterizing on top again, just like you did first;
and if the hairs have gone, then cauterize so that the paper returns to its natural position, and is even, and do not touch the hairs to the oil.
The fire medicine cauterizes wounds by ordering the patient to let their hair grow long and even. Then, make a parchment in the shape of a laurel leaf.
Then, take French soap and hot water, each a .Z., and mix them well together; and apply it immediately, so that it does not cool down, then spread it over the parchment of the hairs; and if the disease only affects one side, then you must operate on that side, and in the same way on the other side as well; and cover it with a moist cotton cloth;
and the dislocated shoulder should be in your sound side; place the medicine on it, and press it slowly and gently each time the patient feels a burning sensation from the medicine, as he also feels a burning sensation like fire.
If you have had this for a long time, take the medicine to your mouth. And when the swelling has passed, then raise the head of bed, and keep an eye on whether the paper is raised as if it were raised by the constriction of fire or by an incision. and if so, well done.
if not, then continue with the medicine on the bed or wherever it has reached, until your hair is even and combed.
and then put cotton wetted with balm on it as long as the wound hurts, after treating the head of the injury called "dyafenis" and others, until it is well.
And if you have to take care of your wound with great care so that the medicine does not touch the hairs.
And if the paper becomes soft then, and the hair pricks into the oil, then begin again with the medicine on that very same head that has been softened by the paper, in the same way that you did before; after treating until it is well.
and this is the form of the furrow in the breast:
You must know that men's breasts are various in size and shape, and according to this.
and it should not be repeated the right way to those whose business is this craft.
Of the cure of a fistula by cautery
When you treat a fistula as we have said in the division of diseases, and your treatment does not benefit them, then it is necessary that you apply cauterization according to this method.
Command the sick person to put his head in your lap; and place the patient's hair between your thumbs so that it does not move or tumble;
afterwards, dip cotton in oil of aloes or in juice of pomegranate on the oil;
afterwards, heat the fire-iron which is sharp;
and place the iron on the head as if it were the shape of a dove's beak, together let the fire-iron be;
if you see, if it is pointed at one end from the other, and if you see, if it is also as a tent;
but moreover, he who is head of his work must move because of your work.
After pressing the fistula has opened, and in it train the porridge, and dry; and if it is closed, if you work, and train hard the bowels;
After put on the fire the hot-water pot, and hold your hand to the pot at the part below the oil, that your hand does not make foolishness; and put the fire in the oil fat, and corrupt it.
If you come to the beginning of cauterization just to the bone, it would be good. If not, if you restart the fire again, and another you have need, and let it be for three days;
After I put on cotton wet in butter, and the cure of the infection dry as long as it is healthy, and forty days pass that it is not healthy, then put on medicine bitter as long as the bone is uncovered; and let him come according to what he will come in his chapter.
And I have a way of cauterizing fistulas, which no one of the ancients said. Listen to the fistula, and cut off the place. After that, put fine steel in it so that this is the shape: and I make the quantity of one .Z. of plaster; and hold it firmly with your hand, and do not move the patient so that the melted plaster does not run to its oil;
and it is necessary that one put on the patient cotton moistened in wine or ale;
the plaster so that he covers the place of the fistula, and the sound by a wonderful health.
And if the fistula is healed by the cauterization which we have said, it is good. But if not, then a piece of iron should be administered to the nose, and the fistula brought back to the nose's own place according to what should be done in its own place.
crevasses in lips times have creases in the lips, which are called "hair", and most often in the lips of adults.
When you treat these creases as we have said in the divisions, and the cure does not benefit, then heat a small caustice according to this form:
And put it carefully in those crevices until it comes to the end of the hole;
After that, treat the place of the wound with ointment as long as it is well.
When an abscess develops at the root of the gullet or the uvula or the palate or at the roots of the teeth, after fermentation and rotting and has become swollen and becomes a fistula; and you cure it as we have said in the division, and it is no benefit: then you must have the cautery according to the quantity of the fistula; after the bottle or hole of the fistula, and hold your hand until the fire comes to the edge of it, and where it goes down;
and make this once or twice after the cure we have said, until he is well;
and if it is cured in this way, it is good; and if not, if it is necessary to uncover the place and remove the corrupted bone, according to what you will find in his chapter.
When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you cure it with medicine and that does not work, then put the head of the sick in your healthy one; After heating the fire cautery, its shape will come out in a certain way that you put a chain on the teeth;
and place the heated fire cautery inside, and hold it for so long that the sick person feels the heat coming from the root of the teeth;
After removing your hand and starting again with the cauterization according to your will;
After filling the mouth of the sick person with foul salt, and rinsing it thoroughly for an hour.
In such a way that the tooth that was moving is confirmed, and the gums that were softened are dried up, and the moisture that corrupts is dried out.
of tooth pain
When the toothache comes from cold, or there is coldness or swelling, and medicines do not work, then it is necessary to use fire cauterization in two ways: and fire cautery.
and fire cautery if it is such that you squeeze butter from a cow, and the end in a spoon of iron or bronze; after take cotton and wrap it on the tip of a tent, and the juice in butter that is made, and put on the tooth with great care and hold it until it has cooled down;
and then often as long as its virtue comes to the root of the tooth, and if you see that wet wool and cotton make butter cool, and put it on the aching tooth, and put it on a hot iron as long as the fire comes to the tooth channel.
The fire cautery together if it is such that you squeeze a iron or bronze wire, and be thick so that the fire does not come to the mouth of the sick person;
After you have heated the cautery, so that it forms as described here, place it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery has cooled.
do this often, for the pain will increase by midday or the next day.
And it is necessary that the patient fill his mouth with good butter in the hurry for that cautery, and then swallows it.
this is how you do the cautery:
and make the cautery on the middle of the tooth that you wish, and according to what you have power;
this is how you do the cautery on the edge of the tooth:
of scrofula When the abscesses are of cold moisture and do not submit to digestion by medicines, then heat the cautery as described above, and make two openings for the fumes to come out on one side of the tooth with this cautery, and on the other side with that.
and apply the fire cautery repeatedly over the abscess as long as it reaches the bottom of the abscess;
and if the abscess is small, apply cautery in proportion to the quantity of the abscess and leave it like this for three days; and put cotton wet with oil on it until the burn is completely healed;
after treatment, apply the ointment and bandage until it is well;
When the moisture overtakes the shoulder blade, and most importantly when it comes from a cold complexion, then the patient must be emptied first with giải thuốc giải độc;
after the fire cautery at the root of the throat, and be careful not to go any further than the throat, and don't burn it more than a grain;
After the fire cautery at the joint of the neck at the base of the spine, and let the cautery that is called 'clavicle' be there, so we have the shape in front;
and treat the lunge as we have said before until it is healthy.
When all and the disease of the foot are cold moisture, and the patient does not have a fever or itchiness, and the disease is old, then do cauterization on the sole of the foot; and another cautery burn between the breasts;
and let the cauterization be called "clavicle" according to the form which has been said before.
And if you see, make a cauterization by poking at all the cauterization which is called "poins" so that the form is as before in the disease of the ears;
and let the pokes be only up to thirty, or less.
Afterward, treat the hole according to what is mentioned above, and let the cauterization be made with three rains according to this form:
And for those where the cauterization is lighter, for which you make three together.
of the dislocation of the shoulder
When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation. Afterwards, instruct the patient to stretch on their back and side; Afterward, give a slap with two fingers of your left hand;
and if his joint is dislocated from within, then heat the fire at the top of the body as follows:
and cauterize it until he pierces to the ribs and joins together four cauterizes.
and for this, cauterize with the fire that has three sides, so that the shape of cauterization is six cauterizes.
and let the nerve follow the subtlety of a thread and this is the form of the fire that has three sides:
And never place on this nerve because there are eight cauteries.
After, place the fire on the fire for three hours with sea salt; After, let the patient rest and do not move his limbs for a long time until he is well comforted.
And if it is dislocated again, let the following thing happen; then make a cauterization with the thick ring of fire, or a large number of cauteries pierce it.
For the joint is closed, and the moisture is dried up, and the patient is healed.
When in the stomach there come chills and moisture until it is removed from its color, and are multiplied to him the catharres, and are manners of accustomed cures and he does not benefit, then the patient should be made to lie on his back, and extend his legs and hands. From this, then, make three cauterizes with the knife of the foot, all four cauterize, and two cauterizes on the sides as far as the form of the cauterizes is at three angles, and there must be a space between them so that they do not join together when they burn;
and let the cauterization be so perfect that it purifies the two parts of the cure, and let the shape of the cauterization be according to this form without adjustment:
And if you cauterize with a large cautery the stomach according to this form;
and he who has fear of this cautery, cauterize by poking and signing on the stomach at a point according to the quantity that you see fit; then cauterize all the cauterization that is called "point".
After the cure of the wound that we had before, as long as he is healthy.
As for the liver, it comes with pain from cold and moisture and a great windiness, as much as it is forcibly taken out of its natural condition because of excesses; and the patient is cured of what we have said in divisions, and it does not benefit him if he abstains from his dietary restrictions; and a mark of three cauterizations according to this form and this figure and this quantity on the liver, away from the hypochondriums, where the cut of the womb comes;
and space between each cauterization the thickness of two fingers; and be the cauterization of the long neck, and do not press my hand all the way down to the whole cauterization;
and let it burn only halfway down the root, and be the patient right-side-up on his feet;
and if he cannot, if he is sitting, and extends his legs, and raises his breasts;
And if your will is, if you cauterize these cauterizations of the root, if you are subtle and wise in the art, and you guard that you do not burn all the way down, for you would dry out all the body; and it does not come out until it is hot, for the cur is very subtle in that place, and let's see.
When there is an abscess in the liver, and you can see if it is in the parenchymatous tissue or in the capsule: if it is in the parenchyma, the patient feels pain that is not too strong;
and if it is in the capsule, one feels sudden pain.
And then when this treatment has finished, the patient must be careful not to move his head too much;
and then sign with a finger where the abscess is, and then heat the fire cautery that looks like a pin, so as to form: and cauterize until the cur is burned, and it comes out little by little, until the pus is all gone.
After the cure according to the cure of the scabs until he is healthy;
and it only works for those who have studied medicine for a long time and by whom these diseases have not been corrupted once.
And then it can take hard work, and always I think that we should leave him.
For the plaudits of pleurisy:
The old people said that one should use roots of aristolochia as cauterization, and in a certain way: take a long root of aristolochia, the largest you can find, and dry it, and also make it as thick and as long as your two hands; and soak it in oil, and hold it over the fire, and cauterize one small cauterization between the jaw and the neck, and two small cauterizations in going down into the part which is diseased;
and two cauterizations between the fifth rib and the sixth, in going back a little; and cauterize the anus, and another on the stomach, and between the two shoulders, and under the two shoulders there is cautery that comes between the two shoulders;
and do not press my hand, but rather open it widely as in smelling.
And no one old said that any man uses fire cautery resembling the razor, and he blows it up and puts it between the ribs, as far as it comes to the apoplexy; and so forward with pain, as we have said in the apoplexy of the liver.
But in this work there is fear that the patient will die now, or a fistula comes from which cannot be healed.
of the mouse
When you treat the disease of the mouse, as we have said in the division of treatments, and it does not benefit, then they have three ways of fire cautery that are all good.
From which there is a way that you do three cauterizations, or four, in drawing according to the length of the mouse, according to the shape of the fire cautery of the liver that we have said before;
and do not press your hand on all the cauterization, and let the patient turn over on his back;
and another way to cauterize is that you heat the cautery which has two sides, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder;
and place the knife which is on the patient's left side, where the cut comes from the left, and be the elevation that you place the knife according to the knife, according to the length of the body, and the cautery is according to the width of the body.
Afterwards pour on the two sides with fire until the knife is perceived from the other side, and then quickly remove the cautery, and so you will have four.
And if you want, cauterize the whole with three sides of the cautery.
After the cure has gotten worse over a long time, and this is true that the other before said cure must be used.
Cautery does not suit yropic, except for the way that is called "asclytes".
When you cure it according to the ways that we have said in divisions, and your cure does not benefit, then it is necessary that you do four cauterizations around the loins, and one on the stomach, and one on the liver, and one on the left side, and two behind the back on the spine, and one on the right foot; and let the cautery be well placed on the skin's surface.
After leave the fire cautery open for to go away long time, and don't let the treatment of the sick after the cautery; and the healing would hurry up, and both intentions would be together with the help of God.
The form of the cautery for the belly is the nail that we have in front of us to pull out; and this for the back is olive-colored, according to what it is put forward.
When the feet are swollen in the person who is ydropic, and they are plain of yellow color, you must cauterize on the back of the foot between the index and the middle finger; and move your hand with the fire cautery without turning it back.
And do not go too deep in the part, otherwise it would come out white; and make the cauterization according to this shape:
After make on the two legs two cauteries in each leg at the point of the knife; and let the caustics be long, one behind the hip and the other forward, between the legs;
and leave the caustics on for a long time without treating, that they may work;
after the treatment of the other treatments that we have said.
When the solution of the stomach comes from cold and moisture, as long as the virtues retain and digest that are in the stomach and in the intestines are afflamed, and cannot be cured by any kind of treatment; and you will see the patient very suffering and of great virtue, so make I grant the caustic on the stomach according to what he has spoken before or the caustic of the stomach, at the caustic circle; and four caustics within the subtle bud to any caustic in the subtle key, and two caustics on the hips.
And if you see moisture abundant and the patient suffering, then make fire cautery on his knuckle, and I cautery on each finger, and II small cauteries in the stomach of the great, for the remedy is profitable when there is good assistance.
For the cure of hemorrhoids
When the hemorrhoids are at the base or one or more, and are old and of large cold and moist corrupted humors, and are cured as we have said in the divisions, and do not profit if cauterization is done: To the spine at the back, that which is completely destroyed should be cut little by little in a triangular shape, and cauterize the two bones.
and if you think that his stomach is cold, and the meat does not cook, and one can see swelling on the face, then the face is cauterized all over with fire, as said before, and another on the liver, and another on the bile all over the body is cauterized; and leave the fire cautery open for a long time. Aftercare until he is healthy again.
When you cut the abscess, if you heat the fire that seems like a razor, and then put it all ablaze on the cut abscess; and I leave your hand so that the cauterization comes to the birth of the vein, from which it is uncut.
do this once or twice, and if there is moisture of the armpit, cauterize each one as we have said; after the cures of ointments that are profitable until they are healthy;
and if you cauterize with a large fire on the armpit, it will be more helpful.
When the patient cannot endure cutting or opening, which we will tell you in your place, if it comes to a disease that cannot be healed except by cauterization.
When there is no outlet for the vent, and it is inflamed and produces pus and corruption, then you should provide a complete thin paste, and be sure to know exactly how much of the paste is required.
After heating the cautery that seems to be sharp, and filling it with fire in the fistula according to the quantity that it seems to have entered, and then restart the cauterization as many times as those infected and corrupt parts of the body burn, once or twice or three times, according to the quantity of the need;
and be careful of the nerves that are inside, and great veins.
If there is a fistula in the torso of the bladder and intestine, be careful with these veins, and do not make incisions except in the middle part, and think that it is not forever.
After treating the wound as long as it is healthy, and if the veins are sewed up, and the matter is ossified for a long time, then know that the wound is completely healed;
and if the matter is not ossified, know that the wound is divided in two, and the bone is corrupted at the root; and thus as one of these things that we will say in its place.
When the pain of frost comes with rain and strong wind, and does not respond to women's remedies, then you must apply a fire cautery on both sides of the rain with the key-shaped cautery that we have mentioned above;
and if we cauterize it with milk, there will be three cauterizations in a line, and greater help will be done.
of the bladder When the bladder is soft and weak from cold and moisture, so that the patient retenes urine, then do a cauterization in the part below the bladder on the penis, where the hair grows, and one on each side, and make each cauterization as long as our thumb.
and do a cauterization behind, where it was pricked;
and make the cauterizations pointed according to the form before mentioned.
When the marital bed is cold and moist, so that it does not promote conception, and the flowers are withered and their time has passed; and when they come, there is great pain: then it is necessary that he do three cauterizations in the back, as we have said before for the bladder cauterization, and a cauterization behind.
and let the cauterization be with nails, as we have said.
When the viscous moisture descends into the hip joint box, and for this reason if it moves out of place, and the sign is that the thigh is longer than the other when measured together;
and the department of the hip joint is found, so that you cauterize the patient on the hip joint box with the fire cautery in a circular shape, and sign before the place of the hip joint inside the circle as it comes back, so that the box is within the circle;
and if be such cauterization as those with which we have cauterized the stomach.
And if this cauterization is not present, then you shall make three cauterizations of the large olive, and let the cauterization be also perfect as all the others;
and treat until he is well.
of the pain in the knee When pain comes to the hip joint, and it is from cold and moisture, and the patient is cured of what we have said in the division, and the treatment does not work, and the disease is old: then you must purge the patient of large humors of foul pills, or other bad-looking pills. After this, make a fire cautery;
and the method of the cautery should be according to two ways: that is to say, together burning medicines, and fire cautery.
Fire cautery is according to many ways, of which one is:
that you cauterize on the hip joint three triangular cauterizations according to this form, and make a deep and large one, and leave a space of two between each cauterization of the thickness of a nut, and let it be olive-colored;
yet no times do you make fire cautery in the middle on top of the hip, for there are 4 according to this form:
And if you see, if the fire cautery in the ring that we have said before in the dislocation of the hip;
but make it in such a way that the circle contains all the hip, and all the flesh of the leg is burned.
And this is the way it is done in sciatica, when the pain remains in the hip and does not reach the thigh or the leg.
And if it comes only up to the thigh and leg, then make 2 cauterizations at the place where the patient says the pain stays, and 3 above the ankle IV times on the left side a little.
and let the cauterization be with the knife, and let the flesh of the leg be burned;
and if the patient feels that the pain extends to two or three toes or near them, then cauterize at the place where the pain is felt 3 times or 4 times with the "point" cautery. And if one practices it, one does it well.
And if one knows that the pain is in the knee joint towards the thigh, then one does a cut with a surgical knife or a circular one, and you give him good care in all your cauterizations so that you do not leave it there so much as the cautery burns the nerves and large arteries, and so that you do not cause the patient great pain and contraction.
And I have seen many who have done a cauterization on the heel of the foot and left it so long that the leg went completely limp, and the toes as well, and became pierced and corrupted all the toes. After a solution of the belly which he had, he died.
And if the pain is in two places together, do a cauterization on each one, according to this way.
And the wise people say in the cauterization of the knee joint, how it should be done, do it like this and make it as thick as a knuckle or a little less, and put it between the joints and between each joint there is a quantity of space the size of a pea;
and the joints are covered on both sides, and they are also like knuckles, and there is good iron in all;
and this is the form:
and be heated until it is all red and hot, and then put it on the chest of the sick person, and turn it on his left side;
and cauterize once more, and let it rest for three days; and then make an ointment of butter, and leave the open wound long; after the treatment with ointment until it is well.
Albucasis says that we use little of this cautery because of the doubt of its effectiveness, and those who use it are few;
and however this is a good cautery, which can bear it, and where it afflicts;
The medical cautery of burning medicine should be made in such a way that the instrument between the margin of the opening and is of brass or iron on one side, and has two sides, with the quantity of its thickness being half an inch; and are at the back and above, and join together according to this form:
After putting the chest of the horse lying on its back on its belly, and holding your hand very much above the chest of the horse; After putting the [horse] between the two circles of hot wax that are heated on the fire, and leaving it for an hour in order to suffer the heat and burning of the horse;
For it has tried the medication as well as fire;
And when the medication is over, let your hand with the instrument and raise the horse's belly of soft wax, and leave it thus for three days, and put on cow dung as much as that which is black from the scorching is removed; and let him rest for three days so that infection does not enter;
And this would be behind aid after the cure of onions until it is healthy.
And if the pain extends only to the thigh or only to the leg, then make the instrument that you hold according to what you have done in the hip increase.
And this is the way of the hot awes, and I have written it or the treatment of the correction of medicines. Take alkaline and live chisel, as much of one as of the other, and grind them together, and put them in a nine pot. or there is a small hole that the point of a razor can enter;
or there is a small hole that the point of a razor can enter; and place another well-filled pot on it and put vinegar and soft water on it, until there are two pots of powder that you have well mixed with your hand;
and leave it in this way until there is only water and soil left, then take all the water, and put it on vinegar and soft water as before;
And so if it is moistened and is made peaceful with the use of medicinal remedies and other cauterizations.
For it performs such work as fire, and if with other medicines, which well cauterize the meat as these, and honey of almonds and chalts with soap, all these things mixed together.
And Gallien us tells a cure wherein one honourable was cured of the pain in the hip and sciatic vein, and he made much murmur, and said that another cure was not done, and that he was healed all at once when this cure was made, and he bathed himself as it is taught hereafter.
And said in this manner that you grind the green and dry tallow, and pound it with a little fat, and put it on the meat and on the thigh and leg where the pain is, and let it rest;
and leaves it for three hours and by that quantity that the patient does not feel the burning anymore.
And then let him enter or bath as long as his body is a little aroused, and let him enter the bed, and the pain will go away all and he will be healed.
And know that no one should use fire cautery of such medicines, unless after the evacuation of blood.
And Dichoriades says that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with goat hair, it helps a lot;
and this cauterization must be done in this manner. Take another and burn it with oil, and put it on the pit that is between the thumb of the foot and the other which is called the fistula.
After taking the dry hair, and putting it on fire until it turns into coal, and placing it on the wool, and leaving it until it is burned.
and repeat this again, and do not cease to do so as long as you think that it comes up to the hip, and that the pain has stopped;
and the way of treating with fire is called "cauterization with hair".
from the pain of the back
When pain comes to the back, or from چرور، یا توسط ضربه یا از طریق تخلیه زیاد، یا از شباهت ماده ی سرد گسترش یافته، هیچ یک از این شباهت ها ارزش cauteering ندارند، مگر اینکه آنهایی که از infusions of cold material come.
It is appropriate that after the patient has voided bad or similar fluids, a fire be applied to his back where the pain is, three lines of five cauterizations each, and according to the strength and quantity that the sick person can endure;
and the cauterization be done according to the cauterization that is called "the touch";
and if you see, make three or four cauterizations with the claw-shaped cautery according to this form:
Several times this disease comes to small children, and the signs of the beginning are that he has a tight spine when he stands up and is afraid. and you find in the back spine of the two and in us the appearance that comes on the others.
When you see this person and you see him heal, if he is cauterized with the cautery of that one according to this form: So that the fire cautery is equally applied to each part of the spine.
And if you see, so cauterize inside the spine with the piercing cautery two lines or three, and let the punctures be close to each other.
Afterwards, heal the area as much as it is healthy according to what we have said, and beware that you do not apply cautery in gibbosity which is in the spice of nerves.
of the joints' pain
When the joints hurt from moisture that spread to each limb of the body, and when pain comes in pieces, that mirage is called "rheumatism" properly, and when it is caused by cold and medicines do not cure it, it is cured by cauterization in this way:
make the cauterization enter into the joint of the foot, and let the cauterization be olive oil according to this form:
And if it is necessary for you to hold the foot, then make a fire cautery with all the fire cauteries that are claimed "point". And if the pains come up to the knees and to other joints, and this happens many times, let him make a cauterization on each knee three cauterizations or four of each part, all with olive cauterization;
and if you have more work to do, but don't hold your hand too hard so that the skin doesn't get burned.
And if the pains go down to the knees and back, administer the cauterization that we have spoken about in this chapter.
And if the pains are in the hands, do not make them too small;
and if there is still some pain, but don't go up to each joint and the hair of the hand;
and if the pains come just as the cuts or just as the shoulders, then cauterize each part and give good government to the patient and apply medicines.
For if you do this with good government and you purge the fluid, then you will be healed by God.
When the rupture comes in the armpit, and the ball falls down to the crotch and is a new injury, then you must first clean it so that it does not get worse. and he should use things that dry up his belly, so that the end comes from his belly.
After that, he should sit down with his back between your hands, and order him to comb his hair as long as the burning feels, and then bring it to your sides, and sign at the base of the fracture on the bone with the fingernail, and mark everything that is like half a circle above the neck;
Then heat the fire cautery so that it is ready:
as long as it is white and it pours drops. Then bring the balls to their place; and the ministers comb his hair on his back so that it does not turn around;
and work well on the patient's legs, and put a cloth and an iron on his legs, and another one on his hands that comb them;
Then put the fire cautery on all your hand, and hold it steady and keep holding it until you reach the bone, and if you don't reach it the first time, try again a few times until you do; and guard well so that the fire does not splash when you are making the cautery. that you do not burn it. and that through this the patient does not die, or some other misfortune befalls him.
And know that when you come to the bone with the cautery, your work is worth nothing.
And it is necessary that the cauterization of children be subtle according to their measure, and of adult people also great according to their measure;
after three days treat with fire as much as the scar is healed;
after the fire treatment apply other remedies until he is well, and place the patient on his back for ten days until the wound has properly healed;
and it is necessary that his movements be limited for a long time, so that the fire does not splash when he goes to bed.
And after ten days, when he wants to get up, let him be given a well-made bandage, and leave it on for another ten days;
and he should have good rest, so that he works little and wards off too much drinking and eating, and too much pride.
and when he has taught this instruction let him be entirely well.
And I will say here after the cure of the cutter in his paste.
When the ruptures come in other bellies and are connected, and you see that they no longer grow, then you do the cauterization of cauterization according to its quantity, and burn the third of the wound; after the cure according to what we have said;
and none of the above said that it must be cauterized at the cautery of III angles according to this form:
but the first sign is the place of incision and make a line across the width above the rupture, and another below it, and with your hand press all the fire-cauterized part.
But the first cauterizations are lighter and gentler.
of old pain in any member When pain arises in any member, or from a knock or a wound, and this pain persists for a long time, and medicine does not help, then it is necessary that he be cauterized with the cauldron which is called 'poins', and the cauterization according to the length of the limb, its smallness, its weakness, its virtue, and its location from twists, and its pain.
if he is well after the first cauterization, it is good;
this name, restart another cauterization above that one, for such is the custom that he must be moved at the member that is closest to him, so that you do the cauterizations until the patient is well.
The misfortunes are alleviated by cauldron in no way or to a great degree, and most often the disease comes from the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy.
If you see the patient at the beginning, take care that the disease does not spread according to what we have said in the division, and do not let it stop or delay, and if you doubt that corruption will stain the whole body, then make five cauterizations on his head. I cut off his hair at the top of his head, and the other towards the end of his hair by the forehead. and II behind the two horns, and I behind the hairline;
and I leave it so much up to the hand that the cauterization comes down to the bone, and so much that the scorches come out without that the vapors of the heavy humors can come out;
and cauterize over the wound according to what it is in front of you.
And if he has a fever throughout; and let him be obviously burned, if it is necessary that you cauterize them with these cauterys which we have said at the head, and one cautery in his neck, and two cauterys on his spine of the back, and one great cautery on the skull, and one other small cautery, and two cauterys on his shoulders; and two cauterys on the knuckles, and two cauterys on the bones of his hands, and one cautery on each joint of the hands and feet, and cauterys on the palm of the hand;
and beware of the nerves that are under the foot when walking, so that you do not burn them;
or one cautery on the bone of the hand, and one other on the bone of the stomach, and one on the liver.
And know that when I make more cauterization, I also give more aid, and it brings more benefit;
and knows that the patient does not feel any pain at the fire, as those who are well do, for this reason the body is already completely corrupted.
And it is necessary that the cauterization be great and small according to the limbs and joints, according to what you will find in the way of iron.
Afterwards, cure with flour of times with honey and other cures as long as he is healthy.
When a member swells up and is treated with medicine, oil, and poultices, and is not yet healed, then you make cauterization on the member according to its size and smallness.
and let the cauterization be a little bit inside the flesh of the cure; then the cure of onions until it is healed.
And never does one make cauterization by hand and foot and back, at the outlet of the nerve that paralyzes the member, and so if it is broken;
and do not get in the way of them at all unless one knows the members and outlets of the moving nerves of the body.
When the disease called "albaras" is awake, and the medicine's power is nothing, then fire cautery with a single perfect cautery according to the amount of the specific remedy until the blushing is removed, and its color is moved.
then heal with flour of vetchies and lentils with oil of rose and leaves of plantain, and blood of cock and blood of thrush, each a part; and mix them all together, and bind it with a bandage, and apply it to the affected area until it is healed.
The cure for leprosy by cauterization:
When the leprosy comes at the beginning, and you see it stop, if the cautery is made with a fire cauldron that seems like a circle, all around the edge of the leprosy.
And all these things say that fire cautery should also be done in the middle of the wound;
and all this does not seem good to me, because I am afraid that it will become ulcerated and corrupted, and I have never done it once;
and the most right thing is that he be cauterized inside, with the cautery which is called "circule", as we have said in many cauteries.
When someone has a disease that is called "adubelati", and it delays death or because of the waste that it makes or because of the age of the sick person when he is very old and has little blood, or because of the heat; and you see him hastening to die: then you cauterize him inside with small cauteries by piercing; Afterwards leave it like this. For it will hasten to die.
And if you see that the whole body is being poked with fire, then heat the fire of this form:
And put your hand in the middle of the disease called "adubelati" as long as the fire has pierced the pulse, and make such fires that the patient feels heat in some way so that the course of corruption is slowed.
After treatment as long as he is perfectly healed.
Another form of disease that is called "corrosion," and is nothing other than a member's putrefaction, for it gnaws away at the members just as dry fire eats away at dry wood.
If you see this disease in a person who can suffer the cautery together with fire, then heat the small and large cauteries as much as is suitable for the place or the sick person;
Afterwards cauterize all around until you remove all corruption, and nothing remains of it, that all the corrupted part is taken away.
And then leave it for three days, and put oil on the incisions that are hurting from the heat until the burns from the fire have healed over, and all corruption.
After the treatment of onions causing fever.
And if you see after three days that no sound hair grows, it is good.
and if not, then begin the fire cautery on those that are delayed in their place腐敗。
And this menthol is never once cured with medicine awash instead of fire cautery;
but nonetheless the fire cautery is of greater aid, and I have already said that the cure for the awash medicine is in dislocation: take it when you need it.
of onions that come to toes times have passed that the feet by accidents give birth to a disease which is called "clos" according to our intention, and it is a large, troublesome thing that breaks the foot.
And the cauterization of this disease is in two ways. It is to be understood cauterization by fire, and cauterization by hot water.
Fire cautery if you need to heat it up as well, just like a pen of a vault, and let it be made of good iron to the measure that it can drive the nail from all sides, and that it has subtle margins;
Then put all heat on the nail, and turn your hand totally around the nail as far as it comes to the nail's tip; and let it remain for three days until it begins to go away; then make a poultice of wild rose leaves crushed with sand, and leave the poultice on all night, and tie it tightly and let it root out its roots.
Then heal the wound by dressing it every day until it is healed.
And if they have been converted by the use of cold, and often come out and into the mouth and the teeth, then you must bring them fire cautery. Here is one way to do it: Take a twig of argan or iron, or a feather of swallow, and put on the nail and the antelope horn, that is to say, for warts; and put the twig on so that it burns all around, then put a little hot water on, and hold your hand firmly, and press your hand turning so that the edge of the twig comes to the root of the nail, and may find the hot water path deep down to the root;
and suffer the illness a little of the hot water an hour; then leave it so, and it will all come out at its roots.
And so do another one, until you have drained all those who are in the heart, then cure the wounds that cause fury.
When someone shivers from cold or fever or another illness, so that you have to make three or four cauterizations on the spine of the back, one cauterization between each spine; and a cauterization on the legs, and one on the stomach with olive oil cauterization;
will let the shivering stop, and will hasten the healing from the cold illness.
Once the skin breaks out in pustules that come from corrupt matter.
if it seems opportune to the first when they appear that one make a cauterization on each head of the pimple: a subtle cauterization with mistletoe bark, so that the tip is taken from the fire, or with the root of a long-hair plant, or with the lentean cauterization.
And once the fire cautery has begun, according to this method, they cannot grow hair in advance, but their excesses are disrupted and they are healed;
but it is necessary that this be done after the evacuation of blood.
Many times there are great disturbances of blood from the artery that is cut to the wound, which enters the skin, or from the fire cautery of the limb, and similar things; and it is a very painful thing to stop breathing.
And wherever there is an opening, if you quickly put your little finger on the wound of a vein, and strain it as much as the pain subsides from your little finger, and no more drops come out;
then place fire cauterization olive oil on many small and large ones until they are all red;
and then take, or a big or small according to the wound and its place where the artery is cut, and put the cautery on that vein where you hold your two, and keep the cautery there until the blood stops flowing.
And if he seizes a fire when you feel your second pain in the vein, and the cautery is finished, if you take another cautery that are on fire quickly.
And do not cease to do this one after the other until the blood has stopped flowing;
and beware that you do not burn the nerve which is delicate, and that no other evil comes upon the patient;
and know that when the blood stops flowing from the artery, it cannot be stopped well even if the artery is large, unless one of the four ways we have mentioned: by cautery, by extraction when it has not been treated, by a very tight thread, or by medicines placed on it which have the power to stop the flow of blood; And let him lie and be restrained with a bandage.
Who will administer a tight bandage or place burning things on it, or similar things, if it does not benefit, then do not do it.
If this happens to anyone and he has neither sight nor medicine ready, then he should put his index finger on the wound of the vein as we have said, and firmly tighten it onto both the wound and the vein. and don't move the finger, but rather cool it often with cold water until the blood is frozen and thick and hardened.
And make questions of those who are skilled in cauterizing and medicine.
We have told you about the first chapter, in which all diseases are treated with fire, hot medicines, and the needling and causes and instruments and forms of cauterization.
And I have put this chapister on the top of the shoulder, and I will go into this chapister by that middle way for those who ache more lightly than those who ache more painfully.
And so, since I have begun to speak of this, it is necessary that you learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first chapter of the cauterizations, and therefore greater caution is required.
For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
And I warn you that you do not undertake madness. For in this way people come to their end. if they come from those who have such a disease that they die easily due to the hardship of their disease, and the great severity of their illness; and from which one must be afraid.
And from these I have a message for you, and he says: Wait, I am old. and the illness is contemptible.
It only concerns you to consent to those who come to you and have this way, but put more great confidence in your honor than in your own interest, and do not open it carelessly but carefully from him of whom you are certain, and from whom you could have taken it and kept it;
and use prediction and indication in the treatment of your patients so that health is converted.
this will help you achieve a good reputation, glory, and memory of praise.
Very dear son, Our Lords grant you good understanding and justice, and if you will ask for the holy inspiration of His hand, amen.
Or I have ordered this chapter in devising by chapters, according to the one that is before or the chapter of the cauterization, which I have devised from the chief to the tip, so that you may find more easily that of which you will have need.
You know that this disease often comes to infants from excessive suckling, and when the child babbles too much, it strains the baby's head.
and never does this come from the cause of a repugnance that is known.
And I have never seen this disease affect anyone but children, and all those who have had it die quickly; and for as much as it seems to me that I must be more careful in using this treatment in the future.
And I saw a child whose shoulders were weak and whose head would fall over every day until it could not be supported.
and this moisture caused his death, and this moisture so joins the bones together over his skull, between the cheek and the bone;
and if they are so large that the moisture is between the tendon and the bone, and the tendons are small, then you should cut a wide slit with your knife at the top of the leg.
and as far as we know, until the moisture runs.
and give it this form of a spaulder:
If the moisture is deeper, and the abscess larger, then make two incisions in the shape of a cross, according to this form:
and if the moisture is out of the bone, and the signs that you see are the combs of the leg overspread on each side, and the liquid jumps up sharply when you press it with your hand towards the inside, and it does not respond to you: then you should cut a slit in the leg according to this method:
And after the incision, remove all the moisture completely. After having closed the slits with cloths and powders, and have put wine and oil on them, and left them like that for five days;
then remove the cloths and powders, and clean the wound with patches and oil, and let the head hang freely, and feed the patient with meat that is dry enough so that the member heals and is healthy.
And another way of cutting is that you look at where the aperture of the abscess is large, and the gathering of the fluid.
For it is never before; behind on the right and on the left
so cut where the abscess opens, and the draining of the fluid, and do it according to what you are able to do;
and guard that you do not block the artery; and bring a flow of blood, so that the patient dies from a loss of blood and an evacuation of moisture.
When there is a disease that is called "cough" or "pit", and the disease is old, and the remedy of medicines does not benefit, then the following remedy should be used: cauterize with what you will cover the two arteries.
It is therefore necessary, since you cannot block the views, for the patient to raise his head; afterwards rub the place with a rough cloth until the arteries open, and then extract the patient's neck from all the cloth; and see where the vein is pulsing, and its lobes on either side are after the ears, and they are closed;
Then mark the lobes of the cheek, then cut each on either side with a scalpeling blade from two parts, as far as the tooth, and this one be done by the broad edge of the blade.
And if you see, remove the spatula from the artery and cover it on top, cutting as well as II do on the back.
And when the vein is covered, let it continue to rise continually without stopping.
And if the artery does not open to the sense, then you must measure the quantity of the space of three fingers, then mark the cheek and cut it up to the bone;
and this one, which concerns the blood to be removed, is six parts, and by chance a little more or less, according to what the patient can suffer, and the regrowth of the artery;
then look at the wound: if it remains on the bone point of pain, if the scalpeling of the abscesses does not come out, then extract the wound and bind it, and the treatment of pus as long as it is healed.
of grinding When the ancient grindstone comes and catarrh is acquired due to moisture in the temples and old scabs and similar things, and it is treated by the methods of medicinal remedies and all that does not benefit him, let us extract the arteries from the temples and cauterize them, as we have told.
And the way of extracting them is that the patient should make his hair grow again on his temples, and listen to the artery which opens in the temple, for it opens well by its beating, and is little seen but in some men who are too cold;
and if it is seen, then the patient should remove his clothes from some sheets, and then rub the place with no rough cloth, and raise the place with hot water until the artery appears clearly; then take the spasmodic mass where this is the shape: then peel the skin lightly until you come to the artery, then tie it up with pinches, and remove well the webs that are attached to each part;
and if the artery is thin, then turn it with the point of the hook, and cut off that part according to the quantity of the two chapters. For if it is not cut, then nothing will remain whole or intact.
And there are six chapters of this book, until three.
and if the artery is large, you should tie it in two threads of strong silk, so that blood does not come out before the wound heals, and comes out gradually.
then cut the excess between the two threads at that moment too, and then, if you see it, with fire cautery from the cut edge as far as the bone is cut;
and this is the operation, if the patient does not have a fever and has a warm complexion. For cauterizing is done to end the moisture: for this is more powerful against moisture.
Or it is necessary for the extraction of arteries to fill the space with fine cotton and put it on well-made bandages;
and when they are dislocated, if one is cured with dry medicines that cause a التشنج، and tents, until they are healthy؛
and if you do not cut the artery as much as you can do it, if you hurry to cover it with fire, or employ lead vitriol and extract it from your hand so that the blood does not flow؛ and if you do not have it present, if you place your finger on the ice-cold water as long as the blood does not flow, and raise the head of the ice-cold water until the blood stops, and is extracted as it should be؛
And it should have between the two knives a space of a thumb wide, and then when you have cut through both sides, and you take off a little with the sharp edge, then cut into the bone with fire as much as it comes out, and cover the wound in two places؛ and are separated between the two shoulders, for it is not joined to this fire cautery from head to toe.
and this is the form of the cautery:
and that which is swollen and lighter in extraction from the artery is that you cauterize the edge of this fire from both sides, but let the cutting be very slow so that it lasts longer on the heat. For when the instrument is too soft, if it retains its heat less.
tears When the tears of the eyes flow down from a vein that is above the temple at the top of the head, and does not benefit from any medicine that is made, and you see the face of the patient grow pale, and feels a tingling sensation as if it were freezing; and the oil is thin and moist so that the hair of the scalp falls out, and the scalp is burned and scalded by the heat of the tears, then it is necessary for this treatment. And they called it the 'old treatment', and that is what you do for the patient who has this condition in his hair on his forehead, then make three incisions at equal intervals along the length of his forehead;
And they called it the 'old treatment', and that is what you do for the patient who has this condition in his hair on his forehead, then make three incisions at equal intervals along the length of his forehead; and one of the cleavings also as two five all the middle part in swallowing until neif, and the others two at the costles above the papers, and keep back from incising the arteries that are above the papers;
and remove your hand from the extension of the two mandibles, and be each wound the quantity of three halves at the four joints;
and have laid out a piece of sponge and mowed the drapels there for to wipe away the blood, then pour the water from two parts where it is this shape:
from the incisions that are to be made on the temple until the second incision; and peel all the skin that is between the two cleavings up to all the medicine that is on the bone, then do the same thing from the middle incison until the other second, and then remove far this sponge. if you put in the first cut the instrument that is called "culteller", and it is very well sharpened on one side, and the other is smooth, not sharpened, and this is its shape:
and set the knife-edge cutting toward the cart at the back, and the edge is smooth towards the bone, and put it in as far as it comes to the middle cut.
And cut all the hairs that descend from the head as long as the incision is continuous until it opens at the curb, and then make another halfway cut until the other end.
and then remove the hair evenly, and press down on the spot where the hair has been removed;
and then put a piece of cotton tent in each cut, and put there drapings soaked in wine and oil and honey, and watch so that the abscesses do not come out;
and for three days leave it alone, and I bring a great quantity of aquatic tar, then the treatment with basilic oil mixed with rose oil, and other treatments to treat wounds, as long as he is healed.
When any patient comes with a catarrh that has been habitual, and you see the hairs turning gray and fine, and weakening vision, and burned papers; and the hair is cut, and where it hurts most, the patient sneezes. So that we may know that these matters and this discharge do not come from many veins, but only from one, this is the cure that I give.
And you command the patient to raise his forehead, then make a large incision at the forehead, and another one wide apart. And begin from the left temple to the right temple, and make the incision just to the bone; and remove your hand from the nerves of the temples that move with chewing;
and when the bone is uncovered, so suck up all the blood with a sponge, and then tie it between the two lips of the incision with cotton and linen; then lay there drapings moistened in wine and oil, and keep the abscess warm;
and when it is uncovered, if you rub the bone so that the blood begins to flow, then treat with drying things, which cause chapping.
In one way: Take two parts of wheat flour, and three parts of colophony, and make an ointment out of it; and apply it to the wounds to stop the disease from spreading.
Of the support of ears
All who have an ear are one of the four: or grain, or beast, or stone of a certain size, or some other thing like it. or seed, such as wheat, beans, peas; or flowing thing, such as water and other similar things.
When it rings in the ear due to a stone or some other object that does not fit into the ear, and does not stay in place, put the ear to the sun.
If you see the stone, then distil no oil of violets or sesame oil, but instead introduce an extract; and let it cool down, and stop up the nostrils with cloth or wool when the cooling down is done, and place it near the ear; and raise the ear up.
Many times this remedy comes out strongly.
and if it does not come out strongly, then administer to her extraction with subtle needles, for the form is:
if it comes out well with the needles, it is good;
if not, then extract with a subtle tiny hook;
and if not by the hook, then make a knife of iron and a bottle with a sharp edge at the top or the opening of the ear, and stop up what is inside with soft wax so that the liquid cannot enter with the knife; then firmly press it down, for many times this comes out strongly as we have said;
and if it does not come out in any way, then take some glue and press the ears, and put in some instrument that is right for the needle to go through, and put a little cotton inside; Then press the meat onto the stone or something, and keep it firm.
And if she doesn't get well from all of the things we've said, then you must quickly split the ear so that it cracks and convulses.
And the way to handle the split so that you make the first rescue of the headache, and extract the blood according to its virtue, then sit the headache between your hands and turn it upside down, and cut a small split in the root of the ear at the fat or where it depends; and let the split be as if it were a moon, until you press it against the stone, then the bone according to your power, and suck it carefully into your mouth;
and the cure until it is healed.
And if it's a grain that has grown large, then administer an extraction;
and if he cannot come out, then bring the spatula gently and carefully according to this form: and provide an incision for that seed.
But do not do so when you think that the grain is moist because of the moisture in the ear, until you have made many pieces;
then remove it with small pincers and a scalpel, as we said, so that the extractions are orderly.
Therefore, when a person has a cold in their ear, they should first use a strong expectorant, and widely wrap the ear with old cotton. And let him go to bed with that ear up where the cold is. if it bleeds, that's good.
if not, then take many pearls according to the length of your finger towards and lightly, and heat them a little on the fire; and put the patient a piece of his ear, and slice on one side of his pieces from another part, and fix with another piece on the piece that is in the ear; and do not stop to make a piece of stone after a piece until the water comes out all the way, and so does it all the way;
and if you see, if burn I a joint, and pour one of the heads in the ear, and the other head take fire until the more strong joint is burned;
and then repair another part of the others as much water as comes out, as we have said in the stone.
In the extraction of the animal, if it is a small horn, as a flea or similar thing, treat it as we have said in the dislocation;
but if it is a large horn so that one can feel it, then do the extraction with tweezers; and this is the lighter thing to open which is in the ear.
In the extraction of worms embedded in the ears, when you treat it as we have said in the dislocation and where we have spoken of the treatments for distillation, and the treatment does not benefit, then you should look at the ear towards the sun: If there is no opening towards the outside, if the thread is very thin, and if it does not open, take hold of the string where it is curved.
It is narrow below and wide above. And cut the thinnest part of the ear according to the quantity of pain in the patient, and then suck off the form with all the string; do this often until all the blood comes out.
And if they do not obey to come out, then stop it with cotton inside as I have said in the stone;
and if they do not flow strongly as we have said, administer distillations that the old ones have tried in the extraction of worms, and you will find them or administrator of the distillations;
and if you distill your oils and medicines in the ear with all this instrument, of which form it is as you see: And let silver or gold be melted down into small pits, and above them pour to distill.
and for pressing within the distillation to the instrument of silver well made for this, and take you a razor and wrap it around the tip forward cotton; then pour in your oil or juice, and what you see of your medicines in the cane, and the cane be in the ear;
then bottle into the razor all cotton, and press your hand moderately until the oil is distilled or drawn from the ear; and let the patient breathe it in, and let the distillation be heated as one would distil it in the ear; and keep it from being too cold, for the medicine would not be so good.
Of the support of ears
No child is born who does not have small pits in their ears;
and these things also happen to people by a wound in the ear, or a nail inside the ear, and these wounds never completely heal if one cannot see them.
and never does one get a pimple on the nose, and see well.
that comes completely, if one cannot see it, is of great healing in many cases, and in this case you should put the ear of the patient in the sun; and look inside: if you see the operation clearly, if the surgery is done completely with this liquid that gives form:
and be agile and cut before and behind everything, so that it doesn't tear the ear;
if the operation is a nail or a piece of bone in the ear, if you hold it with delicate pincers and cut it lightly, until the whole nail is removed;
And if the ear is fully formed, then take a sharp and light razor and heat it slightly over fire, and then put the ear ring in.
If you feel the swelling that the patient feels pain when he hears it, pierce lightly and be careful not to harm the nerves of the ear.
Then put a cotton swab in the ear according to its width, and oil it with Egyptian oil. Do not put anything inside for a day until the wound is healed, or you take a cotton swab and soak it in rosewater, and powder it with vinegar powder;
And if you see the ear draining, if it is possible that you take out the cotton swab and insert another wet cotton swab made of rosewater oil and wax, until the drain is dried up; Then treat it until it is well.
And if the pain comes on, dip a sponge and drape in cold water, and put it on the ear, and use other remedies that relieve the pain of the headache which are or treating distillations.
Take a string from the hair when it is moist and dry, if it is possible that you spread them with pliers and tweezers, and cut them with a spatum of their roots; Then place over the vitriol fire.
And if not peeled, then place the fire cautery, after the cauldron-like fire cautery, and let it cool after cutting.
and often return, such that nothing remains rooted in its place; And when they are burned by fire, if the roots are burned and do not return.
of the root Often come in papers the hairs a thing that seem gressly in its form and in its dureness, and for this is this disease called "grene", and is an assembly of moisture thick on top of the paper above and below; The over-workings are such:
The over-workings are such: take ward that the grene moves from one side to the other, and this is a light thing to know;
Do the scraping of each part lightly, then take it in pinches, and finally bind it up.
If you cannot cover it up without piercing a bit of paper, do not cause any harm to the patient.
and if the fracture is great, and put together with a stitch, and heal as long as it is well;
and if it is small, do not make any effort, for soon it will heal and cause pain again.
And if the swelling is descending from the ear towards the upper part, turn over the paper and place the swelling on some pins, and cover and press from both sides;
and if the paper is moved by the incision, that does not cause any harm;
and when the swelling has been covered, let there be salt water applied, and heal the part where it hurts as long as the patient is well.
of the fat from the hair Enchaine is fat that is caught in webs of paper above, and this happens more often to children than to others, and hurts their eyes, and they come out with the catarrh in the mornings, and cannot bear to look at the light of the sun because of their tears.
and so they lay on their faces together, and sleep, and are in their skins wet from the coldness of the water which is opened in the oil. And when you press the neck to your ears and feel the pulse run between them.
And the way of this remedy is that the patient put his head on the ground;
and then he takes a blanket of linen, and prepares a tent in the form of a circle according to the quantity of the exiniach of each part, and puts it on him; and press with your hands from both sides so that the exiniach is gathered together in the middle of the circle;
and then pour into the middle of the moisture the spatemile cutting a slant with its broad edge, and it should not be any larger than the wound that is made at the opening of the vein;
and then make the skin smooth in perfection until you come to the exiniach; and multiple disorders come from the wound, according to the shape of a piece of white fat.
So take out all one piece of drying cloth between your two hands and turn your hand from right to left as it dries.
and keep you from stretching the wound, that you do not come to all the splint until it is oil, that you do not bleach it.
And if the extraction does not cause difficulty in the wound, then slightly open the wound lightly until it is visible;
Then extract it as we have said, then wet the drapels with water and put them on their place, and extract the splints.
And if there are such men who grind leaven and put it on top so that the moisture that is delayed is corrupted.
Then heal it until it is healthy.
And if it comes to the apothema hot, if the healer of wounds assuages it until it is healthy.
of the papers When the hairs come out by themselves and are worn out, if they damage the eyes, and cause ways of diseases as usual tears and softening of the hairs and albaugine, so that it is a cause of the destruction of the eyes;
and he has four ways to treat it: or by fire cautery, or by medicine as much as he is before, or by the paste of cauterization, and it is made or by incising and sewing or by cutting, according to what I will say.
It is necessary that you put the head of the patient in your right hand, then bring the paper of oil to your left hand;
if it is turned over, it is good; if not, pour a little needle on all the thread above; and if that is too small at the edge of the paper where the hairs grow out from these hairs, and thread all the way up to the paper, and turn it back to the razor;
then make the part of the paper smooth, smoothing out the hairs, all the way up to the skin with a little blade, from the large wound down to the small one;
Then draw out the thread, and place a little tent of cotton and drape on the paper, then sign on the paper a figure of an arm, like the husk of mirth, and nevertheless it is necessary that the figure be according to the quantity which you see raise the paper which is devised for all.
And if the place where it is necessary that it is made a little quantity of the paper according to what the paper is softened;
then mark all the spine on the two lines that you have signed, and begin with great tears until small; and let it be a fracture near the hairs by the thickness of a root, then pour the vinegar in one of the two angles from which it comes, and then peel it all off;
then assemble the two lips to a stitch of a needle with all the fine thread, and wipe off the blood, and make air the excess of the threads on the two sicles about anything sticky, if you see to do so;
and if not, if you are not worried about it, then leave the sewing and the thread until three days or four.
then treat the wound without sewing with dry and constricting things, because the paper softens at the touch of the wound and the bandage, but the sewing is dried (as the old say), and this is done without fear; and if there is another way:
and if there is another way: and it is that you sign the paper with a shape that is like the fern frond, as we have told, at three times according to the form that is here:
Then cut off those who are at the top with small forces evenly according to the form that is here:
And if you do not have the ability to hold the pliers, and the thing is not even, take an needle with a thread, and wrap it around the shape; and bottle another fine thread, and a long one, and a small one, and join them together evenly between your two hands;
and then hold your hand evenly, and hold all the skin over it where you have sewn it, as we have told you, and join the two lips of the wound with a stitch, and treat it until it is healed.
and if an abscess comes to your incision, if you apply cerotin and similar ointments that soothe it;
and no time has passed that the hair of the paper has been turned:**
then you must use what we have said about the incision:**
but the stitch on one side and the other is more artificial.
The treatment of dog bites is done according to this form: and you should turn the paper and put it in according to what I have said, and then make two holes with a sharp instrument, and two thin strings as long as the paper and the width of the spatumile is:** and cut off both ends where you hold the threads.
then bring together the two slowly above that which rises from the paper of the oil, and draw out the two strands from the two parts formed; and leave it like this for a few days, and the skin that has been drawn out will harden and shrivel and rot, until it is gone on its own.
If it takes too long, if the cut is strong, then treat it until it is healthy;
and when the wound has healed, and if the paper has been raised, and the hair will no longer grow;
This is the form of the two strands that you shall make according to this figure, and according to this quantity of long and wide:
the ovraige is such that you squeeze a small needle, and I thread a fine and thin silk thread; and then join the heads together and arrange them carefully, so that the length of the thread is a palm's length.
and then order in the chase another thread of silk briefly, and tie the heads with the thread;
then put the patient's head on your shoulder;
and then take the sun' s help so that the work is gentle and subtle, then stick the needle into all the hair at the base, and pierce it into the paper carefully while you hold it on top of the natural hair;
then remove the hair all the way up to the head, and stick the same hair into the head, if there is one or two or three or more;
then remove your hand until the hairs come out all the way up to the head, mixed in with the natural hair, on the paper;
And if it is chased away, treat it and the hairs will not come out with it, so you will take the chase to all the thread that you have ordered it, until the chase comes out of the hole above and you see it by the sight of oil;
And if you chase it and the thread, and close the oil and leave it closed for two or three days, until the hair grows in its place and the scar comes out;
And if the hairs are small, so accompany one long hair of nature, and be lifted with it or leave it, until it is lengthened and then let it down.
And if he is chased, he is treated; and the hairs do not come with him, if you will spin the tow from the sheep's wool at a distance, so that it comes from the head of the sheep, and then you will see it through the sight of the eye; then if you will spin the tow and the yarn, and harden the oil and leave it hardened for II days or III, so that the hair grows in its place and the curl rises up; and if the hairs are small, then accompany a long hair with natural curly hair, and be carried with that which you leave, so that it is lengthen and then let it lie. When this disease, which is called "aleacrati" or the porridge comes in oil, there are two ways:
one natural, and one unnatural.
And happens suddenly by wound, or by cut, or by cauterization, and similar things.
And the way of healing it in itself is that you split that seam, and separate the lips of it, and put linen threads inside, and let them heal until they are well;
and it is not necessary that you use in the cure of them things that dry and restrain. For if you do this, the disease will return worse than before;
but I have experienced things that soften, as fennel; and the rose of water or salt and flax seeds are cooked, and olive oil is melted in any of the oils, and it encloses a tent, and cure this with it.
And the treasure of your cure is that you give yourself in defense so that it does not harden according to the form that it was before;
and the remedies we have said are that we do not give ourselves in defense from this disease, so that it does not return according to the form that it was before.
this disease that is called "axacrati", and is natural and accidental.
The accident comes from wounds and cuts and burns and similar things;
and the way of this extract is that you should squeeze an needle, in that it has a double thread, and the thread to the cart, and make it pierce from the left side of the ear so much on the right, that the thread comes in two shoulders of the cart;
then place the cart above all the needle, and the cloth to the large spatula. And if the shape of the paper comes back according to what it is that it should be, it is good;
if not, take the razor and put it in the split, and turn the paper, and make two splits where it is inside the paper;
and let the shoulders of the two splits be at the two angles of the incision that you have cut, and let one angle be so that when they are assembled, the shape is like the shape of a letter that has not "I griesche";
and then cut off that bone, according to the quantity that its sides are open, from what encloses the paper, and then join together the two feared parts, and the cost of a sheep's yarn;
and then the treatment for that which we have said regarding the soothing medicines, and bandages, until it is well.
And if the disease comes from a cut, or a stitch, or a cautery, it is necessary that you make a plain cut through the hairs of the paper, and according to what is above. and then join together between the two leaves of a tent, as I have said;
and then join together between the two leaves of a tent, as I have said; and the work must be done according to the shape of the disease, for it is very different in form, and the master surgeon arranges everything within his power so that he can restore the shape to its natural state;
and the patient's middle ones, according to what must be done with the tools and the art of many arrangements.
When this weld is made in such a way that the paper above is welded with the oil white, and cannot move or do its natural work, then it is necessary that you put the point of a razor to weld the paper, and lift it up;
and they are spread out as pins, as much as you can take what is made on the thin blade of a pin, which is not too sharp and not too dull, so that the patient does not suffer from the too sharp blade of the pin, which bleeds the oil;
and be your incision, where you peel off that which is assembled, lightly, so that the paper returns to its natural form;
and all that is gathered is healed, and never put in acidic salt, and raise it with fresh water and wine;
Then place between the paper and the oil a piece of linen cloth, and place on the oil wet wool in abundance of smoke. and after three days use the collar and the things that bind together until it is well.
Know that the finger is according to two ways: It is nervous and resembles a hard matter of blood, and another that is not nervous but resembles frozen moisture, which when touched with iron and heated with pinches does not burn.
And both these appearances begin to spread towards the great tear, and grow more and more until they blind all sight and all light and all movement of the oil.
And the way of the incision is that the patient puts his head in the sun, then he opens the hair; and hold the paper to your hand, then twist the nail around the little finger, and extend it upward; and take a needle, and I put a hair of horse, or of cow, or of bull, and thread it tightly; and double the point of the needle a little and thread it through the nail, and pierce it with all the needle, and tie the nail with a thread and stretch it up, and peel off at all the nails' ends the rind of the nail which follows the tendon and the silk to the hair root until the top, then cut the remaining in the root of the nail so that by the incision does not come out the blood as is used;
and never stretch the nail to the one-sided cut, and on the thread, as we have said; and then burn everything with a fire so that this is the shape:
and keep the spatem away from the raw flesh and don't tear it, and don't pierce the prune.
and after the incision pour in oil a little rope of tar and leave it until the next day; then heal what needs to be healed as much as possible so that it is healthy.
and if the nail is not nervous, and you can't put in a needle, and this image of a nail with medicine is often healed.
and come like I have told you in the division, and if you see it covered, so work on the oil of the sick man, and take a little spatem according to this form: And stretch out the finger carefully, and if you see that it is not shrinking at all and its growth is accelerated, then distil from your mouth in oil made of litargite and red dye and honey, and stop the oil until the next day.
If nothing opposes it in the oil, as if it were a hot abscess, then the milk, and first cure the hot abscess until it is healthy, then begin the operation again as before, until it is healthy.
And then begin again with this same work on the other hand, as long as it is all boned.
And if the appearance of the flesh of the arm hurts a lot in the oil, then hang it on a hook, and make a covering with a part of it, not all at once, so that tears do not come.
And then distil in the red oil which is made of litargite.
Of some men there are none that do not make the red color, and they crush the prunes and hold them on the paper and turn them away from themselves, and it seems like a rose of bumblebee.
and if the patient puts his head in your lap, then he will operate on the hairs, and tie all those that suit him with appropriate knots for that, and support it firmly.
then shave the first hair, and keep shaving until the end, and be careful not to spill the oil on the patient while operating.
and be the incision of the spurium that we have said in the incision of the nail and with small movements so that one breaks the bone with force, as the form after this chapter shows.
and when the incision is complete and all the hair has been removed, then pour on the oil of rose or you have distilled with red wine and similar medicines that are corrosive, and put a cotton ball on top with the help of honey, so that it is assured against an abscess heating.
and if there is a delay and the sun rises on you, and you doubt about the abscess heating, then leave the oil and treat the abscess with soothing things that heat the abscess.
and return to your work as soon as you are well, and so make the skin tight with this treatment.
However, it is necessary that you adjust the cure for each person according to their natural path. and of the route of accident, in work with iron;
and do not put your hand in any of these works until you see that the limbs are suffering from that work.
are red, and are covered over the oil, and endure its work and weaken the oil all the time.
So then, in the first place, examine him to see if his oil is dry, hard, and free of any other disease but the scurvy; then treat it in this way:
instruct the patient to put his head in your shade, then hang down those that are close to the ground completely according to their wisdom, and let them be doubled up carefully according to this form:
And let there be two oils by degrees according to this form:
and then carefully coiling those veins gently, and washing the blood out hour after hour, until you see those veins remove themselves from the oil.
and keep the oil from touching the tips of the spatulas, and do this work at noon before the sun, and be very hot in your work so that you only burn those veins;
and when you have finished this, let it distill in the oil clear and red wine to corrupt what is delayed in the sebaceous gland.
And if you do not have the power to coil all of this in that hour, then make a paste on the oil from soothing things that relieve the pain of the hair, and leave it for several days until the pain is relieved and is assured of the abscess being hot, then start again according to this method which is before until it is healthy;
and this is the form of healing:
The wound is called a "fistula".
When you treat it with hot cauterization and medicine as I have said above, and it is not yet healed, then cut into the abscess, removing all the moisture as far as the bone, until the pain goes away.
And when the bone is exposed, and you will see corruption and blackness, then this is the treatment:
and it is called "aspre chief", and be made of fire from the top to the bottom, and be pointed as a file, like this in the present form:
And place it on the site of the corrupt bone, then turn it between your two hands, and press with your hand a little until you feel that the corruption has been removed;
and do not do this once, then restore the place of dry remedies.
if the legs are closed and the back is straight, and the spine of the bow is also closed, and remains so for forty days, and he does not renew or get an abscess, and bad accidents do not happen to him, that he is well;
if not, if there is no other way than to bring the fistula to the hole of the nose according to this form: and that you uncover the bone the second time with iron, and with medicinal herbs, and when it is uncovered take it according to this form, and let the iron be at three angles, and the flesh be thinned up to the top as you see here:
then put it on the bone with the saw of the lamia, and keep your hand away from the oil pot, then turn the whole iron until it goes through the bone and is felt by the patient because it touches his nose if he holds his hand on his nose;
and therefore restore the place of dry medicines, as I have taught you, and when the horse has grown and hardened its limbs, so the material goes to the nose. this is a lighter thing for the patient.
When the eyes are open in all directions, and it does not come to disturb the nose, neither does it decrease or increase, so you must lie the patient down.
then the healthy one, then put suction cups or a hat on to prevent pain from being sucked in, then put oil there, made of acacia and aloe and incense and sarcolle, and then strain the oil, and plaster it with binders and cloths;
and the method of the cloths is that you press cloths soft enough, and double each one in IV, and then put one on top of the other according to the quantity that the eyes need;
then draw out from above a hard piece of wood, and start again the suction cups so as not to hurt themselves.
then take off the suction cups and let the oil be drawn out day and night, and if it becomes slimy, you must draw it out slowly.
then take off the ligature after day and night, and if you see that the oil is going back, it is good;
if not; then start again with the plaster and the drape-like things, and the ligature and suction cups until it is healthy.
of the breaking of a woven cloth When the ruptures come in the woven fabric, then open, and comes out like a grain of resin, and is likely to be seen;
So if you see it covered, the ovary is such that you push a needle into the root of the part below until it comes out, then push another needle where there is a double thread from the part of the armature; and pierce her, and leave the first needle according to disposition;
then cut the thread twice and fasten a part of the thistle to the thread, and secure it well, then remove the needle and put on another damp oil in plenty of wax;
and let it be until the thread chokes with the thistle, then heal the oil from comforting things as long as the wound is healed;
and no time the wound is restricted by a thistle each part of a circle of cloth, until it is healed.
And if the hairs have great appearance, if it pierces the thin spatula which comes by virtue of the oil, and corrrects the moist albinized and cuts the hairs, and enters in so soon;
then remove it as long as it is healed.
This disease which is called 'alccunati' is only water that is mixed in oil, resembling water descending, and it is not water.
and the manner of the appearance of this chapter is that you should make the patient sit on one side with his back straight, then take the head between your hands from both sides and hold it up so that the hair comes to your fingers; then place it in position, and do not let the light shine on it, and see the patient's things as if he were alone;
and if it does not fall out, know that it is sharp, and do not let the hair fall out from the head as we have said.
if you sit the patient between your hands, then take the thin scalp and place it on the cornea with the continuity of the conjunctiva with the cornea and the crown, until the hair comes out;
and when it is out, pour hot sharp oil mixed with honey, or sharp or fenugreek is boiled and honey, then wash it with other washes until it is healed.
with the oil We have the appearance of arrows in division, and that which is necessary for piercing. For in the work according to health.
It is necessary that you sit the patient between your hands crosswise, far from light by the sun, and that you press the oil of st. John's wort very tightly.
Then place the paper of oil on your left hand if the hairs are on the left, or on your right hand if the hairs are on the right.
Then take in your right hand, if the hairs are on the left, the instrument called 'almagda', or in your left hand, if the hairs are on the right.
Then place the point of the instrument at the root by its thickness on the pale side of the oil in the part of the lesser wound, then pour the instrument called 'almagda' with virtue, and turn back your hand so that it penetrates into the pale side of the oil, and feel that almagda comes to the empty thing;
and it is necessary that the measure of the vein of liquid gold be at the perfect measure of the space that is from the apricot up to the end of the blackness; and this is the crown of oil;
so that you see the bone in this paper for the clarity of the cornified tissue, and then place the instrument at the level of the water where it is, then express it one path after another.
If he is now awake, then the patient will see before him and the instrument in his oil.
Then rest for a short time, and let the water rise again, place the instrument with force, and when it is firmly in place, if it rises, extract the liquid gold gently by turning your hand back and forth;
and then put a little of the clear water on top of it, and take out some of that oil from inside. And then take by the side the oil of spices or another wet in oil with a lot of honey, and bind with the healthy oil.
Now, and those who are of our time, let us put on the komijn with a lot of honey.
And if the magda cannot enter into the oil by its hardness, because there are some men whose hairs are too hard, so it is that you squeeze the instrument which is called "alberit", from which this form comes:
And then pierce the conjunctive only a little bit, and do not go too deep all at once, but make a small hole, then pour in the liquid gold as we have said;
and for the completion of the work the patient prepares to lie down, seeing that he sleeps on his back in a dark place;
and be free of all movement, and eat light foods, and do not move his head to the right or left, and bind it according to its position for three days;
then lay him down in the same dark house and test his vision, and have him look at some things, and then bind it again for seven days;
and it is not appropriate that you do this during the time of the cure or after the incision, but it is appropriate that you prepare him, for what happens to him suddenly in hospital.
For the abscesses come up quickly, so that you take off the poultice before the seventh day and apply what softens the abscess.
and when it is calm, so that it does not see in the morning and put on its face a veil to cover any part of it, and be there in that dark house.
And then he left the house little by little, and turned his back on them;
and know that no one should meddle in this case. And one came to us from the Land of Israel who told us that in our country it is used to eat almagre because it absorbs water, but I have never seen any such thing in our land, nor have I ever read about it in the books of the ancient ones; and perhaps it is a new thing.
These are the appearances of the forms of almagre, so that he who does not know them may see them;
and let them be made of pure brass; And let the head of this middle subtility be, and behind it in three angles aigu.
No one knows if these things will come out whole or half-formed, so some look like scorpions at the tip of the foot.
And if there are any of them that have a blue-green color, and if there is a red-brown color. In this case of those things that are red-brown, and not blue-green, you must place the patient between your hands, facing the sun.
In this case of those things that are red-brown, and not blue-green, you must place the patient between your hands, facing the sun. and open their nostrils, and apply oil to those things, and massage them gently; So that you can hold the patient's foot in place with a thin splint from one side, until you are sure that the thing is all bone.
And if there is nothing left that can't be covered with a thin, lightweight instrument, so that it doesn't stay in place; and if you do not mount on him, or an abscess, if the wound is as it should be;
and if it is malignant abscesses, then you must hasten and cauterize as soon as the heat is withdrawn and all the pus is drained, then pour on it nor oil neither water nor wine. For if it is done, and moisture comes from there to the palace, know that he is healthy;
and if the moisture does not pierce as it should, know that there is bone rotten in the bone above, so that the instrument does not come to cut:
then you must put a thread of linen a little thick, and bind it with hands, and leave between each knot of space one or two; and put the patient's cheek to the thread in his nose at some power, and draw it in smelling until it comes through the nose into the mouth;
and many times teach the child to go to school, and it is a light thing for him who does it.
and then hold the head that comes by the nose with one hand, and the other head that comes by the mouth with the other hand, and pull them apart one after another like us who are spinning thread.
Do this as long as you can keep the thread from breaking, then turn the yarn, wash the blood away, and dip the yarn in Egyptian oil, and then put it back on the nose as before.
Do this for three or more days, until the oil corrupts all that is kept from being stretched;
and then put on the nose a string of leather for three days until it is well, and if it needs dry medicines, then use them.
and this is the form of the instrument for purging the head, so that one infuses oils and medicines into the nose:
And be of silver or gold, resembling a lamp open, as a dog, and so lead them;
and if you see, then make a closed bag, and be the instrument plain to purge the head;
and I always hold the head for him when one heats the oil or any liquid.
of the shoulder from the neck
Many times a disease grows and increases in the head, and becomes great enough so that it is visible to look at;
and therefore you must cut it out at the beginning, and burn the bone thoroughly, then put fire or burning medicine on it;
and if you delay to cut it back until it is great, then take heed if it is hard, of the color, of the poverty of the sense:
if you do not touch me with iron for it is a infected abscess, because when one cuts it once, then there comes great evil to the patient;
and if the abscess is due to a slow touch, not from a sharp pain, and you see that it can be covered completely, then empty the patient and let him rest in peace, and treat the abscess with dry things that will constrict and restrain.
It is known that when a solution of continued nature enters one of these cartilage joints, it does so only slightly, for fear in some men.
So then, if there is any doubt, see if the wound is fresh to all its blood; and then join the two lips with a stitch, and then treat it until it is well;
and if the lips are torn from one side to another, then it is necessary that you peel all their flesh until they heal, and then join the two lips together with a stitch, and bind them, and powder with powder of dragon's blood and burnt incense; and put on the powders a piece of plaster of salt or other plaster that binds forever, and leave it until it falls off by itself, and then treat it with ointment until it is well.
The way of the wound so is that you bring together the solution: or by needles, as we have said in the surgery of the womb; or by thread, as I have told you.
of the lips
At home the apostem is hard within the lips, resembling grains of rice, and smaller and greater;
Then you must turn the lips, and cut each notch, and take it with pliers and cut it into each part;
then employ fire after the incision of vitriol to scorch until the wound is stained;
and then remove it thus, and treat the wound with dry things as long as it is healthy.
Many times grow on the gums a sore that the old one calls "albulus";
if it is necessary that you hold it with pliers and cut off at the root, and let run the blood or the sanc;
and then over the vitriol water boil, or other powders restraining and drying;
and if it returns after the incision, and often happens, so that if it is copped a second time, and cauterized: if it does not return after the cauterization;
No instrument is assembled to the head of the tooth, inside the mouth between the gums, scrapings which are ugly and rough; and the teeth are never black and yellow and rotten, as long as the corruption comes to the gums, and the teeth stink;
So that you make the disease sit between your hands, and its roots are in your sanctity, and remove the teeth or scrapings as they appear, so that nothing is delayed; and then you make it black and green, and yellow and other colors, until they are world;
and if there is one bone broken, it is good. if not, start again on the second day and the third, until you have all healed;
and know that the teeth have different shapes of instruments to grind, according to what the practitioner demonstrates, and for those which the rasper whose teeth are grinding have other shapes than those whose teeth are not grinding; and these forms and others are arranged with you.
It is necessary when you cure the tooth of pain that you delay the drawing as much as you can, for this should not be done at all; because it is a very high substance up to which one has no excuse to draw it.
Now when the patient is forced to pull, you must be certain about the tooth that needs to be pulled. Many times the pain makes the patient crazy, and he thought that the tooth was sound, and made him draw the good tooth; and it does not remove pain from this, as long as the evil is extracted, because we have already wanted to do this with these gentlemen;
and when you are certain of the tooth that hurts, then it is necessary that you scarify the tooth at all its roots; scrub it very hard so as to wear out the gums on all sides;
then you put it on your fingers or with small needles at the first prick and prick, until it is well extracted, then you fasten the needles firmly; and let the patient's head be between your knees, and hold it firm so that it does not move.
After removing the tooth correctly without breaking it, and if it does not fall out, take any of these instruments and put them gently inside each part, and move them as you did first.
And if it is perforate and bleed, then it is necessary that you fill it with cloths where it pierces; and if the extraction is done carefully with small needles so that it does not break when extracted;
and it is necessary to make a bleeding over the gum in order to shake off the tooth.
And be sure that you do not break it, and leave a part of it behind, and return to the patient with greater pain because of the root's mischief than from the first.
And beware that you do not do so as the ignorant surgeon does, who often breaks the jaw by his haste and boldness, and does not administer what we have told you.
but bring about by the incision of that great disease for the roots which remain, or for the chariot which they break, as we have often desired.
and when the tooth is pulled, wash its place with wine or with ash and with a string;
and let them heal from blood that often comes, for it often happens to employ the place of vitriol;
and if this does not work, then burn with fire.
The shape of the instruments, so that they do not damage the teeth first, should be long and thick, so that they do not double when you pull the tooth;
and these are the forms: And let them be large members so that they do not bend when drawing, and made of good iron, and toothed so that they can hold fast.
of the root of the teeth When the root is wet while milking, if you place cotton wadding soaked in oil or butter on the joint for one or two days, until the joints are softened, then the claws which are called 'algefri' seem to be the cause of the problem;
and inside make it as with a file and this is the form:
And if the roots will not come out with all these pliers, you must uncover the jaw completely around the root, and put the instrument called "althali", that is to say a chisel, which is this form:
And be small and thin so that it does not break, and the root comes out through this, it is good;
if not, if you help yourself with all the tools, so that the forms come later:
And if one helps oneself with this instrument which has II rings, from which this is the form: and other iron instruments that are in front in the razory of the teeth, and this instrument which seems a pair of large pliers, from which this is the form:
and be the instruments small so they cannot break, and know that many of the dense instruments are; and also other tools, which are not worth counting;
and the master subtleties try out their own instrument according to that which their work and the disease show them, for there are many diseases where the old teacher does not teach an instrument for the diversity of them; and if it does not break the cart or other bones, on which he sits, if he seeks the instruments that are suitable, I have told you, and help with gestures, so this is the form:
And let them be thick and firmly holding the bone, so that it does not escape but can hold and cut off.
and then restore the place of medicines that are right for it, and if there is putrefaction in the bone, and it is small, so the cure with all this instrument:
When the teeth appear not according to nature's form, and the shape is ugly, especially in young women, then you must know that the root is not in its right place, and it cannot be made sound with tooth powder or filing:
then you shave and if it takes the tooth, then take this instrument which is described above, and which seems like a little fork, and make it of iron made:
And the cap is cut and cut with your hands for the hardness of the tooth, and so that you do not move the others, and if it appears that it can be filed, then file it with a file like this:
and it is also as the file which one makes needles:
and when I touch his tooth little by little, so that he does not move until he chews;
and then when it is smooth all over with a rasp, and its edges are too sharp and it bleeds the tongue, so it is necessary to sharpen the sharpness as much as possible until it is even, so that it does not bleed the tongue or corrupt the speech.
When the tooth is loose in front, either by pounding or by chewing, and the patient cannot squeeze it without causing him to chew, and you have treated them with restricting medicines, and that does not work;
if they are restrained by a gold wire, because the silver thread becomes green and pus, but the gold does not move at all;
and let the wire be neither too thin nor too thick, according to the quantity of space between the teeth;
and if you can reach the back teeth, take the wire and bottle double between the two healthy teeth, then put the bridges between the back teeth, if there is one or more, until you have cleaned them thoroughly up to the healthy tooth on the other side; then start the cover again until the part where you are going to put it, and hold your hand gently and thoroughly as long as it does not move;
and let your lever at the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape.
Then take the bridges with pliers, assemble them and place them between the healthy tooth, and put it in such a way that it does not hurt the tongue;
and then leave it tight as long as it can stay in place, and if it falls or the thread breaks, hold it with another thread;
If it remains and serves this way for all its length, and this is the form of the bones and the appearance of their joining together as you see:
And when the tooth comes loose, if one puts it back in its place little by little, as we have said;
and do not meddle with anything that is not skilled and tolerant, and never make the shape of a tooth out of yak bone, and put it back in its place where it fails, and hold it in place as we have said, and delay and serve thus for a long time.
No one should extract a tooth that comes loose from the tongue or nature, and do not try to put it back in; or by accident of a sore spot;
and the work is such that you open the mouth of the sick person, and put your hand on his chin, and pull back the tongue;
And take the nerve with a broad hook as long as the tongue is dislocated from its position, and if there is pain or no pain, and this is sudden pain of wound, then he seizes the ligature and seizes the broad bandage.
and be careful that the incision is not too perfectly cut, so that the artery is damaged;
and when you have done this, lift up the water of rose and so on, or cold water, then put a piece of linen over the tongue;
and the poultice for each night, so that the ligature cannot be closed.
And if the blood flows out, then put vinegar on the ligature; and if it does not stop bleeding, then cauterize with the slow cautery, which is good for this; then the doctor treats with other treatments until he is well;
and if you see a flesh-color that is black or hard, so that the patient feels it not, do not touch it at all, for it is cancer.
and if it is declining to blue-black, and there is moisture, then he gets the oncine, and makes it with a thin spatulum, and releases it from one side and the other; and if it goes to your head, then put on vitriolic oil until it is burned, then come back to your head as long as you keep it all;
then raise your head and neck, and heal with other remedies until you are well.
of the throat No one comes from within the throat that are called "gourd", and they are properly called "amandres", and when you cure them, as we have said in the section on dislocation, and they do not heal, then take care:
If the abscess is hard and of small size and pale in color, do not touch it with iron.
And if it is red and its root is large, do not touch it with iron, either, for fear of the loss of blood; but you leave it until it is dead, and then you will remove it, or it would break by itself;
and if it is of pale color and its root is thin, then prepare the instrument to cover it, but first see if the abscess is hot and inflamed.
Then you shall place the patient in front of the sun, and let his shoulders be level, and he should open his mouth and press the tongue against all the instrument, so as to form it thus:
and it should be of silver or of gold as thin as our knives:
And when you have pressed the tongue to all this instrument, and you see the abscess, then take the scaly and put it in the almond, and carry it up higher than you can.
and try to make any thread with it, then cover the instrument, so that this is the form, which seems like one force; and all the way the head is corbeled, and one place to another, and are very hard, and is made of iron where or of adanie:
And if you do not have this instrument present, take the cap with pliers, where there is the form: And be trenchant on one side, and on the other side no;
And when you have covered one of the almonds, so cover the other according to this same way, and after the incision gargarize the patient with hot water, and hot and easily, and they move away from the blood if it comes, then gargarize the patient with water, or squeeze pomegranates that are cooked, or oak leaves, and similar things, until the sun is dried up; and then the treatment as long as he is healthy;
and there are no other abscesses in the throat than the two mandibles, if they are cut off properly like the two mandibles.
And I treated a woman for an abscess that was inside her throat, that is to say, a small-sized abscess.
and it had completely closed the throat so that the woman could not breathe through the constricted passage, nor eat or drink, and she would have died if she had remained like this for a day or two.
And the abscess was so high that it had been misaligned by two rain-sized passages through which the patient had breathed.
So I waited a little while, and then I put one of the oxen's horns in his mouth, and it tore at his flesh, and I pushed hard, and in a large portion of the bowel.
and then I fixed another part in the other hole where the abscess was, and I wrapped his mouth, and pressed his tongue.
after I put the ringworm in these abscesses, and I drank a bit of blood from them; and then he took out the tube from her throat and now he started drinking water and wine in turn, and did not stop cutting this abscess for a long time;
and the abscess began to close again, and filled up the space that I had cleaned out, until it became very large;
then I put a ringworm in it and cauterized it inside her throat: and then it didn't hurt anymore;
and I left these parts behind, and only God knows what happened to me afterwards.
of the eye
When the uvula moves down, and she is running and distant, it is called "perpendicular".
And if it's big and round, it's called "uvula".
When she is healed as we have said in the chapter on division, and the healing does not benefit her, and you see that the foot abscess is quietened, and it is subtle, then you should cut it.
and that which is swollen and gathered is not far away; and it is bloody or of a red or black color, then you should avoid the incision of it. For there is great danger with the eye disease.
Therefore, when you see it, according to the manner that I have said, of its swelling and length, you should make the patient sit in front of the sun, and press its tongue against the instrument of which we have spoken above. Then take the oncine [a type of hook] and draw it through the uvula, and trim it with two instruments which I have said in the chapter on incising the two mandibles.
And it is necessary that you do not cover more than the excess that is beyond the natural term.
for if you cover more, it will hurt the throat and the speech.
and after the incision, use what we said in the incision of the two amarets, and cure it until it is healthy.
And if the patient has fear about covering, then you must use fire cautery on the sensitive parts.
And the technique of fire cautery is sharp and piercing. And that the patient puts his head in your lap, and then presses the tongue to the instrument that we said or fire cautery, and mixes it with sharp vitriols, so that it is not too thick or too clear. and use this tool's manipulation, of which this is the form:
and put a hair on one's head or a piece of cloth into the medicine, as if it were a spoonful of medicine, and place the instrument over all the medicine on the wound.
and let the patient lie on his side, so that he swallows and spits out the medicine from his mouth, so that it does not go down the throat and hurt the chest.
then take all the medicine in your hand and press it onto the wound, half the quantity every hour, until you see the wound heal and the medicine's bitterness ease.
and if you see blood, take cotton and wrap it around any instrument, and wet the cotton with the medicine, and put the instrument all over the cotton in the bandage, until the cotton is wet all over the wound.
and do this often, until the burn has healed completely, then leave it to dry, and wash after three or five days.
And if you need to clean the wound before applying the medicine, wash it first and then dry it. Take cotton soaked in the medicine and put it on the wound, and wipe away any medicine that is on top of the wound with a wet cloth.
and be raised by cold water, and be cured by gargling as long as it is healthy.
This treatment is safer than incision, but only the cauterization.
if it is cured by fumigation in this way, take calamus and hyssop and oregano and rue and chamomile and alfalfa and similar herbs, and put them all together or some of them in a pot, and throw it in, and let it boil;
and the pot should be very tightly covered with strong clay, and with a ladle stir it in this way: and of silver or gold, and let one of the bottles be put in the mouth of the sick person as long as the vapor rises to the nose through the tube, until the nose is deadened;
after this start often, as long as the nose dries up, and be careful not to do it at the beginning of the coming of the abscess, for many things come with it; and do not make any fire but to the declination of an abscess cautery.
And if this instrument is not present, then take a knife and put it in the patient's mouth on the tooth with a hook, so that the fire does not hurt the patient too much; For the hook does not cause severe pain in the mouth, and this is good treatment overall.
Often there is an oss or a spine of fish, or nothing;
so that you can see what it is, and press the tongue to the sun with all the instrument, so that you can see the thing clearly;
and if it does not open and is pushed back into the throat, you must make the patient vomit in such a way that the food is cooked in the stomach; in case the thing comes out by vomiting;
ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou I morcello and he takes an sponge and wraps it around his mouth, and then swallows it; and when it comes to the place, if it stays, and then you will pull hard;
and if it does not come out easily as we have said, then take an instrument of plunging according to this form:
And let the instrument be bent at the end so that it can enter more easily into the throat, and lift the chin up; and be careful not to touch the epiglottis, that it does not block the way, and do not punch the bone inside;
and show him how to blow out the instrument so that the thing is removed easily; if the bottle is swallowed, or he draws it up evenly with all the instrument, as long as it is up.
And be the instrument curved to the tongue so that it can enter the throat more easily, and lift the tongue high; and beware that you do not touch the epiglottis, that it does not come to the tongue, nor does it push the bone inside; and be sure that the patient swallows the instrument, for as long as he swallows, he should move or what is happening there; if the drink goes down, or he pulls the instrument back equally, as far as it goes.
No medicine should be given to him unless he has vomited it up, as I said in the division, by the cure of medicines; and when he does not benefit from it, then look in the throat of the sick person with the sun, because you press the tongue to the instrument that I told you about.
And if you see the blood, if it trails a tiny hook, or sharp claws that match this.
And if he doesn't respond, take a dog's chain, and pour it down the throat of the patient, then boil or simmer the blood of the dog, and make this happen often. And if the patient is turning blue every day.
then take a full glass of cold water, open the mouth, and dip it in, so that he swallows it, and moves it to his hand often; and if soon after drinking the water he feels the bitter taste, let him spit it out.
And if it does not taste bitter as we have said, then burn the sick person with the smoke of the astringent, with the instrument that I mentioned in the fumigation of the urine;
Make this many times, for she will not lack a taste of it.
And the way of the smoke if that you squeeze it out a pot or it has coal in, and is the cover of a coverlet pierced into the middle, and in that hole where the head of the instrument is;
Then pour out your smoke, and let the patient put the head of the cane in his mouth, and shut his mouth, so that the smoke does not come out but comes to the blood;
and the blood will now run, and if it does not run, then begin again the smoking with many times;
and let the patient suffer thirst, and drink salty and bitter things, and do not drink water;
and then it is necessary that she go out by this government.
And the form of the instrument has been seen to go out blood, if one can see it, resembling curved nails for them to enter the throat; and give it a smooth appearance with a file, so that whoever takes it cannot let go;
Mouths of appearance are, according to whom the memory comes here after one and another in this book, and they are varied in piercing and cutting;
and it is in two ways: the first is in its own shape, and of what he holds moisture.
The second type are those where the location is affected.
Because the abscess at the top is different from that at the bottom, and the abscess at the charn (the jaw) is different from that at the joints, each has its own characteristics in terms of appearance.
And if to abscesses one must not pierce at all, until the bowels are dead according to their accomplishment;
and if to such as one must pierce when they are cured, and do not die according to their accomplishment, as is an abscess that has delicate joints.
For when abscesses arise from the joints, and are left until they putrefy, there is a risk that the ligament and nerve of the joint may rot, which causes contracture in the limb.
Or the abscess is a delicate limb, and if you delay the piercing until it is dead, it will harm the principal limb;
Or it is delicate to cut down the root, if one cuts it in this way that it dies.
and it does not seem to me that you pierce the anus after having completed digestion, so that the one who is delicate at the root does not spoil completely, and remains inside, and there comes a fistula. and he cannot recover in great pain.
And it is necessary that you know the time of piercing the anus which is dead according to completion, and that is when the pain is eased, and the departure of fever, and the decrease of pain and redness, and the movement and the stabbing of the head of the anus, and the other signs;
and it is necessary that you make the piercing sit down where it is most dependent of the anus, and where it opens muscles;
and the piercing of the long pipe, and if the abscesses are on the hands or feet, or in joints, and at the roots and arteries, and in all of them even, where there is no pleurisy. In cases where they bleed, by what member.
And when abscesses are in the flesh, if it is necessary that you leave the piercing until it is confirmed in the completed digestion, as we have said.
For if you pierce it before this, if you lengthen the pipe of its blood, and it is full of filth; and by chance harden the lips and deepen the pit of it.
And if to any abscess that is pierced according to the width of the body, according to which the members have need.
And you bring small abscesses, small pustules; and in large abscesses, large pustules, and many splits according to the appearance of the size of the abscess;
and if for such abscesses it is necessary to cut the cure, and cover; when they are already become like cloth, and are deadened, so that you do the same with them as you do with blisters:
and if they are cut into three angles, and if they have an opening like the skin of a mirth, like abscesses of arms.
and if they are cut where one makes a round cut, and other cuts, and a similar cope.
those who do not have a head, as in a superficial abscess, you must pierce it clearly;
and when the abscess is large, and it has a great bulge, and you pierce it, if you do not draw out all of the bulge at that time, but draw out a part of it; then stop the abscess just until the next day, then draw out nothing therefor; do this many times from hard to harder, until all of the bulge is gone;
usually the patient is of weak virtue, or a woman porter, or small children, or old honourable people. Those who do not have a head, like an abscess on the surface, it is necessary that you pierce it clearly; and it is necessary when the abscess is large, and it has a large amount of pus, and you pierce it, if you do not remove all the pus at that time, but remove some part of it; then stop the abscess until the next day, then remove nothing more; repeat this many times with great care, until the pus is completely removed; but if the patient has little strength, or a woman carrying, or small children, or old people who are decrepit.
Treat this text with great caution, and when you have pricked your abscess, if the wound has healed, examine whether the wound from the abscess is small. and if it is a simple cut, then prepare cotton wicks or old cotton. and if it is a large abscess and there are many openings, then you should place a wick in each one so that they touch each other.
and if you have cut the skin around an abscess and sewn it up, then you should fill it with dry cotton or linen rags without moisture, and leave it until the next day.
Then, clean the wound and apply ointment as long as it is healthy.
And if there is blood loss with the incision, then apply cold water and quickly, and wet the cloth, and place it on the bleeding area many times.
And if the pain from the wound persists, then apply a remedy and cure as I have described in this book, and if it is an infectious wound, and the apostemes are very nervous, then you should place wet wicks and drapes soaked in wine and oil.
and if it is not yet dried out, and its muscles are still soft, you must soak the fabric in water and oil or cold wine and oil for three days, as we have said before;
and then wash away the abscess and wipe it clean and treat it, as is right, until it is healthy.
This is followed by a discussion of how to diagnose and treat abscesses: "And this is how everyone should understand how to treat abscesses:
or you have said before what one must do when going to the treatment of abscesses, and you will see the ink.
or the little abscesses come out, and are handled so that they become threads, also like the joint of a thread, and there are many similarities.
There is plenty of grease and fat where there is moisture like poultry.
And if it is such that they are hard and bony at the base, and there is no doubt that the artery does not oppose.
And the work of the waist so that you experience with all the instrument which is called "entrismoire", from which the form comes afterwards, what it contains.
For if it contains moisture, if it goes up long way.
When the moisture is dried up, if you do not leave hair on that part where the moisture was, because it will come back to place when you leave some behind;
Then dip cotton in Egyptian ointment, if it is present; If not, in water and salve, and employ the wound, and leave it until the next day; and those who have been delayed by night.
And then begin again the cotton, if as before, the second day, and the salve, as long as you know that it does not remain overnight;
then heal the wound with ointment suitable for it, until it is healthy.
And if the abscess holds only a little grease, if the incision follows this form, then let it be long; and I will cut off your hair, and scorch all sides, and put all my treatment to draw out the cow's skin where it lies;
And if the arteries are opposed, do as I told you after.
And also make of the abscess if it is bony, and of the cutting and curing as I have told you.
And cut on the bony abscess and moisten it, for it will be lighter in weight, because there is little blood. And if to some of these abscesses or head where there is no moisture, and of those that I kopayed in the head of an old woman;
and I found the abscess just like a hard stone, sharp and pale, and could not break it; and if any of them had been cut, one would have made a wound as from a stone.
In other abscesses that come out of the head, these are those that come at the tips of the ears and roots, the opening should always be made at the most dependent place so that the bow can be pulled out;
and treat them as they should.
Many times an abscess comes to the neck, and it heals itself, and it leaves scars, and it never comes elsewhere or gets dry, and it is stinky, and it becomes infected.
And each scar is properly inside its rib, like the nose and the abscess on the head, as we have said; and the appearances of these scars are many.
and the appearances of these scars are many. There are some that contain moisture, and there are some that do not want to obey health.
in that which you see of good disposition in the chest, and is similar in color to the flesh of the body, and silent from each side and is not raised up at the neck neither at the artery nor at the vein, and is not deeply buried.
if you cut it from the top, and peel off each part of it, and have the two lips of the chest united to one, if you need to do so, as we have said in the chapter on the chest;
and cut it little by little, and be sure that you do not cover the nerve or the vein, nor is it too thin, so that your hands do not slip, and do not look too far ahead, so that you do not cover what you should not.
And if you cut the vein or the artery, and it does not allow you to work, then put vinegar on the wound, or some powders that stop the flow of blood, and tighten the wound; and leave it until the abscesses are calmed down, and the wound is softened, and begins to rot.
And when the blood has stopped flowing, return to your work, as long as you continue.
and then examine your index finger to see if there are any small blisters, if they burst and clean themselves.
And if there is great pain at the root of a vein, it is necessary to cut that scrofula at its root, but to let it fall with strong thread, and leave it without any harm.
Then employ cotton wicks dipped in Egyptian ointment, then apply the ointment.
And if you have the whole scrofula, it is necessary that you gather together the two lips of the wound and sew them up, so that there is no delay because of its abundance due to the size of the scrofula. if it is necessary that you listen to cover the root of it, and extract firmly, and sew as we have said.
if it is necessary that you listen to cover the root of it, and extract firmly, and sew as we have said. These scrofulas that have a suppuration, pierce it where it is most infected.
and pierce it as described before, depending on the case, then apply ointment and similar things so that those who are delayed by corruption are corrupted. and when the wound is well cleaned, if the wound dressing causes trouble, as long as it heals.
The old ones used to say and talk about the surgery of the throat; but I never saw it done in our land, and that is from their writing from their words.
For those who have laryngitis, the slicing of the throat which is called "epiglotte" should be removed; And let him not touch with his hands, for all the veins and the blood of the patient are in those who have an abscess warm in the mouth or in the throat or in II Amalies.
When the patient is in the hole of the vein, it is necessary to cover the epiglottis so that the strangle which comes from the constriction does not occur.
It is therefore necessary, when we want to cut the epiglotte, that we cut it with three circles or four a little slice from the side, between the two circles or by the quantity of the slice from the soft part; not in the cartilage;
and if their lips are suitable for the cutting of the epiglottis that there is no carriage, and the vessel is long from then.
And if the master is afraid, it is necessary that he extends the skin of the throat to its entirety, and then he cuts the meat as far as the chin. and avoid the vessels of blood, if you see nothing, and then apply the balm to it, as we have said.
and is proven by the cutting of the fluid of the chin that it comes out through the place that has been broken, and by the loss of voice.
and leave the open wound a piece.
And when the hour has passed by when one doubts about the strangulation, join the two lips of the wound to the meat, and the whole side is under the cartilage.
And administer medicines that cause a healthy birth, as long as he is healthy.
Albucasis says: Don't do this as long as the throat is completely closed up, and the patient is judged to be dead, and the deficiency makes it worse. Then cover the epiglottis so that the patient cannot breathe, and he breathes through the wound, and thus is saved from death;
and to order the elder to leave the wound open as long as the evil of the disease has not passed, and it has passed in three days or four. And then he ordered to sew up the wound and heal, until it was healed;
and I will tell you what I saw. I saw a young woman take a knife and put it in her throat, and she covered part of the neck with her hair;
and I was called by the healer, and I found her as dead.
I discovered the wound, and I found the blood which was issuing from it, and I am sure that she had not cut a vein or an artery but rather the throat, and her breath was coming out through the wound.
I hurried, sewed up the wound, and healed it until it was well;
and not to the lady except that she was red in face, and returned after her own way;
for I fear in the cutting of the epiglottis there might be pain.
An appendix is called "gastric hernia", and is a great appendix of a yellow color, and is very common in women;
and it has two ways: natural and accidental;
where the natural one has no pain.
And the accidental one is according to two ways: one seems like fat in us, and the other way seems like an appendix that comes from our blood vessels; and it has pain, and does not operate fire but in that which is small, and tests and searches all the intruder: if you find it as well as fat, and cannot do anything, if it is cut, if it is like what we cut, and test all its hair, if there is any: and search well soon, and cure him as it should, until he is perfectly healthy.
There are many ways to do this, all of which I will describe in detail;
and it is important that I make the entire difference between what is natural and what is unnatural;
I say that issue is painful and feverish until the boiling has passed and the purging is complete; Then rest the fever and the heat;
With a natural recovery there is no longer any heat or pain or illness, and he begins to excrete, which is according to the color of his skin, and it starts like an egg, and becomes large;
And they are according to two appearances, one fat or moist, and the other of various colors as I said in the chapter on division.
When you come to treat the body, you must first test and question all the instruments that are called "entromessoire", according to what their shape comes or the paste that is after.
And the way to extract abscesses is that you squeeze the moistest part of the abscess that you can find, and turn your fingers in and out slowly, until you feel the instrument has penetrated the core, then adjust the size according to the size of the abscess;
Then take out the insertion tool, and be careful not to hurt yourself.
If there is a good moisture, which color it has, then cut it as I said with other abscesses;
And if after the insertion tool there is no moisture, know that it is greasy, so then cut it across and take it with pincers, and burn it lightly from each side and guard the cot where it lies so that you take it healthy with the nut;
And if you cannot take it healthy, then take it in pieces so that nothing stays stuck.
For if it sticks, it will come back to us many times;
And if it sticks a little and does not bother you, then employ some corrosive water powders on the wound, extract the wound, and put warm, soothing ointment on it, and heal other wounds until it is healthy;
and let us cut both ends of the wound, and heal him who caused this injury.
and if the vein is opposite or elsewhere, do not hurry and apply the fire of vitriol there, and leave it for two or three days until the wound rots, and rest the boiling of blood. then return to copper that which has been delayed from the north.
See here the forms of the intruding instruments, and they are three ways: great and mean and small;
and there are three quarters that are called "albaret", and one that is called "breb", and they are of three ways: great, mean and small, so as to close up abscesses from fistula;
and they are also like the needles where sorcery is cut, and they are of yellow brass, or iron, or silver, and those that are yellow are more proven by the ring blackened to close up abscesses from fistula;
and they are of three ways: greats, mediates, and small ones, according to the quantity of the largeness of the apertures.
The shapes of the incisors are of many kinds, as you see here:
and if the incisors that have two curbs of three ways also;
and if the incisors that have three curbs are also of three ways;
and if the incisors that have two curbs, and some with only one curve, are of three ways;
And all these are necessary in their place.
For the head of these to cut is sharp, and of such I have who do not cut but from one side, so that we peel the skin off, to cut the vein or the nerve;
and of these intrusives are the alems reposed in many, so that the patient does not get lost at the opening of the abscesses;
and they are of three ways: great, small, and moderate, as you see;
and not use on but in the place of the neck, as legs, arms, mamelles, and armpits, and similar places;
and never does one make another instrument small, resembling to knots of fists, according to this form, so that it is not burned with fire; and put it no time to the place which is healthy for coping with veins, and arteries, and never again according to this great form:
and never does one inflame the breasts of some men when they become corrupted, as much as they seem to be the breasts of a woman;
and remain lazy and swollen, and who wants to cure them, if it is convenient according to this form of these lines.b. until g.: Then scorch the fat, and apply the wound with medicine, then join the two lips of the wound with sutures, and treat it until it is healed.
And if he spits it up, and it is thick because of its size, so that it resembles the women's breasts, if you cut it into two pieces from above, by two apparent cuts; so that the larger part touches the smaller one at the end of the one and the other, so that the greater line follows this form, from this line b. until line g. Then scorch the skin that is between the two lips, and remove the fat, and apply the stitches and powders we mentioned, and what else is necessary for the treatment, until it is healed;
and if it is not healed, or the incision is not completely made, so that the patient does not rest, or for the removal of blood, you must fill the wound with wet cotton soaked in a corrosive ointment; and let it remain until it has drained the remaining blood and fat, then treat it until it is healthy.
The pustules that come from heel-spurs are handled in the same way as hard scrofula with ribs, and if there is moisture in them.
Those that contain moisture should be cut according to this shape, from line b to line g: And when all the bowels that are in the abscess are emptied, then fill the wound with cotton, and leave it until the next day, then remove all the cotton, and treat with ointment from now on until it is healed.
And if the abscess is like scrofula, then cut it as we have said in cutting scrofula, and if there is pus in the wound, then apply fire cautery as we have said before.
When the artery is torn and the flesh that covers it is torn too, then often an abscess forms, and in the same way the wound escapes into the abscess.
And if we cut into it as soon as the artery is exposed, then the abscess will be completely filled; and when you feel it on both sides, if you feel extraction;
and when it is for the vein, then let it be cut away carefully;
It is madness to cauterize this abscess, and most certainly when it is cut open and the flesh torn and the blood comes out, and it is full of worms and maggots, and very great. Therefore it is necessary to avoid cauterizing with iron, and the one that is at the head must also be avoided, and in that which is swollen with an artery, cut the skin from above;
then work on the abdomen like a single cloth, and separate the artery from the veins as much as it is uncovered.
then stick a pin in it, and let it pierce to the other side, and pull out the artery with a double thread of two strands, according to what I have taught you about the extraction of the two arteries that are in the temples;
then point out the line that is between the two links of an intramuscular injection as far as there is no hair on it, and take off the abscess;
then bring about the cure that I have just mentioned, until the thread chatters; and treat this with oil coming from this, until it is healthy;
and the abscess is to be opened by the vein, if it is convenient that you hold with your hand what you can of the abscess on all the skin, then stick in the pin at the line that you hold in your hand, and let it pierce with a double thread, so that you pull it out from the other side; and then join the aperture, as I have told you, with thread from one of the two sides to the shoulder blades;
and if you doubt that the thread will not hold fast, if you run another needle through all the thread from one end to the other of the incision made by the first needle, and then pull the thread in four lengths;
and then cut away the excess as it comes free from the incision, and then cut away the remaining thread and leave the one that is tied;
and then put wet cloth on it with wine and oil, and then give him treatments of herbs and spices until he is well.
So too do the nerves come from the artery and the vein, they come to the nerves when they are torn, or by too much work, and similar things.
And when it comes to the shoulder joints and the two sides of the body where they are joined together, this is a sign of trouble, and its color is like the color of the chest, and it is in many states without pain.
and when they are restrained, if the patient feels pain, and is not perfectly cured of the course, but delay treatment;
and mute well on all sides, and do not go forward or backward, nor above nor below, and the one who is in joints does not come together with iron: for fear of a contraction; and those who are at the head or at the front, make the skin with the spatulate.
and those who are at the head or at the front, make the skin with the spatulate. If the abscess is small, if it has a nail in it, and cut it at its root;
and if it is large, if the nail is in the onion, and scorch it, then break the bone and join the wound by stitchwork, and cure as long as it is healed.
Now there comes a disease in the belly and not elsewhere, which is called "mould" by its appearance, and the root is subtle, and the head is big;
and if they are small and large.
and I saw some that had two bellies that were more like fungi than anything else, and there was no difference between them, and they were white, and they had small roots, and they were cut in half, and ran together with moisture.
I picked them up and found one to weigh XVIII ounces, and the other VI з., and in the incision of the ovary so that you look at it the patient is moist, and the color of the arteau is white and moist and has a thin root; if it is coped with a large spatule, and let the cautery be in the fire.
if it is coped with a large spatule, and let the cautery be in the fire. For at the tailor there are often too great movements of blood, and it escapes from you, so hurry up then the cauterizer.
and if you see the patient dying and frightened by the incision of the iron, then take a well-made thread of pluck, and bind the arteau as we have said, and leave it for II days;
and then the restraint, and do not cease to strip the thread of linseed as long as it copes with the arête, and sometimes through it work.
and if the roots are large, so as not to hurt him with a chopper in the middle for the belly, but you can well chop half of it, then cauterize that he does not return.
then heal the wound, and make sure you do not chop off the tuft that is of bad color and poor taste and milk regart.
For this is an abscess with a crust, and I will come to treat the leprosy which follows.
When the wound is healed If the appearance of a bulge comes out by fire or cut on a wound or split, and is on the belly and there are some of the bulges, as it would be in other cuts, or blood that cuts off a vein or an artery according to what is before, or windiness;
and if it is by the cut of the syphus and by the issue of the bulge, if the color of the abscess is similar to the color of the flesh, and it is a light thing without pain, and opening of different issues. And if it is because of the issue of the intestine, then it is more varied, and when one presses it towards his two legs so that it returns, and then comes back again, and perhaps if it is stuck, and enlarges much at the entrance to the basin and by strong work.
And if it's due to moisture, it's a light thing, and open well when you press it with your hand, do not constrain at all;
and if it's due to blood, if open by these signs the large and hard abscess, and is poked according to a quantity; and if it' s due to wind, if there is a sound at the buttocks, and the opening is that you look at its appearance it' s for blood of the artery, or vein, or wind.
and if it' s due to wind, if there is a sound at the buttocks, and the opening is that you look at its appearance it' s for blood of the artery, or vein, or wind. If you should leave the cure. For there is doubt and fear, as I have told you before, or chapistle abscesses, for the artery and for the vein.
And if the appearance is for the intestine or the bowel, then it is appropriate that you instruct the patient to wet his anus, and be extended all straight, then sign of touch all around the bowels; then he commands to move slowly between your hands, then go inside the place that you've touched with all the spine, then extend half of the abscess from above at all the great hook; and the body wrapped with a strong thread or a cord of strong silk tightly, and let us bind him.
Then operate on half the abscess stretched out on the thread, and insert your index finger, and feel the intestine. If you find that he is caught in the thread, then release him, and insert the intestine at the bottom of the abdomen.
And if you find the boil, then take it with a lance, and cut off the excess.
And if the artery is opposed or blocked, then make a loud noise inside, then return to your operation and take two needles, and insert two threads, and insert the two needles where you made the hole that you made pierce;
Then stretch the abscess in four places on the needles, and if you see, remove the needles, and leave it to putrefy for as long as possible, and cut off the flesh by itself. and then you make the incision when it is soft and porous, then heal it as we have said;
and then you make the incision when it is soft and porous, then heal it as we have said; and extract the blood or moisture that you find, then heal the joint of what it corresponds to, and bind the joint.
Of the sore of the leg We have said in the division the appearances of cancer, and how it must be operated with medicines, and how one should treat the cure with iron;
and let us say that the cancer is removed from the breast, and great caution in its cure, and the old man said that when cancer is in a place where it can be cut off as cancer in milk, and in the cuisse, and in similar places, and it must all be cut off when it is in the beginning;
There was never one like this before me.
And the incisions, when they are in place or can be removed, as we have said, are that you purge the black blood never once.
then make him well if he has manifest fullness, then done the incision I good place to do the work;
then pour your scalpel or ulcer, and the hair of all parts, and the bone of all parts leave nothing;
and let the blood run all over, and press firmly the place in your hand or anything, and the removal of the blood makes the incision contrary to the artery or vein, if you cauterize until the skin is dried; then the doctor treats other diseases as long as he is healthy.
about dropsy We have said in the division the appearances of hydropsis, and in what way the accumulation of water is made, and the signs of each appearance, and the treatment that is done with medicine, and that which is cured with iron:
and one must not touch metal in these two cases: that is to say, tympany and hypostasy, for it is a deadly thing;
so when you treat this condition of dropsy, which is called "eclites", with medicines, and the cure does not benefit, if the patient is weak, or if he has another disease besides dropsy, such as a stomach complaint and similar things; if one does not touch metal, for there is doubt;
and if you see the patient of great vigor, and he has no other disease but dropsy only, and he is not too old or too young, then thus should you act: lay the patient down directly on your hands, and press the abdomen in toward the lower part of the spine, then take the spatulum with thorns according to this form: and cut into two parts. a point, and all ways not be so intren that he can come jusc' to the intestine when one puts it in, and cannot bruise him;
and then look if there is water retention inside the abdomen: if it comes out straight from the buttock, three fingers right below the hip bone; and if there is water retention due to liver disease, then your incision on the left side of the hip bone;
and if it is due to pus, then on the right, and it is not necessary that the patient lie down on his back so that the excess does not run into the weak part;
then pierce all the skin with the instrument, and cut it, and hold your hand to all the skin between the skin and the sfac as much as you can with your thumb or index finger; like peeling an onion;
and then pierce the loz with so much pressure that the liquid comes out from within, and this is the source of the pain; then treat it more forcefully, and pour this instrument into which this form is found. And it looks like a silver knife that is very thin, and it is made of bronze or copper that is very light, and there is a small hole in its center. and one end is sharpened, and there is a small hole. and one end is blunt, and the other is sharp.
and the head is cut off so that it resembles a feather, and this is the shape of the incision that the scribes cut with their quills:
at the top of the instrument, so that when the liquid comes out, it drips onto the instrument.
empty it halfway or a third of it, because if you empty more than that at this time, perhaps the patient will die from the loss of his spirit due to the weapon's impact, or he will faint or approach death.
but according to the quantity of its virtue, and according to what the dispositions of the virtue of the disease mean, and its hairs;
then train the instrument and hold back the water, and it is held back now by the curve that stops the perforation which is on the side, of which I have spoken, that you pierce according to this way;
then begin again with the instrument another day, if you see the patient suffering, and train a little quantity of water;
do not do it any day, and keep yourself from doing so as long as he does not stay but a little bit of water.
And if you doubt about the patient, and you leave him with a little water, if the cure of the burial or sand is hot, and by sweating or bathing and in the sun, and if he gets tanned by drinking; and the treatment of drying medicines as long as he is healthy, and cauterizes on the stomach and on the liver and on the spleen after the extraction of the water, as I said before.
There is no child born who does not have a foreskin, or if the foreskin is small, or if it is not in its place.
If it comes to such a point that it cannot pierce the smallest delicate sperm according to this form:
then after that we have put on the subtle plaster of plaster, and let it be and hold it like this for III days or IV until it urinates, then take off the plaster so that it urines, and then put it back on;
and by chance there is no understanding at all, because the urine that comes out hard does not leave the skin closed.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nous avons dit, si s'eslargera.
Who have not put on the plague at their right time are blushed, because no one is born who has the plague at the head of the penis, so that they cannot urinate before they raise their penis up; and they cannot conceive because the material cannot come out until it reaches the testicles, and this is a bad disease.
And the way of this treatment is that the patient lies down on his back, then put the head of the penis and the cup up to the size of a feather, so that the piercing goes in the middle, as it should.
and be careful of the evacuation of blood that comes many times, and if it happens, let the one who stops the blood stop it, and heal the wound until it is healed.
of the pustules of the penis Many times a cold breeze comes in the penis, and it is an appearance of a ugly hair;
and there are malicious ones and not malicious;
if you pinch them with mild force, and cop them and clean them all, then put cotton wet with Egyptian ointment on it; then heal the wound with diofinicon until it is healed.
And if the swelling is malignant, of pus and filth, you should apply fire cautery to it.
When you have coped it, and the cold breeze is in the top of the penis, and a part of it is inside the skin and a part of it is away, then you must take out the cold breeze that is inside first; And when it is sealed, if the doctor leaves.
For when you bandage him together, if it is not securely tied, the joints of his penis may be pierced, and blackness and corruption come to his penis and scrotum;
If it is necessary to cut off all that is black and corrupted, then put on the plaster of honey and flour which is made from pomegranate bark and dates, and then treat him with other remedies until he is healed.
And if the blood flow occurs, then administer the lunar cautery according to this form:
The cauterization should be performed together with these two preparations: which means, "at the evacuation of blood and at the corruption";
and if the joints of his penis are corrupted and withdrawn, you should either cut or lead out a piece of string from the penis, and make him urinate;
and when the hair is shaven from the head of the penis which has not yet been circumcised, or where there is an abscess or an ulcer, then it is necessary that you scrape with the sharp instrument until the ligaments are loosened and the joints of the penis are free;
and if it is a grievous thing to devise that, then you must scald him with no pail of water the head of the penis and the scrotum.
then you must vigorously separate between them, and I put a thin linen cloth wet with cold water on it, so that he does not burn himself quickly.
Circumcision is not a continuous cure if it is like the other wounds; However, when we do this work of our will, and particularly on infants, it is necessary that we do the best work and the lightest work for salvation.
I say that the old people did not speak about circumcisio of their children, for they do not use it in their law, and we have only obtained this knowledge through experience.
For I have wanted the greatest part of the masters and the most famous who performed circumcision around the anus, and with force, and all a новакule;
since it is the course of this operation that there are two holes, and perhaps if one covers that above and holds that below. Or the hand is brought back into place, and the pain doubles, and the purification that comes from the blood is not yet assured at the tip of the limb.
And for the purification of the nail, by chance, the wound is lost, and they correct the work, and many times it comes out like this that there is no need for purification and I want it.
From the purification that is done with force on all the thread I have found the goodness of the experiment, because the forces cut just as much above as below.
For when you press your hand, if you cut it evenly all along, then release it. But that the thread is well tied at the end of the skin;
and be the manner of the first work so that you make the child think, if he hears it, that you do not tie the thread tightly around the staff, and then make it fall in all ways that you can;
then let it rest straight between your hands, and turn the threads between your hands or keep your fingers so that the child does not see them, nor any of the tools;
and dip your hand to the root and blow on it, and hold it up as high as the head of the root is; then clean it well with dirt that is gathered there, then tie the joint with a double thread, then cut it to the other side of the thread;
then clean it well with dirt that is gathered there, then tie the joint with a double thread, then cut it to the other side of the thread; and hold it in place with the second thread at the root and middle finger, and cut between the two threads, then blow on it from above the hospital and hold the head of the root; then let the blood run a little bit at a time, because that is what causes the bleeding; and put powder on top of the powder that is made with a mixture of cooked oil and water, and cover it with a cloth, leave it there overnight, and have another doctor treat him until he gets better;
The form of force for purifying if this is:
The two heads should be soft and pliable, and the heads themselves should also be as long as possible and evenly shaped.
For the mistake of purification if when the curative fluid escapes through incisions:
Then it is necessary that you stretch it out with your hand so that the veins form an abscess.
And make it even, and if you cannot hold it with your hand, then hold it with tongs, and then make it even.
And if it has passed three days, and that which is sore at the root is swollen, let it remain until the abscess has become calm, and then scrape it lightly.
If you can move it as you wish, and keep the part of the root away from it, that will not harm it.
Cure therefore the powder from things that cause a wound, which we have said is to be used in the treatment of powders, and if it is applied in excess, and it goes up, it will not hurt.
Cure therefore, as we have said, as long as it is well.
how to retain urine
The retention of urine is due to the operation of a stone, or frozen blood, or bowels, or similar things, which we have mentioned in the division;
and if the urine does not flow freely, and you see an obstruction due to a stone in the bladder or at the neck of the bladder, then it is fitting that the patient should be bent on his knees; and let him lie on his back, and extend his stomach from the upper part of the back, and restrain the patient so that he lies down as much as he can; and therefore the collar of the bladder is forced to express the stone above, so that the urine is discharged;
and if it does not come, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then you must use all the instruments that are called "syringe", because this is the form:
and be of fine light silver, as the feathers of an owl; and be of the length of a palm and a half, and be thin at the tip.
And the manner of issuing urine is that you take a double thread, and tie it to the tip with a piece of wool or cotton, and dip the tip into the syringe;
and fill the superfluity of the wool and dip it to the tip of the syringe, then oil the syringe with oil or butter and astringent of mint, and make the patient sit on a chair, and oile the bladder and the penis with moist oil and olive oil and water;
Then lightly place the syringe on the penis, until it reaches the base of the penis, then double the penis over towards the testicles.
Then draw back the syringe up to the bladder, and let the patient feel for the hollow spot, and this should not be done without following these instructions, otherwise he who guides it or wherever it goes will be twisted.
Then tie the string around all of the hair tightly, and let the urine flow through the hair, then remove it forcefully, and make the urine run.
and start over with the syringe as the bladder is empty, and let the patient lie still.
When blisters or sores come to the bladder, or it is infected, and you see water and medicine distilling there, so do all the instruments that are called "clepsydras", and this is their form:
It is closed, and if at three openings: On one side, and on the other, as you see it;
And let the hair fall so that the medicine falls correctly on the penis without a trace, and if one can draw out the moisture, and squeeze it when needed.
and when you see your medicines move in the bladder, put the head of the patient on a wet cloth, and treat while moving along who is there;
if you will treat the moist by the head, and then turn it hard forward who is there; if the moistures enter in, and come to the bladder now, so that the patient will feel them;
and this is the form of the subtle کلستر which we use to clister the bladder:
And it is silver or copper, and the head is higher;
and desalt at the root or the linden tree;
Then take a sheep's bladder and put the moisture that you see to clisterize the bladder, then tie it between the two breasts formed of a good doubled thread, and heat the moisture over the fire;
put the head of the pis in the penis, then pull your hand over the bladder toward the moisture coming forward until the patient feels that this moisture has come to the bladder.
if you don't have a bladder, take a piece of parchment, and make it into a circle, and pierce it roundly around. then pour a strong thread into these holes, then join the circle as one joins a cloth, and put inside what you want of oil and moisture and water, and tie it in the instrument;
and do so as you did with the bladder, squeeze your hand until this moisture comes to the bladder.
from stone
We have already said in the division the ways of stone, and extraction together medicines;
and I have said the difference between the stone that is inside as rain, and all signs, and how one must work with size in stone; and in the bladder, and in the penis.
and I will tell you openly and briefly.
I say that the stone in the bladder, if it happens more often in children, is a sign that the water leaps from the bladder, similar to water in its subtlety.
and I open her again, and I wipe the patient's penis, and I rub it many times, and then it becomes smooth again; and at the root of these jumps the foundation;
and it is light for the cure of children until they are four years old, and much heavier in the elderly, and there is much pain at mid-life, and with the young and the old.
and it is lighter to heal those who have large stones than those who have small ones.
And when we come to the treatment, if it is necessary first to purify the patient with a enema, in order to draw out all the matter that is in the intestines. For it is not often necessary to seek the stone.
Then take the patient by the feet, and move him downwardly while turning him, so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder, and does not jump from one side to the other.
and place it between your hands, and his hands shall be down on his thighs so that the bladder is completely downhill;
then look and touch inside;
if you feel the stone in space, so hurry to cut on top of the stone.
And if it does not seem right to you when you feel the stone in space, so moisturize your little finger with oil from your left hand, if the disease is hard, or your second finger, if the disease is juvenile and accomplished; and pour it into its foundation, and look at the stone, and when you feel it with your index, if the pain is in the neck of the bladder;
then press on top of your index, and pour it toward where you see cutting.
And command the minister to press the bladder toward his hand, and command him to extend his right hand with the arteries up, and with his left hand grasp the skin that is down on the arteries in the part where the cut is made;
And I dip the spatula, so that this is its shape: And place between what is between the hip bones and the base, not in the middle but at the edge of the left side;
and let it be on the stone, and your two are close to the base, and let him cut down on it so that it is wide at the bottom, and narrow from above, according to the quantity of the stone, not too big;
So that the press may be there where your two are close to the base, so that it does not need work;
and know that he has stone or angles, and edges: So it is ready to be cut;
And if it has stone that is sharp, resembling a gnat, and round, whose edge is light.
So it will not be hard to cut: And if it has stone that is sharp and round, make the cut larger;
and if it does not fall, then you must extract it with the pliers which are like a file on the head, so that the stone is extracted and does not escape. or you take the subtle corbed instrument
and if you cannot make it fit, then you open it with a small knife, and if it splits, then extract it with vitriol.
and if there is more than one stone, then take the largest first to the collar of the bladder, then chop it down, and then pull it out with force, and the smaller ones afterwards if there are any more.
If the stone is very large, it is appropriate to make a larger wound. For two things happen to the patient: either he dies, or his urine comes again through the hole that the water cannot pass through.
however you must try to extract it, or with pliers, piece by piece;
and when you have finished your work, if you employ the incense wound and aloe and dragon's blood, and the strapping, and place over it a damp cloth in oil and wine, or in oil and rose water and cold water to soothe the abscess; then remove the disease from his neck, and do not loosen the ligature until the third day.
And when you have dislocated it, then arise well oil and water its place, then cure it with the ointment of black cumin and with ointment basilicon until it is healed.
And if hot abscesses come into the wound and putrefactions of blood in the bladder, and hold back the urine, which is conveyed in a certain way that it does not run with urine: then put two on the wound, and take out the blood, for if it is left, it will corrode the bladder, and pour it out;
and raise the wound with water and mud and straw, and help in all ways that you can until it is healed;
and it is necessary that all the hours that you cure him, you tie his two legs, and gather the medicines on the place.
And if the stone is small, and it is put down from the penis, and stuck in, and the urine cannot come out; if the cure of this which I have thus said, that you cut it many times, is done without excuse from the cutting because of this cure. I have proved this.
Take care to forge it according to this form, and be it three inches long, fixed with three pins:
then take a thread and tie it around the penis above the stone, so that it cannot come back into the bladder;
then pour the water lightly on the penis until it comes to the stone; and turn the file in your hand in the stone point by point, until you can pierce the stone from another side;
if the urine comes soon, then press your hand on this which is delayed from the stone that is inside the penis. If he is suddenly bruised, and jumps with urine, and gets worse the disease.
And if you cannot do this by any means to harm him, then take a wedge of stone and another above it, and push the wedge firmly into the stone between the two lines, and then extract it forcefully, and then loosen the two lines, and clear the frozen blood from the wound. and treat him until he is healthy.
from the women's stone
It should be noted that a stone can get stuck in a woman, and if it ever gets stuck once, there is great danger to the patient, and it is prevented by three things:
the first is that perhaps the woman is a virgin;
and the second is that one cannot find a woman who is well-versed in midwifery, even if she is married.
And the third way is that perhaps one cannot find a woman who is knowledgeable about this craft with her hands.
and the fourth method is that the stone of the woman is more perfect than the stone of the man, because it requires deeper incision and great fear. And if necessary send to one, you should squeeze a well-learned midwife, and not cut the navel, and if you don't cut it, do not even try to cast subtle mirth;
and the present a skilled midwife in the life of women, or a woman who knows a part of the art, and commands her to do what you command in the incision of the stone; and look well that the woman is virgin;
and look well that the woman is virgin; then it is convenient to put out his right hand or fundament and seek the stone;
and if she cuts it, then bind her right hand, and recommend her to put out her right hand or cup with the malady, and press and press her left hand on the bladder formed.
If she pees, then it is necessary that she move from the bladder's entrance to the anus gradually, until she reaches the root of her thigh.
Then cut into the stone in the root of the thigh against the middle part where it is muscled, and feel the stone in that part; and do not move her two above the stone or anus, and make the cut first small;
and do not move her two above the stone or anus, and make the cut first small; Then press tightly in the wound, if you feel the stone as much as possible so that it can come out, and know that there are many kinds of stones:
That is to say, small and large, sharp and smooth, long and round, and some are rained.
If you know the appearances so as to know the outcome.
And if the stone does not come out, then put it in vinegar, and keep it for an hour until the stone is taken out.
and come back to your work, until the stone is far away, and take the tools that I told you about in the extraction of the stone for men to help you in your work;
and if it goes out for you, and this is the artery that has been cut, put the powder on the place and extract it from the bottom and the bend, and do not repeat it, and leave the stone and do not draw it, except by chance the patient dies; then heal the wound.
And when the heat of the wound is abated, and the blood clotted, if it returns to your work, as long as the stone is away.
Ramie water is nothing other than assembled moisture or white salt that is the cure for joints, which contains blood.
and it is called "syfac", and is not properly in the fabric of the sheep, if one thinks that it is another sheep; and this is the leather of the joint between white salt that we have said;
and if he does not have it. And the generation of this hernia, since it is of weakness, comes to the testicles, and expands that matter.
and if he is not struck by a percussion on the joints, and this moisture has many colors: or it is a declining color to yellow, or it is without red, or black, or aqueous white, and this happens more:
and these are the signs of this assembly, for if it is as white as we have said, then the abscesses are painful, and only slightly long, like the shape of an egg, and do not open the joints, because all around it is moist:
And if there is moisture in the proper towel, then the abscesses are painful with a part of the egg, and for this reason one thinks that it is another egg:
and if the moisture is between the leather of the joints and the white is well, then he feels it well:
So then when you have learned the color of moisture, try out all of the shoulder joint's movements, since its form is as follows. And if there is moisture in the fabric itself, then the egg whites have reason with a part of the yolk, and for this one thinks that it is another egg; and if the moisture is between the skin of the eggs and the white sfac, then it feels good; therefore, when you want to know the color of the moisture, test everything in the intromissoire, from which its shape comes.
And when we treat it with iron, so that the patient becomes whole according to his power and the repletion of his body;
then let him lie on his back on a high thing, and place some sheets over him;
then sit down on his left side, and order the assistant to sit down on his right, and extend the stick to one of the two ribs on either side of the chest;
then take the stick and peel the skin from the ribs among them until the bottom until a white, and carefully scorch it according to ability;
then pierce the skin of plain water in a wide hole, and drain all the water, and then put your onions, and lift up the skin;
and do not touch the cur of the knees, but the doctor alone. or cut all or separately carefully the cost of him secretly, so that if you do not cut it well, blood will return;
and if the egg has fallen to your work, if you put it back in its place when you have finished the work of the doctor;
then join the two knees together at the joint, and treat it as you would other wounds until it is well.
And if you find the egg corrupted by another disease, then it is necessary that you hang the suspenders, in doubt of the decay of blood;
then cut the knee to all the suspender, and remove the egg, and treat it as we have said.
And if the egg is assembled in two parts together, know that they are two branches; If you cover the other part with oil as you did the first, then rinse off the blood, and put on the other wound a damp oil-soaked cloth.
If you cover the other part with oil as you did the first, then rinse off the blood, and put on the other wound a damp oil-soaked cloth. and put far away another piece of wool wet with wine and oil, and put it on the two joints, and cover it with double cloths, and bind it tightly to all the line which is according to this form:
Then take two cloths, and fill them with wool according to this appearance, and join them together by sewing in the armpit area of the garment, and one of the heads should rest on the back bone, and the other on the part of the hand;
and the other two heads on the two arms, and may all be gathered together in the loop of the bracer;
and never is this ram of cautery in the place of a sharp iron size, and it is that you heat I the white resin that contains the water gently as we have said, so that the white syrup comes off;
If one uses the fire cautery according to this form, and pierces it like an onion, and scorches with that subtle fire cautery:
And dip in all ways as you can, until you have drained everything;
and keep the fire from touching the egg;
and know that this work is safer; and maintain that blood does not flow out of the vein, and keep it so that the work of cutting does not hurt;
and if nothing makes you uncomfortable, or an abscess or bleeding or something else, then treat what makes you uncomfortable according to the advice given above.
And if the patient is afraid and does not want to wait for this treatment because of its horror, then make a hole, as I have said, and put the patient on it; And so the abscess is made in the part of the buttock to all the buttock-skin wide, and put the piercing from the long core.
and let the opening be large, so that all the water runs out;
then put cotton on the place, and bind it, and let run the rest of the water, then the cure as long as the wound is healed;
and if the bleach cloth does not allow water to come out of the mouth of the wound, then you must put in it a quill or an instrument used to drain the water from the cysts, so that it takes the form mentioned above;
and open the wound wide, and know that the water returns, and is assembled after six months or so it twists, and when it is assembled as before, and thus will the patient's days pass.
It seems to me that it is better to let them grow.
and I will tell you the treatment and the appearance of an abscess.
I say therefore that most abscesses come from within, and least often from outside; and this is by chance.
It is known that by acrid and bitter fluid, which increases in the abscess, or by contact;
And the color of the abscess according to the color of the flesh; and does not always cause pain, and is an abscess of trouble;
and sometimes an abscess is grimy and piercing, and of strange color, and never comes from a vein or swelling;
When it is from an artery, if you know the position of the abscess, then when you press it with your two fingers; and it is not necessary for you to touch it.
The one made from a vein is known by its disposition to the touch of the two, and can do well in sizing this shape, and other shapes; and is that you take care of the curls of the hair, then is the fur on top, and the thread white well, and deliver the suspension from all sides of the fur.
If the fur is already soiled with these new curls, then it is necessary that you take the fur, and the curl;
and if it is white again, or in this one that is inside the veils, then it is necessary that you deliver all that is kept, and the curl gently.
And if the birth of the character is behind the egg, then it is appropriate that you cope all of it, and extract the egg, as we have said.
And when your work is done, if you cover the wound with wool wetted with oil and wine, then he will be cured by other treatments until he is well.
This is an abscess wrapped in a wrap that resembles a cherry, with the softening of the curls, and the patient grumbles painfully when he goes.
and the cure for this disease if it is so well taken care of as it is said above, and nonetheless we will tell you the work of it, according to what the old man did.
It is necessary that you make the patient lie on one side, then pour the medicine into the mouth with a spoon, to all the vessels which are near the penis, and wash them well and form them.
then cut with a sharp blade across the vessels in one place until they are uncovered, and then peel off each part as we said above, when extracting the arteries that are in the temples.
Then he puts a needle into it or has a double thread, and ties it to the first place where the vein is visible, and quickly ties it to the other side. then cut them in a straight line according to the length of the body, and remove the腐した湿気.
and then heal the wound just as with others or a bow string, so that no vassal kills any of the balls;
for by this nothing comes from evil, and all the vassals come out, so it is necessary to draw the balls out of all the vassals; so that the oes does not lose its nutrition by the incision of the vassals, and dries up and can no longer help themselves.
The remedies of this chapter are so by the incison that comes or cure, or extension on the belly in the part of the entrails, so that the intestines descend from that incision to one of the balls;
and this incision is either by the cure, or by the extension on it, and these two ways come from different causes:
or by hitting, or jumping, or braying, or by removing pain caused by a similar thing;
and the signs when it is about the extension of the syrup, if it happens little by little, for a long time, and does not come suddenly; and the abscesses are even up to the end, lest the syrup rush out.
And the signs are when it is due to the section of the sutra, that it brings about a sudden pain, and the apophemis are different in appearance, pressing on the skin, and this is for the exit of the intestine and the body away from the sutura.
And never remove the loops with intestines, and are held back, and cause great pain to the patient, even when it is pressed.
In these treatments of fear, because it must be avoided.
And the technique of opening: order the patient that he keeps the intestine in his hand towards the wound, if it can be pushed back in; then let him bend over with his neck between your hands, and gently press the abdomen;
then put the cord over his head, and cut all the skin from the loins down; then push inwards the reins of the waist with hooks according to what you need in order to open the wound, and be careful so that it does not come out;
then peel off the syrup that is on the skin of the loins, until the white syrup is completely exposed from all sides;
and dip the two fingers in this which follows the line of the crotch, in this which is between the white part which is from the skin of the penis, and between the second part, and leave this which is behind the penis, and between the second part.
and when you grip with your right hand in the crotch, and the white part is above your left hand, and hold the penis all around towards your waist. and tell the patient to extend the penis upwards, and leave what is behind the scrotum;
and ask your two fingers if there is any hard or white part wrapped in intestine, and if you find nothing, pour into the abdomen.
then take a needle that has a thick thread made of ten threads, and dip it in the back part of the scrotum, which is after the skin of the crotch; after the neck, then chop the heads that appear from the wool, as long as there are four wools; then put one on top of the other in a cross-like manner, and bind them together with strong thread from two sides; then wrap the heads of the wools and bind them together in two parts so that no vassal who nourishes them can enter their eyes, which an abscess cannot come; and put the thread very carefully according to the first long two threads of those two, and after these two threads leave the thread that is made from sheep's wool which is the cure for abscesses, the length of one of them; and then all the others according to the round that the devil carries;
then chop in the part which is sheep' s wool which is the cure for abscesses, until it feels smooth, and the bow, as we have said before;
Then provide a moist wool in oil, and put it on the wound, and I provide the bandage that we have said. And at no time is cauterized with the white substance that we have said, after the incision, for doubt of decay of blood. For this often happens, and leaves the bandage on him as long as it drips blood;
and if it delays to drip, then is raised with hot water, and put on this that we have said, as long as it drips;
Then heal the wound with other remedies, until he is completely healed.
of hernia carnous
In this recipe I have never seen anyone dare to make the cure with fire.
And the ancient ones said that it is made as a bundle of reeds which are joined together, in such a way that you tie the vassels, after cutting on one side lightly with a knife;
Then cut it and heal the abscess of this one who works, as long as the reeds drip;
and heal it as we have said, until he is healed.
No time comes without a wound between the legs, as we said, and opens the veins.
and do not draw any of the intestines out with cords, and if they are drawn, it is a little, and he repairs every hour;
and, moreover, if he stays too long in this place, so that the wound or syphacus believes it, until the intestines are drawn;
and what happens because of the extension of the syphacus that is between the legs, as we said, for it is extended, then it softens and opens the veins and opens them;
and the cure if it is by fire, as we have said before;
and no time is cured with iron in this way: and it is that the sick person lies still on his back between your hands, then cover the place of the wound with a wide cloth according to the quantity of three days;
And then take out the leech which is on the skin that is affected, and then take the thread and tie it to the apparent place of the leech;
And then press him firmly in the belly, and cut the two apparently-present leeches on top of the thread, and cut both of them;
And then take out the thread's end, and do not cover up the leech nor stretch out any other thing, as I have told you in the treatment of the intestinal ramose; Then treat it with the treatment of wounds.
Then treat it with the treatment of wounds. And when you tie up the wounds, if it is a burn, then heal the wound as soon as possible.
The syrup is constrictive, and does not have an appearance in the cut, and the cauterization is wet in this place, and closer to salvation.
of softening the leather of the hips
Often is the skin of the scrotum softened in some men, so that the worms that are within it are softened, and is to be seen;
And it is necessary, when one cures it, that the worm be made to come out onto the skin, and the skin which is softened be placed on top of the natural skin;
Then join the two lips with a stitch, and cut off the excess skin, soften the leather with three stitches or four firmly.
then cover between the seams, and clean as with the other wounds, until it is healed, and cut off the thread.
Dou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.
I know that chastisements are unbecoming in our law, and for this reason I would not like to speak of them in this book;
and are necessary only in two ways:
that one is that the mirror should answer when it is asked, and that its cure be known;
and the other, because we have often had to chastise some animals for our own benefit, such as rams and sheep and pigs and others.
I say that chastisement is done in two ways: or by attraction, or by cutting.
In the one that we do by attraction, let us sit the beast in warm water, until the joint is softened and during; then dip it in your hand, until they are set and you no longer feel them.
Of the cauterization of wounds: it is necessary that you hold the beast, and press the skin of the joints to your left hand, then tie the suspender, and cap on each leg as you have well scorched them;
and I leave no patch of fat or thin fat that is over the joints;
and this method of cauterization is more durable than that which is made by attraction, for in attraction there may be some delay in the joints, because the beast desires lust;
then heal the wound until it is well.
Of hermaphrodites: It is fitting that you take the best heifer, and press the skin of the cows to your left hand, then tie the suspensory, and bandage each eye with a bandage, when you have well scorched them; and leave no hole in the splay and the sub-tige which is on the vats; and this mode of chastisement is more mature than that which is done by attraction, for what if attraction may happen that there is no thing of the cows, so that the cow desires luxure; then heal the wound until it is well.
Hermaphrodite is one of two kinds: one is that between the two cunts it has also like the figure of nature of a woman, or it has hair, and sometimes in the cunt it ejaculates urine.
And the other way is in women, and it has on the loins knuckle also as a penis and two crotches.
And the treatment for man and woman is that you cup the breasts together, and treat them as other wounds;
in the second manner, of men whose urine jumps out through the cunt, if it is not cured.
Tenting is a joint that comes on top of the natural part, until it is too ugly to see; and some women also have it great like a hand, and this is the treatment.
It is necessary that you cut off the surplus of the tenting from your hand or anus, and deal with it lightly;
and do not cut too much all at once, that the blood does not run too much, and then treat it with another treatment until it is healthy;
and there is another horse that was not born at the mouth of the mare, and he saddles it, and perhaps he will jump, and it is according to the appearance of a cow, and for this reason they called it the old "cow disease". If you have to cut it, as we said before, and heal it until it is well.
It is error when nature of the woman is not yet perceived, or the hernia is small. and it is natural by birth, or happens by accident that come;
and it is natural by birth, or happens by accident that come; or it is by horse that it is jostled, or the subtle or secret medicine, and is made perfect in the mare, or at the cost, or at the source, or whatever;
and they hinder it to conceive, and the delivery, and by chance the flowers to bear.
and the knowledge of this is through the motion of the balls.
For if the stoop is close at hand, appearing suddenly, would you like it to be towards your two hands or to the right?
If it is subtle medicine, and it is near to books, if you hurry, and turn quickly:
Hold both of your fingers together, and let the woman be on her back, spread her legs.
Then join the two hands together, so that the small finger may run, and cover the nipples;
Then take wool, and dip it in oil, and put it on the spot, and let the woman lie on her back every day, so that he cannot hold it in place.
And if the syrup is thick and heavy, you must take a spoon that resembles a leaf of thyme.
If the nipple is erect, then hang it from a chain and cover it;
And put the medicines which stop the blood, if as here, dragon's blood, incense, together with alumen;
Then put a wide patch of plaster on it, so that the wound cannot close;
And let it remain for a long time, and put a dry linen bandage on it;
Then treat with other remedies until it is well.
When the mare gives birth to a foal, if she is covered in this way, there will be no abscesses. For when the mare has an abscess that has formed, one must not touch her with fire.
hemorrhoids Emorrhoids are openings of veins that, without proper care, and when the hemorrhoids become old, turn into thorns.
And we have said in the division the appearances of ears, and signs, and I will say here those that yield cure.
I say that hemorrhoids and the hymen, when they are fully developed in the body, do not come to light except for the treatment by iron.
Those who are at the mouth of the vagina can be felt, they can be cured.
It is therefore necessary that you put the woman in a cold house, and let the thorns grow at the root, and powder on curative medicines that restrain blood, if possible and suitable, such as here is given and blood of dragon and incense, and similar things;
then pour water on the roots for an hour, then put her in cold water.
and if the blood comes out, let her sit in a bath of sumac and bark of pomegranates and gall and similar things, and then take barley flour, and confound it with honey and water, and make an ointment therefrom which you apply to her back.
And if it stops, it's good. If so, make him feel no pain with ventosas on his back and at his breasts without hurting him;
Then take another, and the juice of plantain or of nettle with old wine, and make him feel it at his place.
And when the abscess is healed, keep the wound clean until it is well.
and that which is called “albatyr” is red, and has the appearance of a sharp knife, so cover it as I have said in the text; and then the cure until he is well.
Various kinds of abscesses can appear in the breast, such as syphilis, painful abscesses, herpes, suppurations, fistulas, hemorrhoids, hot abscesses, and many other diseases which I have mentioned in the classification.
It therefore follows that I should describe in this treatise the hot abscess which comes on the breast, which is not an abscess of putrefaction;
and if you want to know the work of iron, see if, when the abscess is beginning to come, it is hot and full of fever, and if it turns red, then you can see it. Do not then hurry to pierce, but let it die as long as the pain is soothed.
and then sit the patient down on a chair, and have two small chairs where he leans his back and joins his feet away from the leg;
and that his thighs are spread wide, and place his arms across his knees, and bind them well with a good ligature;
then suck his baffle toward the right side of his throat, and I shall introduce the instrument with which one operates the mouth of the marris, from which comes the form;
and it is necessary that when you see this instrument introduced, you stick a rod in first to test the depth of the marris, so that what enters the instrument does not come out more perfectly than it should, and does not hurt the patient; and if the instrument is larger, then it should cover the end of the seam of the cloth so that the instrument does not damage it;
and it should put the tip of the instrument above, and dip the instrument.
And when the abscess is opened, and one holds it with a wet hand, if it covers the top, to the spatumile lead;
and when the bowel is empty, then you should put into the wound wet cotton wicks soaked in rose oil or dry green oil;
and place the wick completely over the seam, and place it on top of the seam and on the other hand wet net soaked in water or cooked lavender;
then heal it after two days of ointment applied to this, until it is healed;
and never raise up the wound and disease by a warm bath of water and honey, and then of water or roots of licorice and arisolog long are cooked; and then come back to the poultice.
And if the wound has healed over the marrow, you must beware of cooking with iron, but heal it as we have said in the division.
of childbirth It is first necessary for the midwife to know the signs of natural childbirth, and what they are when you see the woman rush down, and desire to smell the air.
then quickly the baby comes out; then you will know that these births are according to natural order, and the first one comes out with its head, and the second one with it;
and when you see these signs, if it is necessary to press lightly on her belly, so that the baby comes out quickly;
for when he comes out with his head, the second one is with him, and the womb is cleansed of its excesses by good purification;
and what comes from elsewhere does not come naturally.
For it comes not at all on its own feet, and comes from the neck or shoulder, and the hands, or often comes upon its stomach, or sometimes turns upside down on its back, and is turned around by chance on its neck, and by other bad shapes;
is a craft that needs to be wise and subtle in these things, and warn against error and deception, and I will show you all the shapes how one must help it.
If a captive comes upon his head through natural birth, and women give birth with pain, and its strength is weak, then the captor sits on a saddle, or women hold him;
and it rises up of oil or fenugreek that is cooked, and then pour the dance between its two little feet whose shape is here: and split the second, and cut off his fingernail as long as the moisture that is spread out everywhere;
and rub the belly of the woman until the child is born, and if it does not give birth, then it is appropriate to rub the woman with mustard with oil of sesame seed;
then let her rub herself and shiver with a warm compress, and keep her mouth and nose covered for an hour; now bring the child.
And if the two hands are cold, then it is appropriate that you bring them back together gently little by little; and if they cannot enter, then put the woman on a chair, and lift her feet up; then take the chair off the ground, and stretch out the woman, so that she does not fall when she stands up;
and if the hands cannot enter, and the child is dead, then put the knives that were placed before on her hands, and pull out the child, and bring it back together.
the child's delivery from its feet When the child walks on its feet, then it is necessary to raise it up. and then turn it little by little until it is even;
and then stretch the feet little by little.
Until it jumps just as high as its toes, then instruct it to bend, and make it shake with tremors; If it jumps, then God help it.
And if it doesn't work like we've said, then let it be slowly turned, as long as it is according to the natural shape. For then he is lightly healed.
And if it does not come as we have said, then take a small piece of ash wood, and oil of sesame, and gum that is melted, and grind it all together in an mortar; and put this paste on the woman's breasts, then make her sit in fresh water until her breasts are soft;
And when she is wet all over, then put a necklace of myrrh on her, and leave it on for an hour; and then set it on one side, then make it twitch and strain its mouth and nose, and pinch its belly lightly, because the baby is not born yet.
the delivery of the child between its legs When the baby comes in this way, if you put the hand on his back little by little. then be careful with its neck, and let it hang down, and lie on your bed; and fold his hands little by little, then pinch his belly lightly, and take out the placenta until it is completely gone; and if the baby does not cry, if you stretch its legs and move its body, then turn its belly up, then put your hands on its belly; and shake the child little by little; and tell the woman to lie down until the baby comes out.
of the birth of a child who comes from the wide a hand during It is necessary to engage in bringing the hand back: If you can't bring it back, if the woman stands up and goes.
If she can't walk, if you make her sit on a bed, and stretch out her legs straight.
then arrange the muscles as I have described;
and if she doesn't give birth, if you make her sit on a chair, and carefully try to bring back the arm; and arrange the child according to its natural shape, and make it swing, and tell it to stretch as much as it can while giving birth.
of the birth of the child on his neck, and spread his hands, and turned his face towards his mother's back I think that the surgeon should wash his hands, then dry them little by little, and gently massage them;
and when it is even, if you arrange the muscles as I have said, and oil them a little, then tell her to move little by little.
and when you have done this, if the fire sits on the seat, and commands that she is heated; and make the fire shake. by this middle method to all the second part
by this middle method to all the second part When it comes in this way for a second time, if it is heated to the point of smoke, and the moisture is gone;
and if it is put down on its face and on its neck, so that it is not held back, and the animal dies;
then put the child inside, as far as you have done it properly, and command the woman not to heat herself at all:
of the issue of twins Know that good animals are often born, and never more than three or four at a time are born; and this is not a strange thing, and seldom happens. Two are a strange thing, and never live, if they are alone;
Two are a strange thing, and never live, if they are alone; I know this, that they may be multiplied, and are devised by the sage who devises them, who is bound to the bottle.
and never come naturally as we all do, as we have said.
And if they are grieved, if the remedy is as we have said, and let the skillful midwife, and make quickly and lightly what she does; and make so as it seems good for salvation. of many children
And no longer are formed in the marriage I or II or III or IV or V or VI or VII, or more until XV, and all are formed in the form of a child by the measurement of the wise glorious, and know all this, for by chance similar things may happen to them; so do as seems good to him.
of the dead child
When you treat the woman of a dead child or belly, as I said in the division, and it does not come out, and you are obliged to work with your hands; If it is necessary for you to know that his wife is of sound health, and has no accident or she may die.
If it is necessary that his wife be supported on her back, and that her shoulders are tilted downward, and her legs raised;
and the minister is applied to both sides, or she is laid on a bed so that she cannot be treated for the delivery of the child;
then rub the mouth of the pregnant woman with moist oil with mint and fenugreek and flax seed, then anoint his hands with these oils and these perfumes;
then pour into the vagina lightly, then take care that the baby is dressed and ready for delivery, and take care that the head of the fetus is not damaged;
then insert the fingers into her vagina or into her cervix or into her mouth or into her palace (vagina) or into her beard or into her throat or near her ribs, and the delivery takes place on the feet, it is inserted or pricked and the ribs move;
and he should dye the oncine to his right hand, and put the corbel between his two hands with his left hand, and hold the oncine lightly in any of these places that we have said until it comes to the empty thing;
then put another oncine there, where you need it, so that the extractions are even;
and then make them even by moving one way and the other, so that they come out easily, and hold the oncines' teeth firmly in place, like this:
If one part stops moving, then oil some of its joints with oil and push it in that part, and pull the other part;
and if one part stops moving at all, put this oncine in a higher place, and do so until it comes out completely.
And if one hand comes before the other, and he cannot bring it back by the tightness, then you must wrap a blanket over him until it is all finished. Then cover it with a cloth in the joint of the foot or at the neck, and likewise you must do on the other hand, and at the feet.
And if the child's neck is thick and in the birth it is twisted together with an acute bunch of thorns, then you must put the thorn-spasm between your two hands, and make the twist and extract the thorns. or you take the instrument which is called an almidah, with which the form comes out with the instruments or paste which comes after this one;
and likewise I make the child's deformity by nature;
and then cut the bones with nails, and if the head jumps out and is held back by force, then you must split it, until the moisture that comes from its issue is dried up;
and if it cannot be removed, then break it into pieces with a saw.
and if it is swollen in the abdomen or seeps from the sides, then you must pierce it until the moisture runs.
And if he fell on his feet, if the atraction is light, and the re-direction towards the mouth of the mare is light.
and if it is stuck in the abdomen or in the breast, then you must hold it with a cloth wrapped around your hand; and cut into the abdomen or breast until the moisture that is running out;
and if another bone has been broken and the shoulder joint is stuck, then you must pull it out with your hand firmly around the shoulder, and draw it out up to the mouth of the arm pit; then you cut off the head or the foot, and you draw it out;
and if the mouth of the arm pit is tightened by a hot abscess that has come there, then you must not move it, but treat wet and greasy things; and let them take care with poultices, and cut it with water softeners and moistening agents.
And if he hurts himself on his rib, and you put it straight, so take care of what we have said about the living child;
and if we cannot, then let him be torn into pieces, and leave nothing of the second.
And when you have done this, take care of what we have said about the feet that come out in the womb;
and if the pain comes from there, then let it be put in water restraining, and take care of other treatments.
And I saw a woman whose child had died, and another consulting about that child, and another saying that the child was dead. After a long time, the wound opened again and began to pour a lot of pus.
I was called to treat it, and I thought for a long time, but I could not close the wound.
I put on a plaster of strong attraction, and there came out a bone, and after a few days another one. I marveled very much, for the belly had no bones.
I thought that it was the bones of a dead child.
I wanted to heal the wound, and with my own hands, until the woman was better; and waited for the woman a long time like this, and it was a little bit warm in her;
and I forgot about this paste until one day, when the master found a strange thing;
Here comes the translation of the first sentence:
and to the two shoulders of the two lions. However, the horns should be thinner than the head, and made of ebony or boxwood;
and the mouth should be two fingers wide, and the cheeks one palm and a half wide; and the two limbs should be joined by a joint like this, which should be set at an angle of one palm's length or a little more;
and these two joints are fitted into the mouth of the mask so that they open when the horns are turned;
Another shape, more delicate and lighter in appearance, is made of ebony or boxwood, according to the shape of the claws; and it has two joints, like this, a palm' length long and two fingers wide;
and when you open the woman on all the instrument, let her sit on the bed, the pieces up and the legs open, then put the two supports together in the machine, and hold the head of the instrument away from between her knees; and then open your hand to all the instrument, as you have done to the nails evenly, according to the quantity that you open the mouth of the woman, until the ball moves her so that she wants it.
This instrument is all mounted up, and its appearances are multiple. and when you see that they are prepared, the work is faster, and higher for men by their quantity.
Do not despair of the instrument unless you have prepared it, for there is no excuse for its lack of use.
and when the second is ready to give birth, it is necessary that you order the sick woman to keep her tongue and then make her sneeze, and hold your hands to her mouth and nose; and if she jumps high, it's good.
and if she doesn't, if I can catch it, and make a pit or bowl, and put herbs that can open the mouth of the mare, as calamus, rut, anise, chamomile, caryophylline, and centaury; all these herbs, or none of them, are cooked or put in water on the fire;
then place a bowl or pit from the pot, and another at the mouth of the mare, and hold it until the vapours come out of the mare's mouth;
then make her sneeze, as we have said. If you miss the second time treatment.
And if she remains after this cure, and is not better, order her to soak her left hand in oil of sesame or in musk-root infusion, and then pour it on the wound, and bandage it again; and when she has found it, if she presses and extends it little by little correctly, so that the husband does not feel any extraction.
but then it is necessary to move it lightly from side to side and then stretch it out; so that it will come and dislocate itself.
And if the mouth of the husband is tight and constricted, we have said the cure of stretching, and of smoke from herbs;
and if she does not follow all that we have said, keep in mind that you do not make a mistake when you stretch it out;
but it is necessary that the one who is at the mouth of the husband, you tie him to the cunt of the woman, and then anoint it with ointment of four-part herbal tar; so that he will sizzle and be reset, and will come out strongly;
but still, when she gives off a bad smell from the stomach and the head, and blights the disease. So it is necessary to do smoke inhalations suitable for this:
neither of the old have tried smoking with dandelion and dried figs.
The form of the instrument, to which you smoke the woman at the retention of flowers and the second one, is this:
And is like to a dog, and put the head lightly in the fire, and the shoulders wide upon the fire;
and let the inhalations be on the coals, and the tan until it is spent, and begin again another one.
Many children are born who have not yet had their navels cut, but the surgeon cuts them lightly with a sharp knife: if it is necessary to dip him in water so that he cuts the navel of the surgeon with his right hand, and does not cut it at all with a spatel, and bandage him so that he does not touch it;
Then dip it in wine and oil, then the cure of poultices until it is healed.
And if you doubt that it will not recover, then put a splint on it and leave it unmoved, and let the bone be exposed when it goes to bed.
And never does a sudden blister come on a wound or an abscess. if it comes to covering suddenly: if so heal, if as we have said of the poultice of plaster.
Fistula which come from the fundament are nodulation, and grow heavier than those which come from the fundament disappear, or in the space of the II parts, if to one fistula or more;
and when that nodulation is old, if it opens, and again moistens a bleached or subtle bow, and never are these fistula persistent;
and are caused by what it is that he excretes or has wind when the patient makes excretion, and by chance in salt up one way.
And if it pierces to a bladder, and just up to half of the penis. and reach only to the junction of the loins, and just short of the neck of the bladder.
And so recognize the fistula that pierces to the foundation, and not that pierces: and is that you stick your second finger or foundation, and stick a small needle of silver or iron into the fistula when there is no curvature.
And if it has curvature, if you stick a small piece of string or a horse's hair, as long as you feel the string or hair on your finger:
and if you don't feel it, and there is no blockage of excretion or wind, nor does it cause pain, as we have said: know that it will not pierce. If you hurry to treat.
And when the fistula is persisting up to the bladder or up to the conduit of the urine, if it does not hold the urine, and cannot be sustained with medicines.
If it is pierced only to the join of the thigh, then it comes back to its place only at the root; If there is no twisting and the pain remains in the entrails, then it is only at that moment that he should be treated with medication or immediate attention by feeling for the pain;
And in these persistent pustules there is no cure except work and vanity of foolish people who interfere with them.
In that which is not persistent and not old, there is hope of health by fire, as I have experienced, and it is that the patient lies between your hands on his back;
and he lets his legs go up to his thighs, and has his thighs bent towards his abdomen; Then pour a little water, or if there is twisting, pour as much as you know where the pain comes from.
If the patient feels pain at the base, then you should place your index finger there, and feel that the nerve is being pinched.
and so discover between your thumb and the syringe or cannula, then you know it is persistent; if it does not work, then it cannot be cured.
By using the entire arm, one can perhaps cure some, but this rarely happens;
and the aid that can be given, if one heats the small cauldron according to the width of the fistula, as it is said above; and pour into the fistula as hot as possible without burning the base; and make it two or three times, until you know that these needles are burned, which look like an owl's feather;
and then the healer of wet tents will cover them, as much as they want to cook, and then the healer of ointment will burn it and join it together.
If this happens, then it is good.
Or if not, there can be no cure;
and if it pierces between, and not until the top which is at the foundation, and at the bottom of the tent a thick covering of tar or medicine, and you see the fistula to that person who covers from the medicine; if the tar of the beginning of the fistula, and fastens to the tent, and then the cure after, until it comes to the top of the tent; and the tent will be delivered, and will be destroyed;
then the healer of those who are burned will cover them, so that they seem like a goose feather, and there remain none.
And if the wound does not heal and a scar forms between you and the work, then apply fire cautery or bitter medicine to the scar.
For the cure of fire brings together two things: This is to know, the burning of these shoulders, and the tightening of blood and the drying up of moisture.
and then he cures the tents that are wet, whether they are cooked or not, until the heads grow, and those shoulders are burnt in the fire.
and then he cures the wound of the burning stones that have been stuck in the hard shoulder, and are the dry medicines.
For when it has been restored, if it is healed and does not return.
And if the fistula comes only to the foundation, and is distant from the heart, let him boil it up or at the foundation, and inquire that.
If you feel the tent, and come in between II is the cloth or medicine or stones, or is ready to pierce, so there is only a way of betrothal and hope, by the administration of one of the three ways:
or you cauterize it as we have said, or you cut it just to the root, or if you can put tents on it and cure it as first;
and do not cut too deep in perfection, that you do not cover the fundament which holds the foundation, and come by the voluntary way; and then heal, as we have said;
and then heal, as we have said; in case it heals, or remove the covering and clean it thoroughly from its base, or with a towel or other instrument placed there; then burn off that pus which is in the wound as well as you can; then study to restore the wound and to delay the fistula at the edge of the fundament:
then study to restore the wound and to delay the fistula at the edge of the fundament: if it is a lighter disease for the patient.
And in no way are fistulas formed in this way: and when you cover the tent over the fistula, and it is at the edge of the skin on top of the fundament, if one takes a piercing towel at the top according to this form: And I pour I thread tort in II, and pour the tent all the way in the fistula until it is at the head.
If it persists at the edge of the fundament inside, then extract the thread from that piercing, so that you cover your two or fundament:
and turn the head of the hair, and assemble the two shoulders together, and pull them from each other, and leave it one day or two.
and do not restrain once, until the thread holds these keys that are between two, and they move.
then heal the wound as long as it is sewn and healed.
If the fistula does not pierce, if you make it pierce in all the ways that you can, if it is too much emparfonto For it is not good to make a bandage tight all at once, and then to unbind it, if one wishes for the wound to heal completely.
The form of the spikelet with thorns from which one does the tube if it is made of one, part and cut them off; and on the other hand not, so that we do not hold what we should not hold, if you see this:
The emorodides are according to two ways: or they are inside the foundation, as a grain of resin, and there are small and large ones, and cut it with a sharp edge, and there is one or more, and they are away from the foundation and at the top of the foundation;
but those who are absent if there is little moisture, and soon after or a little yellow water or blood, and have the color of the flesh;
and the treatment for those who have them in the fundament, so that you command the patient to sweat by going to chambers, until the fundamentals are gone, and the sebum comes out; so if you hurry, and hold it like claws, or if you keep it with your fingernail, then cut it at the roots;
and if the dislocation cannot be held due to moisture, take it with a cloth, or cotton, or a piece of cloth; and pull them with your two hands, then cut them and powder them with any hot powders that are in the fire's place; or you cauterize them as it is said or metal cautery, so they are cured with other cures until they are healed;
and if his foundation cannot come out, then cauterize the patient with the caustic and sharp clistere to wash away what is at the foundation, so that it can come out freely; When the patient is perspiring, and his muscles are hot from exercise, then the treatment is light.
When the patient is perspiring, and his muscles are hot from exercise, then the treatment is light. and you should squeeze them with your fingernail or tweezers, and cut them off, then treat them as we have said, until they are healed, and do not incision with iron. If you bring the stitch together in this way:
If you bring the stitch together in this way: Take a twisted thread, and put it on a needle, then pull the thread through from one side to the other, and pass the two ends of the thread through the eye of the needle, and make a knot at the end;
and pull the thread tight, then tie the knot, and remove the needle, and do the same with all of them, and leave one for cutting away the excess blood;
and then place on the foundation I dip in oil with rose or in resin, and place on the foundation, and instruct the patient that he rest;
and then leave it for as long as it sheds, and when it is shed, if it is cured of the wound and other cures, until it is healed.
and dry at the end or foundation Often happens drying out at the end in the intestine, and by confinement of nature, and when the disease is old and medicine does not help. If you are able to cut off at the point of a scalpel or with your nail the bark above, which does not leave it to moisten; and then treat it until it is healthy as it should be;
and if it cannot harden, then begin to shave more strongly than before, until it bleeds and is scorched; and then treat it until it is healthy.
He will sweat profusely. FOMOZ [sic] is a small appearance of rot before the collar, and goes well wet perfectly;
and does not cut the vein, but feels like he is dead with a shiver, and enters all over the body, and more in the hands than anywhere else.
And the cure is that you take a feather from an egg of a goose, or a feather from a strong vulture, and put that feather on the shiver, until the purple circle completely covers the shiver; Then turn your hand over all the feather until you have covered the entire shiver, and put it on perfectly, and scratch the shiver from its roots.
And if you see, then make this of a dog's or a horse's tooth according to this form and be careful with the sharp edges and let it run over. do not cut, but keep holding onto both, and press.
And if you see this, cauterize the shiver with fire, as it is before or with the chapter of fire to cauterize.
Do not do this, but make a silver solution, or iron solution, or melted gold, or milk;
and never do these instruments small or large, according to those to whom they are brought. So it is that one brings for the cure of children and who are weak and painful, are small ones.
So it is that one brings for the cure of children and who are weak and painful, are small ones. The form of the clister is small and big if above wide, or the belly is tied according to this manner:
I have seen a distention where the belly is tied, as you see it, and the legs are pierced inside.
and one of the sides has an opening, and the other side does too;
and the belly is filled with medicines from a skin of wine or parchment, and all the small openings are pierced, and between each opening there is a space, then tie this space strongly with a sharp thread twisted in an X shape or a loop around it, and sew the belly together like a sheepskin; and when the medicine is inside, if the instrument has a strong thread before it, then sterilize it;
this is the shape of a circle:
and it should not be too hot or too cold, and oil or saffron oil or some other thing is smeared on the head of the cautery, then pour it lightly; Then the ministers take the cup in both hands until it is completely full, and then pour out the medicine for the patient while holding his legs against the wall, and let the medicine come out as much as possible. and if he sleeps a whole night, that is greater aid.
And if you cauterize him because of a decay of the stomach, and the medicine hastens to come out, then remind him until he is healthy.
And if his hemorrhoids are in the foundation or abscess, so is the clister as subtle as for a child;
and that is the form of the clister subtle where the skin is stretched:
We have said in the division the treatment of wounds;
Or we will tell you the cures for hands and medicine, according to accomplishment.
I say that there are various wounds according to what they are made, and according to the places where they are made, and how they are made.
The things by which wounds are made are by the hitting of a stone, and the cutting of a sword or a knife, or a lance or a staff or a mace or similar things;
where are made according to the rules of the body, such as a wound that climbs up the neck, or on top of the head, or breast, or abdomen, or liver, and similar limbs;
and I will tell you the cure for each wound, beginning with simple wounds on top of the head, because the reminder will come in this chapter's paragraph.
I say that when a simple wound comes on top of the head and the bone is not broken, take care if it is from falling onto stones or similar things, and the skin is already torn and the wound is large, and you wonder about the warmth of an abscess: if the fire begins to warm the skull in a few days if it comes from blood loss from the wound, and if the heat is opposite to the wounded part;
and the patient's appetite for wine and fatty foods.
And if he does not get better, or his meat is reduced, and he does not drink wine, nor eat cheese.
and put a warm cloth on the wound, if an abscess forms, cotton wetted in oil and applied immediately, or in wine of cypress.
and if there is no abscess, if the wound is fresh and does not move with the air, powder, which I will call a little later.
and if the fire has moved it, if he puts some onions on it, until he is cured.
And if the wound is great as of a sword-blade and similar, and the lips cannot be brought together by tension, if they are brought together by stitching, as I will say to the wounds of the belly, from the stitchery.
If the wound is open and deep, and narrow, and only a little, then the wound. Then heal the wound with medicine, and use hard leather instead of skin, and instruct the patient to eat large meat, such as roasted meat and cooked grain, as well as poultry and similar foods.
And if you find a boil, and it is not to the bone, then cut off all of it, and pour in water, and then treat him.
And if he has an artery in the wound or vein, which cannot be stopped with binding, then cut the artery, and if you find it dislocated, then re-align it like a thread. and if this does not benefit, then burn it with fire.
And if these wounds are small and simple, then the light cure is appropriate: and that you put this powder in it so that the wound heals.
And the method for this powder is: take incense a part; and dragon dung II parts; burn alive III parts, and the powder gently, and apply to the wound, and bandage it tightly, until it heals well and joins together all its blood;
and then let it lie well, and leave it unbound, if it doesn't swell. for one does not bandage the medicine until it is healed.
And never should one use live chalz solely, except when one has incense or dragon'blood, but fire has moved the wound.
And if the burn has moved the wound, at least put on it this powder;
but put on certain oil extracts or meal of barley flour made with water and honey until it stops itching; then treat with other treatments until it is healed.
And if the fracture of bone comes with the wound, and it is small, then extract it with subtle pinches;
and I will tell you later about the fractures of the head.
of the wound at the neck
If the wound is at the throat and it is simple, there is no difference between it and that of the head, but the artery at the throat is cut.
If it is asleep, if there is no other way to leave the cure than to put something restraining on, because it hurts the sleeper and makes him retreat; and do not put anything on the wound, because the substance of the nerves is cold, and the extension of water is with the brain, which is the highest limb.
But the medicine should be warm, as hot water in fresh water, and mixed with rose oil, and boiled too, in fresh water, and other stones of different sizes according to this method, and moistened with oil.
And if the wound is large, then bind it with strips, and then treat until he is healed.
And if the wounds are deep and full of pus, then pierce or cut deeper.
and if the artery is cut, and the blood flows out, then stop the bleeding, and cauterize as necessary.
and if the throat is cut, or the windpipe, and the course is blocked, so as to make the meat go down, then cut the wound on the chin of the throat, and do not touch the throat but reset it according to its natural shape. and then maintain it restrained, and leave it for some days, then treat it with onions until it is healthy;
and if the wound has made an impression on the bone, then seek it. and if there are pieces of bone, and you cannot take them out completely, then leave it until the wound festers and comes off on its own, and let the discharge run as it will;
and if the wound is fresh, then sprinkle on the powder that I have said. And if there are bones in the wound, and there is an fistula, then treat it as I said in the chapter of the ointment.
if it is a lance or sword cut, and the wound is deep, then look out for wind from the wound that causes the patient pain: then know that the wound is deadly;
and if it is not deep and is fresh with all its blood, then do not put on the powder at first, nor bind it so that the blood does not run fully, and turn to the side, and let the patient rest; but I have a painful sensation, and I leave it twice a day.
and if you have no pain, put cotton in the wound to absorb the moisture, and let the patient sleep on the wound for three days, or four, or more. if you do not get any spasm, nor a bad tremor of the heart or extraction of bones; and when you see the good dispositions, know that the wound is saved. Heal this and other cures, until it is healthy;
and if it cannot be healed, and it continues, then know that there is a fistula;
if the cure is as it should be. And if the wound is from a sword or a knife, and it is simple, or more or less deep, then the cure of this one; s’elle est grands, de couture;
if they are large, of sutures; and if they are not relieved, then let the wound fester, and make the extractions lighter.
and for other wounds on other members is the judgment as we have said.
Dou derrompement dou ventre
The breaking open of the abdomen is great and painful and small;
from a great wound there does not sometimes come out the intestines or where they lie, so that there is an insertion of air;
and the suturing is more difficult, and there is never less pain in a small wound than in a great one, so that we put the intestines back together only little by little, putting them back together slowly;
so that the intestines swell sometimes so that they feel cold, then we put them back together more slowly, and because a small wound heals more quickly than a large one, so that we keep the intestines in place until the others;II.
And know that the rupture of the belly is according to four ways:
The two common sutures in the belly wound are in the stitch of the other wounds of the body and the two special sutures are common to other wounds.
and all of them are more proper with the stitch of the belly, and I will tell each one and declare.
I say that when the wound is small, and nothing of the intestine comes out, and there is no need to wait for anything, it is by one of the four ways: or because of the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestine is swollen with the cold.
And when it is hot, warm it in the fourth way: Soak a sponge or a linen cloth entirely in warm water, or cook it with lukewarm water and saffron and aniseed, and drain the intestine until it swells;
and never did this wine causing restraints, and is muda that I soul for dispel.
And when you see the swelling depart, if the intestine is moistened with water or salt and cooked meat is heated, for by this is the entrance of little things prevented;
and if it cannot enter, then make a small hole in the wound with the instrument used to cut hemorrhoids;
and the first treatment is to make the person quiet, so we should not cut them unless there is great necessity;
This is the instrument for splitting it:
If you split it inward and not outward, and see this form: And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestines are protruding, if you can put them back in their natural place in their proper position, for that is difficult.
When the wound is wide, and it is in the lower part of the loins, then you must make the patient lie on their back, and raise their legs higher than their head; and if it is in the part of the soul the belly, so put the chief and the penis higher than the parts of the soul, and so too the opening of the belly is in one of the II parts so put t'entente in this that the part navrée be higher than the other;
and so it is necessary to administer what I say in great wounds and deadly ones.
In small wounds put what you are equipped with, then put between your hands pitous who darkens all the opening at its hand, and close the lips;
and this is the common way of sewing on, and it is that you press a needle or more, according to the quantity of the width of the wound, then leave from the chief of the wound I space of ii inches, and I stick a needle or he has i good thread; and pierce the II skins of the skin inside, as much as you make it pierce from that part, and assemble the II chiefs of the siphac together, the three together;
and then the extraction of a double thread from the needle from both sides, then assemble the two heads of the wound in front, and then leave a distance of two spaces, and put another needle;
and then the thread is cut as you did with the first needle, and do not stop doing this according to what you need with the needles until all the wound is closed;
and let the needles be small and large, because small needles go through all the fabric, and too large ones cannot enter well; so that they can be made smaller;
and do not put the needles too far from the fabric and the leather, so that they go through and open the wound in front of the suture;
and then cover the heads of the needles so that they do not burn the patient while he sleeps, and put tents or sheets over the heads of the needles to keep them in place, and leave them until the wound is closed;
and this method of sewing with needles is more convenient for small wounds, because it takes a needle or two.
The second stitch is common, and is that you join the two pieces of leather and the two pieces of cloth together with a strong thread;
and when you have pierced these four together, then take the needle to the part where you began, in the manner that we sew clothes;
and place a space of about the thickness of a smaller thread between each stitch;
This stitch is suitable for a home-sown wound or an abdominal injury that has been cut with a knife; it was about two hands' widths across and contained intestinal tissue about two palms' length long; the wound ran into the abdomen.
I brought back the intestine then it had been outside for XXIIIII hours, and the wound was closed after XV days, and I treated it, and it healed.
And the miracle was that he died, and this was a wonder;
and do not cure it with ointment, for I am in a place where there is none, nor any medicine. and put on cotton wool over the wound twice a day, and rinse it with honey water until it was well.
Or I will tell you the two proper ways to sew:
take the needle, and thread it from the outside in;
when it has pierced the flesh on the right side in line with the injury, take the thread that you have threaded through the eye of the needle and let it come out at the opposite end from the surface;
and the meaning of this stitch is that you sew as the furrier does when he makes fur, and leave a turn on one side, and take it up on the other, until the stitching is complete.
The second method of sewing, as Galenus explains properly, if it is so, as there is no font, who join the two parts together naturally, and apply one of the heads to the other head, in this way:
take an eye or head near the mirror next, and make it pierce that only, and leave the two heads of the syringe; then turn the needle, and make it pierce from the outside part only to that inside, as two heads of the syringe;
then make it pierce one and the other from the outside part only to that inside, in two other heads of the mirror that are on the other side;
and that is the method of sewing and the most common one.
Galenus says this word, and no one testifies, that we must sew the belly to two needles, or there is a thread in each;
and one needle from one part, and the other from another, in the manner of those who sew leathery;
and know that when the rupture is inside the belly, then the縫合更痛 than from other parts of the belly.
The judgments of the wound if they are such as the judgments of other wounds:
and is that when you find the fresh wound to have all its blood, so that the meat has been moved by it, then put back the intestines and the cut.
then put on the powder in preparation for closing, and if the meat has been moved by it, then put on any ointment that is available, as long as the wound bleeds; and chop the thread, and let the needle be heated and the wax; then treat the wound as with others until it is healed;
and if you don't have medicine, put on it, until he begins to go away bowels, cotton wool, and stir twice a day as long as it is healthy.
For you do not need other medicine in many cases when the wounds are simple;
and if you doubt that the wound does not communicate with the main members, then it is appropriate that you moisten another light part in oil of tempere hot, or in oil of roses, and put it around the joints, and clean the blisters;
and if it feels pain or irritation in the bowels, and many times happens, if the blisters are washed with black wine, and most likely the irritation comes to the intestine;
and pierce it inside, and know that when it is the large intestine, it is easier to heal than the small one.
The intestine called "jejunum" cannot be healthy when it is newly born, and this is because of the location of the veins that are in it, and because of the subtlety of all the body, and because its nature is close to that of a newborn.
And if the wound oozes, then put it back as well as the intestine, while it is fresh.
and if it is old and has become black or brown, then the place that is black should be cleaned so that blood does not flow from it, because there are veins and arteries.
then clean what is between the link, and hang the two shoulders from the side of the wound to the end so that the extraction can be done when the wound oozes, and the wound is closed.
of the rupture of the boil
When the intestine has been torn, and the wound is small, then it can be restored in some cases, for I have seen honest men whose stomachs were pierced or stabbed by a lance;
and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and it became infected and turned into a fistula, and there was vomiting and diarrhea;
I will use my skills to heal you as best I can, and I will not stop applying treatment until you are well, and let the wounds heal on their own.
And when I saw that the wound was healing, I doubted that the patient had done harm to his belly; and there was no harm, but delay in good conditions, and eating and drinking;
and they said no experiments that when there is a small wound in the intestine, it must be tied with some sort of ligature: Take a thin piece of wood from a large tree, then bind the lips of the wound together, and when the piece of wood has opened the mouth, place it on top of the two lips, so that it can extract its mouth:
and then he covers the head with it, and stays like this so that it cannot be undone, and puts another piece in the same way in front, until the wound is completely covered; and cover the wound.
If this occurs in the intestine, and causes no harm to the patient, and can be tied with a thin thread cut from the intestine of an animal, in such a way:
Take the end of this thread of intestine which has been cut off, and then tie it to the end of a thin twine of linen, then tie the thread around the skin, then cut the intestine, and then pull it back at the incision.
and this method of sewing with threads is more secure than the way of sutures and faith.
And if the wound is large and wide, especially when it is in one of the small intestine's grooves, there is no need for sutures, but care must be taken.
of fistula or where it is That said, all wounds and abscesses, once they have healed, are called "fistula" in general, and most importantly when they have scarred and closed up with a hair-like thread.
And a fistula is according to the green nodulation which is hard and blistered, or there is no pain felt, and it is also soft like the feathers of an owl;
and never by clear bow, and sometimes thick. never punch, and sometimes strong enough;
and I have spoken in the division of wounds, that any wound that is not healed, and there is no cure, it is only because of one of VIII causes: that is to say, by small blood or pus; or for his wickedness; or because something hard is inside it, and on the lips, which does not allow anything to grow; or where there is too much bow; or where his bones are rotten, and the material is of poor quality; or where the medicine is not good for the cure; or because corruption is in the manner of plague; or where, for property, in the region there is late digestion, and late health, and escapes by nature; where there are veins where there are bones
and I have briefly described all these causes, and the signs, and the remedies of medicines in the division.
Or is necessary that I make you aware of the cure for fistula, which is made by handwork.
Know that fistula occurs in all limbs of the body; For fistulas come from all parts of the body; because they occur in large veins, arteries, nerves, or the uterus, intestine, bladder, any of the ribs, spine of the back, or any joint of the hands or feet; and if it comes from a limb that is primary to the body, and similar things to the root.
And all fistulas of this type are of great difficulty for treatment, and there is only travail and ignorance.
and if there is no fistula that does not come to the surface, for which you have begun treatment and which you can clearly see, then take a piece of leather or iron, if the fistula is straight, feel along it;
and if it is twisted, so the hole of a thin probe dip, because the dip bends much inside the twists;
and if it is very broken and you cannot well search it with probes, if it is cleaned by one of the breaks, because moisture comes from one break to another and cleans it;
and then examine it with your skill, so that you know if there are bones or nerves, and chop them completely, and ask the patient to feel the pain that he feels when you press with your hand, and the place where he feels it;
and when you really know the place where it is, and if it is far from a joint, or a nerve, or an artery, or a vein, or any of the places that I have told you, cut it according to what I have told you, and take out the broken bone and the corrupted cartilage that are inside;
and then the cure as long as it is healthy, and its fistula is very deep from the right place, so that you cut it completely, as much as you can, then put wet patches in medicine water, and bottle them up to the top of the fistula, until the medicine corrodes the excess that is delayed at the bottom;
and then put ointments in a clean cloth, as long as it is healthy;
and if it is not healed by this, then cauterize it as we have said, and if the bone is corrupted by the fistula, then cut it out.
For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
and if the bone is uncovered, and there is corruption and blackening, then cut it down as far as the corruption goes, then treat with ointments in clean cloth as long as it is healthy;
and if he is not healed, and return bow as before, know that you have not yet come to the end:
if it reveals itself and seeks out until you are at the bottom, and remove all the corruption, then restore the place;
and if he is thus healed, it is good. if not, know that the corruption is too deep, that you cannot come there; if there is no other remedy than to relieve it by nature;
and if there is one little bone corrupted, and you can pull it out with pliers, if you extract it with the right instrument for this, and if there are many bones, then pull them out all at once, do not leave any;
and if the moisture makes it opposite to you, and there is no mistake or fear, if you put it in moisture and dry it, and deliver the bones;
And if you do not remove them in an hour, then put on the wound something that provokes rot, and let them rot around the bones, and then the bones will have less difficulty.
and if it is a large bone, such as the leg or thigh, let the corrosion continue until the blackening covers all the bone, and then close the wound;
and if it is a great deal of corruption, and comes up to almost the end of the bone; then cover all of it with poultice, and then treat it until it is fixed;
and I will tell you about a case that happened to a man in his leg, so that you may take an example and help from this teaching.
He was a young man of around thirty years old who had a pain in his leg from an unknown cause, which caused the matter to come out of the leg, and there was a large abscess, and he had no cause for it to open up;
but the mirrour by their madness overran so much that the abscesses opened, and they corroded a great deal of matter, and became a fistula, and it came to pass so much that all went bowels and moisture from the heart;
and many I cured within two years, and there was no cure for me in the art of surgery, until I was called away, and I took my leg and the medicines with which they were treating it, and that which ran through the perforations to the heart; and his body became red in the youth, and had an orange color.
I put a tent in one of these apertures, and then searched all the apertures, and found that one came against the other on all sides of the leg.
So I hurried away, and I probed into one of the perforations until I discovered part of the bone, which I found corrupted and broken, and the corruption went up to the bone inside;
I knew what was corrupted in the bone, and I took care that there should be no other corruption, except for that which I had already found;
and I began to restore the wound with medicines that are long lasting, and cannot be bound.
and then I discovered the bone as it was before, and I found that there was continuous decay in the bone, and the socket, and then I removed the socket, and then I leaned to bind the site; but I could not as I cupped up with my hand a palm of the bone, and I took it away completely from its socket, then I restored it with medicine; and he was healed and bound tightly, and it did not need to be reopened for the weakness of the patient, who could not bear it, and for the fear of death that I had for him. Car for the evacuation of blood often, but it was completely healed, and gave birth in place of the bone a hard shell, and was of good disposition and did not harm nor opposite from all in all, nor air nor come.
And if the bone is broken in any place of the spine, then it should be done in this way: take a bandage, and strain it at the top of the bone that is open, and do not command anyone to stretch it upwards; and if there is another piece of string thicker than the first one, tie it over the joint that has come out from behind the bone, and pull the loose end of the string to the side so that the thread does not damage the joint.
and if there is a stick or a wedge behind the bone to move it back,
and it is necessary to continue sewing as long as one can see and feel the corruption, and sew again.
And if the bone is corroded and does not close up, and the corrosion is in the middle or in one part, then uncover the whole joint.
then put a stick or wedge behind it, and sew the corruption from one part to another, and let the thread go out of the long side of the corrosion, as we have said;
and if the corruption is in the joint, then cover the corrupted joint and sew the bone where it joins from the other side;
and if it is corruption in the continuation of the two joints, there is no other pain than that of copper.
and if it is corruption where the hand grabs, or where the foot grabs, then that is very strong. However, you must inquire about this corrosion and how it hurts you. and cleanse it in all ways that you can, but that the vein or nerve does not make it contrary to you;
and know that the incisor and the sutures to copper these bones are many, according to the placement of the bones and the appearance of the teeth, and their size and subtlety, and their greatness and smallness, and their hardness; and for this it is necessary that you prepare your instrument according to each of these needs;
and know that the work will show you the instrument that you need, according to the knowledge of this craft and the testimony of the ways of the diseases; If you will use the instrument with which you are skilled according to what is necessary.
The joints might be dislocated due to pressure or due to movement.
And when you have medicine that can corrode by the cure of medicines, and it does not benefit, if you cover that member to the place where the corrosion comes, so that the patient escapes from death by the fault of the member, which is greater, from the wickedness that causes it;
and the signs are that the members become black, so that it seems to be burned by fire, and after that blackness, this corrosion of the member takes place from one member to another, and covers all the body;
if you hurry to cover it, and if it is by the stinging of certain poisonous beasts, such as scorpions of the sea and snakes, if the corrosion is at the top of the two joints, if you cover it, and do not give it space to come up to the hand.
And if it comes to the hand, so that the cap goes to the joint, so that the corrosion does not come up to the arm.
and if it comes to the arm, so that the cap goes to the shoulder;
and if it passes the shoulder, it is death, and there is no remedy except for the quantity of its virtue;
and all this while that the corrosion comes or stops: if it comes in the first joint, so that the cap goes after the other joint;
and if it comes or stops, so that the cap goes all over the place; and if it rises up the leg, so that the cap goes to the knee joint;
and if it comes above the knee, there is no other remedy but to make the sick person die by the slow motion of the corrosion;
and the way of capping or sowing the member is that you bind it above and below, and extend one minister between the two bones with a long nail, and another minister the other bone with a long nail, and you remove the cap which is between the two ministers at a large spatumile, as long as the bone is uncovered;
And then take a silk cope, and put of each side a cloth of linen, so that the silk does not touch the sound place, and thus come to the patient another wound and abscess.
And if bleeding comes when you work, then cauterize the place promptly, or put on some powdered restraints;
then return to your medicine until it is finished, then bind the limb with a suitable bandage, and treat it until it is healed;
and I will tell you what happened at home in a little while:
he had a blackness that seemed like fire-burned, and this corruption came first in his foot due to the stone, so it blotted out all of the foot;
and when the honorable man saw the corruption, he covered his foot with copper, and was healed;
and long ten after he came the corrosion or two of the hand, and came to me, and I put him on things responsive after the purification of the body, and can not stop the corrosions;
and he said that I cut off his hand, and I did not do it, but I had hope to reflect the matter; and doubted also that if I cut off his hand, he would not die, because the virtue of man is weak;
and he was despairing completely, and returned to his land, and he got well by copping his hand, and was healed;
and I do not tell the story but that if one does something else, one should do it well.
Now and again comes an abscess in the swollen part, and holds back so long that it causes great gathering of bowels; and then run and pierce, and jump out of it, and stay in place your eyes, as well as our servants; and the skin that is above it is also very thin like the threads of a tapestry, and does not run into the bone, nor into the nerve, and such disease is called "san" and not called "fistula".
but if it gets so long that it reaches the bone completely, then it is called a "fistula".
and the skin if you cut all around it, and most especially when it is thin like a tapestry thread; and does not burn because of its corrosion.
If you have promised that the skin will burn, and the corruption is not complete, and the skin is thin like a sheet of leather, so you use this treatment with it:
Look if his breasts are large, and the breast that they have is of a foul smell, then let him be treated with Egyptian medicine that is made like this: Take ajar, and oil, and leadite, evenly, and put to cook in a vase on the fire, until the medicine is red, and becomes as thick as honey;
and then take of this according to your need, and make it into water and honey, and clisterize his breast, and extract the pit; and leave the medicine in for two hours, then remove it by squeezing;
do this muting time, until the breast is completely broken, and the pucker is made;
and no time is treated with water of ashes, when this medicine is not present, and it is that you squeeze ashes from a vine's wood, and pour water on top, then let it flow, and treat it with, until you know that the breast is completely broken;
and if the patient cannot tolerate it, neither Egyptian medicine nor the ash water, if you cauterize with water and honey or a little bit of lead oxide crushed; or you cauterize with honey and wine, that the honey has the property to cleanse and wash, and the wine makes the wound stink;
and when you have done this, and you have assured yourself that the breasts are well cleansed, if you cauterize with that which causes them to grow, and it is that you press an ointment definitively, and make it with rose oil and wine;
or you cauterize with certain medicines and ointments, of which I have spoken in treating of ointments;
and if the nipple is small, and the cautery knife cannot enter, if you widen it a little with an iron bar, and put in it a tent of Egyptian ointment, or basilicum ointment, until it is widened;
and if the wound is too wide, so that the pus comes out so much that it can enter between the cup and the skin above or below it.
and if you cannot cover the breast as you see, so arrange it in such a way that the boil runs to the lowest point; for when the boil is round, if it does not burst in the middle, and if you cannot cover the breast as you see, so arrange it in such a way: so that the boil runs lightly down, and do not leave any of the boil;
so that the boil runs lightly down, and do not leave any of the boil; and take medicines that solidify it, put it on a linen towel that covers all the breast; then cover the hole on the breast from the other side as tightly as possible according to the quantity of the hole, and put it over the hole on the breast to tighten the boil, and do not take off the large towel for a long time;
and those who are out of the breast of the heart, often for the purpose of extracting the bowels, and know what runs from the bowels, whether it is poison or pus or enough or digestible or undigestable;
and take care if the patient feels pain or not, and whether there is an abscess or not, and how much medicine has been spread out in some way and you see the nature that rises up on the breast of the heart, know that the breasts are already sore, and approach the sanctity;
and then take off the dressing in the morning or third day, and when you dress the wound, if it is another cloth, and renew the poultice.
And if subtle poison becomes evident after a long time, do not despair of health because health is approaching.
For there are some who are late in wetting their wounds, and those who do the opposite;
and if the digested bowels rise up out of the heart after many days, know that the breasts are not sore;
and if it is delayed in coming out, and is prolonged, so take medicines separated wet in substance and dried in virtue, as the remedy definitely finishes, for there is a great part of vitriol, and this is the behind medicine;
take the separated remedy definitely, and make it with oil rosin, and dye it with uniform red wine in substance;
then make it and use it;
and this itself is made better by cooking, when the separated remedy is not present, or you take mirr and aloe and incense, and grind it, and powder it on honey when it is out of the fire;
and then pour it in a dripper, and put it on the breast, and never administer it with wine long time, and roots of the celestial plant, which is also like flour of times and hundred; and in simple medicines or compounds: crush them, and make a powder, and put on honey that I have said, and use;
and if the cure is long, and this cure does not work, then know that corruption has taken hold, and causes pressure in the bone, or in hard members, or in limbs; if the cure of the cure of the fistula, as we have said before.
Paraclete is a wound that opens at the nail of the hand or foot, or perhaps opens in another two;
and when it is sent, and no attention is taken, if it comes to the root of the nail, and perhaps коррорти whole;
and comes to the bone, so that it causes a painful ache, and the two fingers are wide apart, and the color turns blue;
When you treat it as we have said in the division, and the cure does not benefit, then you must cut off all the excess that has been reserved of the nail, and then cauterize the wound afterward. The fire cautery is a great help if the bone is sound and the nail is healthy;
and if the nail presses into the flesh, and begins to prick, and bleeds, then you must cut off the nail that pricks the flesh, cut it high up, and carefully and lightly chop off the end of the nail, and put burning and corrosive medicines on it to stop the bleeding; then you must cure it with onions as long as it is healthy.
And if the corruption is in the bone, then chop and grind it hard, because as long as the bone is corrupted, it cannot heal.
And if you see the bone getting corrupted, then cut and grind it as described above, and then cure it until it is healthy;
and if it is broken, burned, and smells bad, then you must heal it first.
Then cut the nail of the spittle with a saw in a cross manner above, and be careful that the saw does not go beyond the nail, for otherwise the patient would feel too much pain.
and if so, put something on it that soothes.
Le doigt qui pousse dans la main de certains hommes est entièrement charnu, et par occasion il y a un os, et jamais une ongle, et aucune fois la racine de la jointure nait dans aucun d'eux.
Whoever is born in two different places will not move, and whoever is born at the junction of two places may move.
The saw of the chubby one should be light, like this: Cut it with a large nail at its root:
Whoever is born in the root of the junction is hard to treat: If you hold it with a lid:
In whoever is born with an odd number of legs who must be cut off at the hip: first cut around the hip joint neatly up to the bone, then cut the bone with a suitable knife, and finally treat it until it is healed.
The joints that come together in two pieces are those that, by birth or by injury, or by fire's scorching, or similar things, come to be.
If you cover that one with a lid so that he can be repaired according to his natural forms; and put between two tents or drapes wet in oil rosin, so that they do not stick together: or place between two thin pieces of wood, as long as the logs are tight together, just as it should be.
She begins to touch any of his two with the palm, so handle it like this is right.
The vis are great wrapped up envelopes full of melancholy excesses that come from many members of the body;
and more comes in the legs of those who walk on foot and work and carry, which is others.
Therefore, you should not give him any kind of purification treatment, and then cure it from the base of the nose.
The cure for this in two ways: one is that they are copped and the black blood is drawn out; and the other way is that you open the vein and draw it all out.
The cut is done according to this manner: first the leg is cut with hot water so that the large vein is thin, and then it is extracted from the leg of the sick person up to the hip joint;
then the vein is cut in one, two or three places, of a large size, then it is drawn out and black blood drawn out by hand, from one side to the other, as much as the patient can bear;
and then let it sit, and he orders that it be dipped in black pepper meat.
and then start the evacuation and salting when the veins are empty, and rub on the patient.
The treatment is done in this way: Rehearse the leg of the sick person, if there is hair, then put it in bath or dip it, and raise the leg with hot water until it turns red, and swollen the veins;
And if you do not have a bath, if you heat it at the fire, and then apply hot meat to the vein at the heel of the ankle, or in the part below the ankle;
then soak the skin with vinegar, and scrape the vein from each side until it is smooth when you feel it;
and it turns red and black, and when it enters or leaves the skin it seems as white as a cord;
and fill it with water as long as it is lifted from the skin, and then put it in the oven at a low temperature, and then cover it with a cloth over three days.
and burn the skin on the vein as long as it appears, and then remove it from the fire, as you did, and put it in another oven, as you did first;
and cut another piece, or more than you need, and then remove it from the fire, and then wrap it around the second size of the stone, and then trimmer and remove it to the second size;
and extract it piece by piece until it is completely removed, and then wrap it up;
and if you cannot pull and lift it, put an extremely sharp needle on both ends of the thread, and tie and cut it, and fill it with fire, and turn your hand from one side to the other until it comes out; and make sure she does not break, because if she breaks, neither can we pull her out nor lift her up, and this will harm the patient.
and when you have treated it completely, place wet wool in wine and oil over the wound; and let the patient heal.
And if it is twisted and bent and wrapped up together, and is not straightened, as we have said, then you must split it in a twisted manner, but do not cover it; and treat it as we have described above.
The form of the iron which you cover over the joint should be curved, and do not cut it off, so that it does not break the vein;
and it should be thickly curved, for if it were thin, it would break the vein, but it should be thick as we have said, and this is the shape:
This vein is found in legs, warm parts where no herbs or trees grow, and soil that is dry.
And sometimes it grows elsewhere than in the legs, and this comes from a sore that cracks the skin, so it goes inside the body, crawling between the skin and the bone.
And if the signs of the beginning of this wound are that an extremely great inflammation comes in the leg, then the places change, and it begins to come out of its place, just as the root of a plant.
When the head is open, if you wrap a piece of linen cloth from one and a half to two inches in diameter around it, and then close it, and leave the cloth attached to the leg, and every time it comes off, as soon as the cloth comes off, and wraps it back on;
and if it is too far away, then wrap one part of it and cover the rest, and do not cover its root entirely until it is completely covered; for if you cover it, then it enters into the bone, and brings an abscess and sores where it is, and a bad disease;
for that thing it is necessary that it be treated little by little up to the root, and there remains nothing or wound.
and it is never this vein when it is treated with the palm of a hand, or ten fingers, and one hundred [people] die for me, at whom she stopped from ten fingers long, and when you cut her, if it rises or falls, and pierces up to the base, so that all is broken;
and be empty the matter that is within, and bring to its place medicines against putrefaction every day, then heal it as you do with abscesses.
and never this vein when it is opened in the joint of the foot or the leg, and it comes out with great pain, and where there is much swelling;
then heal it therefore as we have said before.
The hair should grow between the hide and the horn; This disease is called in our land "beef disease", for this it often enters the bulls, and is a small worm that births between hide and carriage, and goes all over the body up and down, and feels well to one member after another, until it reaches the skin where it goes, and leaps far.
And is infected with pus of some humors, so that it comes towards them, crawls and glides and worms or maggots in the belly.
And there is doubt of its maliciousness, for when it goes through the body and comes to the head, and comes to the brain, by chance enters and destroys the brain. and this often happens.
When you see him being cured and drained, so can't one force but when he goes:
So it is necessary that you lay him down on a strong bandage that is tightly tied up, then cover and drain him well, and the liquid comes out completely into the carriage, and you do not find it, so burn it with fire, until he dies.
and the greater harm it does, if it corrents the oil, as we have said;
and if you see the head coming towards the oil, then restrain it by its neck form; and strike him hard; and
and use the patient of medicinal solutions to rid the bad moods from corruption, and wash with meat that is rotten with corruption.
from pain that comes from windiness This disease is called "vakirir" in our land, and it is a pain that comes to some limbs, and moves from limb to limb;
and I saw what I told you. I was called to a sick woman, and I uncovered her arm, and saw a small swelling in the vein of the arm;
and I poked after, and I saw it rise up as a worm to the shoulder, more quickly than anything else, so as a lively silver when it cuts from one place to another;
the pain leaves that place, and enters the shoulder, and then after a little while corrupts all the body, until it comes to the other arm.
and then he told me that it turned again inside the body, as I saw it.
I marveled at how this woman moved her member from one to the other, for I have never seen such a disease in this way before. Nevertheless, I have seen many who wanted to move their pain from one place to another, but I do not want to see it, as I saw it in the woman.
and I thought that was because her torso was very thin, and the veins were exposed, and because it seemed that the wind was forced out;
and do not appear to me according to this reason for those who are healthy, who have moist bodies and relaxed veins.
And when you treat this disease and the patient feels that pain, if it opens as we have said, above and inside the hospital, and then after a long time until that wind is forced out at that place; and cauterize the joint;
if you do not see the hair, if the doctor who stops the winds, if it is like pills that rot, and pills of seraphim, and similar others.
They are various, according to their appearances and according to the colors of their feathers when they fly.
The diversity of them is that there are those who have great tips, small, hair, and soldered; and of those who have II angles, and of those who have tongues, and of those where there are pieces;
and that which is broken in any member if it is broken according to two manners: or in a principal member it breaks like a skull, liver, heart, pancreas, kidneys, intestines, bladder, and similar limbs. When it breaks in any place of these members, and the sign of death, which I will tell you later, you discover it: If it is necessary for you to extract this arrow, for death comes after many preparations. and when there is no bad sign showing itself to you, and the arrow is not fully extracted, if it catches, and heal the wound.
And the sign of the skull when the arrow catches and pierces the bone, and the medicine that is on the skull, and the scotomias and fainting and twitching and rash in the eyes, and inflammation and rash on the tongue, and convulsions and confusion of thought, and vomiting of food; and perhaps it has come out through the nostrils or ears; and perhaps it has come out through speech and sound; and in jumping from the moisturized wound there is a pulsing that seems like a pulse, and like a flame of fire;
and when this sign shows itself to you, if you hold it back from being extracted, and extract the arrow if it is stuck.
The sign of the arrow when it strikes is that it is near the left breast, and also as if it were stuck in a hard thing rather than in emptiness. and the arrow may also change course like the birds do, and strike in dark blood, and bring coldness and cold sweat, and faintness. then sense doubt that death comes.
And the sign of a sneeze that doesn't involve the nose is that there is no foaming from the wound, and the throat swells, and the patient's skin changes color, and he sighs loudly and shivers with coldness.
And if the arrow strikes in the covering of the hip, then break the small ribs; and bring great pain and a loud cry. and all the limbs move.
And if the sneeze comes from the stomach, perhaps there is something coming out of the wound that isn't digested meat.
And if an arrow strikes one in the belly, and it goes through the intestine without a stop, there is no hope for the cure, nor for the extraction of the arrow.
And if the arrow strikes in the bladder, and urine comes out in spurts, causing the patient to urinate, and great pain is felt. then know that the wound is deadly.
The other member, if it is made of face and neck and throat and shoulder and ajutoire and spine and forcele and cuixe and legs, and the limb that looks like it, are safe according to many arrangements. When the arrow is in the nerve or artery, and it does not hurt, so that as I will tell you that it happened to me, do not make it differently.
There was a man at home who had an arrow strike him in the throat and cut through the root of his neck; I tried it, and the other side seared off the grease from the ear, and he was cured without sensation.
And try a string that the chutel fell into the grease of the oil seared off paper, and the string was re-attached, and there could be only the tip toward you from the fist, and the string was great in an arc of Turkish color, all my ears were light without sensation;
The doctors were cured, and no bad accidents happened.
And try a string from the throat to a Christian, and the string was Arabic to ears:
I shaved the beards, and tried it as much as I could, and the Christians were cured.
And try a string to him at home, which was his cheek or belly, and I thought he would die;
and then let it pass XXX days, if he does not change his condition; I cut into the arrow, and shaped it, and tested it, and there was no bad accident.
And if you have an arrow in your butt or chest, and the wound is sewed up;
and let the arrow remain within, and do not change its natural dispositions, nor find harm in any of its natural works.
And I saw another man, to whom an arrow struck in his face, and was sewed up; and it remained thus without suffering great pain;
and many other similar things.
And I tested an arrow on a prince's son, who had a lump on his neck that was not in the middle, and it was slightly tilted to the right side; and the arrow was completely embedded.
I was called to treat her after she had been lame for three days. I found the wound very tight.
I tried all sorts of remedies, and could not feel anything; and there was no feeling of pain or tingling in her right ear.
I thought it was due to the arrow's point; I put a plaster of the most efficacious and digestive kind on the spot, lest the swelling increase; and I saw that it was indeed an arrow.
and I saw that it was indeed an arrow. I applied the plaster every day, and quickly healed the wound, and for a long time after that, the patient felt no pain from the arrow, which was embedded deep in his neck;
and it came out. I applied corrosive medicine to the wound, which was opened, and tried it out, and felt that the arrow's point, which had become embedded in the neck, was being drawn out;
And I adjusted at the opening of the wound by that medical water, until the head of the arrow was visibly visible.
and I waited well the end for III months, and then it opened so much the wound that I drew out the claws, and picked it up from one side to another, and could not get out;
Then I stopped from subtilizing and devising ways to make instruments, until I got it with claws well made, according to what its form will be at the end of this chapter, until I took it up and healed the wound.
And the doctor judged that the cartilage of the nose cannot be healed; I healed it then, and was sewed up the wound, and the patient was completely healed.
Or you have not said the quality of the extraction of some arrows, so that you put your cure on this which I did not say, for the book cannot encompass everything;
but the wise masters compare few things well, and on those that are present and deficient, try nine works, and nine instruments, for the dismemberment of strange things that come in this art.
I say that arrows do not come from limbs or they are fixed except according to two manners: or by where they enter, or by another part;
and that which is not fixed is by the place where it enters, it is an arrow entering into its flesh, and never remains in place once.
And if it does not remain there, let it be left so that the flesh is rotten within, and the course is healed.
and if it is fixed in the bone, and cannot come out, let it remain so for some days, and move it every day.
and then it comes out, and if it does not come out, let it be poked inside with a small sharp thing until the flesh inside is enlarged, and then extract it.
And if the arrow has been driven into the chest bone so that it cannot be seen, and you seek it with all your strength: and if you feel it, handle it with an appropriate instrument.
and if you cannot extract it by the pressure of the wound, and by the feel of the arrow, and there is no bone, nerve, or vein, then cut as much as the wound is great;
and try to extract the arrow if you can, and if it has ears on either side that hold it in place, then remove the core that is lodged in the ear with a pin that you can push, and then break or bend the ears of the arrow as much as you can;
and carefully so that you do not break the arrow, but try to extract it more painfully.
And if you cannot pull it out at once, then let the joint between the arrow and the flesh rot; then draw it out, for extraction is painful. And if the removal of blood causes the opposite effect, then use what we have said in this chapter's recipe about the cure in its paste;
and take care not to cut the nerve or the vein, and do not push too hard when extracting the arrow, otherwise you may cause harm, or quickly, or firmly, or loudly;
and put the patient in the position they were in when the arrow entered their body, for that is the greatest aid there is, and if you cannot do that, then follow the signs the body shows you.
The arrow that comes from another part, where it does not pierce anything of him, or the skin is swollen in a place which one can neither see nor feel apart:
Cut away until you can get your hands on the arrow, and then remove it: If it is now too late:
And if it is held in the bone, so turn your hand round, until it enters into the bone, and widen the bone, then take it out.
And if it cannot be removed, leave it alone for a while, and then start the extraction again as soon as possible:
and if the arrow is stuck in him, push it all the way in:
and if it is stuck, and you have a file, so that the point of the arrow goes into the edge of the tool;
And then push it out again, and if the arrow is caught in him, push the tool out with a point going in, so as to ease the extraction.
And if the arrow is stuck, so it is necessary that you cut all the flesh around where the poison is; if you can, then treat the wound as it should be done.
And if the arrow goes out through the neck or through the belly or through the bladder or through the ribcage, and it is close by, then you can cover over it, if it covers.
and don't cover the vein and nerve, and then extract it, and then sew up the wound, that is a job. and the cure until it is healed.
The shape of the pliers that are used to remove arrows are similar to an eye, and this is how they should be made:
And in these are many ways: great, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the arrow.
The shape of the bit used is also like the beak of a bird, to bite into the tip of the arrow, as this is the shape:
Veins that are healed are XXXI, where there is a head of XVI, that is to say: II batons which are after the ears, which are called the "dous herbech". and the II arteries which are in II temples appearing; and II veins that are in II laps of II hairs, which are called "aspires"; and the cut that is at the forehead; and the cut that is at the top of the head; and the two branches that are at the neck; and the two cuts that are on the lips above the mouth, and these are called "augen and the two cuts that are at the tip of the tongue.
The five common cuts are V in each arm:
the one is the cerebral, and it is at the left side of the spine, and it is called by the lay people "cut at the top and the middle one is called "fast" and is composed of the cerebral and the temporal, and it is called by the lay people "cut at the ear"; and the temporal is at the right side of the spine, and it is called by the lay people "cut at the belly", and it is above the facial, and this is the one that is spoken of, which opens clearly over the cheek.
And the small finger is the sine that is between the index and the ring finger, and if it has II raindrops;
and in the leg and where the foot are III veins: one is located on the inside of the left shoe, and the second is at the ankle of the right shoe; and the vein that is called "nesse", which is in the ankle on the other side;
and in the other leg are III veins located those.
The vein that is behind the ears helps with old cataracts and causes headaches;
and the quality of the vein, as I have said to you, is that you move the head of the patient, and rub the spot where the veins are with a rough cloth; and then tie the patient's neck to a pole, as much as the two veins appear behind the ears depending on the head; Keep it on your right side, and where you feel the pulse of your right arm, if it is hot to the touch, that is a sign of disease.
Then take the lance and pierce it through the vein up to the bone, then lift your hand all the way up, cut off the skin and the bone well, and let blood flow as much as you see;
Then extract and bandage it, until it is healed;
and that is what I have said about incision and cauterization in the first book.
The two arteries that are in the two temples, if they are old and hardened, and used to being cold, and to the eyes being wet, and to tears flowing;
and the quality of the sick person is such as I have said: that the patient extrudes his neck until the two veins are exposed; and put the thumb on top of the two fingers, then sign with the index.
then place the thumb on top of the two fingers, then sign with the index, and insert the lance into the vein at the base, and lift it up, and cut it off, like you did in the other two veins, and cut the blood according to your need;
then clean the wound, and put a finger on the vein for an hour, then put cotton on it; and then let it form, and leave it until it is healed;
and we have spoken about their treatment and extraction, or the beginning of the book.
The wound on the forehead heals as well as the headache from an ancient wound in the face, and has migraines and lightheadedness;
and the quality is that the patient holds his neck and twists it until the vein appears; then take the instrument which is called "casserole", whose form is:
And put the point on the vein, and hold it up with your hand, or something else, and let the blood come out in the quantity that you see; Then cut the neck of the patient, and tie the vein as long as it is healthy and never use a wide flame.
Nevertheless, the flame must not be too hot; and cut across, for the bone is near, and by chance the flame breaks when it is thin.
The vein of the two limbs that are in two layers should be used to help with the eyes, and with the plague, and with redness, and with oil in the face;
and the quality of their vein is that the patient's neck is pulled out by twisting it with a rope, as before;
and then the doctor, and the healing of the traveler, a little of long flame a little wide, because there is no fire. And if the flame is thin, perhaps it will break;
Then make a fire of the blood, as much as you need, and then put it on wool, and bind it well.
The doctor of the vein of birth if he worths to ague, and suddenly fever, and diseases of the face, as if headache and dizziness come into the face, and even when it is old.
and the quality of the doctor is that the patient strangles his neck, then he holds his birth vein with your left hand, and he puts the thin flame between the two nostrils, because the vein does not open well on its own, and the birth will begin to run now;
and do not go too far with the powder, and make the blood flow according to your need, then let it rest a night, for it is quickly restored.
This is the form of fire:
and the quality of the blood is that the patient should extract his hair from one side and another, as we have said;
and the master standing on one side of the patient's head, and the patient cuts the hair at the back of his head with a sharp knife, then he makes an incision in the blood vessel of the long hair, then he heals the wound with fire quickly, or as much as is necessary;
then he does the same on the other side of the head, then he shaves the hair from the back of the neck with a sharp knife, then he makes an incision in the blood vessel of the long hair, then he heals the wound with fire quickly, or as much as is necessary; then he takes care not to cut the hair of the neck so that the patient does not choke; and leave it until morning, so that the wound heals.
of the medicine of the animals For the medicine of the veins of the lips above helps to heal in the mouth, and corruption of the gums, and cuts of the lips, and of the baby and the womb.
And the quality of the cure is such that the patient sits before you, and his neck is held as I have said; then turn the lip, and look at where they are veined, which one is on the right lip and which one is on the left, and by what you can see that they are black, and by what is between them there are small veins that are black;
So make sure the two are correct, and if you don't know them and are in doubt, so make sure the bigger one of the two is on top, and do the same with the veining that is above and below, for this is a good way to do it.
For the medicine of the tongue The cure for these veined areas is to help after the cure for the cephalic venesection, and it is for the strangulation of the throat, and for diseases of the eye, and for diseases of the mouth;
and the quality of the sun if the patient dies between your hands before the sun, and make him lie down on his back, and look for every corner a black vein.
so save both, and do not cut them too short, for the veins are there.
The veins that are commonly saved are saved according to two ways:
either cut them at the top with a sharp knife, or cut them finely like a string and are called 'incisions'; and they are long and fine according to the width and the stretching of the veins. The shape of the flame is sharp and broad, as you see it.
And it is necessary to open the flat veins that contain large blood and turmoil; and this is the shape of the vein:
and is more subtle pointed, and is for saving the veins subtlety, where there is a subtle citrines blood.
the save of the base, which is one of these veins, so help the diseases that are there in the throat, and where the neck, and where the chest, and where the belly;
and it is necessary for the surgeon to bandage him so that he bleeds and burns with the sword which is broken. And if he cuts the artery, and the blood flows, if it comes to stop the bleeding, if it comes as I said; and must not be struck with fire but cut off like a nail.
And if the base does not open clearly, if it is necessary that you extract it, and change another one; or you do not want any rain from him, or you heal in his place the vein at the base of the arm: it opens clearly; and it is cut off with fire as we have said.
And if you see the place of the wound, it is necessary that you extract the arm, and touch the place as long as you know the pulse: and then mark the neck of the chest, and then tie the arms, and cut off the vein of the flame with a knife; and be careful not to wound in the artery when you see the neck broken, because it is an artery; so avoid it.
And if you see coming out on top like the urine of a child, and the blood is red and thin, know that it is an artery: so hurry up and put your arm on top for a long time, then cut your arm where the blood stops flowing, because it often happens; tie the arms, and leave them like that, and do not move the patient;
and be afraid, and do not move him until he is healthy.
And if the blood does not stop flowing and he comes to you, and if the medicine is not given, then cut the artery, because the head of the shoulder is dislocated: and restrain the pain.
Take a branch of fig tree, and cut it, and take one half and bind it well until the other day;
If the pain is restrained, it is good. if not, if the cure, as we have said, of powders that restrain pain;
and the restraining does not take place in many situations because of the small size of the wound and the strength of the arm of the patient.
The blood of the wound in the middle should be treated with a paste that is made from the head and the root, as we have said, because it is composed of the bazilica and the cephalica, so that:
and it is necessary for the patient to heat by fire the nerve that is at the root, and if he heats too much in perfection, and he burns the nerve, and he swells and his health is damaged, and perhaps he cannot heal;
and this nerve opens many times, and if it does not open in any man because of its fineness, it is necessary that you heal it with a sharp instrument. and avoid opening the nerve with your power.
And if there is a vein between the two nails, then cut it short.
the treatment of the head if it helps, that it attracts blood from the head and treats eyes;
and it is necessary to heal by touching at the olive flame or at the marten flame, for it is the most saving of all veins, because it does not damage the nerve nor the artery. However, it is necessary to seek the lighter way first, and do nothing wrong if it is done for the first time, and start again; and perhaps the way opens in some men the first time, but it does not harm to do it for the first time, but
The quality of the bloodletting is according to your opinion.
the first thing you must know about healing is that healing should be practiced only to preserve health and prevent future diseases from arising.
and let the surgeon make his cut in one of the three veins that are there. this is to say, cerebral, facial, and basilar; and the surgeon should make his cut at the beginning of fasting, and in autumn and winter after dinner when the sign of fullness appears;
and the surgeon should make his cut on the first day or third day after two hours or three days.
The surgeon who is skilled in the art of healing does not need to be instructed in this regard, but he should perform surgery at any time or for any reason;
and does not need to be instructed in this regard, but he should perform surgery on children up to the age of 12 and on women only after four months, up to seven years. The patient who is healthy and free from disease does not have a determined age; however, it is appropriate to begin treatment for adults during the hours of day or night, at all times, and it is not appropriate to treat children until they are 12-13 years old, nor women except those who have been pregnant for four months up to seven months. It is also not appropriate to treat the elderly who have passed 60 years of age.
And when anyone is to be operated on, in whatever way, it is necessary that he urinates in a light enema so that the bowels do not retain the fluid and thus the veins do not draw the fecal matter and harmful residue into the principal members;
not not heal those who are too sunburnt by meat, nor who are yolks, however much they may be, nor droopy.
and if they are healed after colic fever, vomiting, abdominal pain, frequent childbirth, travail, staying up late, and all that is caused by weapons or the heart;
and then carefully adjust the humors, if they are thin, with meat, drinks, and medicines, if you have any doubt about it;
and then enter or bathe, if anything does not help them, carefully adjusting the blood, and healing the swelling of the testicles from within the navel to the third joint, as we have said;
and keep yourself from work, drinking, lust, and similar things;
and be lying and resting, and let the healer stand above those who are to be healed, and rub their arms twice or three times, then stretch the tendon slowly, because when it is too stretched or tight, it cannot be bent;
and then rub the wound with hands, while the veins swell up and can be felt.
then wet the wound with a drop of old oil, then put his thumb of his left hand on that vein at the spot where he wants to inject, so that the vein does not get caught in the fire.
For there are veins that run like strings when injected, and some that are prone to bleeding, so that when you put the flame on them, it retreats from the flame, and cannot open the vein, and thus one is vulnerable to this. and if he opens the vein, if the wound is too narrow, so that the surgeon must be careful about such things.
And if the vein opens the first time, it is good; if not, then begin again a little bit further along that line or on another part of the body if the veins are not swollen.
And if his arm is swollen, and the patient hopes, leave it for a day or two, and do not bandage the arm. perhaps there will be abscesses.
do not enter or bathe, and then begin again the treatment if it pleases him;
and if his fracture is small, or the pain is subtle and you doubt that it will come out as much pain as you see, then take all the fire right to the fracture;
and work a little hospital so that his arm is swollen; For this often happens, when the wound is small.
If you see the arm swollen, do not begin again the treatment, and put on a little oil, for it soothes the body of pain, and is moist in that place where the oil is;
and administer the oil of olive to each vein that you heal, so as to stop the flow of blood;
and this same mixture makes three times and bowes down when it is placed in its place; if it is very large, it escapes when it is too big.
And if there is one large abscess, which often happens, but only when the opening of the vein is small, and you hurry, and place a wet sponge in water and in silk a little warm, and hold it for an hour;
and you do this after the flow of blood from the vein, and if it remains in its place for a few days without any black or green, then it does not harm him; and if you see it, put on any thing of aloe or myrrh, juice of calamus, or other things.
And many times abscesses and appearances occur to the santiment of the basilica:
So then put your hand on it, and if you find that the place is soft under pressure from your hand, then this is the source of the infection. Avoid putting your hand on anything we have discussed, for fear that you may cause damage to the artery without knowing it.
But let the flesh be dried by the sun until it hardens the place, and then treat it with other remedies until it is healed.
And according to each person's quantity of virtue, and the color of blood.
For if it is black inside, then let it drain until it is red. And if you see blood, let it flow until it is thin. And if it is too hot, then let it cool down.
For those who are sick and have the need for blood extraction, make the wound larger so that the flames are wide.
and for those who are weak, do the opposite, and it is necessary to treat them often and sometimes, and they must be treated by cutting across, not by piercing.
and this method of treatment is saved from the decay of blood and the cutting of nerves, and it is better than long-term treatment with broad cuts.
And for those whose bodies require treatment, it is necessary to give them moist water in grape juice. if it is heated, if three or four times the treatment of blood has been performed; and if it has a cold constitution, if before the treatment moist water in muscatel juice, or honey syrup with aromatic spices, such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and fennel, and well-smelling syrup is given,
And if he is ill to the point of blood loss, after the exudation of blood, it is necessary that he swallow beer and aromatic syrup and use other things we have spoken about in the chapter on the treatment of syncope for the purpose of evoking a vein.
And if he vomits up his food or is ill at other times, as often happens when he is very sick, that he gets better little by little, depending on the amount of his continued virtue.
And if he vomits up his food after the first sickness, and he has a strong pulse, then he gets better seven hours after the first sickness, or nine hours.
And if he is sick in another place, he must get well in two days or three.
For it has an effect on the blood in the body that is already heated, causing fever. If it is necessary to extract a large quantity, and to widen the hole as much as possible with a chisel. and then that you comply with all the conditions for health, and put your hand on your pulse as it heals, so that death does not come from the paine, and this happens many times, when the healing is neglected;
and it does not serve to see that the arm is dislocated and made to move again with pain, and the hole is closed, so you press firmly on it; if it is curved, let him extend his arm carefully, because that would be wrong;
but leave it until the second time it heals; or you take the flame to the end of the vein so that it is separated from the hole, and put a little thread wet with water on it, and press lightly.
And if the vein has burst, leave it alone and do not constrict it, until the abscess has settled.
And if need be, drain the blood a second time, whether it is in the same vein, or in another vein, or in the other arm.
The vein that runs through the arm is connected to the vein at the base of the neck; for it is composed of the same blood.
And the way of treatment is that the patient dips his hand into hot water until the joints are red.
Then let him stretch it gently so that the vein shows clearly, then treat it now with the knife, not wide nor long;
and be careful not to cut too deeply, and treat it well near the joint of the hand, and if he cannot remove it, dip the hand in hot water and let the blood run in the water until you have enough;
and if it is frozen, do not dip the hand in hot water again, for we put it into ice more than into water;
and the treatment of this vein is safer from all other veins, as it does not have an artery or nerve.
The treatment for the right hand, which is saved from all diseases of the liver, is as follows:
Extend the arm, and dip it in warm water, as long as the vein is gone, if you see it. and bend it across, and cut off all of it, if it doesn't hurt anything;
and don't cut it too deep all at once, for the nerve are very close together and then put the hand back in warm water, if it is frozen in the wound, and cannot take it out.
And when you have treated for as long as necessary, put oil and wax on the vein to hold it tightly together, and do the same for each arm.
The treatment for left-hand savour is good for mouse disease; and do the same as I told you to do for the right hand.
The treatment for the foot is good for all kinds of disorders of the body, such as diseases of the joints, and also for the feet and legs, old diseases, and similar ailments.
And the quality of this arm is that the patient dips some foot in warm water, and rubs on the vein as long as it goes away, and then put the joint of the foot. and the vein if it is at the ankle, and then all along the foot go many ways;
治 the joint either too large or wide, or at the ankle, so that it does not hurt.
And if you treat it on the leg, beware of the nerves that are exposed, and treat it with a travers also as when you dig.
and let the flames be extinguished.
And if he cannot pull them out, put the foot back in water, and let the vein well drain.
And if it is treated for the first time, start again on top of it a second time because its head is salt;
do not doubt about the nerves, as we have said, and do likewise with the other leg evenly.
The legs of the sciatic vein are at the ankle, and its blood runs to the pain in the thigh when it is time for birth.
And the quality of the treatment is that the patient goes in or bathes, and extracts from the ankle eight in twisting, because otherwise the vein does not open;
and if it opens, then treat it in all ways that you can, and traverse it; and vale more than you dig because its head is up and it is very swollen at the hands of many men.
and vale more than you dig because its head is up and it is very swollen at the hands of many men. And if you do not treat it, so that there is no rain of blood from the foot or back, and towards the small chest, and guard yourself from danger.
and do so much to stop the bleeding that you can see, and then clean the wound, and put cotton on it and hold it in place; This makes her well.
Vessels are made of horn, or bronze, or glass;
and the suction is done according to two ways: either by hurting and drawing blood, or without hurting.
And this suction that is without hurting is according to two ways: either it is all-over fire, or without fire;
and the suction that is made by hurting and drawing blood is made in twelve parts of the body, one of which is all-over the chest; and the other is in the neck; and II others at the sides of the neck; and the suction cup from the chin; and the suction cup from the shoulders; and the suction cup at the ribs; and the suction cups extend to the arms; and the suction cups on the legs; and the suction cups at the ankles;
and the suction treatment does not release blood, unless from small veins that are scattered in the chest, and for this reason it does not fail, as is done with the suction of a vein; nor is it necessary that she be bled, nor does fire alone or heat alone help in any disease that comes from overindulgence, until the whole body is deprived.
And if for necessity of disease or custom, we treat each hour with the beginning of the month and at its end, and with suction and with compression, then let us do it in turns;
For there are many who, when they have to breathe, become very heavy.
and if it is something that causes them trouble and redness on their face, and in their head, and at the neck, and darkness in their eyes;
and those who breathe blood into their mouth, and their tongue has fled, and they are thirsty for blood; and if it is something that causes them to dream, and see things that are not there, and hear sounds, and taste strange things.
And when we saw these signs, and most certainly when it is the middle of the month, we order them to fast after three hours from day.
The medicine of the head if it helps with the pain ... which comes from the eyes, and does not come except that blood is evacuated from the whole body;
and this breathing if it is in the place of the medicine of the head, and does not come except that which has a cold complexion, or which is chatty, for this causes them much harm;
and therefore it is not necessary for me to tell you not to use them when there is a cold disease.
And those who recover from it often become dizzy, and for this reason one should put the cup a little lower down due to the doubt of dizziness.
The ventilation of the neck is in place of the windpipe and larynx, and therefore it causes trouble with the throat, and with the cutting of the voice, and with clearing, and with the swelling.
and therefore it is necessary to put a stop to it, because if it holds too tightly, in this way it hurts or stomach and heart.
The ventilation of the neck hurts like pain in the throat, and it blisters and stings, and chokes, and causes pain at the roots of the teeth, and is in place of the larynx.
And you must order the doctor that he hold his hand in place and not hurt the artery, and that there be no movement of blood.
The windings of the throat are so troublesome to illness of the mouth, and corruption of the gums, and similar diseases that are in the mouth; and is in the place of the two lips.
The windings of the shoulders cause a disease that comes from heat and swelling.
The windings of the arms are as valuable as three veins, because they draw blood from these large veins;
And instruct the surgeon that he not sew it too tight, for the blood vessels are naked there and can be easily torn;
The wound on the back is as valuable for the foundation bleeding and for similar diseases as the wound on the leg; it must be large and deep so that it can draw well; and if it is too thin, it will burst; and make large wounds.
The leg wound opens easily because it draws blood from the whole body, and is valuable for the old pains of the kidneys, of the womb, and of the bladder; it also removes the blooms;
and are in place of the two feet, and of the two ankles, but they weaken the heart after a long time, and bring about premature death in many conditions.
The manner of putting the suction cup is that you put it first empty, and suck quickly, and then place it permanently, and move it evenly, and do not cease to do this, until you see the place red and inflamed, and appear the color of blood;
then dry it off, and remove the suction cups, and take care in the position of the bodies, for there are some who have very soft hearts, and some who have hard spines: if one is to be injured once only, and one is to make wide wounds, and a little deep; and suck lightly.
And if the vein is thick, then it is necessary to hurt twice: the first time to dilate the path of blood flow
And if it is very thick, then it is necessary to wound for the third time;
and when we want to draw out blood little by little, then we suffocate just once. And if we want to draw out much blood, then we start again and again;
and if the blood is thick, then we draw it out completely, and the end is that the pulse is perceived suddenly, and it is necessary to touch a person who has thick and hard skin, and who has been perspiring, so that you moisten the lees of the vials with oil that opens and dissolves: if it is in a state of estrus, of violet oil, or of sweet almond oil, or of cucumber seed oil;
and if it is in the period of yew, of mustard oil, or of lily, or of chamomile, or other similar things.
And if the surplus is thick and cold, take olive oil, or balm, or anise oil, and similar things.
And if the person with the injury is old and has wide joints, there is no need to put oil on it, but it must be washed after the windification of rosewater, or cold water, or water from mulberries, or water from cucumbers, or porcelain water, or other things like that.
And for those who are affected by moisture, if they rise in such water, or in water from myrtle, and sumac, and similar things.
And those who have great excesses rise with wine, or with water of wormwood, or with aneth or chamomile decoction, or others.
and they should not be washed by a vacuum before the bath or in the bath, but after the bath an hour or two.
and do not sleep after vacuuming, and it is necessary that he be warmed up, when he should be vacuumed, and when he has been vacuumed.
And guard those who are being treated for colic, and that their bowels do not move too fast and ignite. if it is necessary that he drink cold things, like pomegranates and endive and lettuce at the edge, and similar things; and make a juice of pulses, and char on a griddle, and moist meat.
and make a juice of pulses, and char on a griddle, and moist meat. And those who have a pale complexion, if they drink syrup of honey and fragrant wine that is between old and new, and make juice of pulses, and make juice of pulses and small birds and pigeons;
and when he vomits, then he must drink more than eat.
and it is necessary to give some people once or twice or musk before the ventilation, or after, to strengthen the main members; and be careful with the water, but it is only necessary that those who are warm drink it.
The vacuum that is applied to the back does not hurt, those that are placed on the liver, and the kidney, and the podagra, and on the belly, and the buttocks, and the rain, and the hunchback, for this member does not feel the pain when it is applied to the skin, and we put it on the breasts when the baby is born;
to remove the viscosity that is in the member, as we put vacuums on the belly and the buttocks to weaken the member;
and bone pain, when there is an operation or a stone, if bone, by its attractive virtue, the operation, or deserts the stone from its place;
and so it is done when you put it on the liver and on the mouse when there is wind trapped, and these suction cups are emptied clean for only so much; and never are they put together fire, and no times plainness of water is filled, if as the diseases of pleurisy, and in such a way that one fills the suction cup with hot water, or water in which he has boiled herbs suitable for this;
The shape of the suction cup is administered to fire thus:
And it is II fingers wide and half a palm long, and it cost between the middle of the finger and the nail, as for sticking an needle, and be of air, so that it does not bruise the patient when you put it on the member;
and have in the middle a staff of wood or iron to place an axletree, and they are large and small according to the disease and age of those who take them;
for the suction cups of children are other than old ones, and lean that are thin that fat.
And this suction cup should be placed on the member:
take the wax candlestick or the string, and put it in the middle of the suction cup across the staff that is in the middle of the suction cup, so that the clarity is at the bottom of the suction cup so that it does not burn the patient.
and then put it on the member, and these two must be on the hole that we have said, so that when you press it, if there is steam, and take off the suction cup;
and take the string as before, and restart it often, if you need to.
In the bellows, then, which is used to treat pleurisy, there should be no water, no pipe nor duct, and it should only be activated when it is completely dry and placed on the limb with great care;
and this is the form:
Only in limbs or parts where there are small openings can bellows be applied due to their smallness, such as the lips and gums, and similar parts; and in bare legs, if they are thin or naked, like two legs, and others that resemble them;
and the quality of using it is that when you find bellows that are in clear sweet water without danger, then take them;
and dip them into clear sweet water, as long as they remain wet, and do not have anything in their bellows; and then anoint with oil from the wound and from the bellows, then rub the limb until it is red, and put the bellows on;
and when they are clear, and cheer up, if there is a place where one can put a suction cup, one puts it on, for this is worth much after.
If not, raise the level of water in such a way that it covers the joint well, and then pour out the water very well, and then press it;
and if the joint is too sore after raising the level of water, then soak a linen cloth in cold water and put it on, until the joints are numb;
and if there are many joints, then put on vitriol powder, or garlic, and similar things, until they are numb;
or you put on the level half of peeled beans, and leave them until they burn at the level, then they will be numb now;
and if you have more work to do, then take other joints.
And if the sweats do not want to take, then rub the place of sweat with fresh blood, or you put in an needle as much as the sweat comes out, and then put them on, and sometimes as soon as they feel the sweat, they burn.
And when you see that they are chucking, then powder on a little aloe and sea salt, or ash, they will throw it now.
This is the translation of the provided text: The chapters of this treatise are often necessary in the art of medicine, and are beneficial for fractures and dislocations.
Know that, dung of the shit, that the wise men have never poured this chapter, that no book or letter has ever read it;
and for this reason the science is strange in our land, for I never found any good one;
and know nothing, except for the science of ancient books, which I have studied so much and treated the science, and by experience, and by habit of my life;
and I have described in this chapter what is contained therein, and I have summarized it at the end, and I have clearly set forth the forms of the instruments that are used, as I did in the two chapters above.
It is therefore appropriate that we say in this book the sums of words and the chapters where the sagacious mind places his understanding, and remains on truth, so that those who are tested may learn and understand this noble art, and teach it to others.
I say that when fracture, dislocation or twisting, or dislocation comes to someone, it is necessary that you hurry to save the sick person from one side and the other, if nothing prevents him from doing so, as in cases of weakness of the corset, or paralysis, or old age; or his tension is not very tight, or it is too frequent;
and do not eat too much, that is to say, cold dishes, and char of onions and garlic, and do not drink wine, or eat any greasy foods, and do not fill yourself too much with meat that fills the veins with blood, until you are sure of hot chili, nor of expansion of matter in the member;
If the disease comes back after initial treatment, it is necessary to resume the treatment.
And when the broken nose begins to heal, it is necessary that the sick person be nourished with meat that makes great fattening, or has viscosity, like cooked wheat in water, and rice, and beans, and peas, and dough of wheat, and eggs, and fish fresh, and strong wine, and similar things. For as soon as the heat is removed, the breaking must be delayed and postponed.
And know that the bones of old and decrepit people cannot be well healed or hardened according to their nature by the loss of limbs, nor those that are too tender, such as the bones of small children.
but if there is no cure, reset the broken bone and join it together with large tendons that hurt and connect the limb, until it heals as it was before; and do not cut off any of its members, and for this reason it is necessary to feed it with large amounts of meat, as we have said.
And know that there are different kinds of fractures in many ways.
For the fracture at the top is different from the fracture at the foot, or at the leg, and I will tell you in this chapter all kinds of fractures. For there is a fracture that goes up and another that goes down, as when the chisel cuts, or as the length of a feather for writing.
For there is a fracture that goes up and another that goes down, as when the chisel cuts, or as the length of a feather for writing. And if there is a break with a wound, and a break at all a small slit.
And each has its own tool for restoration, according to what the memory brings back to its place;
and how the break in the bone is caused by the twist of the lever, and wide apart well by the force of the hand;
and if there is no twistedness in them at the base, and the patient does not feel great pain, then there is no fracture.
but it can also have twistedness, or a split, or a small fracture. If you do not move it with your hand but put it on medicine that comes next, and then hold it now slowly.
And know that the fracture that has happened in the arm, and its two parts are separated, now it is necessary to put them back in an even way, so that the bone grows again.
and if the bones are healed, let him not work for a day or two, until the bones have healed.
then put it in an even way to the muscle that you can easily and cleanly cut it, and know that the healing of this is lighter than the healing of that which has parts.
and tighten it, as it should be done.
And if the bone has broken into pieces, and its extension is of two parts, whether it be hand or foot, or at the hand, a small member, or two strings, or a string and at the hand;
and adjust the member according to its natural figure, so that when the parts of the broken member are arranged, all additions should be removed from their places that you can, and keep that your work does not cause any harm or pain to the patient.
and adjust well the two bones according to the best forms.
And feel it well with your hand if you think it is not well:
if it is drained properly, and do not pull it too much, and do not press it as those who do so with their work, hot and contracted to the member, as we have often wanted.
And when the member is in order, so instruct the patient that he does not move it, neither standing nor sleeping, nor turning, nor in any other way; and keep well that the member is so secure that it feels no pain at all. For when there is no pain at all, or hardly any, and it is convenient to put it in such a position that it does not feel any pain.
and keep well that the member is so secure that it feels no pain at all. For when there is no pain at all, or hardly any, and it is convenient to put it in such a position that it does not feel any pain. and keep it so that no twists come when it is restored;
and the quality of the broken member is according to what I tell you.
You know that the broken members are diverse in size and in greatness and in form.
For there are small limbs, such as arms and legs, and similar things: it is convenient to wrap cloths of soft and subtle linen around them; and those who are fat, such as the leg and thigh:
it is convenient to wrap with a broad and sturdy linen cloth, for it embraces all the whole member and holds it evenly so that there is no itchiness;
and then it is put in light splints, three or four according to the limb, and held tight with one hand all around the linen cloth, then it goes up over the break and loosens it slightly, so that the break comes away a little;
and make soft the ligature little by little, as you pinch much of the sound part, then take another ligature, and turn very close around the broken place;
then return to the soiled part of the break, and hold it tightly, not too hard or too gently, as we have said in the first ligature above;
then put between the tied threads of linen or drapes, until they are all even, then tie everything above the bandage, and then place your well-made pads on, if there is an abscess or swelling.
And if there is swelling or an abscess, put something soothing over the abscess, which eases the swelling, and leaves it like that for several days;
then hold it under your pads, and be of half a broad strap made of linen, or of oak that you make saws, or of palm leaves, and be according to this form:
but it is necessary that the stake which one puts on the fracture be a little thicker and wider than the others;
and is also far away as it is necessary for the limb, small or large; then hold them to the stakes as you did with the first limb, then tie a thread upward, like in the first limb on the fracture; and then narrower upward, however;
and that the thread is light, not too thick nor too thin, and of soft linen;
for if the thread is thick, like I have seen in some of the works of the fools who make their ligatures with linen threads that are twisted, and that is a great error, for the ligature cannot be even if it is too thin, and it only comes to less than two inches between each stake.
And if the patient is stabbed by the nails of the stars after extraction from his natural skin, then put on them a cotton wool or another rag so that he does not scar.
When the wound is with the bruise and the bandage is broken, I will describe the treatment hereafter.
And know that it is not good to extract stars from all the broken members on the first day. For when the limbs are large, one must not put on stockings before five or seven days, or more according to the direction of the apothecary's knife with care at the same time.
and here is the way of the old plasters in order to restore fracture, dislocation, and twist:
which you take of the flour which holds to the walls of the mill, and confound it with much egg, and apply this confecting, not too clear nor too thick, and use it, and this is the common way of the plaster which restores the fracture to many dispositions, and most of all to women and small children, for it is not too soft nor too hard.
Another way of the plaster which restores the fracture and the dislocation and the twist: Take 3 oboles and ladanum and nard and assafetida and gum arabic and mugwort, in 10 zois. mirre and aloes, in V Z. mirre and aloes, and in VIII Z. and mix it into a powder with milk of ointment. If the complexion of the patient is warm, then use this ointment, for it is of good composition, and restores broken bones quickly, and benefits many people.
Another method of making ointment that is useful for torsion: take muggins and viscinin, in X Z. mirre and aloes, in VIII Z. mixing it with VI Z. with bo-arminic X Z., and grind it well, and mix it with milk of ointment or milk of ure, and apply it.
Another method of making ointment for joints and bones that are out of place and pain: Take another new one, and soak it in milky water and cooked oil, and put it on the wound.
It is better to use poultices than to apply direct heat; they are good for calming a hot abscess, and properly relieve pain.
Another way to make plaster that restores broken bones: Take dry fig leaves and earth leaves of the poplar tree, grind them together, and make a plaster.
Another method of poultice for healing broken bones and reducing the swelling of an abscess. Take roots of marsh mallows, chamomile, violets, flour of oats, of each a part;
and grind them, and mix them with wine, and heat the member, and apply the mixture of water and coriander juice, or water, and use it.
Another method of poultice, stronger than the first, for healing an abscess that has become chronic and is healing slowly. Take roots of marsh mallows, and linseed, yarrow, melilot, and sage, and flowers of violets and chamomile, of each a part; and grind them, and mix them with salt water, or sweet water, or wine, according to the heat of the member, and its rest.
Ypocras says in his book that one should not put anything on a broken member to restore it except tar made of wax and oil, and nothing else, and he says that it must be neither too soft nor too hard.
And it seems to Galen that one should put on a broken member, to restore it, dry things a little warm, such as myrrh and aloe and incense and similar things, as we have said.
Another way to treat with fire; which is good for injury and pain: Take moldy bread and grind it with water, or feathers, and viscera, and make it into a paste and apply it to the skin.
Then carefully remove the paste, and pay attention if the patient feels any pain, or if their bones have moved out of place. If not removed by hand soon. And if pain arrives at the site, or itchiness, or heat, or swelling, do not delay, remove the paste, and apply the treatment immediately.
And take a light cloth, and a sponge of the sea moistened, and dip it in water, and raise it up to the site, until the itchiness stops, and the pain is soothed. Then let the member rest for an hour, and then put a dry cloth on it, moistened with rosewater or oil, and place a bandage on it, until you are sure there is no heat.
and let the inflammation of the limb rest, and pain in the bone then begins again with gentle work, and a little turpentine, and do not pull it as hard as before; and gently until he is well.
And if you see that the abscess is causing pain and inflammation and swelling, then you must apply poultices and bind it up, if it begins to heal as you have done at first.
And if the limb does not come as we have said, do not dislodge it until after three days or four or five or seven. and never leave it for more than twenty days, according to what you see, until the break heals, and bring the shoulder close to the neck;
then restrain it less than before, and let his meat grow thicker, as I have said above;
and if you see that the head is drying up more than it should, know that dislocation can no longer come; then arise with warm water every time you dislodge it, and do so for three days in a row, and let the oil sit for a little while;
By this work, therefore, cut off the members, and cut with great care what is twisted in such a way that it restore the members wrongly.
This is bad, and if the work is painful, and I see nothing else than to let it lie and do it right.
There are many ways of breaking, and different shapes, and causes are distinct.
For it has fractures that are made by the impact of an arrow, and the collarbone is all broken down to its facet that is dislocated from the bone, like this makes a break or so. And for this is called "breakage
The arrow breaks the bone from above, and it is called in this way "absolute breakage".
And is the wound of these two great fractures or small ones.
And if there is impact inside, or a split, or of the jaw of stone, or of falling on stone, or similar.
And if there is a penetrating break, that approaches the tendon that is outside the bone, or it is on the bone, and this wound is great or small.
And if it is a wound that has entered the bone as finely as our hair, and is a small split, therefore this is called 'capillaire' fracture.
and if the wound is made by a stone, or by a blow, or by a similar thing, and enters a piece of bone downstream, and the break is so fine as to be like the hair that the blacksmith makes when he works on the bellies of his kettles; then it enters between the stones.
and this can happen more easily to those who have a soft skull, like the skull of a child;
and has all these types of fractures that small pieces are broken off like pieces of wood; I will speak about it in its place.
And let us know all kinds of fractures by traction on them, and inquiry into the tents, and by the rotten cart that is above.
The hair-like appearance is caused by what happens when you uncover the bone and rub it upwards, thus creating a black fracture.
In the treatment of fractures, take care of potential accidents that might occur with the patient, and if you see no bad accident, as vomiting, loss of understanding, extensiveness, paleness, fever, the eyes getting redder and redder, and other similar signs and symptoms in multiple situations, it is difficult to heal.
And if you do not see a potentially dangerous accident, and you hope for healing, then begin the treatment.
And when the newborn comes to you first, and it is in winter, then it is necessary to remove the bone within fourteen days at most.
And if it is in the foot, so that you hasten to remove the bone before the seventh day, so that the tissue of the bone does not decay, and the accident comes which we have said.
And if the fracture of the bone comes only to the membrane that covers the skull, so that you split the split part in two;
and you squeeze the head of the patient by nagging it, and dislodge the bone in all ways that you can, and on the shape of the wound more than you can, and the loss of blood comes to uncover the bone, or abscesses hot, help yourself with what is appropriate, and you fill the place with wet linen dipped in oil rosin; and let the wound rest as long as the abscesses cool down, and be sure of the loss of blood; then start to open the bone, and it is done according to 2 ways of work:
one way is that you cut very narrowly at the front, and this is the shape:
And then I put another in the same way as the first.
and the second way is that you have several different size chisels, some narrow and some wide, and some pointed, and made of iron;
and in oevre lightly, that you do not bleach the head.
And if the tooth is loose and hard, it is necessary that you pierce the base, so that you arrange it with care, not completely cutting through the tooth but leaving a margin on top of the point, so that the tip does not go beyond the tooth;
and you should have several, so that each comes into its place at the tip of the bone, and you have care for all teeth;
this is the form of the three ways of pulling out teeth:
The quality for piercing into the bone is that you put the toothpick on the bone and turn it with your fingers as long as you feel that the tooth is pierced;
then put the toothpick somewhere else an inch away, and so do all around, then make a small incision into the space of the bone that is between the teeth, and do it more carefully than you can, and lightly, as we have said, until you draw out the bone by your hand, or by any of the tools that you have such as pliers, tweezers;
and keep your hands off the brain and the spine.
and when you have broken the bone and treated it, if it is known that you hold back the marrow which is delayed in the bone from all other instruments resembling an incisors, but it is necessary that it be more gentle and finer than the other incisor;
and if he does not delay any small bones, or no scales, if the bone is lightly cut with tools; then heal the wound with tender and medicinal things that we have said.
And the other way of doing this is that which Galen says, which is more effective; and the loan is very strong, and this is his word. It is first necessary that you discover a part of the bone, where the fracture opens; and so when you have discovered that part, you put on the end of this lens-shaped incision tool, from which comes its form:
And do not cut from one side, but the cut is on both sides of the bone so that the cutting is around the bone;
and then with a small mallet above, so that you gently hit the bone all around, and are well aware of the membrane that is dislocated.
if it is attached to the bone, so gently hit the bone because the bone is well aware of the harm and fear.
And if the fracture of the bone does not pierce until the skin, and the bone is cut so little from above, and there are small pieces, then let it be roughened again with a sharp razor, and scrape off the scales with a fine one of which you must have several quantities, to administer in each place the most convenient, according to the work and the shape of the fracture.
If you have a very sharp razor, and then a finer one, and do not stop doing this until it is well done.
In each of the other hair-trimmings and subtle injuries, you must bring about healing according to their repairment;
and this is something that has not yet been answered by anyone who has put his study into this craft.
And if the sifus is uncovered, you must take a linen cloth, according to the quantity of the wound, and dip it in oil, and put it on the wound; then take another cloth double-layered in II or III, dip it in wine and oil and put it on the first cloth; and make it with as little pain as possible so that you do not aggravate the disease, then administer on top of another lien, and do not strain it more than it will dry the wound only.
and leave it for a day or two, until the abscesses are relieved, then remove it, and administer medicines as roots of licorice, flour of mustard, powder of incense, and similar things;
and from these things make a powder, and put it on the wound, and immediately administer medicines that are deadly without itching;
and guard that the wound is clean, so you do not leave it oozing, nor do you let it assemble bowels, for when the bowels gather on the membrane of the skull, if they are corroded and rotten, they bring great harm to the patient;
For when one applies a mordant substance to the loins, he should not touch it from above. Take good care, so that no bad accident happens to the patient, as we have said, if there is doubt without doubt.
And if black dye comes out only because of the medicine put on it, which has virtue, then you should squeeze a part of honey and three parts of rose oil and one clothful of glue, and put it on the loins. Then treat in the way that seems fit to you, until he is well.
Know that the two parts of the neck are never broken from above, for they are two bones;
And this bone is cartilage and does not break, unless it is forced or twisted, and then it heals.
And if one of the two parts is broken, then you should pierce your little finger or the palm of your hand at the base of the neck, and make an even cut into it from one side to the other, so that the neck regains its natural shape according to its figure. and do it lightly, and guard against the patient feeling pain from your work.
And if it is broken in the upper part of the neck, and cannot return to its place, so you put a ray equal to the head of a small stick on top.
If the fracture is in two parts, then do otherwise, and if you can, hurry to restore the first day;
if not, after the seventh or ninth, when the abscess is calm, then bandage the head with linen towels, if the fracture is in one part.
Or you patch one with another, if the fracture is there; and let the towels be so thick that they fill the apertures of the nerves.
And say that one should moisten the bandages every day. I do not think it is good, but it is necessary that they are moistened in a mixture of egg white and powder of malt; then leave the bandage on until the bone is hard and the cartilage tough.
And never use goose- feathers in place of towels, and if the wound is sore, and hold the break, and blow on the patient; Or fair le cheuil de cuil que tu vois.
And if abscesses come while you are operating, so that you put cotton wet with oil or a drop of aquilone;
Or fair le cheuil de cuil que tu vois. And if the abscesses don't come out, then put plaster on it with flour from sesame seeds and incense powder, confited with honey of bee, then put it on thin liniment, and don't tie it tightly.
And if the break in the neck is small, and it is broken into small pieces, then extract it with suitable instruments for this, then cut off the limb, and cure the other wounded animals, and bind them together, as you would do with plasters and ointments suitable for this;
And if there is no break in the neck, then treat the injuries and place it in a harness made of rope until it has healed.
When the mandible is broken and there is no wound, and the break is not very deep, and it is not broken in two, but only bent inside, so that it looks like a hook, then one should handle it lightly.
It is necessary that if the break is on the right side, you put your index finger in the mouth of the patient; And if the fracture is in the left mandible, then with your right index finger, press the fracture lightly and make it equal, and make it equal with your other hand from the side.
And if the break of the mandible is in two, then you should bring the two parts together, so that they are equal.
And if the movement of the teeth is, or a rupture, then extract it with a gold, silver, or silk thread, and put on the broken mandible wax, and put on a double cloth; And put on the cloth a large well-made stake, or a piece of leather that is long and wide according to the mandible, and tie it to the mue (jawbone), and instruct the patient to rest, and eat light food.
And if you see that the figure has changed, then dislodge it on the third day, and then reset what has changed; and put plaster on, with flour from the mill mixed with egg white or wheat flour, after you have removed the wax;
and place a lighter plaster over it, and if the plaster curates, do not change the patient's disposition until he is well. is healed in three weeks.
And if the abscesses burst, then administer what we have said many times.
And if there is a fracture and a wound together, do not put a piece of bone into it; if it is subtle enough to be cut with ostensible instruments;
And if the wound is narrow, then widen it with fire according to your need.
And when you have removed all these pieces of bone, and there is no delay at all, if the wound is wide, put on it poultices suitable for that, to promote healing, until it is healthy.
The fracture should be broken several times before, behind the shoulder, and the fracture should be made in three ways:
where it is broken and deranged in two, and there are pieces, and it is easier to restore;
where there is a fracture with a wound.
And the work should be done when the fracture is without a wound, that you have two ministers, so that one holds up the shoulder while the other breaks it; and the other extends the neck towards the part;
then make the break even on both sides, so that the form is as it should be, and there is no appearance or combing.
And if you have a need to extend more, then put a round staff under the shoulder of the patient, or a cloth, and make it large according to your need; and let them stretch out the staff, and hold it with your hand so that you make the break even, as it should be.
And if you have the ability to extend further, if you put a round staff under the shoulder of the sick person, or thick cloth or linen, and it is large according to your need; and raise and lower it, and remove the staff from your hand so that you place the break equally, as it should be. If you cannot take off the head of the staff at the end, for fear that it comes apart completely, it is appropriate that the sick person lie down on his back, and put the shoulder under one ear, and press down the ministers on the shoulder downward, until the bone of the staff is raised.
And then put the break on both sides, and if you find it loose, then cut it;
and lightly try the pieces, and if the bone cannot join for any reason, then take off the cap from one of the incisions you have made; but that you put away this surgical instrument, to save the patient;
and it seems like a spoon, and is not a hair, and also wide as it should be, according to the size of the bone and the capacity of the work;
and has two heads, so that one is wide and the other narrow, just as it is in the fracture of the bone that you made when you broke the bone;
and when you secure the abscess with hot poultices if there is little rupture, or if you doubt about securing the abscess with hot poultices, if you cover it with cloth and tents, according to its quantity.
And if hot abscesses come, if you dip it in oil with garlic and vinegar, and put it on.
The extraction of the bone, when there are no wounds and no bruises, is that you put on the bone the talc from the mill and the ash from the oven, and lightly press it with a spoon, and insert a nail into the assembly, if you need one; And then take a very long bandage of one palm wide, and then put two sheets on top, and wrap it up. And then take a very thin string three fingers wide and long, and wrap it around the bandage, so that the head of the bandage is hidden. And then put the string on the break in the skin, and tie the bandage around the neck, and remove the healthy sleeve, and remove the sick sleeve. And then remove each part, and when you see that the break is holding firmly in place, and you can clearly see that the string is not moving on top of the broken bone, then let it rest for a day, and when you tie it again, if it does not move.
and make the sick person lie on their side, and put it there when they sleep, so that the shoulder is raised up. If the break in the shoulder is even with the adjustment of the arm, or you tie the arm to the neck, and there are no bad accidents coming from it, not until XX days.
then begin the plastering again, if you see that it is necessary, and holds and leaves it in this way until it is restored;
and it is restored in 28 days or less for some men.
of the dislocation of the shoulder
Then came that the shoulder was broken or out of place, and did not move on either side by touching it;
if the arm is reset according to the shape of the break, and is left according to its natural form, in all ways that you can;
then put on the powder of the mill with much flour, and light dustings, and put on a double drapery; Then place it on a wide and thin board, slightly larger than the shoulder, and saw the board at the shoulder with a long beard of flax so that the board is cut evenly.
and then tighten it with a large and firm bandage so that the board does not move from its place, and inspect it every day;
and each time it moves, if it is tightened, and make the board even if it has moved from its place, and lay the patient on their side;
and the shoulder is reset after 20 or 25 days.
And when the number of days is complete, if it has dislocated again, be sure, for it is not bone that can move lightly.
And if a piece of the bone sticks out forward and there is no support for it, then turn it over, and the bone, and do as we have said in the breaking of the femur to calm down an abscess with heat.
of the break of the leg
The bones are never broken in the middle, but this does happen a little; But it often breaks in the direction of the wind.
And when it is broken in the middle, if it bends towards the inside, and the patient feels great pain, and there is no support, and sometimes he vomits blood, and the skin splits open over the broken bone, and he can feel it well.
And the restoration is that the patient lies down on his back, and you put a towel between his shoulders, then press the shoulders together, and assemble the ribs with your hands, and adjust it with subtle movement in all ways as you can, until the figure of the bone is as it should be;
Then put on plasters and bandages thereon the thin bone of salt, or another light stuff, and wrap it in a cloth, and lay it on the broken bone so that it does not move; and wrap the bandage around it smoothly at the back, and hold it in place, and unfasten it every hour, and if it relaxes, then fasten it again;
and if it requires unfastening, for corruption or itching that comes to the place, or pain or abscess, if you hurry, and unfasten it, and remove the plaster, and treat it with ways of cure;
And then remove the plaster, and hold it until it is cured.
Of the rupture of the ribs
Know that the breaker of ribs does not come except in large ones after the back and at the head, and do not bend them much because they are brittle. And the smell is good to the inquiry as it should be.
And the restoring them is that you make equal the rupture, if it is necessary. And then put the plaster on, and tie it with a strap, if you need to do so.
And if the ribs are broken inwards, then the patient feels great pain and a sharp pain, as if crying, because the bone hurts the membrane. And it bleeds and spits much blood, and that is good for health, and the old have put great effort into it.
And if some of those who serve say that it is necessary to administer meat that swells the belly, in order to push back the rupture by force.
We don't do this either, unless hot abscesses come, if they haven't yet come. If they have come, then let them come.
And they said to me that we set vials on the place to draw out the air, and that is apparently right; However, I have doubts that the vials attract the excesses to the place by the disposition of weakness.
And say that we must cover the place with another dry one in oil, and put tents between the sides to make the area even, then let it be treated with the cure for plague, meat, and medicine.
And if the patient feels great pain that he cannot bear because of the bone that pokes the cloth, and there is doubt in the patient, then it is necessary to cut over his chest on the side of the bruised rib, and put the instrument so as not to hurt him.
And then one must cut the bone and extract it lightly, and then sew together the two lips of the wound, if it is large, and treat with poultices until it is healed.
And if an abscess forms, put oil on a cloth and place it on the spot;
and heal while keeping the joint that needs to be an abscess clean and dry, and keep it clean and dry on the rib where it is, until it is healed.
and to the back of the neck.
And when it has come to any, and you can see whether it will be healthy or not, if you notice that its hands are soft and swollen and dead, and cannot move them or extend them, and when you prick it with a needle, if it does not feel anything.
Know that it is fatal in many situations; and if he does not feel it when it is held and does not feel anything when it is pulled, know that the joint of the bone is saved, and that the patient is cured, if you put the cure on it.
And if similar things come to the back of the neck, and you can tell whether it is healthy or not, see if the feet are soft, and if the accident that happened was by a sudden wind and excretion without will;
and when you have soothed it on his belly, if there is sudden excretion without willpower. And when he is soothed on his back and he tries to move, he cannot. Know that it is deadly: do not work on its treatment.
And if this accident does not come from him, then it is the lighter thing.
And the cure is that you put oil on it or butter of sheep's milk on it, as much as it is calmed down;
then put it in a poultice of comfort and drying, and tie it with a string, and tell the patient to rest; and do not sleep on that part where he feels pain until he is healthy again.
And if some bones are separated, cover them with poultices. and if some bones are broken, then sutures them with thread, and if they are large, with stitches, and treats them with ointment, keeping it clean until they heal;
and if the head of the bone is broken, which is called "the head of the collarbone", then take your left hand and hold it level with your right hand, and then apply plaster and bind it on, if you need to do so;
then bandage it, and if there are any separated bones, set them and treat the wound until it is healed.
the hip joint fracture
For if the bone in the hip is broken, and if so, there would be a little bit of swelling at the head; and stretch out long, and lean on the side, and comes to the disease pain in place, and puncture, and swell that breaks.
And the restoration is that you extend your hand over it, as long as you are on the broken side; and knows what is the break and the shape of it;
and if the break is at the top, so set equal that break, as long as it is in natural shape.
And if the break is long, or it declines inward, so bring the patient up by his stomach, as long as the restoration of that break is made known to you. And when you have made it equal, then put on the plaster, and then put a beam of wood or of timber on it, and pull out the break so that it does not move;
and fill the sides with soil, as long as the place is equal. And command the patient to sleep on his side or back.
And if the abscess is hot, do not scratch it, as long as the abscess is calm, and then put on that which we have said before; and then return to restoration, and restrain it as it should, if there is no bad accident;
of the dislocation of the shoulder
The adjutories is that which is between the loin and the top of the shoulder, and if it is broken, then one should restore it according to one of the two ways:
whereone is that you take a strong lever, according to this form:
And place two shoulders two ties, and raise them up, and cut the patient on one side;
then cast one arm broken on the lever, until it comes to rest, and has in the middle a beam of wood, then cut on one side; and then put one hand below a heavy object or place where it extends downward;
then place the broken arm together with his hands in such a way that the fracture returns as it should.
And the other way is that one should send the sick person to his loins, and tie the hand to his neck, then order two ministers that one should tie who is on the brisurer to his hands, and the others should tie all his limbs, and extend each to its part.
And if you see that the extraction is more forceful, then tie the limbs all together, and on the brachium, and extend each minister to its part.
And if it is broken near the top of the shoulder, you should put a bandage around the joint, and another one across the back, to fix the break.
and if it is broken on the side, you should put a light bandage on it, without straining, as long as the break is level with the shoulder and with the back.
Then make the break even, as it should be, and hold it steady; if a vein bursts, stop the bleeding.
And if a vein bursts, if you do not hold it steady for seven days, and put on it an ointment of honey and olive oil, so that the burst vein is calmed down;
then hold it, and the way to hold it is that you put the plaster on the break, then fix the arm with the aid, and place your hand on the shoulder or the back;
and wrap it, and tighten it around the shoulder, and up the arm, so that the arm is in its natural position, where nothing defiles it or where the bone is not broken.
And if you doubt that the bone does not move, then use spices, and put on the break a wider and stronger stake than the others, and leave between each stake two spaces, and let each stake be so big that it passes the break three times from each side;
Then tighten up on the stakes, in this way as I said at the beginning of the chapter on the chaplet on the break, more tightly and less by moving away.
And if you see the setting of the stakes and the tightening up, as we have said, in the hour that you restore the broken member, and you doubt the stitch, let it be tied for seven days, as we have said;
and then observe each for three days that the rash does not grow or come to a head, or that the pus does not come to the member because it is too constricted. If the splint, as we have said.
And if such an accident does not come, let it be dislocated only after three days or more, and the patient sleeps on his back, and has his hands on his stomach;
and put cotton into the shoulder joint with care so that it is equal, and observe each hour during the day or night whether the shape of the member does not move, or the ligaments are not relaxed;
if it is treated with the power of medicine, and gives him the food that we have before mentioned, in such a way that the food is at the first layer; and when he begins to recover, if it be thick.
And it is fitting that the shoulder and the leg should both be set in place within 40 days from now. and then you must unbind and administer oil and remedies to the injury.
And if the tightness is bad and blocked, if it takes one or two months to loosen it up.
from the fracture of the arm
The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the "fosciles," one of which is small and is that which connects to the palm;
and the other is large, and is that which extends towards the little finger;
in case one of the "fosciles" breaks, either the large or the small, and in case both break together.
When the small "foscile" is broken, the repair is light, and the healing;
and when the large one is broken, it is much worse than when both are broken together.
If it is the small dark spot that is bruised alone, then what is needed is to gently stretch it out and make it even.
And if it is only the large "foscile," then it should be extracted with more force;
and extend it on the right side, and darken the pouchet of the hand higher than the others, and the smaller two lower than the others two, and let the patient cross over himself, and I put my cussin in front of him higher than the patient, so that the patient suffers no labor;
Then extend the ministers his arms to the part dislocated on his hand, or where he lies, and one other minister to the other above.
Then let it be made even according to its best form.
And if it is in pieces from the break, then let each one be put in its place, and if any of them grasp the other, and you cannot restore it to its place, then do so onto the bone, as we have said before.
And if with the breaker there is a wound, I have spoken about it to the singular chapter; so take care.
And if in the beginning of the restoration swells come absesses, then I dip them in a paste made of rosin oil and white wax, so that it is not too hard or too soft; and I dip them over gently, as long as the abscesses are calmed down.
And then the bone to char, and I put the plaster of the powder from the mill with a lot of egg, because I put the plaster, and be the plaster of the breaker sooner stronger, and one little more wide than the others.
and know that it must have six plasters or arms in various positions: whether the breaker is in one of the bones, or in II;
and hold up more on the breaker than on any other part, and always less on the distance, as I said at the beginning of the chapter about the plaster; and that the drapelets which are on the breaker be soft and moist, and not hard or rough;
and that the drapelets which are on the breaker be soft and moist, and not hard or rough; and that the thread, of which it is held, be of linen, not too thick nor too fine, as we have said.
And restore the member and the ligament after a few days. And if any bad accident comes to the limb, such as itching coming to the limb, it is necessary that you soak the limb with warm water until the itching is relieved;
And let the member do not mie 좁ly rest.
And then recommence the extraction, and if the ligaments are softened and the bone is dislocated, and similar things, then treat it.
And if it should not come to the member because it is too tight, then you must make it soft a little, and leave it thus for a few days, until the tightening comes again, and then extract it.
And if none of these things that we have said come to the illness, then take off the shoulder for 20 days.
Or hang it, then hold his hands to his neck, and let his necks be even, and ward away movement and turning, and sleep on his back;
and know that this bruiser is healed in XXX days or in XXV, and perhaps in XX days, according to the compositions and complexions of virtues.
of the broken hand
are often many breaks in the back of the hand and there comes but little pain.
And when the plant of the hand is broken or wet, so that the patient cuts it crosswise and sits straight before him evenly;
then put his hand on the table extended, and extend the minister the broken bones, and make them even mirrors, as long as they are well joined;
and put the plaster and the staples, if an abscess does not come, then he puts a stake according to the quantity of the place; and be wrapped in a linen gown.
And if it rips at the waistline of the gown, make a patch with some linen fabric, and instruct the patient to tie it around his/her wounded waist. and then take a long linen cloth and wrap it around him/her, as well as the injured hand, and secure it, so that it matches the size of the plant in his/her palm.
And if it breaks at the end, then you should put a staff on it, and another under the plant, so that the hands are open and straight, then tie it all around the hand, and tighten the bond between the two.
And if it rips on one of the two arms, wrap it up and make it even, as it should be. and secure it with the plant, and if you see that it needs a small straight patch to lift the rip, and do not move.
and if the rip is on both sides, as in the index or one of the others, make it even and secure it with a healthy hand that comes next. And there you tie them all together, so they stay put, or you place them on a stake, like a pouch.
and take care in the restoration and arrangement of an abscess, and heal those who come to it, as I have said.
The bone of the hip is often broken, and one can clearly see when it turns forward and backward.
and the restoration is so that you tie them together on top of the fracture, and the other is dislocated. And the patient lies face up, then extends each minister his leg to its equal part;
and that is when the fracture is closed with bone.
And if the break is near the root of the chest, then one of the ties is towards the thumb and the other is towards the heel of the break.
And if it is near the knee, then let the bindings be loosed from the knee, and let the extension go downward;
then set the bones equal with his two hands, as they were in nature, and then put the plaster, and bind them, so that an abscess does not come;
And if there is an abscess, let it be calmed then return to your work and to your treatment. The space is made in such a way.
It is necessary that you wrap the break with a hard piece of wood doubled over itself twice or three times, and let the excess go, then turn the leg until the heels come to the root of the ankle, and insert a long pin between the thigh and the leg, freeing the knee from the pin, and bring the head of the pin above;
then turn on the leg and on the thigh the bandage, then put the wooden splint, and put a wooden Splint on the bone of the leg;
then place the space between the leg and the thigh of canvas and string to make the strapping even, then begin to tie in the form of three or four twists on the break; and the more you go up the break, and the less you restrain it;
then take the two legs that you have tied together between the thigh and the crotch, and the three ties that are on top of them, then go back to the dislocation at the head of the thread, as far as you can get it off the foot;
and holds it steady so that it does not move out of place, then leaves it like this, and that he does not come to abscess or inflammation or any other kind of sign; And if it comes, if it comes out of place, and goes back to the one that comes, as we have said many times;
and if there are pieces of bone that grab hold, if it is appropriate, then you can; and if you cannot, if it is appropriate to split the place and draw out forcefully; and let him go as we have said, as long as he is healthy.
And never break the wrist or elbow as you put on the splint, as in the shoulder and arm;
However, when restoring it, do not let the patient move his hand or arm.
And know that the chest is restored in one day, or little more or little less, according to the diversity of complexions.
And know that in the street of the ankle there is little injury, but it bleeds many times.
And if it breaks, unless it is just a crack or a gash, and goes to all parts, and feels no pain, and this can be felt well.
And the restoration is done so that what is long is equal to its two sides, as much as it can move without it;
then put on the plaster, and a round splint if you need it, and hold it as we said for all other breaks, such as a hot abscess and others; put on each accident what suits him, as long as he is healthy.
of the leg break
Know that in the leg there are two bones, so one is called "mustelz" and the other "foscile";
and comes all like a break as it is in the arm, and for this the restoration is as that of the arm evenly, and the work is all I. And if the two bones are broken together, so turn the leg on all sides.
And if his subtle nose is broken, then turn back.
and if the large bone is broken, then one feels great pain and sees it clearly; and turn dislocated.
Then bring expansion, and set it evenly, and tie the joints evenly;
however, if the fracture is ugly, and there are many pieces, then the extension should be smaller and lighter; and align it according to your virtue.
And when you have completed your work, take two fascines of branches that shade the leg on one side and the other, and are long from the ankle to the top of the leg;
And envelop in two lees one bendel over and under, and put him in the middle as well, and at this liefness shall not the leg decline to the right nor to the left, and so it is good.
and let no one administer to the long leg, and if necessary, and put the leg so as not to move, and properly made this in the fracture or there is a wound;
and move each day the leg, that one may see if there is any abscess or other accident; if the patient as long as he is healthy.
About the break of the bones of the feet
About the ankle, there is no break at all, but from the bones of the feet there comes a break in some cases, and in most situations there comes only a fracture, and it has never been seen to occur on its own.
And if there is an oss of the foot broken, and you see these bones touching each other, put that person on the ground as if he wanted to walk, and then now put your foot on his side, where the bone is raised, and press it until it comes back into its place;
And then put on the plaster and press it down, and put a little table of two legs at the foot of the chest, then fasten it to the ground, and when you have wrapped your drapes and other things that you need.
And when three days or four have passed, then untie the bandage, for you will find the bones even if they are broken or dislocated.
If there are any of the two broken, if they restore, if as we have said the two with the hand; Then put on the two broken a table according to the length of the two, and make it a little more wide, then put on the foot that I said table, and fasten it to the ground;
And if there are two or three, or more broken, if put on each two a table according to its quantity, wrapped in a linen drapes, and fasten the table to the ground; and be standing on the top of the table face down the foot of the chest, so that he covers it well.
And you must not forget the other things I have said to others about broken bones when we have said it; and cut off each accident as is fitting.
of the break of the bone of the knuckle
When the woman's bones are broken, if she is seated enlarged, then she leans to the back part and is held from behind;
then fill the void of nature with cotton illness, and put it as big as I stand;
then lift the woman up, and lower her back slowly and slowly, and then jump the cotton, until it comes to the entrance of nature, and returns the bones with her stand;
and when she wants to urinate, if she pees cotton, and when she has urinated, it is put back, and in this way do seven days or more; then the break will be healed, and if you see it, take a bladder of beer, and tie a cord around the penis, and pour all the bladder into nature; Then blow through the tube, as long as the bladder is pushed in. the break will be healed by nature;
then fill it with cotton, and leave it thus for some days, until he is well.
And when the bone of the arm or of the woman is broken, if he sets it as we have said concerning the bone of the thigh;
and these fractures are not hidden from him who puts his study and use therein, and listens to my book.
For the break signifies many things to him who knows the right way to restore it; then listen to it first.
In the penis, when it is broken, take a goose's neck and bottle it up; then wrap it in strips of cloth, and leave it wrapped for three days or more, and he will be well without hospital.
of breaking with wound
For those who have broken a bone with a wound, even if it is a large one, such as the hip or shoulder or arm, let them be healed now, so that the wounds that we have spoken of may testify to their healing.
And if the wound heals, but the vitriol burns, then, if you have nothing else, continue to restore the break in the same hour, or else the abscesses will come out.
And if the abscesses come out, but continue to leave it until another day, as long as the abscesses are calm and you don't touch them nor on the third day nor on the fourth, for you would bring about a bad accident.
And if the broken bone appears on the side that is covered with the wound, it is necessary that you place it at a slight angle with your hand, at a small extension.
And if the extensions have not yet been applied to make your hands equal, if you hold this instrument that is made of iron, which has seven or eight inches in length, and the blade is wide according to the quantity of the wound; and because it is necessary for him who uses this instrument to take three or four, according to what is required in each cure of a broken limb;
and let it be round and a little thick, so that it does not press on the limb at your work, and let it be pointed in front, and wide in the middle, thus:
And it is called "palainche", because it is necessary that the bent head should be placed on the top of the apparently visible bone; and he blows once, as long as it remains, and makes them equal one to another. And if the fracture is subtle, and the instrument cannot take the bone well, you must chop the head of the bone until the instrument has the ability.
And if you cannot bring back the bone, as we have said, with the handle of an appropriate instrument, or scalpel or chisel, in your power;
Then take this which is retained in the bone and cut it with a sharp knife and small chisels.
And when the bone has been reset, and the patient feels great pain after it, know that it is not in its natural position.
If you do so that it is in its place, then soak the dressing with black wine vinegar, and properly if it is in the wound; and put nothing on the wound that has grease or another thing where oil is, for it not to cause infection and corruption;
and then administer the ointment when you have restored the bone, and leave the wound uncovered, covering all around it, according to the quantity of the wound, and be sure that the wound is not pulled with the break;
and many times have done this foolish thing, and have brought upon the patient death or corruption; and let the breaking be less hard and less sharp than the others.
and if the wound is bad or large, and you doubt that a good accident will not come, as we have said, and you feel pain at the place, then it is not appropriate to put on splints. but wrap with strips of cloth instead of hard splints, and bind them firmly.
And when you see after one or two days to the wound, if an arrow that you have put there has come out, and put on it a healing ointment, as healing tar and similar things;
And it is necessary that you dislocate the limb twice a day, in the morning and at night, until it is healed and sound.
And it is necessary that the limbs be arranged in such a way that the arrow runs down easily.
And if every day it passes, and he cannot hold it in place, but it comes apart again, because there are little pieces of bone, so that you must take the wound with a towel, and those little pieces of bone that come out cause pain;
And if a fistula comes to light, or some other kind of corruption, then you must cure it according to what he said in his chapter above.
and when the bone is broken and opened on the member, as the shoulder bone or the shoulder blade, and other similar bones of large members, do not pull it out, for many times death comes from it, but let it be until it putrids.
for fear that he may heal himself after XX days or XXX days, then heal the wound, if you can.
and if you cannot, leave it.
We often come after the health of the breaker, even when it is near the joint, and it is an ugly thing to see the member's figure; and by chance cannot make the limbs perform their natural functions.
Take care therefore that we are not fresh. if he administers medicines that are sticky, such as aloe, incense, myrrh, and sarcollate, acetic acid, and similar things, so that you do not press any of these things, or all together, and blend them with wine that is sticky or with a large amount of egg white or with oil; and put them on the nose in layers, and hold them firmly together, and do not remove them from day to day;
and put them on the nose in layers, and hold them firmly together, and do not remove them from day to day; and then remove it, and start a new one until the nodules have all been removed;
or hold on a piece of cloth well made; because the property of the cloth is that it removes all swelling from the limbs;
and if the nodule has become hard like stone, it is necessary to cut it off, leaving behind the crust and removing the excess that appears; ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu'elle soit ostee, et la cure tant qu'elle soit sanee.
the member that is weak after the garrison
Once the fracture of the bone has healed, and the limbs remain weak and delicate, this may be due to: because one is because it was bound too tight, and was not bound as it should have been; or because there were too many ties, and could not bring the member back to its natural position; or because of a multitude of injuries; or because of too great movements, not in its proper time; or because it has lost blood in its body, and is weak.
And the cure is that you make the patient eat, and make the body soft, until the blood multiply in it; and the minister bath, and he made joy and let go.
then put ointment on the member, so that the ointment attracts all the swelling, and rise it often with water, as much as the swelling goes down to the member; and return to its natural shape.
two injured limbs after sickness When the member is twisted after restoration, and the bone is broken open, and the form of the member is ugly, yet it does not lose its natural work:
if one does not believe the foolish people who say that one must break the member all over again, and many foolish men have done this in our land;
and these works are to blame, and there come great evils, and perhaps death;
However, if the dislocations and torments are fresh, it is necessary that they be raised with hot water, or with soft herbs boiled, as leaves of walde, and roots, and melilote, and similar things;
and make the plaster softening, as well done hydronium, and you take the musk of viscose, and confound it with grease of gele or oil of sisa, and make the plaster on;
or you take figs, and grind them with hay of hay, and similar medicines that soften the pain.
And never is the arm raised by continuous and prolonged friction with moist hands. And make sure there is no movement in the limb every hour.
And if his toughness is sore and hardened, too, like stone, then it must be opened with a sharp iron to the bone, lightly incising; and put resin and study in the cure.
Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
When dislocation comes to anyone, if it is now necessary to bring back sensibly.
For if it is delayed, if the loins swell, and by chance it is reset to its place at the loins;
For so he will not come if it is moved in his urge when it is swollen: many times causes pain and other pains;
first of all, when this happens, if you make the patient well, then leave him, until the abscesses are calm;
then raise the member with hot water and oil, then move it slightly, and heal each member as the wound heals in its place.
And I have ordered the chaplets for the dislocations of the shoulder joint up to the edge of the breastbone.
Now let's begin with a sentence about dislocating jawbones, and there are two ways to deal with dislocations of both jaws: or they are a little bones out of place, and softens a little; or they are completely dislocated, and hang down to the chest, and prevent the saliva from leaving the mouth, and wrap the tongue with words.
When the dislocation is small, return it with several different positions.
And if it is complete and finished, then you must reset it quickly in the hospital, and do not wait.
and in this way that the minister holds the head of the patient, and pours a little water from one of his hands at the root of the dislocation of the jaw inside the mouth, there are two ways to deal with it. and the other two hands are far apart, to put even.
and command the patient that he softens his jaws, and moves them in all directions. And let the mirror be made equal, as soon as it revives in its place.
And if they have become stiff, most of all if the two jaws are together, let him warm them with sharp heat and oil, until he makes them slightly flexible again;
do not wait to bring them back, as we said.
And when they have been brought back evenly, and the mouth of the sick person is closed well with a softener, let him put it on drapings soaked in a wax made of oil and beeswax, then make it slightly flexible again by moving it;
and let the sick person sleep on his back, and his cheeks be between two cushions, so that he does not move to the right or left, nor make any effort to improve, but eat soft food, until the pains have ceased, and the jaws have healed;
and then cut what needs to be cut lightly, and do not work on opening the mouth for eating or drinking until the jaw is well healed and sound.
And if the two jaws cannot be reset within an hour, and are not restored to their places, so that there come fevers and sudden pains used, and by chance stomachache, and by chance vomiting of clear bile.
And when you see this, know that it is a sign of healing. and many times kills those to whom it was given, in nine days.
does not dislocate due to a lack of movement from within the bone and from the top, and does not dislocate at all towards the back, and one can feel it.
And the recovery is such that the sick person rises soon after his back and extends his arms. and then press the joint with your thumb, and it will return;
then put on the splint and bandage and holds it in place;
and the head that is toward the chest cannot be dislocated;``` if it does not pop, and if it does not dislocate at all, if one returns it to its place, as we have said;
then put on the splint and bandage and holds it in place, and instruct the patient to rest until he is sound;```
and likewise is to be brought back the head of the sword when it has come out of its place.
of shoulder dislocation
I know that the shoulder is dislocated only by three methods:
that one is when it has come out of its joint in the part of the arm; and the second is at the part of the shoulder; and perhaps dislocated at the top, and this happens sometimes;
and do not dislocate behind for the shoulder, and do not dislocate inside for the neck;
and many times dislocated out of its joint towards the sword, except those who have broken their collarbone, because at that time they must be hospitalized;
except those who have enough collarbone, then let them go, and return home.
2. And perhaps it happens to some men that there is beating or breaking, and the shoulder becomes hot with an abscess, and they think that it has dislocated.
It is therefore necessary that you test it, until you are certain of it; and so begin the treatment.
And there are differences between them when they fall down the neck, and you will find a manifest difference between the sick and the healthy shoulder, and you will see that there are various degrees of it. and at the head of the shoulder there is a pit, and put the shoulder down to the ground the head of the shoulder, as though it were one egg; and the patient cannot bring his hand to his nose, nor move at all;
and if it is dislocated upwards, then unless it is hidden, because you will see it clearly on the ground;
and this type of dislocation cannot be reset when it is new, or if the patient has fallen ill.
And the way is that the minister raises the hand of the patient upwards, then puts the shoulder down with his hands, and forces the joint back into place upwards; and the ministers leave the hand, and extend it upwards, because it puts it out. if he will come immediately.
And if it does not come as we have said in days, it is necessary that the patient be bathed in hot water; and provide soothing and soothing remedies, as a decoction of mint and fenugrec and melilot in water, and be provided;
then let the patient lie on his back, and put on a sock made of equal yarn, not too tight nor too loose, then put the foot of the limb in the sock, and let the minister pull the shoulder blade with ease, and draw the hand of the sick person;
and other ministers hold his head so that he does not move backwards; then the shoulder immediately returns, and if it does not return in this way, then you must try again:
and it is that you make be present I home who is greater than the patient; and be two sides of the coast, and bottle s'espaule from the asselle of the patient, and lift the asselle upwards, so that the patient hangs in l'; and other ministers pull the hand of the patient downward toward the belly. And if the patient is too light, then with him there is nothing heavy, and the dislocation returns now.
And he renames it also in another way:
and is that you file I long stick in the earth, whose head is also as a pistol, and not too thick or too thin; then be placed on the patient, but that it have drapelets water upon, and the patient be standing on the long of the stick;
then be extended its hand downward from another side forming, and the joint will return to its place smoothly;
and if it does not return for all these things that we have said, then this remedy fails: take a piece of wood from the two arms of a great and four fingers wide, which has the head ready to enter perfectly into the socket according to this form:
then place it on top of the head with a dry cloth so that the patient is not injured, then put it into the socket of the patient:
and spread your arms on top of the pole, and place the shoulder head on the pole, and the arm at the head of the hand, then put the arm on a stick of one span wide, and let the body hang from one side while: the joint now returns.
Then, in whichever way it is, if you put an equal woolen sphere in place of the socket, then put the plaster ready with powder from the mill, with incense and ambergris around the entire shoulder and neck, then remove the socket gradually, and tie the thread to the plaster, and embrace the hand at its collar, and let the hands remain like this.
And it is necessary that he be placed in a comfortable position so that the limbs are relieved, for he will heal faster;
and then after 5 more days or 7, and move it; if it is stiff and is not softened, then is cured.
And if the joint has come out of place due to moisture or some other cause, you must apply the cauterization three times, as it is done with the paste of the cauterization.
And if you do all this, and it dislocates after 7 days, and the joint does not stay in place, and cannot raise your arm forward, then know that the nerve at the top of the shoulder is torn or stretched or weakened; and know that the joint will never go back to its place.
The dislocation that is on the side of the chest, and the shoulders, or behind, it is made by an impact, and the stretching of the arms, and I administer another place;
and treat as long as it is cured.
And if after recovery the member comes with a shake and slow move, so often does the patient use it, until that shake is healed, and returns to its first nature.
of dislocation of the head
And know that the joint at the neck is dislocated and returns to its place;
and it has dislocated from all sides, and most of all in front and behind, and the dislocation is not returned, for we can see it well and feel it well; and repeat according to each shape. And when you join the injured shoulder with the healthy one, so that you can see it openly. For the joint is chopped, and cannot bend the arm, nor touch its shoulder at all.
And it is necessary that you reset it in the same way as we have done for the arm, because if an arm comes off completely, it would be a great loss if it were to be reset.
and it cannot be reset completely from all sides, least of all when it is at the back; is less painful than other dislocations, and yet causes great pain, and possibly death.
And the restoration is done, as far as it can be reset, so that you can stretch its hand with both your hands; and its arms are spread out, and the hands around the neck from behind and from the front, and press the joint to its shoulder blade together, or at the root of its palm, until it returns to its place;
And if there is a dislocation in front, so that it returns when it doubles its hand to its place, and tightens the joint at the root of its palm where it has come loose.
And if it does not return to its place, then administer a strong extension;
and it is that two ministers extend the arm, and tint them two ministers, so that it does not move to extension;
then turn the arm of each part, then you have wrapped a double cloth long and wide;
and when you see the joint of his hand, if it is not oiled to soften the joint, then oil the joint completely, until it heals;
and when it is in place, if put on plaster dry with ointment of bee wax, and strain it, and bend the arm at the neck of the sick person, and leave it for a few days, then dislocate it.
And if the joint is firm in its place, then loosen the bandage, and leave it;
and if you see that the joint does not move well, then begin again with the plaster and the bandage, and leave it in this way for some days, until it is firmly placed; and untie it.
And if he feels pain after the joint is reset and still moves, let him bathe and gently rub it, and press until it is relieved. Or you put on the joint a fleece of fat lamb, then let it rest for a day and a night, then the bone, and then let it enter or bathe; and when it sweats, gently rubs the joint, then puts on the fleece again, and then bathes; And do this twice or three times until it is well.
and if you see, put on the end of the veil a warm butter, and draw it out;
so that it returns to its position.
the dislocation of the hand
The dislocated joint of the hand returns more easily than that of the other joints. However, it is necessary to reset the joint in its place when it is dislocated, so that the bones do not move or come apart, and there is no inflammation or abscess.
And let them put the sick hand on a table, and extend the fingers, and make them even, so that they put their palm on the appearance of the joint, and press it until it revives.
However, you must ensure that it is in the right place. Then put the patient's back hand on a table for extension and retraction. If the dislocation is at the back of the hand, put the sick person's back hand on a tray, and make the palm face the joint location.
If it returns now, it is good. If not, if the extraction of cold, painful abscesses, and let them stay like this for a while.
If he cannot bear it, and you are unable to put it back in place after several days, the dislocation will remain.
and do not tell the patient that as long as the hands are wet, they cannot extract anything completely: Then you must know that the nerve is cut or the artery.
if there is no other device except to extract by fire with care the case, and perhaps there is nothing else.
And when the hand is in place, put the poultice on it that we have said, then extract it and leave it for 5 days, then change it and leave it like this.
If he cannot move it well, and there is no fracture, if the wet hot water, and rub until it is healed.
of the dislocation of the two bones of the hand
Never are the joints of the hand dislocated from any part, never at the base of the palm or in the belly;
Then hold the joint, and push the dislocation into the folds until it comes back, then support the top of the joint, and turn it towards the side where it is joined;
and leave it for a day, and then make it even for that day;
and do not move it, as we have said, and loosen it from day to day, and make it move, and then reline it with the nut;
and do so often, until it is tight, and do the same if it is dislocated in the palm of the hand, and do as you have done before, until it is well;
And do this too, when it is dislocated from another side.
the dislocation of the shoulder from behind
When the neck is dislocated, or there are several dislocations, if there is no cure, because it quickly kills the patient.
And the signs are that the excrement is not done without volition, cannot be held, and many times a limb is softened, or both legs, or both arms, or one.
And many times the buttock moves to four parts;
that which moves to the back is called "gilbositez".
The cure is that you should reward if the gilingos has come from childhood: if it does not have a cure or healing of all
And that which comes from sitting down or blows or similar things, the ancient manners of cures say with great words, and it does not bring any great benefit;
But I have simplified it according to my intention, and I have formed instruments in various ways.
I say that in the gimblet which comes to the foot before, there is no beginning nor health.
and also that what comes straight in two sides, and cannot be cured but that which comes properly to the back, as I say;
and it is that the patient be laid on his back in a level position, and has an extraction from him, so that he does not bleed;
then give a small stick to the head in the form of a cross, and another one under the hips, and another one between the legs, and another one to the ankles, and another one to the knees, and another one to the feet;
and the two ministers know the ropes, one at the head and the other under the hips, among the two sticks;
and be well fastened, the stick as we have said, and the mirrier puts his palms on the back in the form, until he recovers.
And if it does not return with this treatment, then take a table of three arms long, and cover the wall with it, and let the patient be on the side, and bottle the head of the table over the wall, and then put the middle of the table on the spine. and put the scales on the other head of the table, and press well, until it comes back to its place;
and if you see this, then do it to the joint that twists with the hand. And that you stick two torches to the head of the patient with a long arm, and turn them over the scales II others, and place between each torch, upside down and covered, a palm of space of length;
and put in each torch a pit where the joint twists, and let the torches be firmly in the ground, so that they do not move;
and between each of the two torches there is one torch turning, so that the chains turn, and in two turns there are two small torches a palm's length long, to turn the tourniquet.
and then the chain that is among the assistants to the tourniquet above the head, and the other chain towards the stones at the other tourniquet, and each of the ministers turns his tourniquet on all the chain, and the master sets the spike even as we have said.
And when it is even, put on dried plaster with a lot of ointment, and then the staples, and then the plate of three long fingers, that by purple the place of the gibbosity and the part of the spine healthy, then the chain of a chain, as we have said, and use the patient of subtle nutrition until he is well;
and if anything comes at the end of life, it is necessary to administer soft and soothing medicines, with the help that we have said above; and never is administered a piece of cork, and never does the appearance come in the lower spine at the back, and think that it is dislocations; is the bone that opens, for you must not have any presumption: in case it brings about death.
Know that the joints of the hip and the shoulders only come out due to dislocations, not at all like the other joints;
and the joint of the hip is dislocated according to four parts: deep and far away, and in front and behind;
and the deeper it is there, and the more it is dislocated in front and behind.
And the knowledge of his dislocations within is that when one joins the sick leg with the healthy, it is longer, and the sick knees are more than the healthy, and the sick cannot double his knee on fire; and is the place that is inflamed by the abscess, so that the head of the thigh comes there.
And the sign of those to whom it comes from behind is that this accident is opposite to these before.
And the signs of this one who has before it, if it is good his leg according to the accomplishment; However, he does not double his knee with pain, and if one makes him walk, he cannot go before, and he holds back his urine, and swells the ankle, and when he walks, he goes on the heel.
And the signs of him who is behind, if he cannot spread his knee, nor bend it, and this leg is more twisted than the other, and the ankle is soft, and the hip bone is in place between the ribs.
The re-making of this appearance of dislocation is that you reward it if its dislocations are old, and it remains according to its disposition, there is no cure for it; and it is not necessary that he has presumed.
And in the one where the dislocation is fresh, and there are four ways of dislocation, if you hurry so that you reset the joint, and it goes in and out, and moves to the right and left; so that it returns, and there is no need for another remedy.
And if it does not return in this way, it is necessary that you prepare a strong minister, and hold the leg firmly with two hands, or tie it with a rope around the knee; and other ministers extend their hand over him in such a way that they can press their hands together, then extract it with a rope around the wrist attached to the leg; and other tugs at the leg;
and they extend both up and down all at once, until the patient is lifted off the ground once, and stays in that position.
This way of extension is common to four resemblances, and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, it is good.
If so, then one must apply treatment to its appearance.
When the dislocations are in place, if one must treat the patient at the root of the pain, then put the bandage on the base of the spine, and the line that is away from the angle, then place the bandage upward toward the angle, and upward along the spine; and
Then pray for other ministers to hold his arms, and embrace the large line of the painful groin, and extend it toward the back: then let it return to its place now;
and this manner of dislocation is lighter than others.
And if you cannot hold it in this manner that we have said, then one must tie the patient's two feet together with a strong string from above their heels, and above their knees, and let the painful leg be extended twice as far as the other;
Then let it be hung from the top of a beam, and let it be on top of the ground two long arms.
Then order one minister to embrace the top of the chest, and let there be other ministers hanging with the patient who embrace the chest properly, for the joints will come back into place quickly enough.
And when the dislocation is far away, if the patient lies down as we have said in the one who has gilbositeit, and extract the joint properly from the leg that is not well, and also from the foot.
Then take two torches, one at the top and another at the bottom of the leg, then put one torch between the hips of the patient with a twist; and place wet towels around, so as not to harm the patient, then spread out each minister on both sides of him, and have him put his hand in position for the dislocation.
If it returns, it is good.
If not, place on a .ie. bed, and press as we have said in the gibosity, and lay the patient on the left side.
And when dislocations are present, it is necessary to extend the affected leg quickly, and according to what I said; and place the mirror so that it faces the painful leg, then press with the other hand, and hold it down towards the knee.
And if dislocations are at the bottom, it is not necessary to extend the affected leg down, or to lift it up off the ground, but rather that it be raised as if one were lying on one's back with one's legs bent; and be placed face up, and the leg extended as we have said above, and it must be held firmly against the table; and will be at its maximum when the patient extends his legs, and they will be equal in length; then apply the plaster, and hold it with a bandage, and extend the leg using a splint so that the hinch does not move; and let it rest for three days or four, then remove it, and put the ointment on;
and if you see that they are even, if you extract them, as before, and let it rest for three days;
then remove it, and cause it to walk vigorously, until the limbs are comfortable.
of the dislocation of the shoulder
The neck is dislocated according to three ways: that is to say, inside and outside, and behind;
and do not dislocate in front.
And the signs are that you command the patient to bend his leg to his knee, and if he does not move it to his knee, know that he is dislocated;
and the restoration of all this is that you make the patient sit upright, and extend his leg if he can, and place your back on his face, and place his foot on your feet;
then take your knee to your palms, and draw back between your two hands, then bend the two sides of the knee together as if it were an L. and other ministers extend his foot, until the kneecap comes back to its place, and the sign is that he does it well by touching his knee with his toe lightly.
and apply the plaster on top of it, and make the leg move at the hip, and bring the two together strongly for three or four days, then let go.
and do not work the patient to walk, until the limbs are comfortable.
And if the limbs are not in place, if you administer a strong extension, as we said in the treatment of the hip, until it is healed
of the dislocation from the heel
The heels are never dislocated, and never fully displaced inward or outward.
And if the sign is that the ankle is dislocated, and test before moving it from the part where it was dislocated:
then let him move if he is light, and you must extend him lightly to his hands when he is just slightly bruised.
And if it is dislocated from the top, so that you make the patient sit up straight, and the ministers place themselves away from the leg, over the ankle:
And then put your foot to you to your right hand, and then to the left twice, and then raise it up, and pour well water on the top;
and do this twice, as we have said, pouring and pulling the foot;
if it comes back, it is good;
if not, then start again the working, for it returns;
and if it cannot come back like this, then make the patient sit on the ground, and place a staff firmly in the ground between his knees, and tie the sheets around it so that he does not fall;
Then put your foot in the lap of the assistant, and another assistant extends the foot with his hands or by tying it up so that he sits on the top of the foot; Then extend each assistant evenly, and the staff is to be placed close between the knees of the patient so that he cannot fall over;
and then make the dislocated shoulder equal with your hands, and other ministers will dye the sound leg at the shin, and the dislocation will come back completely.
And when it is ready, put the plaster on and tighten it, and form the splint, and tie the foot to the leg, and guard the tendons behind the ankle, so that the bindings are not too tight;
then leave it for two or three days, and let the bonds loosen a little, if the splint is needed;
then take off the splint on the third day or the fourth, and the patient can go for four days; and if he goes before that term is up, it is not yet certain that he has not dislocated again.
And if abscesses come up, so calm them down as we have said elsewhere, until they are healed.
The two of them. When the two are dislocated, so it is a good idea to stretch them smoothly without work, and it is a light thing.
And if the dislocation is in any of the joints of the foot, then you must make the patient sit on a straight bed or chair, and put your foot on what opens up from these joints, and press down on your foot as far as it will go, until it comes back;
and when it is even, and there is nothing opened, so let the sole of the foot be placed on a table with II shoulders, then strain it, and leave it for III days, then unstrain it; and make it rest, until it is well.
for wounds and dislocations together
When the wound comes with dislocation, and one attempts to restore it, many times the patient has died:
if you are not presumptuous in the cure, if you are not knowledgeable in the art and have not used it for a long time, and if you are not compassionate and merciful and slow to anger, do not be hasty;
and use at the beginning of things calming bloodletting absces, and let the patient in God's hands, if you do not see hope of health; and when you see hope, if I now reset the limb in its place, so that the bloodletting absces comes;
and when the limbs are in place, if ministering soothing things to the abscess causes pain, and healing the wound, as it should, of drying ointments;
and with dislocation has fracture, and small bones are broken, if the bone, and do what we have said in simple diseases;
and keep yourself from going into a state of fear, according to what I have said, for this will cost you your life according to your Creator, and for the sake of protecting yourself and your body.
