O you, very dear sons, I have completed this book which is the last of the medical art with its contents and I have finished it by way of its explanations and declarations. And it came to me in a vision that I should complete this treatise with you, which is part of the work by hand, that is to say, "surgery".
And for this reason the work by hand is well-treated in our region and is completely different from all others, so it has the science and the knowledge, and there is nothing left to be desired from the force of the hands but the small descriptions in books of the ancient ones that the hands have moved. And from this has come the error and the vanity, and the intentions are closed and the science is distant.
Or me seems that I will come to life again with the direction of this healer according to the way of exposure and statement and abbreviation. and I will come together with the forms of the tools of cauterization, and of the other instruments of the work with the setting of the statement and preparation for him, as it is fit.
And because there are no good masters of hands found in our time, the art of medicine is extended. And he who engages in this should master the science of anatomy, as Galileo says, to such an extent that he knows the judgment of limbs, and their shapes and connections and separations of bones, and has knowledge of nerves and veins and the number of joints, and movement and resting veins, and the place of their exit.
And for this do I say that he will not be bitter with the food, and little by little with the work; and especially in the art of the hands.
We will say to you in the introit of this book that he who is not aware of the things before said, let him guard so that he does not err and hurt men;
So that I have often desired many of those who meddle in this science, and if they abandon themselves to this science and to their experience.
For I have seen a foolish man who cut an abscess on the scrofulous neck of a woman, and he cut the arteries at the base of the neck. because so much blood came out that the woman died between his hands.
And I have seen another foolish man who treated a stone in the bladder of an old man, and the stone was large; so he took away a piece of the bladder with him, and the man died three days later.
And I have already seen a patient called for an operation, and saw the dislocation of the patient and the size of the stone; and if one operated on him, he would die.
And I have seen another foolish man who took as his cure a duke of our land who had his leg broken, and with the break there was an ulcer;
and the foolish physician, out of ignorance, tightened the break on top of the ulcer with a very tight bandage, and left no salve on the wound, leaving it in this condition;
and he ordered that he not remove it.
and causes delays so that the leg is all hidden and the foot and comes to ruin.
I was called to come to him, and I hurried to come to remove the leg; and when I removed it, he was at peace and felt no pain.
But all the ways in which he had corrupted that limb were already confirmed, and that member could not be healed;
and the corruption did not cease to spread through the limb until all the members were lost.
And I saw another wonder that would cause an abscess to become putrid and then inflame because of the evil of its nature.
For leprosy, when it is infected with melancholy humor, does not come to touch it except with iron in such a way that all that is corrupted can be removed.
And therefore, dear children, you must know that the work of hands is divided into two divisions: that is to say, there are those in which there is danger in many situations.
and I will show in each of the books of this book where there is fear and danger.
For you must keep them so that the bad man cannot speak ill of you.
If you take your weapons in harmony, and tackle your patients lightly but resolutely, and employ the better method, so that by the grace of God you come to salvation and are healed;
and leave behind the incurable diseases of great illness;
and keep your weapons from those who make you doubt, and believe that you may come from this world to the other of glory.
Galien wrote some of his advice: Do not take on a patient with a bad disease, lest you be called a foolish doctor.
» I have devised this treatise according to three chapters.
The first chapters are about fire cauterizations and water-based medicines, and the chapter order from the loins down to the feet;
and of the shapes of tools, and of the iron instruments for cauterizing, and of all that is necessary in the work.
The second chapter deals with the use of knives for cutting, suction cups for sucking, and vacuum for extracting matter from wounds, as well as the extraction of arrows and similar procedures.
and this is the order of the chapters and the forms of instruments.
The third chapter deals with the restoration of dislocations and torsions, and similar procedures.
and here are the forms of instruments from the beginning to the end.
Thus we remember the work; it is necessary that I speak about the quality of aid and the harm of each color.
I say that the qualities of aid, and its harm, are the most distant word and subtle science and secret responses.
and from these words many wise men will speak, and agree with them.
And I am satisfied with few words, because I shorten the long.
I say that universal aid, in all parts where there is matter, except in two complexions: This is hot in nature, and dry by substance.
In hot and dry complexions together with substance, there is no one who does not say that cautery is a great help; and the other said the opposite: that cautery is of no value to a disease that comes from heat and dryness. For the fire nature is hot, and must not be cured of a hot disease by heat, nor by dryness;
and he who says that cautery does great help to a hot and dry disease that comes about in men's bodies. For when you compare the body of the man and his moisture to the complexion of fire, you find the body cold.
And I agree with this word. For I have never found it by experience.
And all the ways, except those who have tried it and know by long use the treatment of fire, and the diversity of human complexions, and their dispositions and causes of diseases, and the wonders and space of time;
Of other complexions we have no fear, but of the cold and moist diseases. And all of them agree and are in harmony with the fire cautery.
And know, sons, that fire cautery is more effective if it is applied to wounds that have already been treated, and it has much greater beneficial power than cauterization with burning medicine.
For fire is simple, and comes only to the member that is wounded, and does not harm another member at all.
The burning medicines come from one member to another by removing them, and bring to the member painful diseases of great repair. and by chance the disease occurs.
The fire for its height and because of the goodness of its substance does not cause it, if there is no surplus.
And which I have found by experience and by the length of service and study that I have put into this art, and is based on the wisdom of things;
And because I am sorry for the length of speech, for it does not please me to rob you of the secret which is hidden in fire, and the quality of the work, how he routs diseases of the body, as the philosopher says in his demonstration; and may you take it to heart.
And know, son, that they should be performed at the right time, and they should be prayed over.
And I say that cauterization is appropriate at all times, because the harm caused by what comes after can be prevented by cauterizing. and most often it is done for necessary and urgent pains that cannot wait until the time when greater and faster harm might come to the member.
And do not think, young man, as they do, because there is no returning from the disease that is healed by cauterization. and it should be served in this way;
and it should be served in this way; but it is not the same as what they do; for cauterization is not like medicine that changes the appearance and dries up the humors that cause pain, nor does it have as quickly as medicine does, its power over its work and its dignity in its action.
And things that can be known are that the disease will never return according to the appearance of the patient and the location of the disease and its virtue;
and are gathered together in him the excesses by the acquisition of meat and similar things, if it is not that cauterizes are administered into him where he has a little excess and moisture, so as to cauterize with thick for the pain, and similar things, and the part pain does not return again; but this did not happen.
And many people do not understand because the cauterizes of medicine are called the derrians, and it is seen;
but they do not believe that cauterizes are good after medicine, but their intentions are wrong, and the cauterizes of the derrians of medicine are good because when we administered ways of treatment in any disease and they did not work, then let us administer the cautery, and it is good.
Then it is clear that cauterizing the derries is useful for whatever reason when we administer ways to treat various diseases and they do not work, so let us administer the cautery, and it will be useful; but it is not according to the intentions of the foolish people.
The ancient ones said that the cautery of gold instruments is gentler than that of iron, and they did not say about the quality of gold and because of the high quality of its substance;
and they said that the fire cautery does not cause ulceration, but that is not true because I have tested it, and I found that it is true in some people;
and gold cauterizations are better than iron, as they used to say. And whenever you heat a gold instrument, it is not the same as when it is coated with gold, and it quickly cools down;
and if you heat it too much; so it does in the fire; and so there is enough hindrance.
For in this chapter on the head of the shoulder, order it so that the view is easier to find.
For this cautery with olive oil is for the head, and by reason of moisture and coldness on the head, and because of many humors that descend from the hair, and to the ears, and for many troubles and pain in the teeth and in the jaw, and most importantly for all diseases that come from coldness such as paralysis and sodomy and apoplexy and similar illnesses.
The form of this cautery is such that the patient should be purged with a liquid medicine that softens the head (III or IV), according to what is appropriate for the virtue and the age and the habitude of the disease; and then make a hole in the head of the patient.
And then take the fire and sit it between your hands, and put your hands on his back.
After that, place the root of your palm on the root of his nose between his two eyes; and then let your two fingers come together, and if it bleeds from the middle, heat the fire which is called 'olivaire', by which this form is made: And place it on the mark of ink, and do it descending and drawing your hand back and forth again; and then release your hand, and look at the bone I sole little; And if you don't see it, begin again the fire as long as you see the bone, as I told you;
After that, take a little thread, and put it wet and soft cotton inside, and place it on the mark, and leave it for three days;
After me take cotton wet with butter. and leave on until the heat is gone; After me treat the wound with an ointment called "tetrafarmacon" until it is healthy again.
And say to him who is old, that the longer the wound remains open, the more it will fester; and for this reason one must act quickly.
And they said that one must leave the fire cautery in place for so long that part of the bone is burned; and then remove what is burned from the bone, and it will heal.
And serve the other that he must be cauterized as long as it can be, and press so hard that the humor can come out of the bone as far as the women put in their thorns to get rid of the humor;
and one must leave the wound open for a long time; After this, you must treat and support it.
And these two ways of cauterizing do not seem good to me in any way, except that in some people who are prone to fear;
and it seems to me that I must leave him alone.
because the shoulder is weakened by continuous solutions of nature, as we witness in other members;
and even when the shoulder of the sick person is weak by nature, and the first appearance of cauterization is more calm and quiet for me, and from this I operate in a orderly way to save.
When all the head comes to great pain and lasts a long time, then the patient must use his herbs and pills which are called "coches", and head washing and oils and plasters; and if on him the cauterization that we have just said is done, and it does not work. Take care if the shoulder of the sick person is of strong nature, and he is not too cold; then cauterize him a little as we have said above. After making fire cautery on each horn of the head just up to the bone, as we have said before, and make fire cautery where it is called "vessel"; and put vials there; and arrange your hand so that you do not see the bone: the patient feels too much pain in this fire cautery than in others, and I will speak about it later;
and the fire cauteries of the horns should be thinner than those for which you make fire cautery on the head, and this is the form:
Dou cautere dou chief When sudden pain comes in part of the head up to the oil, and the patient is extended until the bone, and the shoulder has been cleansed with medicines that make one well, and all this does not help: then do fire cautery according to two ways, that is to say, of water medicine and of fire.
To treat a medicine ague, if you squeeze an almond and scratch the skin but do not remove the flesh from the two shoulders, then make a temple where the pain is in some way that you can respond to the almond being removed from the skin.
and when it has been responded to if the bandage and restraint are well done and left thus for twelve hours; then remove the bandage and treat with garlic, and leave the wound thus for two or three days; then put cotton dipped in butter on it as long as it can stand it.
After the garlic treatment until it is well;
and if you see that fire of some burning medicines that I have written or one-twelfth treatment of burning medicines.
The fire cautery if it is according to this manner. Heat the cautery so that it is this form:
And is called "close" for this head is made in the form of a close or it has a small crook, and is middle to a small appearance;
and set over the painful part, and hold your hand and turn the fire a little lighter, until half of the meat is burned.
and leave your hand so that the artery does not burn, which will stop bleeding, and run with a great deal of blood.
Afterwards, put cotton in silk, and set over the part for three days. then soak the cotton in milk and butter, and then treat the part with ointment until it is healed;
and if you want to cauterize this headache with the cautery which is called "cultellare", do so at the tip, and be careful not to cover the artery in this headache which is not old.
of migraine
When you treat a headache as we have said before in the division of diseases, and do not profit from it, and see that the cautery which is called "cultellare" is blunted, then it is necessary to sharpen the cautery until it is white.
and so with a line of half an inch long, and hold your hand once, and strain it so that you do not cover the artery and do not come to the bone;
and so with caution from the mandible that moves when it is bitten, and the root does not hurt except for the movement and spasms that come to the patient, and so with caution from the blood loss of the artery when it is cut, or if there is a great fear and uncertainty in those who do not know about this, and who are not students and have not experienced it; and leave the work half done;
but I will tell you how to strain blood when the artery is cut, and I will show you the line where it should be done in this book.
And if you see that these cauterizations are not sufficient for the illness, and the patient is suffering, cauterize the head as well as we have said, and heal the wound until it is healed.
and if you see, administer the cautery that we have said or the chapter of extraction of the artery, with the cautery which has II blades; and this cautery is better than that and more helpful.
of the pain of ears from coldness
When there is pain in the ears from cold, and one has applied fluid medications and other treatments that we have spoken of in the division, and the pain does not go away, then warm this poultice called "poins", and it is shaped like this:
After puncturing all around the sick ear, or around the two of them until it hurts in both, and move away a little from the root of the ear then because you have marked the place of the incision; and there are ten points around each ear;
After heal the place until it is healthy.
of the torture of the mouth
The torture that must be healed by cautery is only good for those that move of fluidity, as we have said in the division of diseases;
and do not make any cauterization as similarities come from hunger and dung of animals.
When you heal this similarity of torture that moves of fluidity of hydros and of dung of mouth and of gargling, and this does not work, then it is convenient that you cauterize the disease with three cauterizations: one at the root of the ear, and another a little way beyond the temple, and the third in the placement of the two lips;
and place the cautery in the healthy part, and make a fire cautery at the top of the ear on one side of the pinna, and another one at the temple as far back as one finger's width; and leave the fire cautery there for as long as half of the skin has burned away;
is the form of the fire cautery:
And it is the appearance of the scalpel that we have described above, but it is a little more delicate and the blade should be a little thicker;
after the fire cautery has been placed as I have said before, for as long as it remains healthy.
When the apoplexy is old and you treat it in this way as we have said, and it does not improve, and the patient has no fever, then make four fire cauter I cut off the two horns of the head, and I pull out the head, and I put fire on the mouth of the stomach;
and let it be cured as we have said before.
Of lime.
For this illness requires that the patient take great pills and bitter drinks for his brain;
after I have cut off all the head of the patient, and put on it the mustard poultice as it is written or how to treat poultices;
and this is the way of the cautery: if you do so as I have said.
If he is well then, good; and if he is not well, then I make three cauterizations by pulling out the head down to the collar, and I leave two spaces of a finger's breadth between each cauterization;
and the doctor does so as well, and if you see him struggling, the patient suffers, so he makes the fire cautery in the middle; and if his job is, in other places on the two horns, and the doctor as long as he is healthy;
and be the fire cautery which is called 'olive', as I have said before.
It is necessary that the head be cleansed of years and of what we have said above;
after he has washed the head of the patient, then he makes the fire cautery on the head and each horn, and behind and three on the spine of the neck;
and if you have more need to do it, and the body is moist and the patient suffers, and the disease is beyond, so he makes four cauterization on the spine of the back; and he leaves until the top of the curative is burned, and gently take your hand away; After the cure, as long as he is healthy, and the cauterization which is called "olive" that we have mentioned above.
of epilepsy
of epilepsy Do not apply fire cauterization to the head except for those who are feverish; it is necessary first to wash the skull with yeres and other remedies that we have mentioned in the section on treatment when the patient is ill and suffers greatly from medicine.
And if it is a baby who cannot suffer the pain, let him gargle and chew with bones often with good meat;
After the king has been placed in the middle, and I have cauterized according to what we have said above, and I cauterize on the thigh, and on each horn; And if the patient is far away and suffering, let him have the cauterization as I have said to those who have paralysis and softening of the limbs, on the spine of the back and neck, and let the olive cauterization be done according to the way I have said.
If the disease is far advanced and painful, make the fire cautery as follows:
When due to melancholy there are excess fluids or腐敗 and thick pus, then the fire cautery on either side as we have said to him who has paralysis:
And if for the cause of melancholy is the superfluity declining to melancholy, and the body of the patient is moistened, then he does him a drinking thing so that his brain is purified, according to what it is in front in the division.
After the king has been placed with the patient; After that I make a tourniquet of linen well made, just as I do a loop, if I place it on the head;
and the sick person is laid on his side, and must be held fast all around.
after applying the ointment, it should be covered with old beard butter; and heat gently over fire, so that he may drink if he can bear it; after emptying the circle inside out and wiping the head dry, and let it cool;
and do this to the sick person every week with good government until he is well.
Or if you see cauterize the neck by making punctures in all places.
This method of fire cautery moistens the skull slightly;
and then put cotton wet with butter and with grease on the scalp.
of the hair When the hair comes first by the signs that I have said in the division, then begin and do drink to the patient one thing purifying the skull, and warding away all moisture, and making it sweat or bathe many times while fast.
After he has washed his hair, he instructs him to get a fire cautery on the head, and to have two cauterizations on the temples together, or one cauterization each, depending on whether they are on either side;
and cut all cauterizes all veins and arteries that are out of place, and let the cauterize be long according to the width of the temple;
and guard against the loss of blood, and if you see too much blood coming out, let it stop with a cloth so that you can keep it.
And I will teach you how to cauterize arteries and incisions, how to stop the bleeding;
nor do we ever make a cauterization or an incision behind the two bones.
and we can see that it is a cold and phlegmatic excess, therefore I make the cauterize that I said at the beginning of the eye descending to the tears: I cauterize the crown, and I cauterize on the two temples, and I cauterize where the jaw joins the skull. and if it is necessary, if the cauterization bleeds above the ear, then a small cauterization.
When you treat it according to what we have said in the section on treatment, and it does not help, then do three nights of bad dreams. After he has raised the crown, and he makes a cauterization at the center of the olive-colored cauterization; and make two cauterizations of the cauterization called "clavis" on the two ears, a little bit away from the hairline;
and guard against the vessel that you do not cover it.
And this is the form of the cautery called "clavilis":
When the paper of the oil is softened by disease and moisture, then the cauterization with this cautery which is called "olive". for
And if you see that you make two cauterizations on the two ears as long as the ears are;
and do not leave the hand free except as long as the third part of the paper is burned, according to the way I have said.
دو شعر که از موهای سر بیرون می‌آید No time has passed when the hairs of the oil are converted to the parched, and they touch the oil, and I make fire according to two ways: it is to be understood from fire, or burning medicine.
For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
When they have grown and are even, then put the medicine on the body; after signing on the paper of the hairs a shape that is also like the fur of the oak tree, and is the beginning of the sign of the hair;
and then I took cotton moistened with vinegar and muskellunge of persils over the oil, and then heat the fire for this is the form:
After cauterize on the shape that you have signed little by little many times, that the burn be made at the place;
and the signs of health of the work are that you see the paper retreat, and the hairs rise to the height of the oil;
then lift your hand up, and leave it like that for three days, then I took cotton moistened with butter as long as it heats; after the cure of ointment as long as it is healthy.
And if after this the hairs come out, and the paper is softened then start again the fire at that same height, as you did first;
and if the hairs go away, then cauterize as long as the paper goes back to its natural height, and is even, and does not touch the hair to the oil.
The remedies of hot medicine are that you command the patient to let the hairs grow long and even, then make a parchment in the shape of a fern leaf;
and take French soap and hot water, each of one , and well grind them together; and make it quickly, so that it does not cool down, then, in the shape of the fern leaf that you have made, put the hairs on the parchment; and if the disease only affects one side, then operate on one side and also on the other; and dip the cotton wool in oil moistened with urine;
and the head of the patient being on your healthy side, place the medicine on it, and press the poultice and suck the juice every time the patient feels a tingling sensation from the medicine, because he also feels a tingling sensation as if from fire.
If you have been sick for a long time, then take this medicine at your tongue. And when the mouth has passed, then raise the jaw up, and keep it raised as if it were raised by the constraint of fire or by incision. and if so, then well.
If not, then put more medicine on the place where it has not worked yet, until your hairs are even, and your eyes are set in their sockets.
Then put cotton wetted in oil on it until the burn is healed, and after that, treat the jaw of the infection called "dysentery" and other things, until it is well.
And if you have to care for your wound with great care so that it does not get irritated by the medicine's hairs.
And if the paper becomes soft after that, and the hairs stand up in oil, then begin again the medicine on the place that is softened by the paper properly, just as you have done before; and after that treatment until it is well.
and this is the form of the flesh of the heart:
Now know that the eyes of men are different in size and shape, and according to what is fitting for you.
and do not answer right away the question to those who ask about this art.
For the treatment of fistulas by cauterization:
When treating fistulas as we have explained in the section on diseases, and your treatments do not help, then you must apply cauterization according to this method.
Tell the patient to place his hand in your lap. and hold the hair of the patient's head between your hands so that it does not move or fall;
after you have dipped a cotton swab in wine or juice of pomegranate on oil;
after heating the iron instrument which is sharp;
and place it on the head like the shape of a feather from a dove, together with the mouth so that the iron tool is:
if you see, if it is pointed at one end to the other, and if you do not see, if it is like a tent;
but anyway, this who is the head worth must move for your work.
After press the fistula if it is open, and do a treatment of perspiration, and dry it; and if it is closed, if you work, and treat firmly the bowels;
after put on the fire carefully, and hold your hand to the fire at the part down of the oil, that your hands do not make madness; and put the fire in the oil fat, and corrupt it.
If you come to the beginning of the cautery just to the bone, it would be good. If not, if you restart the fire again once, and other than that you need to do, and leave it III days;
after I put on cotton wet in butter, and the care of the infection drying as long as it is healthy, and pass XL days that it is healthy, then put on medicine sour corrosive as long as the bone is uncovered; and let him choose according to what he will come with his chest.
And I know one way to cauterize a fistula, which no one of the ancients spoke of. Listen to a fistula, and seal it up. After that, we will place a thin layer of substance on the incision to protect it: and we will make the quantity of one tablespoonful of paste; and hold it firmly with your hand, and do not move the patient so that the melted paste does not run down to his oil;
and it is necessary that we put on the patient's cotton cloth wet with oil of olibanum or with ointment;
The paste should be applied to the hole of the fistula, and it will heal by a wonderful healing power.
And if the fistula is healed by the fire that we have spoken about, it is good. If not, then you should administer a punch to the nose, and bring back the fistula to the root of the nose according to what is suitable in its own place.
in the fissures of the lips These times have caused fissures in the lips, which are called "warts", and most often in the lips of children.
When you treat these fissures as we have said in the divisions, and the cure does not benefit, then in a small cauldron according to this form:
And put it carefully in those crevices until it hardens;
Afterwards, treat the hole with ointment until it is well.
When abscesses form in the root of the tongue or in the uvula, or in the palate, or at the roots of the teeth, after putrefaction and rot and are enveloped and become fistulas; and you cure it as we have said in the divisions, and it does not benefit: then it is necessary that you have the cautery according to the quantity of the fistula; after the opening or hole of the fistula, and hold your hand until the iron comes to the source thereof, and where it is;
and do so once or twice, after the cure we have said, until he is well;
and if it is cured so, it is good; and if not, it is necessary to discover the place and remove the corrupted bone, according to what you will find in its chapter.
When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you cure it with medicines, but that does not help, then put the head of the sick in your healthy one. After warm the cautery so its form will come out after in a way that you put a chain over the teeth;
and put inside it carefully, and hold it so that the sick person feels the heat coming from the root of the teeth;
After remove your hand and start again the cautery according to your will;
After fill the sick person's mouth with salt water, and leave it for an hour and rinse it well.
In this way the tooth which was moving is fixed, and the gums which were softened are tightened, and the moisture which corrupted is dried up.
of the pain in the teeth
When the pain of the teeth comes from cold, or there is cold or fever, and medicines do not help, then it is necessary to cauterize according to two ways: and fire cautery and butter cautery.
A cauterization with butter if it is such that you squeeze butter from a cow's udder, and the tip in a spoon of iron or brass. After, take cotton and wrap it around the tip of a needle, and squeeze out the milk into butter, and put it on the sore tooth carefully and keep it in place until it cools down;
and often so that its virtue comes to the root of the tooth, and if the wool and cotton become wet with butter and are put on the sore tooth, and put on iron hot until the fire comes to the root of the tooth.
The fire cauterization together if it is such that you squeeze a piece of iron or brass wire, and make it thick so that the fire does not come to the mouth of the sick person;
After, heat the cauterizer, so that its shape comes out later, and put it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cauterization cools down;
Make this frequently, for the pain will increase on the next day or the day after.
And it is necessary that the patient fill his mouth with good butter when applying this fire cautery, and then quickly rinse it out.
This is how you make the fire cautery:
And make this cautery on the corner of the mouth that you want to, and according to what you are able;
This is how you make the cane:
of the scrofula When the abscesses are swollen and cold, and do not respond to medicines by means of digestion, then heat this head-cauterizer; for there are two openings so that the fumes can rise from one side and come out from the other.
And place the fire cautery hot on the abscess once, or where it is necessary to do so, until it reaches the bottom of the abscess;
and if it boils up, make a small cautery according to the quantity of the boil, and leave it like this for three days; and put cotton wetted with balm on it until the burn has healed;
Afterwards, use oil and poultices until it is healthy again.
When the moisture conquers the chest of the patient and most importantly when it comes from a cold complexion, then the patient must be emptied first by soluable medicines;
Afterwards, make a cauterization at the root of the throat, and be careful not to go any further up the throat, and only apply it with a little heat.
Afterwards, make another cauterization at the joint of the neck to the base of the spine, and let this cautery that is called 'clavicle' give us the shape beforehand;
and treat the wound as we have said above until it is healthy.
When all and the disease of the liver are cold moisture, and the patient has no fever or chills, and is an ancient disease, then make a fire cauterization on the lever in its eyes; and another cautery boils the urine between the breasts;
and let the cauterization which is called "the clavicle" according to the shape that has been said above.
And if you see, make cauterization by poking at all the cauterization which is called "the point" of where the shape is above in the disease of the ears;
and let the points only up to XXX, or stop before the end.
After treatment, follow this method described earlier, and let the cauterization be done in three steps according to this form:
And for those who are less able, do three together.
to prevent the dislocation of the shoulder
When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation. After, have the patient lie on his back and on his side; After, give the patient the potion that is inside the phlegm with both hands of your left hand;
and if the joint is dislocated from within, then heat the fire cautery that has two sides here is the form:
and cauterize it until he pierces it up to the coast, and come the figure of the cautery all together four cauteries;
and because it is made with fire cautery that has three sides, so that the form of cauterization are five cauteries;
and they are the nerves according to the subtility of a thread and this is the form of the cautery that has three sides:
And never is placed on this nerve for there are 8 cauteries.
After he puts himself on the fire cautery to grind with silk; Then rest the patient, and do not move the limbs for a long time until they are well relaxed.
And if it is dislocated from above, such a thing happened, then make the cautery on the thick part of the cautery with a claw, or many cauteries pierce it.
For the joints are closed, and the moisture is taken from the bone, and the patient is healed.
When in the stomach come colds and moisture as it is taken out of its composition, and are multiplied to him, and the customs of cures are used, and he does not benefit, then the patient should be carried on his back, and his legs and hands spread out. Therefore later he does three cauterizations one on the tip of the finger per the quantity of a grain, at all the cauterizes are crossed, and two cauterize from the two sides as much as the form of the cauterizes is made by three angles, and there is a part between each one that they do not join together when they move by fire;
and let the cauterize be so perfect that it burns the two parts of the wound, and let the shape of the cauterys follow this form without touching:
And if you burn the stomach with a large cauldron according to this form;
and whoever has fear of this cauldron, burn and sign on the stomach at a point according to the quantity that you see fit to; then let him burn all the cauldron which is called 'the point'.
After the treatment of the wound that we have had before, until he is healthy.
As for the liver, it comes pain from cold and moisture and thick windiness, as much as it is strongly removed from its natural composition by the excesses; and the patient is cured of what we have said in the divisions, and it does not benefit him, if the patient is silent on his hemorrhoids; and mark with three caustics according to this form and this figure and this quantity on the liver, so that the hypocondes, from where the cuts of the ome come;
and let there be space between each cautery the thickness of two fingers. and let the cautery be long all the way down, and do not press too much with your hand on all the cautery;
and be burned only halfway down, and let the patient lie on his back;
and if he cannot, then let him lie on his side, and extend his legs, and raise his breasts;
And if your will is, when you cauterize these cauterys of the skin, that you be subtle and wise in this art, and guard yourself so as not to burn all the way down, for you would parch the whole body; and let it not go any further than a pimple, for the cut is very delicate in that place, and the sight to see it.
If he has an abscess in the liver, and you need to know whether it is in the parenchyma of the liver or in the capsule: If it's in the parenchyma, then the patient feels pain that isn't too intense;
If it's in the capsule, then the patient feels acute pain.
And when this treatment for the blisters was finished, the patient would become confused about his head;
and then sign to where the abscess is and then heat the fire which is similar to a toothpick, so as to form it; And cauterize until the wound has all burned, and bring it down to where the hair grows, so that the scalp is completely furred over;
after the treatment according to the treatment of the ulcers until he is healthy;
and it is not good for anyone who has not studied medicine to use this fire treatment, because these diseases have never been cured by it.
And then he can take it as hard as possible, and it seems to me that he should leave it alone.
For the plagues,
The ancient ones said that one must do for pleurisy root cauterizes of arisology, and by this method: Take a root of arisology that is long, the largest you can find, and dry it as well as making it as big and as long as your two hands. and soak it in oil and hold it to the fire, and cauterize I cautery between the jaw and the neck, and two small cauteries one little descending into the part that is hairless;
and two cauterys between the fifth rib and the sixth, in going down a little behind; and one cautery over the anus and another on the stomach, and one between the two shoulders, and two ribs farther back from the one that is between the shoulders;
and do not squeeze my hand, but make it open as well as you would when smelling something.
And said no old man that any man use fire cautery like a razor, and blow it and put it between the ribs, until he comes to the abscess. and saunter for the pain, as we have said in the abscess of the liver.
But in this work there is fear or the patient dies now, or a fistula comes out which cannot be healed.
of the mouse
When you treat the disease of the mouse as we have said in the division of treatments, and it does not benefit, then they devoted three ways of cauterizing that are all good.
Of which there is a way that you do three cauterizations, or four, lining according to the length of the mouse, according to the shape of the fire cautery of the liver that we have said before;
and do not press your hand on all the cautery, and let the patient be sore on his back;
and another way of cauterizing is that you heat the cautery that has two edges, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder;
and leave the cut that is on the mouse's side, where the patient's cut comes towards the left, and let the elevations that you cut be aligned with the cut, according to the length of the body, and the cautery be aligned with the width of the body.
After, pour the two waters boiling as long as the sound of the knock is perceived from the other side, and then treat with fire, and so in it will be four.
And if you see, then cauterize until all the cautery is three.
After the cure has been left to stand for a long time, and this is true that the other cure in front of it must be finished.
Do not cauterize by the method called "ascultation".
When you cure according to the ways we have said in divisions, and your cure does not benefit, then it is appropriate that you make four cauteries around the bouge, and one on the stomach, and one on the liver, and one on the back of the spine, and one place on the pelvis; and let the cauterization be well placed near the cure.
After, leave the fire open for a long time, and do not let the patient's wound remain untreated after the cauterization; And the healing would hurry, and both intentions would be together with the help of God.
The shape of the fire cautery for the abdomen is like a nail that we have before us. and this for the back is olive-shaped, according to what it is described here in front.
When the feet are swollen in those who are hydropic and are pale yellow in color, it is necessary that you cauterize on the back of the foot between the index and the ring finger; and hold your hand with the cautery without turning back.
And do not enter too far in all of it, lest the yellow [color] would be forced out, and the cautery is made according to its form:
After that, do two cauterization on each leg at the tip of the heel; and be the cautery long, one from behind the knee in front and the other away, in front of the leg;
and leave the cautery on top for a long time without cauterizing, so that the blood comes out;
After this cure of those other cures that we have said.
When the solution of the belly comes from cold and moisture, as long as the virtue that retenues and digests which is in the stomach and in the intestines is affloated, and cannot be cured by any way of cure; and you see the patient very suffering and of great virtue, so do I great cautery on the stomach according to what it has spoken before or cautery of the stomach, at the circulation of cautery; and four cauteries around the navel subtly to all cautery nail-like, and two cauteries on the hips.
And if you see moisture abundant and the patient suffering, make a cautery on the knuckle, and a cautery on each finger, and two small cauteries on the stomach, for the cure is profitable when there is good aid.
in the treatment of hemorrhoids
When the hemorrhoids are in the fundament, or one or more, and are old and are great cold and moist corrupt humors, and are cured as we have said in the divisions, and does not benefit, if do cauteries: and three on the spine of the back, which is all out of the body slightly and slightly in squaring, and two cauteries around the navel two;
and if you think that his stomach is cooled down, and the meat does not cook, and one sees swell the skin, then on the skin I grant cautery over the stomach, as it is said before, and another over the liver, and another over the mouse to all the cauterized clavicles; and leave the cautery open for a long time. After care, let the wound heal until it is well.
When you cut the hellebore, if you heat up the cautery that seems like a razor, and then put it all on fire on the chopped hellebore; and I leave so much your hand that the cauterization comes to the birth of the vein, from which it is not cut short;
do this once or twice, and if there is much hellebore, then cauterize each one as we have said; after the treatments with beneficial herbs until they are healed;
and if you cauterize with a large cauldron over fire, it will be more helpful.
When the patient cannot bear cutting or opening, which we will tell you in your place, so comes a disease that cannot be cured except by cauterization.
If there is no outlet for the wind, and it is agitated and vomits pus and moisture, then it must be given an extremely subtle treatment, and you must know exactly how much of the treatment is perfect.
After heat the cauldron that looks like a razor, and pour it into the fistula according to the quantity that it has entered, and restart the cauldron as long as that heart is infected and rotten, once or II or III, according to the quantity of the remedy required;
and protect yourself from the nerves that are inside, and great veins.
If the fistula goes to the core of the bladder and intestine, protect yourself from these nerves, and do not make fire except in the flesh, and think that it is not useless;
After you have healed the nerve as long as it is healthy, and if the nerves are scarred, and the matter is ossified for a long time, then know that the nerve is completely healed;
and if the materials are not osteous, know that the bones are three, and the bone is corrupted at its root. and so with one of these that we will say in his place.
When the pain of frost comes with rain and a heavy wind, and does not take the shape of a woman, then you must make a fire on either side at the clove-joint that we have mentioned above;
and if we cauterize it in the middle, then there will be three cauterizations in a line, and greater help will be done.
of the bladder When the bladder is soft and weak from frost and moisture, so that the patient retenes urine, then you make a fire in the part opposite the bladder, where the hair of the penis begins, and one on each side, and let each cauterization be as long as a finger.
and let me cut the back, where you have been pricked.
and let the cauterization be made according to the shape described above.
When the marrow is cold and moist, and will not allow conception, and the flowers are decaying and late in maturing; and when they come, such great pain is felt: then you must make three cauterizations around the loins, as we said above in the cautery of the bladder, and a cauterization on the back;
and let the cauterization be made by claving, as we have said.
When the viscous moisture descends into the hip joint box, and for this reason it moves out of its place, and the sign is that the leg is longer than the other when measured together;
and find the line of the hip joint department, so that you can cauterize the patient on the hip joint box at the circle-like cautery, and sign in front of the line around the box as it comes back, so that the box is within the circle;
And if there is such fire cautery as that which we use to cauterize the stomach.
If this fire cautery is not present, then make three cauterizations with the olive oil, and also make it completely as all the keys;
and treat it until it is healthy.
for the pain of the hip When the pain comes in the hip joint, and it is from cold and moisture, and the patient is cured of what we have said in the dislocation, and the cure does not work, and the illness is old: then you must purge the patient of great humors with foul pills, or other bad-looking pills. After that, make a fire cautery;
and the method of the cautery should be according to two methods: it is as follows together hot medicines and fire cautery.
Fire cautery if it is according to the manners of which one is such:
To cauterize the hip of the horse III triangular cauterizes according to this form, and you make it deep and wide, and have between each cauterize a space whose size is that of two fingers, and let the cauterizes be olive-colored;
No one does fire cautery in the middle on the head of the hip, for there are three according to this form:
And if you see, if the cauterization is with a circle of fire that we have said before in the dislocation of the hip;
But do it in this way that the circle contains all the hip, and all the thickness of the leg is burned.
And this is the way it is done in sciatica, when the pain remains in the hip and does not reach the thigh or the leg.
And if it comes only to the thigh and leg, you do two cauterizes here where the patient says that the pain holds him back, and one cauterize above the ankle three fingers, on the left side a little bit;
and let the cauterization of the knife, and let burn the thickness of the skin.
and if the patient feels that the pain extends to two or three fingers or four or five away from the wound, cauterize it at one of those points with the fire cautery called "points". And if they are qualified, let them do it more often.
and if he says that the pain is in his knee and goes towards his thigh, then you make a cauterization with the knife or circular cautery, and be careful in all your cauterizations so that you do not leave them for too long; neither do you burn the nerves nor the large arteries, and do not cause the patient too much damage and contraction.
And I have seen many who have made a cauterization on the heel of the foot and left it so long that the leg was completely swollen, and the bones as well, and it became pierced and rotten throughout the bones. After a solution for the stomach which has brought death.
And if the pain is in two places together, make a fire cauterization in one and in the other, according to this way.
And the wise men say in the cauterization of the hip, as for this manner, you should do it and make it at the top just as thick as a fingernail or a little less, and between the cheeks and also from one cheek to another with a space the size of a fingernail;
and let there be between them two bars, and also as knots, and I have one of iron well made;
this is the form:
And let it be heated until it is quite red and cool it down, and then put it on the hip bone of the sick person, and turn it around the small of the back;
and the fire cautery once more and let him rest for three days; then do an ointment of butter, and leave the open wound long; after the course of ointment until it is well.
Albucasis says that we use little of this cautery because of its danger, and those who use it little;
and all the same this is a good cautery which can bear it, and where it afflicts him.
The medicine-burning cauterizes if you make an instrument from which the end of the margin of the door extends, and it is of brass or iron to a long wall, and there are two of us, and each has the quantity of the thickness of a finger. and be placed above and below, and join together according to this shape:
After you have put the box on the patient's back and made sure that it is steady, and you hold your hand very close to the patient's back. After you have placed the two circles of hot metal, which are heated in a firepot, and leave them for an hour, and allow the patient to feel the heat and the burning:
For it will produce the same effect as fire.
And when the mordication has passed, you remove your hand from the instrument and lift up the hot box, and let it stand for three days, and put on butter as much as that which is blackened by the burning: and let him leave for three days to get well from the wound;
and this would be behind help after the healing of oints as long as he is healthy.
And if the pain extends only to the thigh or only to the leg, then do you make the instrument small according to what you have done in the hip more
is the way of the hot awes, and I have written it or the healer of the correction of medicine. Get alkali and live charcoal, as much of one as the other, and grind them together, and put them in a nine-pot. or there is a small hole with which the point of a razor can enter;
or there is a small hole with which the point of a razor can enter; and put another pot well filled there, and put alkali and heat and soft awes on it, until there are two powders above them that you can well pour into your hand;
and let it rest like this until it releases hot awes and pee or pot that is well filled, then take all the hot awes and put them on alkali and heat as before;
And then if it is wet, let it rest and recover with the medicines of the doctor and other fire cauteries.
For it does the same work as fire, and if it is mixed with other medicines, of which one cauterizes well the wound with turpentine and myrrh and calamine, all these things mixed together.
And Galiens tells us of a remedy where one honourable person was cured of the pain in his hip and sciatic nerve, and he mowed the grass, and said that no other remedy was used, and he was healed at once when this cure was done, and he bathed himself as it is taught hereafter.
And it is said in this way that you squeeze the green and dry chalk, and grind it with a little fat, and put it on the wound and on the thigh and leg where the pain is, and let it rest;
and leave it for three hours and so that the patient does not feel the burning anymore.
And then let him enter or bathe as much as his body is a little warm, and let him get into bed, and the pain will go away completely and be healed.
And know that no one should use fire cautery of such medicines, unless after the evacuation of blood.
And Diescoraides says that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with goat's hair, it helps a lot;
and the cautery must be done in this way. Take another and wipe it with oil, and put it on the fold that is between the thumb of your hand and the other which is called the finger.
After taking the dried hair, and burning it until it is charcoal, put it on the wool, and leave it until it is burned.
and do it again, and do not stop doing it as long as you think by reason that it comes up to the hip, and that the pain is stopped;
and this way of cauterizing is called "cauterization of cheese".
of the pain in the back
When pain comes to the back, or from shaking or from too much evacuation, or from the appearance of cold material spread out, none of these appearances is worth cauterizing, except for that which comes from an infusion of cold material.
It is necessary that after the patient has voided any foul stools or similar things, one should make three lines of cauterization on his back where the pain is, and in each line V cauterizations or more according to the virtue and the quantity that the patient can bear;
and let it be made according to the cauterization which is called "poins";
and if you see, do III or IV at the cauterizing claw according to this form:
Many times this disease comes to small children, and the signs of the beginning are that they have a tight lining when they stand up and are afraid. and you will find in the back of the neck of the two and in us the appearance that comes on the others.
When you see this person and you see him healed, if you cauterize him with fire according to this form. So that the fire cauterizes each part of the spine evenly.
And if you see this, then cauterize inside the spine with fire that is two or three lines long, and let the points be close to each other.
Afterwards, cure the area as long as it remains healthy according to what we have said, and beware that you do not apply fire to gangrene which is in the tissue of a nerve.
of the joints
When the joints are painful due to moisture that spreads to each member of the body, and when pain comes in pieces, which the people call "podagra" properly, and when it is caused by cold and cannot be cured with medicine, it is cured with fire in one way.
make the fire of the cauterization inside the joint of the foot, and let the olive oil cauterization according to this form:
And if it is necessary that you hold on the face of the foot, so it is cauterized with all the cauterization that one claims "no point". And if the pains come only to the genitals and to other joints, and this happens many times, then you make a fire cauterization on each testicle three times or four times of each part, with all the olive oil cauterization;
and if you have to do more, then do not hold your breath but only as much as the fire has burned the flesh.
And if the pains go down to the knees and back, then the cauterization administered as said in this chapter of the chaplet.
If the pain is in the hands, then do not cut off the skin more than two lines deep;
and if there remains some pain in both, then do not cut too deeply on each joint and on the hair of the hand;
and if the pain comes only to the shoulders or just to the neck, then cauterize each part and give good advice to the patient and apply medicines.
Because if you do this good government and you purify the pus, then you will be healed by God.
When the cut comes in the throat, and the balls fall down to the cheeks and it is a new wound, then you must not let him talk at all that day; and he uses things that make his belly wet, so that the end comes out of his belly;
aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors;
Then set the fire cautery upon his back between your hands, and command him to let his hair grow long while the boils are being dried, and pull them towards his hands, and sign with the iron from above the knuckle of the hand, and make a whole sign that is like the half of a circle above the body;
as long as it is white and dry. Then reset the bolas to their places; and the ministers let his hand burn so that it does not turn back;
and work well the thighs of the patient, and put a cushion and an assistant on his legs, and another one under his feet that burns his hands;
Then place the cautery on the bone with all your hand, and hold it steady and keep it there until you reach the bone, and if you do not reach it the first time, then try again another time until you touch it; and be careful so that the fire does not spread when you are making the cautery; so that you do not burn it; and that by this the patient does not die, or suffer any other harm.
And know that when you come up to the bone with the cautery, your work is worthless.
And it is necessary that the cautery of small children be delicate according to their size, and also for grown-ups according to theirs.
After three days treat the bone with butter until it is healed;
After treating with other remedies as long as it remains healthy, and lay the patient face down for 40 days on his back as long as the wound is well healed;
and it is necessary that his nostrils are relaxed for a long time so that the fire does not protrude when he tries to go to bed.
And after forty days, when he wants to get up, a well-made wand is given to him and held for another forty days.
and let there be good rest, that he work little and guard against too much drinking and eating, and too loud breathing;
And when he practices this teaching, he will be completely healed.
And I will say here after the cure of the tailor in his paste.
When the sores come in other bellies and are infected, and you see that they no longer grow, do the cauterization of the cauterization according to its quantity, and burn the third of four; after the cure according to what we have said;
and no one of the old has said that he must cauterize at the three angles according to this form:
but the first sign is the base of the belly and make a line across the width of the rupture, and another behind it, and with your hand spread all over the past with the nail.
But the first cauterization is lighter and milder.
of old pain in any member When pain arises in any member, whether from a strain or from an injury, and this pain persists for a long time, and the medical treatment is of no use, then it is appropriate that he be cauterized with the cauldron which is called “poins,” and the cauterization be carried out according to the length of the member and its smallness and its feebleness and its virtue and its location from twists and its pain.
If he is well after the first fire cautery, it is good.
Take note of this name, then begin another fire cautery on that one, for it is custom that the hair must grow on the member closest to the patient, so you must make the cauterizations until the patient is well.
The month of May is never treated by fire cautery with great help, and least of all does the disease come from the decay of phlegm and melancholy.
Can you see the burn patient? Take care that the disease is at the beginning, and if it is healed according to what we said in the division, and does not decrease or remain stagnant, and you doubt that the corruption will spread throughout the whole body, then make V cauterizations on his head. I cut off the hair at the back of the head, and the other towards the forehead at the end of the hairs; and two on the two horns, and one behind on the nape;
and I leave it until my hand feels the burn, and until the hair comes off in pieces so that the vapors of the bad odors can come out;
and cauterize on the mouse according to what it is before.
and if his skin is everywhere sparse; and if his skin is visibly sparse, then you must cauterize it with the cauterizes that we have said above the shoulder, and one on the neck, and two on the back, and one on the skull, and another on the chest, and one on the two shoulders; and two on the knees, and two on the hips, and one on each joint of the hands and feet, and in the grooves of the hands;
and beware of the nerves that are behind the heel of the foot, so you don't burn them;
and never make a cautery on the bone of the hand, and one on the bone of the stomach, and one on the liver.
And know that the more I make fire cautery, the more I make help, and it profits.
and know that the patient does not feel pain from the fire cautery as the healthy person feels it, for this reason the body is already completely corrupted.
And it is necessary that the cauterization be large and small according to the members and joints, according to what you will find in the way of iron.
After treatment, leave the loin of bread with honey and other treatments until it is healed.
When the swelling grows in any member and is cured by medicines, oils, and poultices, and it is not healed, then you make cauterization on the member according to its size and smallness.
and let the cautery go in a little way into the flesh of the part; then heal it with ointments until it is healed.
And never make fire cautery at the hand or foot or back, at the outlet of the nerve that silences the member, and thus if it is fractured;
and in any way do not get involved in them unless you know the limbs and outlets of the moving nerves of the body.
When the disease called "albaras" is awake, and the medicine's essence is not useful, then cauterize with a fire cautery a little perfectly, according to the quantity of the spice used, until the blushing is taken away, and its color is moved.
then heal with flour of vegetables and lentils with oil of rose and leaves of plantain, and blood of collard and almond, each a part; and mix all together, and bind it with a cloth, and apply it to the wound as long as it is healed.
the treatment for leprosy by cauterization
When the leprosy appears at first, and you see it stop, if the cautery with fire that seems like a circle, is applied all around the leprosy spot.
And all the wise men say that one should also cauterize in the middle of the ulcer;
and to me this does not seem good, for I fear that it will become an ulcer and rotted, and I have never wanted to do it once;
and the most right thing is that it be cauterized inside, at the cautery which is called "circulating", as we have said in many cauteries.
When someone has a disease that is called "adubelati", and it takes long to die or for the excess of blood that the sick person has or for the age of the sick person when he is very old and has little blood, or for the heat; and you see him hurry to die: then let it be cauterized inside with small cautery stings by piercing; afterwards leave it thus. For it will hurry to die.
And if you see her pierced with all the cauterization, let the fire of the cauterization be hot:
And place your hand in the middle of the disease called "adubelati" as long as the cauterization has pierced the heart, and let it be such cauterization that the sick person feels heat in some way so that the course of decay is accelerated.
After the treatment as long as he is perfectly healthy.
Another type of disease is called "corrosion," which is nothing more than a members' rot, as it eats away at the members just as fire dries up wet wood.
If you see this disease in a place that can suffer from fire, then heat the clavels small and large, according to what is suitable for the place where the disease is;
afterwards cauterize all of it until you leave no corruption behind, and nothing remains of it but what is corroded; so that everything that is corrupted is taken away.
And then leave it for three days, and put oil on the burned places so that the burns from the fire are healed, and all the corruption.
After the treatment with ointments causing burning.
And if you see after three days that the hair does not grow, it is good.
and if not, start again the cautery on who is delayed in his place corrupt.
And this ointment is never yet cured with medicine of water in place of fire cautery;
but nevertheless fire cautery is of greater help, and I have already said the cure of the water medicine in the division: take it when you need it.
of onions that come from the stones For many times it happens that by accidents a disease is born which is called "clos" according to our intention, and it is a big thing which blisters the foot.
And the cauterization of this disease is done in two ways. That is to say fire cauterization, and cauterization with hot water.
Fire cautery should also be done as if it were a penis, and let it be made of good iron at the measure that it can push the nail from all sides, and let there be subtle margins;
After this put all hot on the nail, and turn your hand completely around the nail until it comes to the tip of the nail; and leave him for three days until he begins to get diarrhea. then make a poultice of wild mallows that have been crushed with water, and leave the poultice on all night, and tie it on tightly and let it root out from its roots.
Here is the translation of the text:
And if his body is turned by diarrhea and many times comes out in hand and pies, then you must bring him fire cautery. In this way: take a rope of copper or iron, or a feather from a swan, and put it on the nail and the athelol, that is to say, to dry out warts; and put the rope on it so that it turns red all around, then put a little hot water on it, and keep your hand well away, and press your hand in turning so that the margin of the rope comes to the root of the nail, and may find the hot water's path deep until the root;
and suffer the disease a little of the sharp hot water an hour; then leave it like this, and it will all fall out at its roots.
Thus do another, until you have healed all those who are in the root, then cure the wounds that generate pain.
When some shake with cold, or with a quarterly fever or another, it is convenient that you make three or four cauterizations on the spine of the back, one cauterization between each spine; and one cauterization at the feet, and one on the stomach with olive-colored cautery;
will leave it trembling, and will hasten the saint from the cold disease.
Now and then, apparent on the body by bad smells, blisters full of pus, which come from corrupt matter.
is convenient in the first place, when they seem that one make cauterization on each head of the pimple: a subtle cautery of a vine of mirth, of which the point is taken in the fire, or of a root of a long-word, or of a lenticular cautery.
And never do the cauterizations start when it appears according to this way, and they cannot grow hair before, but the surplus is cut off from which they come, and they are healed.
but it is necessary that this be done after the evacuation of blood.
종종 혈관 파열로 인해 큰 출혈이 일어나는데, 이는 상처에 도달하거나, 부위 또는 목동에서 발생하는 것일 수 있으며, 유사하게 보입니다. And it is a bitter thing to smell.
And in any case when it appears, if you hurry to put your index finger on the vein wound and hold it there while the blood stops flowing from it, and no drop more comes out;
then place fire-bated olive oil on it a few small and large ones as long as it is all red;
And then take the fire cautery, or large or small according to the wound, and place it on this vein where you hold your two hands, and keep the cautery there until the blood stops flowing.
And if you feel pain when you press your thumb above the elbow, and the cauterization burns, take another cauterizing tool that is hot.
And do not stop doing one after the other until the blood has stopped flowing;
and be careful that you do not burn the nerve which is delicate, and that no other evil comes on the patient;
and know that when the artery is cut short, one cannot stop it bleeding well even if the artery is large, unless by one of the four ways we have said: by fire cautery, or by extraction when it is not yet been treated, or by a strong thread tied on, or by medications put on that have the power to stop the bleeding; and be laid and held fast together.
Who will administer the tightening of the bandage tightly with fire or other burning things upon it, or similar things, if he does not benefit from it, let him do nothing.
And if this happens to anyone and he does not have any mirth or medicine presented, then he should put his two fingers on the wound of the vein as we said, and stretch well until it is stuck above the wound and above the vein. and do not move him, but keep him dry of cold often that it is damp cold as soon as the sun is cold until it is frozen and thickened and stuck.
and make inquiries in advance of those for whom it is necessary to use cauterization and medicine.
We have told you in the first chapter of all diseases when it is necessary to use fire cauterization, or burning medicine, and the questions and causes and instruments and forms of cauterization;
and I have put this chapter of the head up to the foot, and I will go in this chapter through that same way for those who hurt more lightly than those who run;
And so, since I have begun to speak of this, it is necessary, O you who hear, that you learn that with this ointment there is greater danger and fear than with the first of the cauterizations, and for this reason greater caution is required.
For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
And I advise you not to take any foolish risks. For in the ways of men come many kinds of trouble. If one comes from such people who, with their disease, die easily because of the violence that they bring upon themselves due to the greatness of their illness and their wickedness; and of this one must be afraid.
And of these people whose sense is taken away, and who say: Wait, I am dying. and the disease is spiteful.
It is fitting that you concede to those who come to you who have this manner, but put more trust in your honor than in your covetousness, and do not open wide but carefully from him whom you are sure, and from whom you may have taken and lost.
and use prediction and indication in the treatment of your patients so that health is converted;
and this will help you to gain a good reputation, glory, and memory of praise.
Very dear son, Our Lords give you good understanding and justice; and if you will ask for the holy inspiration of His hand, amen.
Or I have ordered you this chapter in speaking by chapters, according to that which is before or the chapter of the cauterizing potions, which I have devised from the top down, so that you may find more easily that of which you will have need.
Know that this disease often comes from babbling too much when the child is an infant, and when the baby's bail is drawn too strongly.
and never does this come of a resolved cause which one does not understand.
And I have never seen this disease affect anyone but children, and all those whom I have seen die quickly. and so for what I can tell, it seems to me that it is better to lessen the work of this chapter in treatments.
And I saw a child whose shoulders were wet, and the head turned from side to side every day until it could no longer be sustained.
and the moisture was so great that it killed him, and this moisture mixed with the bone on his side, between the cheek and the bone;
and this work is so great that the moisture is mixed with the bone, and the abscesses are small, so you should make a wide slit in the head with the knife;
and also as far away as we can go, until the moisture runs;
and have this form of the spatula:
If the moisture is deeper and the abscess is larger, then you make two cuts in the shape of a cross, according to this form:
and if the moisture has mixed with the bone, and the signs that you see are the folds of the head turned inside out on each side, and when you press it with your hand towards the inside, water jumps out; and this does not return: If it is necessary for you to cut a man's hair, cut it according to this manner:
And after the incision, remove all the moisture. After removing the drape and powder from the wound, apply wine and oil, and leave it like that for five days;
Then unbind it, and heal the wound with tendences and ointments, and let the hair grow evenly, and feed the patient dried meat of some moisture until the limb is healed and healthy.
Another method of incising is to look at the opening of the anus and the angle of the rectum;
For there is no time before; There is no time behind; There is no time to the left; There is no time to the right.
Cut then where the anus opens, and the filling of the rectum, and do as much as you are able to;
and guard against covering the artery; and bring a flux of blood, so that the patient dies from the pain of blood loss and the evacuation of moisture.
When there is a disease that is called "catarrah" in either the nose or throat, and the disease is old, and the treatment of medicine does not benefit, then the last treatment is to cauterize with what is used to plug the two arteries.
It is therefore necessary, since you cannot cover the eyes, for the patient to remove his hat; after rubbing the area with an arid cloth until the arteries are visible, then remove all of the patient's clothing; then look where the vein pulsates, and the backs of the hands are turned towards the head and the palms towards the feet;
then sign the backs of the hands, then cover each with a flat piece of wood on both sides until the bone is reached, and the same for the top of the head;
And if you see, plug the sphincter with astringent powder into the artery and cover it with a bandage, also cutting as I have said above.
And when the vein is covered, let it continue to bleed constantly.
And if the artery is not felt at first, then measure the quantity of space of three fingers, then sign the back and make an incision just to the bone;
and what is to be done about the blood should be six cups, and perhaps a little more or less, according to what the sick person can bear, and the filling of the artery.
then look at the wound: if it remains on the bone without a scar, and if the wound that was cut does not come out, then extract the wound and stitch it up, and treat with ointment until it is healed.
of grating When the ancient catarrh comes, and the muck from tears and heat in the temples and old feverishness and similar things, and it is cured by ways of medicinal remedies and all that does not benefit him, let us extract the arteries from the temples and cauterize them, as we have told.
And the way to extract them is that the patient should let his hair grow out on his temples, and listen to the artery that opens in the temple, for it opens well by its beating, and is a little too weak to be heard in some men who are too cold;
if it is dilated, the patient should be taken out of some sheets, then rub the place with no sharp cloth, and raise the place with hot water until the artery appears clearly. and then take the spatula whose this is the form: Then peel away the skin lightly until you reach the artery, then twist it upward into pinches, and well remove the membranes that are attached to each part;
And if the artery is thin, then twist it at the point of the hook, and then cut off that part according to the quantity of the two claws. For if it is not cut off, then there will be no saving of life in all things.
And make an incision of the six quarters, just up to three;
And if the artery is large, then you should tie it with a strong double thread of silk, so that it does not burst before the wound closes, and so that it heals quickly;
Then cut away the excess that is between the two threads at this same time, and then, if you see it, so that the cauterization with the cautery knife goes up to the bone as soon as the claws are cut;
and it is a hot fever, and he is of a warm complexion. For the cauterization is done to end the moisture: for such is the great help against moisture.
Or, for the extraction of arteries, it is necessary that one fill the place with fine linen and put on well-made tents;
and when they are removed, so let there be cured of dry medicines that cause the birth of air, and of tents, as long as he is healthy;
and if there is no need for an artery ligature as you work, so hurry to stop the bleeding with a cauterization, or employ the vinegar at the place and extract it with your hand so that the stain does not remain; and if you do not have any present, so place your finger on the place as long as it is frozen, and raise the place of cold water as long as it stops, and extract it as it should be;
And it should have between the two knives a space of an inch and a half, and then when you have cut through both ends, and you take hold of them with your hot iron, until it comes to the bone, and then stop the vein in two places; and let them be distant between the two heads because it is not bound by this fire of everything;
is its form;
and he who is wounded and lighter in the extraction of the artery, it is that you cauterize the vein with this sharp fire of two sides, but let the sharp be well spread so that they last longer on their heat. For when the instrument is too soft, then it holds less heat.
tears When the tears of the blood are descending from the veins that are on the forehead of the shoulder, and there is no benefit of the cure of medicine that is done, and you see the face of the patient turn black, and it feels cold; and so the oil is thin and moist that the hairs of the papers are lost, and the papers are heated, and scorched by the heat of the tears, so there is a need for this treatment. And they called it the 'ancient cure', and that is what you do to the patient who has this disease on his hair or forehead, then he makes three incisions or forehead evenly according to the length of the forehead;
And they called it the 'ancient cure', and that is what you do to the patient who has this disease on his hair or forehead, then he makes three incisions or forehead evenly according to the length of the forehead; and one of the incisions is also like two whole teeth all the way down to the nape, and the others are II half teeth on top of the papers, and be careful with the incision of the arteries that are on top of the papers;
and keep your hand away from the continuation of the two mandibles, and be each wound III teeth in length joined together;
and equip yourself with a sponge piece and many cloths to wipe the blood, then pour the sputum gathered from both sides of it is the shape:
from the incision that is due to the temple just up to the second incision; and peel off all the skin that is between the two cuts all the way to the whole part that is on the bone, then do the same thing from the middle incision just up to the other second one, and then remove this sputum. If water is added to the first cut of the instrument called “culteur,” and it is very sharp on one side and soft on the other, it is this shape.
And place the edge of the cutting tool facing towards the carriage at the top, and make the edge soft towards the bone, and add water until it reaches the middle cut.
And cut all the hair that falls from the head at the incision as long as it is continuous up to that which opens from the neck, and then do the same thing in the middle cut just up to the other side;
and then remove it evenly, and extract the blood evenly, and squeeze out the blood;
and put in each cut a tent of wet cotton, and put on damp cloths made with wine and oil and water, and take care that the abscesses do not come out;
and for the third day let him lie and I shall bring a great amount of cold water, then the treatment with basilic oil with rosewater, and other treatments to heal wounds until he is well.
When there is any catarrh by custom, and you see the eyes red and small, and the vision dimmed, and the papers burnt; and the hair grows, and where the head hurts acutely and the patient sneezes; then know that these matters and this catarrh do not come from many veins, and the treatment that I give is right, for such is this.
And you command the disease to raise his forehead, and then make a large cut on his forehead, and another with a wide edge. And begin with the incision on the left temple up to the right temple, and go through the bone; and remove your hand from the nerves of the temples that move when one cries;
and when the ear is uncovered, if you squeeze out all the blood with a sponge, and then wipe between the two lips of the incision and put cotton wool and linen bandages. then place wet towels in wine and oil, and keep the abscess warm;
When it is dislocated, if you rub the bone until it starts to bleed, then treat it with drying things, which cause dry spots.
In this manner: take two parts of wheat flower and three parts of kohlrabi, and make a paste of it; and apply it to the wounds to cause dryness all over.
of the sticking up of the ears
All those who have their ears cut are among the four: or grain, or beast, or stone of a certain size, or similar things as iron. or seed, if it is jemmied, beans, peas; or choose an antidote if there is water and ease and similar things.
When it is chopped up in the ear or any other kind of thing that does not fit into the ear and does not grow in the ear, put the ear to the sun.
If you see the stone, if there is no drop of purple oil or sesame oil, then let's bring extraction. and the blow is to shake off the condition, and the nostrils are closed when the shaking comes, and put around the ear pieces of cloth or wool; and let the ear be raised up.
Many times it comes out strongly with this treatment;
and if it does not come out strongly, let'n bring extraction with subtle pincers, for this is the form:
If it comes out strongly with the pincers, it is good;
if not, let'n bring extraction with a small and subtle hook;
and if not with the hook, then make a knife of iron and break off the end of the chief of the knife or the hole in the ear strongly, and stop up what is inside the hole with soft wax so that it cannot enter with the knife; Then the fire cautery is prepared, for much perspiration comes forth from it as we have said.
and if it does not come forth in some way, then take up glutinous liquid and put it on the joints, and place on some instrument that is right for doing so, and put a little cotton around it; then press the glutinous liquid upon stone or something else, and fire cautery.
And if it does not come forth through all of these things that we have said, then hurry to split the ear in such a way as to cut the abscess and spasm.
and the manner of splitting it so that you make the first treatment for the headache with the fire cautery according to its virtue, then place the headache between your hands and turn the ear up, and make a small split at the root of the ear to the fat or where it depends. and make the fracture like the moon, until you come to the stone, then take the bone according to your power, and suck it into your mouth;
and cure it as long as it is healthy.
And if it is a arrow that has entered and it swells, administer extraction;
and if it cannot be extracted, then administer the sutil sponge according to this form: and provide instructions for cutting the seed.
But do not use this method when you think that the arrow is moist due to moisture in the ear, as many times as you have done it;
then extract them with subtle pins and suckling, as we have said, so that the extractions are controlled.
Then, when he sneezes in the ear, the patient should use an instant treatment of water, and widely open the ear with a cotton swab. And be attentive to that ear where the sneeze is. if it does not hurt, it is good.
But if not, then take several pegs according to the length of your finger and make them light, and heat them a little on the fire; and cut off a part of his ear, and sew on it with one thread from the other side, and fasten to another stone on the stone in the ear. and do not cease to make this stone by stone until the water has completely run out, and so it will be completely run through;
and if you see, then take a piece of wood, and dip one of the ears in fire, and the other ear with the hot piece of wood;
then make another piece of wood with the hot piece until all the water has run out, as we have said in the stone.
In the extraction of the arrow, if it is a small one, like a tick or similar thing, treat it as we have said in the dislocation.
but if it is a large one that we can feel, then carry out the extraction with tweezers; And this is the lighter thing to pierce, which is in the ear.
In extracting the worms from the ears, when you treat as we have said in the division and where to treat distillations, and the cure does not profit, if it is necessary that you look at the ear towards the sun: if there are no worms, if you treat with subtle pincers, and if they do not appear, take the knot so that it is known what the shape is:
And it should be narrow below and wide above. And pour out the thinnest chief in the ear according to the quantity of the suffering of the patient, then suck the form to all the knot; do this repeatedly until all the worm comes out.
And if they do not submit to come out, if you stop up the knot with cotton as I said in the stone;
and if they do not protrude as we have said, administer distillations that the elderly have experienced in the lysis of worms, and you will find them or the treatment of distillations;
and if you distil your oils and medications in the ear on all this instrument, so that it is this form as you see: And be of silver or gold, be heated to a small hole, and over the top for distillation;
and to press down on the instrument of silver or gold well made for this, and if you see take a razor and wrap it around the tip forward cotton; then pour your oil or juice, and what you see of your medications in the line, and the line is in the ear;
then pour into the razor all of the cotton, and press your hand gently as much as the oil is distilled or flowing from the ear; and let the patient feel the heat inside, and let the distillation be small to the fire thus as one distills in the ear; and keep it from being too cold, for the medicine would not be so good.
of the sticking up of the ears
No child is born with any perforations in their ears;
and this same thing happens to people by the accident of a wound, or a wheel inside the ear, and these accidents sometimes go completely into the ear if one cannot see them;
and never does any perforation come from fire, and one can see it well.
That which comes completely, if one cannot see it, is a painful treatment in many ways, and in this one can see that you put the patient's ear in the sun; and look inside: If you see the clear operation, if the work has all this syrup of which there is the form:
And be careful and cut in front and behind everything flat, so that it does not hurt the ear;
If the operation is on the cheek or jaw of the ear, if you hold it with gentle pincers, and cut it lightly, until the bone is all exposed.
And if the ear wax is completely removed from the ear, then take a fine and light razor and heat it a little on fire, and then place the ear ring in.
If you feel the operation that the patient feels sharp pain in the ear, cut lightly and be careful not to hurt the nerves of the ear;
Then put a tent in the ear according to its width, and wet it with Egyptian ointment. Do not touch it at all until the wound is healed, or take a tent and wet it with rose water, and powder it with vinegar brew.
and if you see the ear flee, so consider that you take the tent and move another wet tent made of oil and wax until the swelling is removed. then treat it as long as he is healed.
And if pain comes, dip a sponge and cloth in cold water, and put it on the ear, and use other treatments that calm the pain which are or treatings of distillations.
Cut the roots off with shears and pincers, and trim them with a scalpel from their bases; then put on him vitriol broie.
and if it does not come off with scraping, then the fire cautery with a fine lens-shaped fire, and the fire cautery after the incision moves more slowly.
and repeatedly scrape, so that nothing remains attached to their roots; and when they are burned with fire, so the roots are singed and never return again.
of the gristle часто come off in pieces that look like hair in shape and hardness, and for this reason this disease is called "hairy" and consists of a mass of thick moisture on the surface of the paper. The surgeries are as follows:
The surgeries are as follows: the injuries are as follows:
do not cut the large part, then burn each part lightly, then take it with tweezers, and clean it.
if you cannot cover it without piercing a bit of paper into it, do not harm the patient.
and if the fracture is great, join it with a stitch and treat it until it is healed;
and if it is small, do not use force, for the swelling will restore it soon enough and harm it.
and if the fracture is going up from the ear towards the top, then turn the paper over, and take the fracture with tweezers, and clean it and press from both sides;
and if the paper is severed by the incision, it causes no harm;
and when the rain is over, if you wash with salt water, and cure the place from that which has caused it, as long as the patient is healthy.
of the fat of the eyes Exina is a grease that is caught in the webs of paper above, and this happens more often to children than to others, and it grieves their eyes, and they come down with catarrh in the mornings, and they cannot look at the light of the sun because their tears hasten to their eyes;
and when they lie down on their faces at night, and sleep on it, and the paper above their eyes becomes moist, so that it swells and changes in appearance from the Exina which has penetrated into the oil. And when you press down on the shoulder with your two hands and feel the escape between them.
And the way of the treatment is such that the patient puts his head under water;
and then take a linen garment, and prepare a tent in the form of a circle according to the quantity that is contained outside each part, and then put it on him; and press with your two hands from one side and the other, so that the external quantity is gathered into the circle;
and cut in the middle of the moisture to the spatula with a sharp edge making a slit of the wide size, and is not more than that made at the vein opening;
and make the skin perfect until you come to the external quantity; and in multiple positions comes the external quantity of the slit, according to the form of a piece of bleached fat.
Then take all a piece of linen cloth between your two hands at the end, and turn your hand from right to left as much as it is spread out;
and keep from jerking the wound, that you do not come to all the sputum until the oil, that you do not bloat it.
And if the patient does not jerk at the wound, but gently pulls a little on the edge of the wound as it appears;
Then remove it as we have said, then dip cloth in water and oil, and put it on the wound, and remove the bandages gently.
And if there are such men who grind seeds and put them on to corrupt this moisture that is delayed.
Then heal it as long as it is healthy.
And if the place of an abscess gets hot, then the healer compresses with poultices as long as it is healthy.
of paper hairs When the hairs grow out, they should not be pulled except by nature, and they are wrinkled, so they hurt the eyes, and cause various diseases such as accustomed tears and soft skin of the hairs, until it is the cause of hair loss.
And the treatment is according to four ways: either by fire cautery, either by a medicinal drug according to that which it is before or by a cauterizing paste, and it is done by incising and sewing or by cutting, according to what I will say.
It is necessary that you put the head of the patient on your right, then turn the oil paper to your left hand;
if it is turned over, it is good; if not, pour an needle into all the thread above; and if this is not done, pour an needle into the margin of the paper where the hairs grow out, and thread all the way through the paper, and return it to the razor;
then open up the part of the skin paper, pulling out the hairs, and measuring all of the skin with a long blade from the large wound to the small one;
then remove the thread, and put over the paper a little cloth and fabric, then sign on the paper a figure of an apple, as if it were a mirth, and in all cases, it is necessary that the figure be according to the quantity that you see lift up the paper which is laid out;
And if someone who is skilled at it uses a large amount of paper according to what the paper is softened.
then cut all the stain over the two lines you have signed and start large tears from little. and be the one of the splits next to the hairs in the thickness of a root, then pour vinegar into one of the two corners where it is, and then scorch it all.
then join the two lips to a stitch of a needle with very fine thread, and wash the blood, and blow off the excess of the threads over the two sorcels at nothing sticky, if you see this.
and if not, if you are not cured of it, then leave the stitch and the threads until three days or four.
then heal the wound without stitch with drying and constricting things, because the paper is softened at the touch of the wound and gathers, but the stitch is rotted (if they said it), and that is painful work. and if there is another way:
and if there is another way: is that you sign the paper with a shape that is as much as the shell of myrrh, as we have told, at three times twist according to the form that is here:
and then take the one who is higher up, with small forces evenly according to the form which is here:
And if you cannot hold the pliers and the thing is not even, take an awl with a thread on it, and bind the shape; and another fine thread, and the second long thread, and the third short thread, and join them together evenly between your two hands;
then move your hand evenly, and then bind all the leather over where you have signed it, as we have told, then join the two lips of the wound with a stitch, and treat it until it is healed;
and if an abscess comes to your incision, so that the poultice and similar blistering ointment relieve it;
and never has hair from the paper been converted
if you use what we have said about incising;
but stitching in one place and another is more artificial.
The cure for dogs follows this form: and that you convert the paper and put it inside according to what I have said, and then make two dogs by art, and two threads very long like the paper and the thread of the spurium is; and tie as two heads on two sides where you hold the threads;
then put together one and the other very carefully on what rises from the paper of the oil, and extract the two dogs from the two parts formed; and leave it like this for a few days, and the skin that is extracted will die and shrivel and rot, as long as it lasts on its own.
If it is delayed, if the cup has one force, then heal it as long as it is sound.
and when the wound is sewn up, and if the paper is raised, and cannot grow hair anymore;
This is the form of the two knees that you will make according to this figure, and according to this quantity of long and wide:
The work is such that you press a very fine needle, and you tie a very fine, soft thread; then assemble the heads and bind them together very finely, and make the length of the threads a palm's length;
then order in the chase another very fine thread of silk, and bind the heads with it;
then put the patient's head on your shoulder;
and be careful of the sun so that the work is subtle and small, then insert the needle into all the hair at the root, and pierce it into the paper carefully as you pull it up from the natural hair;
Then remove the hair up to the nape, and pour into the nape that hair, if there is one or two or three or more.
Then remove your hand so that the hairs come out all at once into the paper with the natural hair.
And if the nape is treated and the hair does not come out with it, then you shall pull the nape off at a single pull all the way down to the end that you have ordered, until the nape comes off from the top and you can see it through the sight of oil;
then if you pull the nape and the thread, and oil is left behind for two or three days until the hair grows in its place and the hair comes out.
And if the hairs are small, then accompany with one long natural hair, and let it hang with that or leave it hanging until it is grown out and then cut off.
for the oil rot When this disease, which is called "alacrat" or the poultice comes in oil, there are two ways:
one is natural and the other is unnatural.
And comes from a wound, or from the scalpel, or from a cauterizer, and from similar things.
And the method for treating it in this way is that you cut open the seal, separate the lips and put linen inside, and leave it until it is healed.
and you do not use anything to treat it that dries and constricts. For if you do this, the disease will come back worse than before;
but treat with softening things, such as fenugreek; and the water or ale and flax seeds are cooked, and the castor oil is melted into any of the oils, and it is wrapped in a tent, and you treat with it of this disease.
And the treasure of your healing, if you keep yourself guarded that it does not become hard according to the form that it was before;
and those treatments that we have said are only valid if we address this disease, so that it does not return according to the form that it was before.
This disease that is called "ascratic", and is natural and accidental.
The accidents come from wounds and cuts and burns and similar things;
and the way of the chapter is that you take a needle, so that it has double thread, and tie it to the horn, and make it pierce from the left ear as far as the right, so that the thread comes in two shoulders;
Then put the horn above all the needle, and the cap on the wide spatula. And the form of the paper returns according to what is appropriate, it is good;
If so, take a razor and put it into the fissure, and turn the paper, and make two slits where it cost in the paper.
and make the heads of the two slits at the two angles of the incision that you have cut, and let one angle be so that when they are assembled together, that the figure is as like to the figure of a letter which has not "I griesche".
then take away that one piece, according to the quantity that its edges are apart from the paper, then add the two parts cut off, and join them together with a thread of linen;
then the cure for this that we have said about the softening medicines, and the tents, until it is well.
And if the disease comes from a fissure or stitch or cauterization, then it is necessary that you cut a plain slit in the hair of the paper, and according to what is above. Then separate the two leather pieces of a tent, as I have said;
Then separate the two leather pieces of a tent, as I have said; and you must prepare the application according to the shape of the disease, for it is very diverse in form, and the master surgeon will determine how to restore the shape to its natural state using all his powers;
and even the patient, according to what is appropriate for him in terms of application and tools in various preparations.
When this weld is made in a certain way, that the paper on top is welded with oil white, and cannot move or perform its natural work, then it is necessary that you burn the tip of a razor onto the paper, and lift it up;
and spread them out as pinches, until you get the one that is suitable for the delicate sponge, which is not too sharp or too thick, so that the patient does not suffer from the very sharp sponge injuring the oil;
and so your incision, from which you peel off the gathered paper lightly, so that the paper returns to its natural shape;
and all of it is healed, and never in acidic salt water, and in fresh water, and in vinegar;
then place between the paper and the oil a tent of linen, and put on the oil a wet woollen cloth in abundance of salt; and after three days use the collar and the hard things until it is healed.
I know that the thumb has two ways of being treated: it is nervous and seems like hard medicine, and another that is not nervous, but seems like frozen moisture, which, when touched with iron and treated with heat, cannot stand it.
and both types of appearance begin to flow towards the great tear, and grow larger and larger until they obscure all vision, all light, and all movement of the oil.
And the way of incision is that the patient puts his head on your chest, then he opens his hair. and leave the paper in your hand, then turn the nail around with small turns, and put it on top; then take a needle, and I put a hair of horse, or of she-goat, or of ox, and a strong thread; then double the point of the needle a little and thread it through the nail, and pierce it with all the needle, and tie the nail with a thread and put it on top, and peel off all the skin from the nail that follows the nail and the silk up to the head, then cut off the remaining in the root of the fingernail very carefully and finely and leave the nail natural or the nail, so that by incision does not come the blood of the vein as is custom;
and once their nails are cut short, and the thread, as we have said; then burn it with fire, all its skin, so that there is no form:
And keep the skin of the spine from touching the raw flesh and breaking it, and that the spur does not pierce it;
and after the incision pours into the oil a little vinager, and a collar made of lime, and leaves it until the next day; then treat with this as much as is needed until they are healthy.
And if the nail is not sore, and you cannot insert the needle, and the nails do not go in, this nail-like appearance of medicine is cured many times;
and they grow like I have told in the division, and if you see it covered with oil, do this to the patient, and take a little skin according to this form: And raise the finger above the nail, and if you see that it is thinning little by little and the nail is pressing on it, let it distil from your mouth in an oil collar made of alum and red dye and a mixture, and stop the oil until the next day.
If any other thing is opposite to oil in the skin, as an abscess does, then the milk, and first treat the abscess while it is sound, then resume the work as before until it is sound.
Then start again with the other wound according to this same operation as long as it is all boned.
And if the appearance of the flesh of the arm hurts greatly in the oil, let it be suspended for a while, and chop off some of it, not all at once, so that there is no pain;
Then let it distil in the red oil which is made of alum.
Some men have never had a red rash, and they rub the plums and hold them against the paper and turn them around, and it looks like a rose of baluster;
and if the patient puts his head on your chest, then he twists the hair, and all of it like snakes suitable for this, and supports it with strength;
then cut the first piece, and all of it cutting close to the skin until the end, and be careful not to scar the oil at the work;
and let the incision be with a spud that we have said in the incisions of the nail and small forces where one holds the bone with a pin, as the form after this chapter shows;
and when the incision is completed and all of the bone, then employ the oil of seed or you distil red collyrium and similar medicines corrosive, and put cotton on the oil with a cloth of linen, so that it is assured for an abscess to heat;
and if it does not wait, and the sun rises over you, and you doubt about a hot abscess, then leave the oil and treat the abscess with soothing medicines that warm an abscess;
And then return to your work as long as you are healthy, and in this way the char is held in place by this appearance.
But it is necessary that you adapt the cure for each weak oil of the natural way; and of the accidental way, in work with iron;
and do not put your hand into any of these works unless you see that the limbs are suffering from that work.
are red, so that they are covered with oil, and tolerate its sight, and weaken the oil every day.
So it is necessary that you first examine which oil is good, and bad, and there is no other disease but the bad one; Then set aside this oil in a certain way:
Instruct the patient to put his head in your lap, and then hang those veins in all places according to his wisdom, and let the veins be doubled according to this form:
And let there be two oils by degrees according to this form:
and then gather up those veins carefully, and rinse away the blood hour after hour until you can remove those veins from the oil.
and keep the oil from splashing on the points of the spatules, and do this work at noon before the sun, and be very careful in your work so that you only burn those veins.
and when you have finished doing this, let it distill in the oil of the green and red to corrupt what is left of the sebaceous.
And if you do not have the power to gather everything up in that hour, then make a paste on the oil of soothing things that relieve the pain of the hairs, and let it stand for several days until the pain is relieved and is assuredly calmed down by the apothecary's heat, then begin again according to this manner which is before until it is healed;
and this is the form of the force:
the mirror which I call "arissati" hole:
as you cure it with fire cautery and medicine as I have said before, and it is not healed, then cut along the abscess, leaving the dead part, and drain all the moisture that is there until the bone is exposed.
And when the bone is exposed, and you will see the corruption and blackness, then use all the instruments that I have described above to make this form:
and is called "aspre chief", and it should be made of fire from one end to the other end, and it should be pointed so as a file, as shown in this form:
And put on the end of the bone that is corrupted, and turn it between your two hands, and press with your hand a little until you feel that corruption has gone:
and don't do this again, then put back the place of medicinal drugs drying.
if his leg is stiff, and he cannot walk, and the spine of the bow is stiff, and remains so for 40 days, and does not renew itself or become an abscess, and bad accidents do not happen, since it is healthy;
If not, if there is no other way except to bring the fistula to the navel according to this form: and is that you uncover the bone the second time with iron, and with medicinal herbs, and when it is uncovered take care that the head of the iron is at three angles, and the fistula is narrowed down to the top as you see here:
then put the blade on the bone with care, and keep your hand away from the oil I cut, then turn all the iron as long as it pierces the bone and hurts the patient by what comes out of his navel if he holds his hand on his navel;
and then restore the place of dry medicine, as I taught you, and when the horse is born and hardens its parts, so bring the matter to the nose. This is a lighter thing for the patient.
When the eyes are open all the way around, and there is no distortion to the nose, nor does it decrease, but it is necessary that you lay the patient down;
then the doctor, then put on him the cupping glasses so that it does not hurt to suck, then put on oil mixed with acacia and aloe and incense and sarcocoll, and then squeeze out the oil, and apply a poultice made of bandages and drapes;
and the way of the bandages is that you squeeze soft bandages, and double each one four times, and then put one on top of the other according to the quantity that the eyes need;
and remove from above a hard piece of wood, and start again with suction to avoid injury.
Then he removes the suction cups and lets the oil strain day and night, and the ligament becomes looser, so that you must remove it slowly.
Then he removes the ligature after day and night, and if you see the oil recover, it is good;
if not; then start again with plaster and bandages and the ligature and suction cups as long as it is healthy.
The tearing of woven cloth. When disruptions come in the woven cloth, then open, and comes paper-like grains as if a resin seed, and is predictable to see;
then if you see it covered, the overlay is such that you push a needle into the root of the part almost up to the top, and then push another needle where the thread is doubled in the part of the rope; and pierce her, and leave the first needle according to arrangement;
then cut the thread in two places and tie one end of the loop, then tighten it well, then remove the needle and put another moistened thread in abundance of wax;
and leave it until the thread sounds with the loop, then treat the oil with comforting things until the wound is healed;
and no time the wound is restricted by a circular bandage of cloth each part of a circle, until it is healed.
And if the hair is very fine, if you pierce it with a very fine spittle that comes from oil in perfection, and draw away the moistened albuginous and cut the hair, and insert it soon;
then remove it until it is healed.
This disease which is called "alkunah" is only water that is gathered in oil, resembling water descending, and it is not water.
and the way of the appearance of this chapter is that you make sit the patient on one side bare and straight, then take the head between your hands from both sides, and move it until you see the bow come to your fingers; then let him sit down, and do not kneel or bend your back, and look at the patient's things as if he were alone;
and if it does not sit down, know that it is acute, and the sitting of the bow should not be bare as we have said.
if you sit the patient between your hands, then take the thin spatchula and put it on the horny membrane I hole by the continuation of the conjunctive with the horny membrane and the crown, until the bow comes out;
and when it is out, let it be distilled in hot acrid honey, or acrid water or fenugreek boiled and honey, then let other cures be used until it is cured;
with the water of the oil We have the appearance of needles in the incision, and what is necessary to pierce. for in the work according to health.
It is necessary that you sit the patient between your hands crossed, away from the light by the sun, and press the healthy oil very strongly;
then put the paper of oil in your left hand if the hairs are left-handed, or in your right hand if the hairs are right-handed;
then take in your right hand, if the hairs are left-handed, the instrument which is called "almagda", or in your left hand, if the hairs are right-handed;
then put the tip of the instrument at the base of the hair by its thick end in the blubber of oil in the part of the lesser larmier, then bottle the instrument which is called "almagda" firmly, and turn your hand around until it pierces into the blubber of oil, and feel that almagda comes to the hollow thing;
and the measure of the vein of mercury should be at the perfect measure of the space that is from the prunella to the end of blackness; and this is the crown of oil;
if you see the bone in that paper for the clarity of the corned skin, and then put the instrument up to the water where it is, and then express one vein after another.
If he faints now, then see the patient in front of him and the instrument on his oil.
Then rest for a little, and the water rises again the second vein, put the force with the instrument, and when it is well stuck and does not rise anymore, then draw out mercury lightly by turning your hand back and forth;
and then put a little of the green thread into the water, and leave it from that oil inside. Then put on one side the oily oil where or another moist thing in oil and a lot of water, and bind with healthy oil.
Now then, and those who are of our sect, let us put on common broied with a lot of water.
And if the alum cannot enter the oil because of its hardness, for there are some men who have too hard hairs, then you must squeeze the instrument which is called "alberit", from which this form comes:
And then pierce the conjunctive only, and do not go too deep with the needle, but make it fine, then draw out mercury, as we have said;
and at the completion of the work prepare for the patient a dark place to sleep, so that he sleeps on his back.
and be free of all movement, and eat light food, and do not move his head to the right or left, and bind him according to his condition for about three days.
then release him in that same dark house and test his sight, and let him see some things, and then he remakes the bandage until the seventh day.
and it is not necessary that you do this in the hour of the cure or afterwards, but it is necessary that you prepare it beforehand, so that water does not mount up inside him.
if the abscesses are fresh, you should remove the poultice before the seventh day and apply the poultice from someone who soothes an abscess.
and when it is calm, if he does not lie down the face up, so that he may not see any more, and be in that dark house.
And then out of the house little by little, and turn back to his case;
and know that no one should meddle in this case. And one came to us who was from Jericho, who told us that in his country there is such a thing as an earthquake, which sucks up water, but nevertheless I have never seen it in our land, nor have I ever heard of it in the books of the ancients; and perhaps it is a new thing.
And these are the signs of the shapes of almagda, for he who does not know them may see them;
and let them be of pure bronze; And may the head of the two of this very subtleness be, and behind three acute angles.
And no one is born or dies of various kinds of horses, from which there are none who seem to be scorpions at the mouth of stones;
and if there is any of this or that it has green wax of fox, and if there is any good-colored wax. In this case of the wax that is good, and not green, it is necessary that you make the patient sit between your hands towards the sun;
In this case of the wax that is good, and not green, it is necessary that you make the patient sit between your hands towards the sun; and open his nostrils, and pour the ointment into these waxes, and massage them; and then you may take this that you have prepared with a thin spatula from one side, as long as you know that this wax is all bone;
And if there remains nothing of it that you cannot cover, then open it with a very light and thin instrument, so that nothing stays behind; and let him stretch out, or absess, as it is necessary;
and if they are malicious abscesses, then hurry and cauterize as soon as the skin is stained and all the waxes are boneless, then pour or do not pour easily and quickly and run water. If there is no pain, and moisture comes up to the throat, know that he is well.
and if there is no perforation like it should, know that he has a bone split above, so that the tool does not cut properly:
then you must put a piece of linen thread, about an inch thick, between each tooth, and bind it tightly with the hands, and leave some space or less between each knot; and put the patient's teeth in linen thread at his finger ends, and draw it through his nose while smelling until it comes out of the nose into the mouth;
and many times do this to the child while he is in school, and it is an easy thing for him who does it;
then hold the head that comes out of the nose with one hand, and the other head that comes out of the mouth with the other hand, and take one after another while we are threading the linen thread;
Make it as long as you know that the new one has corrupted this thread, then treat the child, wash the blood, and soak the hair in Egyptian ointment, and put it back on the neck immediately as before;
Fai ceu three or more days, as long as the ointments corrupt all that is delayed from the hair;
and then put on the neck a twine of thread some days as long as it is healthy, and if it needs dry medicine, then use it;
And this is the form of the instrument to purify the head, so that one distills the oils and the medicines on the neck:
And be of silver or gold, resembling a lamp opened, like a twine, and lead it also;
and if you see, then make a closed twine, and be the instrument plain to purify the head;
and always hold the head so it doesn't move when they heat oil or any other liquid.
of the neck from the nose
Many times a disease that is called "telul" appears at the head and grows and becomes very large, so much so that it can be seen with the eye.
And for this reason you must hold the head still at the beginning and put the fire or burning medicine on it;
and if you delay covering it until it is very large, take care if it is hard, of its color, of its poor sense:
don't ever touch it with iron because it is an infected abscess, for when you cover it up there comes great evil to the patient;
and if the abscess is of soft touch, not of poor color, and you see that it can be completely covered, so cover the patient well with drying and restraining things;
It is known that when a solution of continuance comes to one of these cartilage ovulations, it does so little, otherwise in some men.
It is therefore necessary that someone come who, if the wound is fresh throughout his body, and then he fixes the two lips to a stitch, and then he cares for it until he is well;
and if the lips are torn from one side to the other, it is necessary that you peel all their parts until they heal, then join the two lips to a stitch, and tighten them, and powder them with dragon's blood and burned incense; and put on the powders a piece of resin of some sort or other resin that sticks together, and leave it until it falls off by itself, then care for it with ointment until it is well.
The way to stitch so is that you join the wound: or with needles, as we have said in stitching the belly; ou par fil, if as I have told you.
of the lips
With hands at home, inside the lips there are hard, resembling seeds of times, and small and large;
Then it is necessary that you turn the lips, and cut each in two, and take them with pincers and chop them into parts;
then apply the fire after the incision of vitriol, until the blood is stopped;
and then let it rest, and treat the wound with dry things until it is healthy.
Often a tooth comes out on the gums, which the old people call "albulus";
if it is necessary that you hold it with pliers and cut off the tooth at the root, and let the blood run out;
then apply the fire of vitriol, or other powdered substances that bind and dry up;
and if it returns after the incision, and many times happens, if the cope the second time, and cauterize. if it does not return after the cauterization;
No joints are assembled to the head of the teeth, inside the mouth between the gums, which are ugly and rough; and no tooth is black and yellow and rotten, as long as the decay comes to the gum, and the teeth are stinking;
if you make the patient sit between your hands, and his joints are in your holy place, and expose the teeth or scars as much as possible, so that nothing is delayed; and then make it black and green, and yellow and other colors, until they are clean;
and if one bone is in the first ratio, it is good; if not, then begin again on the second day and third part, until you have all of them;
and know that the teeth have different shapes of instruments to cut, according to what the operation shows, because the scissor which one uses to cut hair has other shapes than those which one uses to cut flesh; and these forms and others are with you equipped.
It is necessary when you heal the tooth's pain that you wait to draw it out as long as you can, because one should not do this at all; because it is a substance of high moisture so that one does not have an excuse to draw it out.
And now when the patient is forced to extract it, you must be certain about the tooth that hurts. Many times the pain leaves the patient, and he thinks that the tooth is healthy, and he makes the good tooth drawn out; and wherever it does not go away with medicine, as long as the evil is removed, because we have already tried to do this for these elderly people;
and when you are certain of the tooth that hurts, so it is necessary that you scorch the gum in all directions with strong spittle;
then dip it in your two hands or small nails at the first hole and hole, until it is well loosened, then firmly secure the nails; and place the head of the sick person between your knees, and hold him securely so that he does not move.
After removing the tooth correctly without breaking it, if it does not come out, take one of these tools and push it into each side lightly, and move it around as you did first.
And if it is pierced and blood comes out, fill it with cloth where the hole is; and if you hold it tightly with small nails so that it does not break while you are holding it;
and it is necessary to cover the wound above the gums so as not to disrupt the tooth.
And you should be careful not to break it and leave a part of it, and let the patient feel more pain from the root than from the first one.
And you must not do so in the same way as the ignorant surgeon does, who, through his haste and recklessness, often breaks the chariot, and cannot administer what we have described;
but bring about by the fire of that great disease through the roots which it holds back, or through the chariot which it breaks, as we have often seen;
and when the tooth is drawn, wash the place with wine or water and string;
and let it dry of blood which comes out, for that often happens, if one employs the place of vitriol;
and if that does not work, then use fire;
The shape of the instrument which first prepares the tooth is such that it has long points and thick handles so that it does not double up as you draw out the tooth;
and these are the forms: And let them be strong limbs so that they do not bend when pulled, and well-made iron, and let them have teeth to hold fast.
from the root of the teeth When the root is still at the trellis, you should put cotton wet with oil on the joint or two, as long as the leg is soft, because the nails that are called "algefri" seem like a 병;
and inside they make like a file and this is the form:
And if the roots do not want to come out with all these pliers, then you must take off the whole tooth, and put the instrument that is called 'althali', that is a chisel; this is the form:
And be far away from sharp things so that it does not break, and the root jumps because of that, it is good.
If not, if you help yourself with all the tools, by which the forms come here after:
And if one helps himself with this instrument that has two heads, from which this is the shape: and other tools that are in front in the rasion of teeth, and this instrument which seems a big pliers, whose is this form:
And be sure that no tool can break it, and know that most of the tools that are inside are; and also other tools, which are not counted;
and the master sages subtlety tries on their own instrument according to what their art and the disease of the patient show them, for there are many diseases or the old man does not teach an instrument for the diversity of them; and if it does not break the chariot or other bones, or he falls, if he seeks the instruments that suit him, I have told you, and helps with gestures, by which this is the form:
And let them be big and firmly holding to hold the bone, so that it does not escape, but can hold and remove it.
and then return the head to the place of medicine that is suitable for this, and if there is a pus in the bone, and it is small, then the cure with all this instrument.
When the teeth appear not in accordance with the natural form of the jaw, and the shape is ugly, especially in young women, it is necessary that you know whether the root is attached to the tooth or not; it does not fit into its place, and one cannot nail or file it:
then the extraction: and if it is attached to the tooth, then take this instrument whose form is similar to a small pick, and which is made of iron;
And the cap fits tight and tight by the hardness of the tooth, and because you do not move the others, and if it seems that it can be filed, then take a file with this shape:
and it is also like the file from which one makes needles;
and at intervals rub the tooth with a little water so that it does not move until it comes out.
Then the plane at the end to any razor, and its density is too hard and it bleeds the tongue, then you should rub the sharp edge until it is even, so that it does not bleed the tongue or corrupt speech.
When the tooth is loose, either by pounding or by pulling, and the patient cannot bear pressure on it without hurting, and you have treated them with restrictives, and that does not help;
if you can restrain it with a gold wire, for the silver wire turns green and puces, but the gold never moves;
and let the wire be neither too thin nor too thick, according to the quantity of space between the teeth;
and if you see how to smooth the dense bones, then take the string and double-knot it between the two dense bones, then put the heads between the dense bones, if there are one or more, until you get them smoothly up to the healthy tooth on the other side; then start wrapping again until you get to the part where you started, and slowly and carefully remove your hand, so that it does not move.
and make sure that your grip is on the root of the tooth so that he cannot escape.
Then take the heads with pliers, and join them together, and put them between the healthy tooth, and so that he does not hurt his tongue;
and then leave it tight as long as it can stay in place, and if it slips or the thread breaks, hold it with another thread;
if it stays and serves for all its time, and this is the form of the upper and lower sides, and the appearance of the two upper ribs and the two lower ones, as you see:
And when a tooth falls out, if it is put back in its place again and again, as we have said;
and do not meddle with those who are not wise and patient, and never make the shape of a tooth out of a piece of hay; and put it back in its place where it failed, and hold it fast as we have said, and stay and serve for a long time.
Never is there a tongue that comes out of the mouth or nature, which one bears in one's body; or by accident of a sore burn;
and the work is such that you open the mouth of the sick person and put your hand on his chin, and hold his tongue down;
and then cut the nerves long, as long as the tongue is dislocated from its socket, and if there is any hardness or numbness, and this is sudden pain from a wound, so he pulls out the nerve and cuts the ligaments.
and be careful that the incision is not too deep, lest the artery be cut.
and when you have done so, raise the level of salt water and cool it, then put a patch of linen on the tongue.
and rub the disease on each night so that the hole does not close.
And if fever comes, then put vinegar on the spot. and if it does not go away, then apply fire to the skin with a white hot spark, which is good for this. then treat with other treatments until it heals,
and if you see a red or black or hard color so that the patient does not feel it, do not touch it because it is leprosy;
and if it is slanting to the left, and there is moisture, then pour the ointment, and wash with a thin sponge, and deliver from one side to the other; and if it does not go to your ointment, put it on vitriol until it is stained, and then return to your ointment while you take all of it;
then lift up the head from there and from rope, and heal him with other treatments until he is well.
of the throat No one should put his finger or hand into his mouth, which are called "godaths", and they are properly called "amandres"; and when you heal them, as we have said in the division of them, and they are not healed, take care:
If the abscess is small and has a pale color, then do not touch it with iron.
And if it is red and its root is large, then do not touch it with iron, also for the removal of blood from the wound; but let it alone until it dies, and then you will remove it, or it would break by itself;
And if it is of a pale color and its root is thin, then prepare the instrument to cover it, but first see that the abscess is warm and calm.
Then make the patient sit in the sun, and his shoulders are parallel to the ground, and he opens his mouth and places his thumb between his hands, and presses his tongue against all the instrument, so it is shaped like this:
and be of silver or thin gold as well as our knives:
And then press the tongue to all this instrument, and you see the abscess, take the scalpel and put it in amber, and drive it up above what you can.
and then remove any threads with it, then the cover to the instrument, so that this is the form, that seems one's force; and allways the head are corbed, and one place another, and they are very good, and is made of iron ind or forge:
If you do not have this instrument present, if you take the handle with pliers, so that there is a form: And let be trenchant on one side, and on other side no;
and when you have covered one of the amber, so cover the other according this same manner, and after the incision gargarize the patient with hot water, and cold and easily, and let them rest until they stop bleeding, if gargarize the patient with cooked pomegranate juice, or cooked apple leaves, or similar things, as long as the wound is cleaned; and then treat until he is well.
and never do any other abscesses in the throat than the two mandibles, unless they are very much like the two mandibles.
And I treated a woman of an abscess that was lying within her throat, that is to say, one small abscess.
and I had well closed all the throat, so that the woman could not breathe by the conduit which was stopped up, and could neither eat nor drink, and would have died if she had stayed thus for one day or two.
And the abscess was so large that it had risen two rain-cycles through the two apertures where the drainage was coming from.
I hastened then a little, and put in one of the incisions, then I tore it open again, and put in a large portion of bowstring.
then I refitted another part on the other hole where the abscess was, and closed his mouth and pressed his tongue.
after I put the ointment on these abscesses, I poured some of it out, and only a little blood came out. and then I removed the tube from her throat, and now she began to drink water and wine, and I kept cutting this abscess for a long time;
and the abscess reopened, filling up the space that I had emptied, until it was very large;
then I put a stop to it and cauterized it in her throat: after that it stopped hurting.
and then I left these parts, and only God knows what will happen to them after me.
of the eye
When the wound heals up, and she is gone and far away, then it is called "perpendicular.
and if she has had a large and round belly, then it is called "ve.
When she is healed as we said in the division, and the healing does not benefit her, and you see that the abscesses are calm, and they are subtle, so it is necessary that you cut them.
and this one who is round and assembled and is not far away; and it is bloody or a purple color or black, so you avoid the incision of it. For there is great danger with the eye disease.
It is necessary therefore, when you see it, according to the way that I have said, of its blenching and its length, that you make the patient sit in front of the sun, and press his tongue to the instrument of which we have spoken above; Then place the ring in its hole, and split it open, and cut it with two instruments that I have said in the incision of the two mandibles.
And you must not cover more than the excess that is beyond the natural term.
for if you cover more, it hurts the throat and speech;
and after the incision, use what we said in the incision of the two testicles, and heal it until it is healthy.
And if the patient has doubt about covering; then you must use fire cautery on the painful part.
And the way of fire cautery is sharp water. And it is that the patient puts his head in your place, and then he presses the tongue to the instrument that we said or fire cautery, and mixes with sharp vinegar so that it is not too thick or too clear; and use this tool's maneuver, from which comes this form:
and put the head in a bunch or hair where one puts the medicine, like the bunches of a spoon, and place the instrument on all the medicine on the wound;
and the patient be lying on his side, so that his saliva and mucus run from his mouth into the medicine, so that he does not choke in the throat, and burn it;
then keep your hand over all the medicine and press it against the eye, the quantity of half an hour, until you see it become calm and the medicine's stinging is relieved;
and if you see it, take cotton and wrap it over any instrument, and moisten the cotton with the medicine, and dip the instrument into all the cotton in the chain above, until the cotton dries on the eye;
and do this often, until the fire-cautery is perfect, then leave it to dry, and see after III or IV days or V;
And if you need to prepare the medicine fire-cautery, if it is prepared, and after the fire-cautery rinse it with cotton soaked in medicine, and clean what is inside of the medicine;
and be dipped in cold water, and be cured by gargling until it is well;
This cure is safer than incision, except for cautery.
if she is cured by fumigation in this way, take calamus and hyssop and oregano and rue and chamomile and yarrow and similar herbs, and put them all together or any of them in a pot, and put it there like this, and make it boil;
and the pot is well glued with strong earth, and dip the tool in this way: and be of silver or gold, and be one of the shoulders squeezed in the mouth of the patient as long as the vapor rises to the vein through the tube, until the vein is numb;
after it has started again, often, until the vein is dried up, and you keep it from happening at the beginning of the entrance of the abscess, for many things have happened; and do not make such a fire that it burns at the base of the apophelis.
And if this instrument is not present, then take a knife and put it in the patient's mouth at the base of the apophelis so that the mouth does not get too hot. For the knife of the ape does not make the steam very hot in the mouth, and this is a good treatment that saves both together.
Often there is an object stuck in the throat, or a bone, or nothing.
so that you can take what you can see, and press the tongue to the sun with all the instrument, so that you can see the object;
and if what is not open for you and has been pushed back into the throat, then you must make the patient vomit so that the meat is cooked in the stomach; By chance if the thing disturbs by vomiting.
Or if the patient swallows a sponge, or a piece of navel, or a root of lettuce, or a piece of dry bread; and he puts it in his throat and then swallows it; and when it comes to the place, if it disturbe, and then pull hard;
and if it does not come out well from what we have said, then take an instrument to hit according to this form:
And let the instrument be bent at the end so that it can enter more easily into the throat, and lift up the head; and beware that you do not touch the epiglottis, that it does not come to him, and do not push the bone inside;
and move the patient so that he can breathe, so that the thing does not disturb him; if the bottle is swallowed, or he draws it out with all the instrument evenly, as long as it is strong.
of the fluid from the throat
No medicine is more important than the one I have mentioned in the division, by the cure of medicines; And when that does not benefit, then look at the patient's throat in the sunlight, so you can press the tongue to the instrument I have told you about.
And if you see the fluid, if you draw it out with a small hook or tiny claws that are worth nothing.
And if this does not work, then take a knife, and put it in the throat of the patient, then blow on or cut with the blade, and do this often. And if the patient is coughing up water every day.
then take a full glass of cold water, open the mouth, and let it fall into the throat, and move it from side to side often with his hand; And if soon after swallowing the water feels cold, then turn around quickly.
And if she does not sneeze as we have said, then make the patient sniff smoke with the instrument I mentioned in the fumes of the wine;
do this many times, for it will make her sneeze without a runny nose.
And the way of smoking if you squeeze a pot where it has charcoal visible, and let the pot be covered with a coverlet pierced in the middle, and in that perforation is the head of the instrument.
Then pour in your smoking, and let the patient put the head of the cane in his mouth, and close his mouth so that the smoke does not go out, but comes to the blood;
and the blood will come now, and if it does not come, then recommence the smoking with many times;
and suffer the patient to have thirst, and drink salt things and bitter, and do not drink water;
and then it is the duty of healing that he is done by this governance.
And the form of the instrument to see how it treats the blood, yes, when you can see it, similar to twisted hooks so that they can enter the throat; and give a look to the beak of care, and I had harshness of lime, so that whoever takes it, she cannot let go;
The shape of the mouth of an abscess is, according to what the memory comes after one and another in this book, and are diverse in piercing and cutting;
and this is in two ways, that one is in its own shape, and of what he holds moisture.
And the second way is for the joints where they are twisted.
For the abscess at the top is different from that at the base, and the abscess at the twisted part is different from that which comes in joints, and each has its judgment in the work.
And if to abscesses it does not have to pierce, as long as the bow is dead according to its achievement;
and if of such that it comes to pierce when it is cut, and do not die according to its achievement, as an abscess which are delicate joints.
For when abscesses come in delicate joints, and one lets them remain pus-filled inside, by chance if the ligaments and nerves of the joint are corrupted, this is the cause of contraction in that limb.
Or the abscess is a delicate limb, and if you delay the piercing as long as it is dead, it will harm the principal limb;
If he is delved down to the foundation, if it is perceived that it is dead;
and it is not necessary that you pierce the abscess cruelly after having accomplished the digestion, so that the one who is delved down to the foundation does not putrefy completely and remains within, and comes out with a fistula; and cannot heal in great terms.
And it is necessary that you know the hour of piercing the abscess which is dead according to the accomplishment, and it is when the pain is calm, and the departure of the fever, and the decrease of the pain and rubor, and the tension and the keenness of the head of the abscess, and the other signs;
and it is necessary that you make sit the piercing or more dependent place of the abscess, and where it opens much;
and the piercing of the long pipe of the heart, and the abscesses are in the hands or feet, or in joints and nerves and in all even where there is no pleurisy. In those who bleed, according to that member.
And when the abscess is in the flesh, if it pricks let the piercing be until it is confirmed in complete digestion, as we have said.
For if you pierce ahead of this, if you stretch the pipe of its blood, and it is plain of mud of waste; and perhaps the lips become hardened and the depth of it becomes deep.
And if to any abscess that are pierced according to the width of the body, according to which the members have need.
And it is necessary that you bring small abscesses, small holes; and in great abscesses, great holes, and many cuts according to the appearance of the size of the abscess;
and if at such abscesses it is necessary to cut the kur and cover; when it has become soft as cloth, and is worn out, if you make it like you make boils:
and if they are of those that are split into three angles, and if they are of those that one also copes with as the skin of the myrtle, like abscesses of arms.
and if they are of those for which one makes a ring size, and other sizes and similar copes.
Those who do not have a head, like a superficial abscess, you must pierce it clearly;
and it is necessary when the abscess is large, and it has a large boil, and you pierce it, if you do not extract all of the boil at once, but extract a part of it; then stop the abscess just until the next day, then extract nothing else primarily; do this again and again with great effort, until all the boil has come out;
usually the disease is of little virtue, or a woman bearing, or small children, or old honourable people. Those who do not have a head, like an abscess on the skin, it is necessary that you pierce it clearly; and it is necessary when the abscess is large, and has a great boil, and you pierce it, if you do not draw all the boil at once, but draw some part of it; then stop the abscess until the next day, then draw no more; do this many times in succession, as the boil comes out completely; but if the patient is of feeble virtue, or a woman bearing, or small children, or old men decayed.
Begin therefore this treatment with great caution, and when you have pricked your abscess, if the wound is small, wash it. and if it is a long, straight scar, if you apply linen or old cotton. and if it is a large abscess and there are many ruptures, you must pierce each one with a tent so that they touch each other.
and if you have torn a part of the skin with the abscess, and you have wrapped it with a cloth, you must fill it with dry cotton or straw of linen without moisture, and bind it firmly for three days.
Then apply the ointment, and treat with medicine until it is healed.
And if there is a strong fever that arises from the opening, then administer cold water and do it quickly, and wet the cloth, and place it on the opening many times.
And if the blood loss persists, apply treatment and the powders I have mentioned in this book, and if it is a long scar or an abscess that is very painful, you must put linen and towels soaked in wine and oil on them.
and if it is in this state, and his legs are fleshy, it is necessary that you dip the blankets in water and oil, or in wine and oil until the third day, as we have said;
and then wash the abscess and dry it and heal it, as it should be, until it is healthy.
And this it is necessary that he recognizes completely in the treatment of abscesses:
Or you have said to me how one must go before in the treatment of abscesses, and see the paste.
Or treat small sores, and they are handled by us so that they are in webs, also as the neck of a goose, and there are many resemblances.
There is some that is fat and such where there is also moisture as feathers;
and if it is this kind which is hard and bony at the cutting, and there is no doubt that his artery does not make opposition.
And the work of the waist so that you test all the instrument called "intramuscular", from which the form comes after, what it contains.
For if it contains moisture, and it goes up into the long leg.
And when moisture is empty, if it scalds nothing the hair which contains that moisture, for it returns immediately as one leaves nothing;
Then dip cotton in Egyptian ointment, if present; If not, use water and salve, and apply to the wound, and leave it until the next day; and those who have been pricked apply ointment to them, as they are delayed due to nit;
And then dip the cotton again on the second day, and the salve, as long as you know that the nit does not remain;
then apply ointment to the wound with what is suitable, until it is healthy.
And if the abscess does not go down quickly according to this form, then cut it; and throw your scabs, and scorch all parts of it, and put all your treatment outside the coat or where it is;
and if the artery is against you, do what I have told you afterwards.
And also make an incision on the abscess if it is painful, and with a scalpel and a curette as I have told you.
And cut on the abscess that is painful and moist, for it is lighter because there is little blood. And if some of these abscesses or head or there is no moisture, and those are the only ones that I saw or head of an old woman;
and I found the abscess as a large, sharp, and white stone, and could not break it; And if any of them had been cut, one would have done the same wound as a stone.
In other abscesses that come out of the head, they are those that come from the ears and roots of the hair, the opening should be completely closed so that the bow does not get stuck;
And treat them as it should be done.
Many times have they come with abscesses to the throat, and have removed the lumps, and have had boils, and never come to another place or sore, and are rotten, and infected one with another.
And each scab is properly inside its shell, like the nose and abscess on the head, as we have said; And the appearance of these scabs is varied.
And the appearance of these scabs is varied. There are some that contain moisture, and there are others that are malign and do not want to obey health.
in that which you see of good disposition in the chest, and appears similar to the color of the flesh, and is mute from each part and is not attached to the neck neither to the artery nor to the duct, and is not deeply rooted.
if it is necessary that you chop it from above, and peel each part, and the two lips of the mouth are turned up to one side, if you need it, as we have said in the treatment of the chest with scars.
and cut it little by little, and be sure that you do not cover the nerve or the vein, nor is there any risk of cutting the tongue or causing a wound that the hands do not escape, and do not look too far ahead, so that you do not cover anything you are not supposed to.
And if you cut the vein or the artery, and it does not allow you to sew it, then put vinegar in the wound, or some powders that stop the blood, and draw the wound out. and leave it until the abscesses are calm, and the wound is softened, and begins to rot.
And when the blood has stopped flowing, if you return to your work, as long as you finish it off;
then inspect your little finger for any small bumps, if there are none, scrape and wash them.
And if there is great root of the scar, then it only comes to scrape that scar in its root, but let it hang by a strong thread, and let it fall without any harm;
then employ cotton wool dipped in olive oil, then clean it up.
And if you catch the whole scrofula, it is necessary that you join together the two lips of the wound and sew them up, so that there is no delay because of its great size. it is necessary that you listen to cover the root of it, and draw it out firmly, and sew it up as we have said.
it is necessary that you listen to cover the root of it, and draw it out firmly, and sew it up as we have said. These scars that have excess fluid, pierce where it is opening and dying;
and pierce in the same way as that which is said before, depending on, then I spread tendres with olive oil and similar things, so that it corrupts those who are delayed from corruption; and when the wound is well dressed, if the healing ointment comes into contact with it, as long as it is healthy.
The ancients spoke of the treatment of the throat; but I have never seen it done in our land, and it is written in their words.
For those who have laryngitis, it is necessary that the opening of the throat called "epiglotte" be removed; and do not use this, for all the veins and the blood of the patient are hot in his mouth or throat or in two mandibles.
When the patient is in the vein of the neck, it is necessary to cover the epiglottis so that the strangulation which comes from the obstruction does not occur.
Therefore, when we want to remove the epiglotte, we should make a cut of three circles or four small cuts from the edge, between the two circles or by the quantity of the cut in the cartilage; do not cut it in the cartilages.
and if their lips are not suitable for cutting the epiglottis, there is no char, and the vessels are long from it.
And if the master is afraid, then it is necessary that he extends the skin of the throat to the very end, and then cuts the meat as far as it comes to the cheekbone. and avoid the blood vessels, if you see nothing, and then apply the salve, as we have said.
and is proven by the cutting of the vein of the cheek which sprouted from the place that was broken, and by the loss of speech.
and leave the open wound as a piece.
And when the hour has passed by which one doubts about strangulation, bring together the two lips of the wound of the meat, and the whole shoulder under the cartilage;
and administer medicines which cause a growth of hair, as long as he is healthy.
Albucasis says: 'Do not make this cut until the throat is completely blocked, and the patient is judged to be dying, and the failure causes him to lose his voice.' Then wrap the epiglottis around it so that the patient cannot move it, and he breathes through the wound, and thus is guarded from death;
and to command the elder to leave the wound open as long as the disease is gone, and it has passed in three days or four. And then he commanded to stitch up the wound and heal, until it was healed;
and I will tell you what I saw. I saw a damsel take a knife and put it in her throat, and she cut through the chisel of the pommel;
and I was called to heal her, and I found her as if dead.
I discovered the wound, and found the blood that had issued from it, and I knew well that she had not cut a vein or an artery; the blood came forth from the mouth because of the wound.
I hurried, sewed the wound, and healed it until it was well;
and didn't come to the damsel except she was red in color, and returned after her condition;
for I fear that in cutting off the epiglottis there will be no pain.
the abscesses are called "gastric hernias", and there is a large abscess in the color of a mustard seed, and it is very common in women;
and is according to two ways: natural, and accidental;
where nature has no fault.
And the accidental one is according to two ways, of which one seems like fat to us, and the other way seems like an abscess that comes from our arteries; and he has fear, and it is not good to operate on fire without first making sure of the small one, and testing and searching all the instruments; If you know how to fix it like I don't know how, and can't do anything at all, if the cup, as we use cups, and treat him with everything he needs, if there is any left. And look well after it, and treat it properly, so that it is completely cured.
There are many ways of doing this, all of which I will describe.
And it is necessary that I say all the differences there are between us and dislocation.
I say that dislocation is hot and fiery, as long as the fever has passed and the blistering is done; Then the fever and the heat subside.
With the cup there is no heat or fever or pain, and it heals itself, which is its own sac, and it begins as a scar, and becomes bigger;
and according to two appearances, either grass, or moist, and much of a color are so as I said in the division.
When you come to treat our condition, you must first test and inquire about all the instruments that are called "entromissoire", according to their form or the paste that follows.
And the way of testing the abscesses is that you press out or more moist liquid than you find in the abscess, and twist your thumbs little by little until you feel that the instrument has penetrated, then stop according to the size of the abscess;
then remove the instrument, and take care not to hurt yourself.
if it runs quickly with moisture, which color it has, then do the same as I said for the other abscesses;
and if after the instrument no moisture comes out, know that it is fat, so do it in a cross shape and take it with tweezers, and scrape it slightly from each side and save the cot or where it lies;
and if you cannot draw it out whole, then draw it out piece by piece so that nothing stays behind.
For if anything remains, it will return to us many times;
and if there is a little bit of it, and it does not cause you pain, then employ some corrosive water to extract the wound, and put something soothing on it, and give it other treatments until it heals;
and if it is large, cut off the two corners of the wound, and treat what causes it to hurt;
and if the vein is opposite or another way, then hurry and employ the place of vitriolic broich, and let it stand for two or three days until the wound festers, and rest the blister in the blood; then return to copper what has been left behind by the blood.
See here the forms of the intruding instruments, and they are of three manners: large and mean and small;
and there are three quarters that are called 'albaret', and one that is called 'breb', and they are of three manners: large, mean, and small, so as to encircle the abscesses of fistula;
and they are also like the needles used to count sorceles, and they are of yellow brass, or iron, or silver, and those that are made of yellow brass are more proven to sound black, so as to encircle the corbiculae of fistula;
and they are of three manners: large, mean, and small, according to the quantity of the width of the apertures.
The forms of the hooks are of many appearances, as you will see here:
and if one has three corbecs of three ways;
and if one has three corbecs, and are also of three ways;
and if one has two corbecs, and once of a corbec, and are of three ways;
and all of these are necessary in their places.
The head of these should be sharp, and of some I have who only cut from one side, so that when you skin them, you can cut the vein or the nerve;
and of these introducers are the alems replied in many, so that the patient does not lose them at the opening of the abscesses;
and there are three ways: large, small, and medium, as you see;
and don't use any but if in its place like legs, arms, mammary glands, and shoulders, and similar places;
and never make any other instrument small, resembling scurf of blisters, according to this form, so that one does not burn with fire: The chief of these cuts are sharp, and some do not cut more than one side, from which we peel the skin so that we do not touch the vein or nerve; and these intrusions are placed in many ways, so that the patient does not lose them when opening the abscesses; and they are of three kinds: large, small, and middle, as you see; and we use them only in the leathery part, as legs, arms, mammary glands, and arms, and similar things; and never do we make another instrument small, resembling blades, according to this form, so that we stop the blood:
The breasts of some men become inflamed when they are infected and appear like the breasts of women.
and remain ugly and swollen, and those who must treat them, if it is appropriate according to this form of that line: b. g.: then scratch the fat, and apply medicine to the wound by wrapping it, then join the two lips of the wound with sutures, and treat it until it is healed;
and if his breast falls down, and becomes soft because of its size like a woman's, if it is made into two ridges on top, by two resembling clefts: from which one is held by the other at the end of one and the other, so that the greater line contains the smaller according to this form, from this line. b . g .; then peel off the skin that is between the two lips, and remove the fat, and apply what we have said about suturing and powders, and whatever is necessary in the treatment, until it is healed;
and if it is not healed, or the incision is not completely made, so that the patient does not rest, or because of the evacuation of blood, then you must fill the wound with wet cotton impregnated with an astringent; and leave it until the remaining skin and fat has dried up, then treat it until it is healed.
The pustules that come from the glutes are handled with care or they have ribs, and if there is only one that contains moisture.
Those that contain moisture should be cut according to this shape, from line b to line g: And when all of the bow that is in the pustule is empty, then employ cotton wool, and leave it there for another day, then remove all the cotton, and treat with ointment as soon as it is healthy:
And if the pustule is like a wart, then cut it as we have said in cutting warts, and if there is bow in the wound, then apply fire cautery as we have described before.
When the artery is torn and the skin that is above it is tightened, then many abscesses come, and also they go to the escaped vein and abscess;
and if the incision is deep as much as for the artery, if it is long the abscess completely. and when you feel it on both sides, if you feel extraction.
and when it is for the vein, if it is to be cut apart.
and it is foolishness to cover this abscess, and most of all when it is dislocated in the armpit and in the throat and in other places, and there are many. Therefore it is convenient to remove the cure of iron, and that which is at the top also has to be removed, and in that which is swollen with an artery, do so from above the skin.
then operate the waist like one person, and separate the artery from the threads well, until it is uncovered;
then stick in one needle, and make it pierce up to the other side, and extract the artery with a double thread according to what I have taught you in the extraction of the two arteries which are in the temples;
and then point to the place that is between the two ties of an intromitter as long as there is no tie there, and loosen the aphistma.
then administer the cure for a bowel rupture as long as the link remains intact; and then treat with oil coming from the wound as long as it is healthy;
and if the aphistma is the size of a vein, then you should take oil from your hand that you can get to the aphistma on all the skin, then remove the needle from its place where you hold it in your hand, and let it pierce, and it has two threads, so that you pull it from the other side; then tighten the aphistma, as I told you, or the link of one of the two parts to the other with two threads;
and if you doubt that the thread does not come out, then he will take another needle at all the threads from the incision of the first needle, and pull out the threads in four places;
Then cut the abscess as much as the excess is released, then cut the excess with the curette and leave what is attached;
Then wrap him in a damp cloth soaked in wine and oil, then apply tent remedies and spices as long as he is healthy.
as they come out in the artery and in the vein, they come out in the kidneys when they are wounded, or through too much toil, and similar things.
And if it happens more often with the shoulder joints and two legs or at all where there are joints, and this is a grieve abscess, and its color seems to be the color of the flesh, and many people are in pain;
And when they are restrained so that the patient feels pain, and is not completely healed yet, but let the cure continue;
and does not move well in any way, and does not go forward or backward, nor up nor down, and what is in joints should not be cut with iron: in case there is a contraction; and if it is at the head or at the forehead, make the skin with the sponge.
and if it is at the head or at the forehead, make the skin with the sponge. If the abscess is small, and if he has a pimple, and copes it in its root;
and if it is large, if the sore has hair, and skin it, then bone it and sew the wound up, and let it heal until it is well.
No time has come when there is a wart in the belly or nowhere else, and it is a disease that is called "fungus" by appearance, and its root is fine, and its head is large;
and of little and great moisture;
and I saw two homes where there were two warts that looked more like fungi than anything else, and there was no difference, they were white, and had a small root, and were split open, and ran with moisture.
I measured them and found one to weigh 18 ounces, and the other 6 Z. (possibly a unit of measure for weight), and the incisions so that you notice that the patient is moist, and the color of the arteriole is pale and moist and has a fine root; If it is large with a wide spatula, and let the fire cautery be in your presence.
If it is large with a wide spatula, and let the fire cautery be in your presence. For when the tail comes out with great pain, and it leaves you, then hasten to cauterize;
And if you see the patient in pain and frightened by the iron incision, then take a piece of string well made, and bind the arteriole as we have said, and let it be for two days;
and then restrain it, and do not cease to remove the string from the arteriole as long as it copes with the string, and move it a little by its own motion;
and if the roots are large, so be afraid of the coppers at once for the belly, but you put them well coppers half, then cautery that it does not come back;
then heal the wound, and keep so you do not coppers the tangle which is of fuchs color and poor scent and milk regart.
For this is an abscess to which I will come in the treatment of the ulcer hereafter.
When the breast is inflamed If the appearance of the boil comes by cautery of wound or cut of syphi, and is on the belly and there are some of the boils, as it happened in other ruptures, or of blood which cuts from veins or arteries according to what is before, or of windiness;
and if it is by the rupture of the syphi and by the issue of the boil, if the color of the abscess seems like the color of the flesh, and it is a light thing without pain, and opening of different issues. And if it is by the outlet of the intestine, then there are many things, and when one presses it with his two hands, so that he repents, and then returns, and perhaps he is caught, and grows larger at the entrance to the bath and for great work.
And if it is because of moisture, it is a light thing, and open well when you press it to your hand, do not constrain it.
and if it is because of blood, let it open by these signs, the thick and hard abscess, and let it be placed according to a quantity; and if it is because of windiness, if it is hot at the touch, and the opening if it is that you look at its appearance is for the blood of the artery, or of the vein, or windiness.
and if it is because of windiness, if it is hot at the touch, and the opening if it is that you look at its appearance is for the blood of the artery, or of the vein, or windiness. If it is appropriate that you leave the healing. For there is doubt and fear, as I have told you, or chapister apomes, for the artery and for the vein.
And if its appearance is for the intestine or loins, then it is necessary that you command the patient to tie his loins, and be stretched out straight, and then sign with your hand all around the loins; then command him to walk slowly between your hands, then go into the place that you have signed all around the loins, then extend the half of the abscess from above to all the large nail; and then tie the foot with a strong thread or a strong silk rope tightly, and let us bind it up.
then operate on half of the appendix extending on the thread, and with your index finger press the intestine; if you find it stuck to the thread, then loosen it, and press the intestine towards the inside of the abdomen;
and if you find the boil, take it with a blade, and cut off the surplus;
and if the artery or vein is against it, or if you have pricked it deeply, then go back to your work and take two needles, and thread them with two strong threads, and tie them up tightly where you made the hole that you made pierce;
then stretch the appendix in four places on the needles, and if you see it, then remove the needles, and leave it there until it is rotten, and let the dead flesh drop off; Here is the translation of the first sentence:
Here is the translation of the first sentence: And extract the blood where you see moisture, then treat the joint of what it touches, and weld the joint.
Dou Chancre We have spoken about the appearance of leprosy, and how one should act with medicine, and how one should avoid curing with iron.
and let the leper go in the marris, and great care in the cure, and tell the old that when leprosy is in a limb or breast as leprosy is in meat, and in soup, and in similar foods, and it must all be cut off when it is in trouble;
no one ever heals before me.
And the shoulder, when it is in a limb where it can be cut off, as we have said, is that you do not purge any evil of black bile;
and then make him better if he has a manifest fullness, and then, made the patient comfortable to do the work;
then put on them your scabs or sores, and the hair from all sides, and the bone from all sides without leaving anything;
and let the blood flow freely, and compress the place well with your hand or with anything, and if the blood stops flowing, cauterize it until the skin is burned; then heal him with other medicines as long as he is healthy.
of droopsie We have said in the division the appearances of dropsy, and in what way the gathering of the water is made, and the signs of each appearance, and the cure that is made by medicines, and that which is cured by iron:
and one must not touch iron in these two cases: this is to say, tympany and hypothermia, for it is a deadly thing;
so then when you treat this case of edema which is called "ecolthes" with medicines, and the cure does not benefit, if the patient is weak, or if he has another disease besides edema, such as flatulence and similar things; if one does not touch iron, for there is doubt;
and if you see the patient of great vigor, and he has no other disease besides edema alone, and he is not too old or too young, then one must act thus: lay the patient down straight on your hands, and the assistant presses the abdomen at the lower part of the belly, then take the spatulum with thorns according to this shape: and be cut in two parts. a point, and wherever it is not so deep that it might enter up to the intestine when it is put in, and not be able to be hurt.
then see if there is dropsey [a medical condition where excess fluid collects in the abdomen] there above the intestines: if it is convenient that you cut them up from the back of the neck three fingers wide straight down on the breastbone; and if dropsey [a medical condition where excess fluid collects in the abdomen] is there because of a liver disease, then your cut should be on the left side of the back three fingers wide straight down on the breastbone;
and if it is because of the wind, then it should be on the right side, and it is not convenient that the patient lie on his back on the cut so that the excesses do not run to the weak place;
then pierce all the skin with the instrument, and stretch it out, and hold your hand at the back of the neck from the skin to the spine as much as the length of an index finger or more;
Then pierce the lozange until the spit comes out of its hole, and this is the place of the water, then the more it is hard, and it bottles this instrument from which thus is the form: It is like an elegant silver spike, and it is made of bronze or lightweight iron, and in its upper portion there is a small opening; and where it is bent on one side, there is an opening; and two on the other side, and one on the other;
and the head is cut off like a feather, and this is the shape of the incision that the scribes cut the feather with:
at the top of the instrument, so that when this instrument comes into contact with water, it drops immediately onto the instrument;
then make it half or a third full, because if you fill it more than that at the time, perhaps the patient will die from the loss of his spirit by the removal of his weapon, or he will faint, or come close to death;
but according to the quantity of its virtue, and according to what the dispositions of the virtue of the disease and its hair mean;
then train the instrument and hold back the water, and it is held now by the curb that stops the hole that is above the wound, of which I have spoken, so that you pierce according to this manner;
then begin again with the instrument the next day, if you see the patient suffering from that, and train a small quantity of water;
do not do this again for one day, and guard against making too much of it as long as there is no delay but a little water.
And if you doubt about the patient, and you leave a little water for him, if his cure is in the earth or in the sand hot, and by sweating or bathing and in the sun, and if he gets tanned from drinking; and the treatment of desiccative medicines until he is well, and cauterizes on the stomach and on the liver and on the spleen after extraction of the water, as I said before.
No child is born with an imperforate penis, or if it is perforate, it is small, or it is not in its place.
If it is necessary that it should be perforate at all, very subtle skin should be used according to this form:
then put on him a thin cloth of linen, and tie it and hold it like this for III days or IV and when it begins to urinate, so take off the cloth, and let him urinate, and then put it back on;
and by chance do not understand at all, because the urine that comes out strongly does not leave the cloth closed.
The hole of the piercing is opened with medicine made from clove oil, as we have said, if it widens.
Those who do not have the pertus in their proper place are blistered, because no one is born who has the pertus at the top of the penis, so that he cannot urinate before he raises his penis up; and they cannot get pregnant because the material does not come out until it reaches the navel, and this is a bad disease.
And the way of the opening is that the patient lies down on his back, then the head of the penis and the cup are like the size of a quill, so that the piercing comes in the middle, as it should.
And be careful of the loss of blood that often comes, and if it happens, let the wound be staunched, and heal the wound until it is healthy.
of the wart Often there comes an ugly scar on the penis, and it is a hideous sight;
and of evil and good;
if you squeeze them with subtle strength, and wrap them and clean them all up, then put cotton wet with Egyptian ointment in a bandage; then heal the wound with Diafinicon until it is healthy.
If the wart is malignant, of a pale color and dripping, you must apply fire cautery.
When you have wrapped it up, and the scar is in the middle of the penis, and part of it is inside the skin and part outside, then remove the wrap that is inside first; and when he is solid, if the doctor goes away.
For when you join it together, if not firmly secured, the joint of the penis may be pierced, and blackness and corruption comes to its penis and scrotum;
if it is necessary to cut off all that is black and corrupted, then bind on the plaster of honey and flour which is made from pomegranate skin and seeds, then cure with other remedies until it is healed;
And if blood flows from the injury, then apply the lunar cautery according to this form:
The cures should be combined in two ways: For blood evaporation, and for corruption:
and if the joint of the penis is corrupted and withdrawn, you must bind or lead the penis with a cord, and let the patient urinate;
and when the hair has grown out at the tip of the penis that has not yet been circumcised, or where there is an abscess or an ulcer, it is necessary that you scrape with a scraper instrument as long as the bonds are loosened, and the joint of the penis is freed from all sides;
and if it is a painful thing to devise this, then you must scrape it with the spetumile of the root of the penis and the scrotum.
then cut deeply between them, and put a fine linen cloth wet in cold water on it immediately, so that it does not burn quickly.
circumcision is not a dislocation of continuance if as other wounds; however when we perform this operation of our own will, and especially on children, it is necessary that we do the best work and the lightest work for salvation.
I say that the ancient ones did not speak of circumcision for their children, because they do not use it in their law, and we have it only because we have acquired it by experience.
For I have heard the greatest part of the masters and the most honorable who performed circumcision around the balls, and with force, and all a new thing;
If it is done with two threads, and by chance one of them breaks, then the skin may hang down and delay the work. Or the recovery of the cup, and it is doubled pain, and to the purification which is there from the hole is not assured the point of the member.
and to the purification of the nail by accident escapes the wound, and corrects the work, and many times it comes up that there is no need for purification and I want it.
Of the mouthwashing that is made so well on all the body of man I have found the goodness of the experiment, for the forces cut as well above as below.
For when you press your hand, if you cut it evenly in L all parts stretch; but that the string be well tighten around the leather;
and the manner of the first work is that you make the child think, if he hears, that you do not tie the string too tightly around the stick, and then you make it rest in all ways that you can;
then make it lie straight between your hands, and resound the beats between your hands or shut your fingers so that the child does not see them, nor any of the tools;
and dip your hand to the root and blow on it, and tie it up high as long as the head of the root is; Then wash it well with dirt that has gathered there, then tie the joint with a double thread, then tie it to the other one;
Then wash it well with dirt that has gathered there, then tie the joint with a double thread, then tie it to the other one; and hold it by the second thread to the thumb and to the index finger, and place between the two threads, then remove the cautery from above carefully and tie the head of the root; then let the blood flow little by little, because it is the bleeding; and put powder on and on the powder I wrap with a piece of cooked egg yolk dried with rose water, mixed with good oil and fresh herbs, and let it sit for another day, and the healer treats it as long as he is well;
The form of the cure for this disease is as follows:
The two bones should be soft and rounded, and the joints equal in length to each other.
the mistake in the cure if it is when the curative fluid escapes from the incision;
then you must extend it to your fingernail so that the incisions form an abscess;
and make it even, and if you cannot hold it with your nail, then hold it with pliers, and then make it even.
If it lasts three days, and that which is sore at the root of the penis is swollen, if he leaves it until the abscess has dried up, and then scalds it lightly;
if you can move it as you please, and keep away from the part near the root of the penis, it will not harm you.
Cure also the powder that causes bleeding, which we have spoken of in our treatise on powders, and if applied too vigorously, it may cause injury to the upper part.
Cure therefore, as we have said, as long as he is healthy.
retentence of urine
The holding back of urine is due to the extraction of stones from the urinary tract, or to frozen blood, or to bowels, or to a similar thing, which we have spoken of in our discussion of the division.
and if the urine is not eliminated, and you see a stopping due to a stone in the urinary bladder or at the base of the bladder, then it is necessary that the patient be made to bend on his knees. and let him put the stone on his back, and extend his abdomen from above his back, and restrain the patient so that he lies as flat as possible; and then forces the collar of the bladder to express itself on top of the stone, so that the urine is discharged;
and if it does not come, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then you must bring the instrument called "syringe" to
and be of fine light silver, like the feathers of an owl; and be of a long and half palm size, and be sharp at the tip.
And the manner of the flow of urine is that you take a double thread, and tie it to the tip with a piece of wool or cotton, and insert the tip into the syringe;
and fill the excess of the wool with oil or butter and linseed oil, and insert the tip into the syringe, then smear the syringe with oil or butter and linseed oil, and make the patient sit on a chair, and lubricate the bladder and the penis with moist oil of olive and water;
Then hold the syringe lightly to the penis, until it reaches the root of the penis, then twist the penis over the bowl.
Then pour the syringe up to the bladder, and let the urine go into the empty thing, and it is not done in this order unless you are taking it away where it goes.
Then tie the thread to all of the wool piece by piece, and let the urine follow the wool, then remove it, and make the urine run.
and start the syringe again until the bladder is empty, and keep the patient calm.
When the scorbut or blisters come to the bladder, and it is assembled together, and you see it distilling water and medicine, if done with all the instrument that is called "clepsydra", and this is its form:
It's over, and if at third attempt: On one side, and on the other, as you see;
And the hair is cut so that the medicine does not stick well to the penis, if there is moisture, and it is pushed when necessary.
and when you take your medicine out of the bladder, place the head of the cautery in the moisture, and treat with the treatment that follows.
if you pull the moisture onto the cautery, and then quickly twist the treatment that follows; if the moisture enters in, and comes to the bladder now, so that the patient will feel it;
and this is the form of the subtle enema, from which one enemas the bladder:
is made of silver or oak; and the shoulder is higher;
and is tied to the breast or the neck;
then take a sheep bladder and put the moisture that you saw to prepare the enema into it, then tie it between the two breasts with a good double thread of string, and heat the bladder's moisture on the fire;
Then pour the wine in the chamber of the scrotum, then draw your hand over the bladder to all the moisture coming out, until the patient feels that this moisture has come to the bladder.
and if you don't have a bladder, take a piece of parchment, and make a circle on it, and pierce it roundly. then pour in a strong liquid into these cavities, then assemble the circle as one assembles a tapestry, and put inside what you want of oil and moisture and water, and bind it in the instrument;
and do so as you did with the bladder, pressing your hand until the moisture comes to the bladder.
of stone
We have said in the division of the ways of stone, and the extraction together with medicines;
and I said the difference between the stone within the body as rain, and all the signs, and in which stone one must work with a chisel; and in the bladder, and in the penis.
and I will tell you openly and briefly.
I say that the stone that is lodged in the bladder often appears in children, and this is a sign that the fluid jumps from the bladder to the thin part of the kidney.
and I cut off, and rub the patient's penis, and then wipe it many times, and then anoint it; and at the root of these movements, the foundation;
and light is the healing of children until they are four years old, and great sorrow is in the elders, and at middle age is much trouble, to those who are between youth and old age;
and the treatment of these who have a large stone is lighter than that of these who have a small one.
And when we come to the cure, if it is necessary first to purify the patient with a hot bath, in order to draw out all the pus that is in the intestines. For he does not bother at any time to seek the stone.
Then take the patient by the feet and turn him upside down and move him so that the stone comes out of the bladder completely, and never cut from above;
and set him to sit between your hands unclothed, and his hands shall be on his thighs, so that the bladder hangs down all the way to his ankles;
then question and touch inside;
if you feel the stone in the space, then hurry now to cut it off from the bone.
And if it does not slip when touching all over, then wet your index finger with oil from your left hand, because the disease is incurable, or your right hand, because the disease is completed and accomplished. and pour it down into its foundation, and question the stone, and when you feel it with your thumb, so that the urine comes out at the neck of the bladder;
then press on it with your thumb, and pour it out at the place where you see it cut off.
And command the minister to press the bladder toward his hand, and command him to extend his right hand up over the testicles, and his left hand underneath the skin that is above the testicles in the part where circumcision is made;
and then I pour the sputum by pouring, so this is the form: And make a space between what is between the loins and the fundament, not in the middle but next to the left side of the womb;
and be right up against the stone, and your two be close to the fundament, and be the size of the stone, not too big;
so that the press if what is between the loins, so that it does not work;
and know that there is some stone where there are angles and edges: so it is cracked;
and if there is some that is soft, like a ball, and round, whose exit is light:
So then where it has angles and edges, make the size bigger;
and if it does not jump, then you must extract it with pliers that are like a file on the head, so that the stone does not escape; or you put a small, sharp instrument into the ear;
and if you cannot do this thus, then let it be broken with a sharp instrument and if it is corroded, then extract it with vinegar;
and if there is more than one stone, then first remove the largest one from the bladder neck, then cut it off, and the small ones after, if there are any more.
If the stone is large, it should be made into a larger wound. For two things happen to the patient: either he dies, or his urine comes out again because the head cannot close properly;
but nevertheless you must try to extract it, or to break it with pliers, piece by piece;
and when you have finished your work, employ the ointment of cinnamon and aloe and dragon's blood, and bind it, and put on top of it a damp cloth dipped in oil and wine, or in oil and rosewater and cold water, to calm the abscess. then wash the patient's neck, and do not remove the ligature until the third day.
And when you remove it, if the oil and water are very well separated, then the cure of the wound with astringent and balmy ointments until it is healed.
And if hot abscesses come into the wound and putrefactions of blood in the bladder, and hold back the urine, which is conveyed in some way so that it does not flow with the urine: then put some dry salt in the wound, and extract the blood, for if it remains, it will corrode the bladder and spill it out.
then raise the wound with water and sand and earth, and aid it in all ways that you can, until it is healthy;
and it is necessary that all the hours that you cure him, you bind his two legs, and gather the medicines on the place.
If the stone is small, and he is taken out of the bladder with a stick and pushed in, and his urine cannot come out; if the cure for this, that I have said above, that you cut it many times, is not sufficient to cure him, then you excuse the cutting because of this cure. I have proven this.
Take iron, forge it according to this form, and make it into three angulated pieces of iron rod.
then take a thread and bind it around the root of the bladder so that it cannot come out;
then pour the urine into the bladder lightly, until it comes out to the stone; and return the blade to your hand in the bladder little by little, until you can pierce the stone from another side;
if the urine comes out soon, then press your hand on him who is held back by the stone in his bladder. If it is immediately bruised, and jumped with urine, and is cursed the patient;
And if you cannot do this for any reason that harms it, then I will file the stone and the other above, then cut the verge between the two lines, then extract it firmly, and clean the frozen blood which is in the wound; and treat it until it is healthy.
of the stone of women
It happened that a stone was stuck in the bladder of a woman, and if it ever happened, this is a painful cure, and is attacked by three things:
one is that per adventure the woman is a virgin;
and the second is that we cannot find a woman who is able to disclose it to the mirages, even if she is married.
And the third way is that per adventure we cannot find a woman who is skilled in this art of hands;
and the fourth method is that the stone of the woman is more perfectly than the stone of the man, because it requires a deeper incision and there is great fear. And if this is necessary, you should call on a woman who knows well, and do not pull her hair, and if you do not pull her hair, do not ask for her to cut it;
and the present a good ballade in the life of women, or a woman who knows part of the art, and commands her to do that which you command with respect to the extraction of the stone; and look well whether this woman is a virgin;
and look well whether this woman is a virgin; then it is necessary to put his finger or foundation and seek the stone;
and if she pulls it out, she should hold her finger or hand firmly, and recommend to her that she puts her right hand on the bladder with her left hand.
If she pees, then it is necessary that she move it from the bladder's entry to the anus, as far as it comes to the root of the thigh.
then cut into the bone in the root of the thigh against the middle where it is moved apart, and feel the bone in that part; and do not move her back up the bone or anus, and make the cut first small;
and do not move her back up the bone or anus, and make the cut first small; then pour the rain into the pelvis, if you feel the bone so close to the wound as much as the bone can come out, and know that there are many kinds of bones:
That is to say, small and large ones, sharp and smooth, long and round, and which have rained.
If you know the appearance [of the stone], then you will know the outcome.
And if he does not come out, then put it in vinegar, and keep it for an hour as long as the stone is being strained;
and return to your work, as long as the stone is far away, and have the tools that I told you about for the extraction of the stone to help you in your work;
and if it goes out from you, and it is the artery that has been cut, then put the powder on the place and extract it little by little and by degrees, and do not repeat this, and leave the stone and do not draw it out, except by accident, so that the patient does not die; and then heal the wound.
And when the heat of the fire is gone from the wound, and the blood stands, if it returns to your work, as long as the stone is far away.
The water that is used for washing is nothing but a mixture of moisture or white wine, which helps to release the joints, which are contained in the egg;
and is called "syfac", and is not properly in the shell of the egg, if one thinks that it is another egg; and this is the leather of the loins between the white syph that we have said;
if it does not come out. And the generation of this Ramie is so weak that it comes from the testicles, and this substance spreads.
And if this comes out with the percussion on the loins, and this moisture happens to many colors: or is it declining to yellow, or is it without red, black, or white water, and this happens more;
and these are the signs of conio-isthenic assemblage, for if it is or white that we have said, if it is the reons of an aposteme, I poc long as much as the figure of an O that does not open the loins, because it has moisture all around.
And if there is moisture in the proper towel, then it is the reons of an aposteme with a part of the uve, and for this reason one thinks that it is another uve;
and if moisture is between the skin of the testicles and the white muscle, then he feels warm.
So that when you know the color of the moisture, try on all the lower part of it, since its shape is as follows. According to this, and what comes after the insertive quarter, judge of what is within.
And when we treat them with fire, so that the patient becomes well according to his power and the replenishment of his body;
then make him lie on his back on something a little high, and put over him many blankets;
then make him sit on his left side, and instruct the assistant that he sits on his right side, and extend the stick to one of the two ribs at the bottom of the testicles;
then take the spatula, and peel off the skin of the testicles among the long hair down to its root, and make your cut completely straight while removing the skin of the testicles little by little, according to his power;
Then pierce the hole of water at a great height and drain all the water, and then put your fingers in it, and lift up the water.
and do not touch the curve of the finger, but let the water fall alone. Take it all or piece by piece separately from him subtly, so that if you do not take it well washed, the water will come back.
And if the egg was stolen from your work, if you put it back in its place when you have finished the work of the water;
Then join the two fingers of the hand together at a joint, and bandage it up as you would do with other wounds until it is well.
And if you find the egg corrupted by some disease, then it is necessary that you hang the vessels that are suspended, in doubt of the decay of blood.
And then take hold of the coccyx with all the suspender, and extract the uvula, and clean it as we have said.
And if it is assembled in two parts together, knowing that these are its branches; if you do the other part likewise as you did the first one, then wash the blood away, and put in the wound another wet thing made of oil;
if you do the other part likewise as you did the first one, then wash the blood away, and put in the wound another wet thing made of oil; and put away another woolen cloth wet in wine and oil, and put it on both coccyxes, and cover with doubled sheets, and tie it all together according to this form:
Then take two sheets, and fill them with wool according to this form and join them together by stitching in the throat of the breeches, and one of the heads should rest on the foundation up to the back, and the other at the part of the hand;
and the other two on the two arms, and all is gathered up in the loop of the breastplate;
and never is medicine this fire cautery in place of iron size, and it is that you squeeze the cautery with a sharp tool, and scrape the skin of the feet, and is heated as we said, so that the white plague that contains the water is uncovered;
if you take the cautery according to this form, and pierce it with a sharp tool, and burn it with this fine cautery:
and coat it in all ways that you can, until you scrub everything;
and keep the fire from touching the egg;
and knows that this work is more safe; and maintains the prevention of blood loss, and keeps the work of ironing;
and if there is nothing that contradicts it, or an abscess of blood or another thing, then treat what contradicts you, according to what the one who is in front says.
And if the patient is afraid and does not want to wait for this work because of its horror, then provide a perforation, as I told you, and it is that when you are certain by the signs that we have said that the ramose water is there, then place the patient on a raised seat; then pierce the abscess in the part of the back to all the broad spine, and put the perforation from long the neck;
and make the opening wide so that all the water runs out quickly;
then put cotton in the place, and bandage it, and leave to run the remaining water, then treat as the wound is healed;
and if the white cloth does not allow the water to come out of the wound's mouth, it is necessary that you put there a feather or the instrument with which one treats the water of the dropsical, from which the form is as described above;
and open the wound wide, and know that the water returns, and is gathered after six months or so, and when it is gathered as before, and in this way the patient will get better day by day.
Know that in the section of this essay there are many different arrangements, so it seems to me that it is better to leave it.
and I will tell you the work and appearances of an abscess.
I say then that many abscesses come from the belly, and most often from the bowels; and it is by chance.
This is known by bitter and water that is spread into the bowels, or from impact;
and the color of the abscess according to the color of the bone; and do not prick at the pain, and the abscess is painful;
and perhaps an abscess is painful and piercing, and of pus, and never comes out of a vein, or swells up from a vein.
When it is out of a vein, if it is hot by the position of the abscess, when you press it with your fingers; and it does not suffice that you touch it.
What is done by swelling up from a vein is known by its position in relation to the touch with the fingers, and one can do well in making the incision on this appearance, and on the other characters; and that you take care of the tips of the fingers, then the pain is in the top, and the tremor of the white part is clear, and deliver the suspension from all sides of the finger;
If the egg is already well cooked with these new charred pieces, then it is necessary that you take the egg and break it.
And if it is caught in the sieve, or in any of the vessels that are inside, then it is necessary that you release all those that are held, and break them up well.
If the dislocation is at the back of the shoulder, you must reset the entire joint and remove the cause, as we have already described.
And when your wounds are healed, then bandage the wound with wet wool in oil and wine, and then treat it with other treatments until it is healthy.
This is an abscess surrounded by a covering that looks like a bug, with the softening of the tissues, and the patient groans painfully when it moves.
And the treatment for this disease is very similar to what we have mentioned above, and we will tell you everything about the work of it, according to what the old one did.
It is necessary that you make the patient sit on a soft seat, and then pour the water from the tissues down his throat with both hands, all the way to the vessel that is closest to the penis, and wash it well, and spread it out smoothly.
And cut with the spetum, a sharp instrument, through the thick part of the veins, until they are completely exposed, and then peel off each piece, as we have said in the extraction of the arteries that are in the temples.
And then put an awl with two threads and tie it to the first loop where the vein has come together, and quickly tie it to the other end. Then cut them in the middle correctly, according to the length of the body, and remove the corrupted moisture.
Then treat the wound as you would with abow, so that no vessel bleeds from one of its ends;
For by this nothing comes, and all the vessels come together, so that you can pull the ends of all the vessels; so that the blood does not run out from the incision of the vessels and dry up and cannot be helped.
The symptoms of this disease are either due to the sectioin that occurs or the extension on the belly in the part of the kidneys, because the intestines descend from that wound into one of the caissons.
and this cut is either due to the sectioin or the extension of it, and these two ways come from similar causes:
or from impact, or from jumping, or from yelling, or from pain caused by something raised, and similar things;
and the signs when it is due to the extension from the cut, if it is little and little, slowly and slowly, and does not suddenly come; and the abscess is even until nearly at its top, so that the cut does not press on the intestine.
And the signs are when it is due to a cut of the syphyl, that sudden pain appears, and the appendages appear different, as if they were going out of the skin, and this is due to the exit of the intestines and the body away from the syphyl.
And never let the intestines twist around the colon; otherwise it will be held back and cause great pain to the patient, especially when pressed.
In these treatments of iron to remove fear, so that it must be avoided.
And the manner of the opening so that you command the patient to keep the intestine in his hand inside the wound, if he can withdraw it; And then put yourself on his neck between your hands, and loosen the ties.
Then take off the coat from above, and cut off all the skin of the back longwise. Then place it face down on the table and cut open the skin from the waist down according to what you need to open the wound, and be careful not to hurt him.
Then peel off the skin from the back, making sure that the raw flesh is completely exposed and dry on all sides;
Then place your index finger in the space between the skin and the raw flesh that is exposed from the back, between the white skin that has come off the skin of the back, and between the second skin, and from behind the spine, and between the second skin;
and as you move your right hand inside the coat between your shoulders, take the white skin that has come off the back and put it on your left hand, and loosen the spine all around the wound; and command to the minister that he extend the feather upward, and undo what is behind the ligature;
and examine your two sides if there is any wrapped or white fecal matter, and if you do not find anything, pour it into the abdomen;
then take an needle or has a thick thread made of X threads, and pour it into the behind part of the fecal matter, which is after the skin of the anus; after the cut, then cut the threads that appear from the feces, until there are four threads; then assemble them one above the other in a cross shape, and tie the fecal matter, which we have said is after the skin of the anus, with a strong knot on two sides; then wrap the threads around the feces and tie them together in two places so that no part of the anus can enter, and let the abscess not come out; and then very strictly the string according to the first string long II is of that, and after these II strings leave a syfac who is desoz the cure of the côins the great of a day; and then all the others according to the rondesce that the euf carries;
and then cut in the part which is desoz the leather of the côins, until it is no longer deformed, and let it bow, as we have said before;
and then bring wet wool in oil, and put it on the wounds, and let the string that we have said. And never is cauterized the white blood that we have said, after the incision, for doubt of decay of blood. For this often happens, and leaves the string as long as it does not stick to itself;
and if it delays in the cheoir, so be raised by a hot water, and put on that we have said, as long as it does not stick;
Then heal the wound with other remedies until it is completely healed.
of hernia carnous
In this recipe I have never seen anyone dare to make the cure with iron.
And the old one said that it is done so as the vine which is bound together, in such a way that you tie the vials, after cutting on the thigh lightly on the sole;
then cut it off, and heal the abscess of him who has operated, until the vials bleed;
and heal it as we have said, until it is completely healed.
No time comes when there is a rupture in the arteries, as we have said, and open the veins;
and do not let any of the bowels come out as pieces, and if they do, it is little, and repair every hour;
and in any case if it stays too long in this place, if the wound or gangrene believes, until the bowels come out;
and if there is extension of the wound that is in the angles, as we have said, for it is extended, then it is softened and swollen and opened its places;
and the healing process if it is by cauterization, as we have mentioned before;
and never is healed in this way: and he lies down on his back between your hands, then cut the place of the wound with a broad blade according to the quantity of three;
and then remove the skin that is under the tissue that has come off, and then take a thread and tie it on the place that appears of the wound;
and then he presses well the belly, then sews the two places that appear of the wound on the top of the thread, and sews both;
and then remove the thread, and do not cover the wound nor extend the ulcer nor any other thing, as I have told you in the healing of the intestine; and treat with cure for wounds.
and treat with cure for wounds. And when you sew the wounds, if the wound is cured, do so until it has healed.
The wound-healer is necessary, and has no appearance in the laceration, and the fire-cauterization is damped at this place, and closer to salvation.
of the softening of the leather of the cod
Many times the skin of the testicles is softened in some men, because the balls that are inside are softened, and can be seen.
And it is necessary, when one curates him, that one make circumcision of the male member with a knife, and cut off the skin that is softened on the natural skin;
Then join the two lips with one stitch, and cut off the surplus of the softened skin at three stitches or four firmly;
Then sew between the stitches, and treat it like the other wounds, until it is healed, and cut off the thread.
Dou chastrement
Know that chastisements are not included in our law, and for this reason I do not want to speak about them in this book;
and it is necessary only for two ways:
that one is that the mirrour in his sickness answereth when it is asked of him, and in his cure.
and the other, for since we have often had to chastise some beasts to help us, as goats and sheep and hogs and others.
I say therefore that chastising is done in two ways: either by pulling either by cutting
In that which we do with attraction, let us sit the beast in hot water, until the coccyx is softened and still; then with your hand press them, until they are set and you no longer feel them.
Of the chastising of the tail: it is necessary that you take the beast, and press the skin of the tails to your left hand, then tie the suspension, and pull on each eye with a hook when you have well scorch them;
and I leave no little pot of medicine and subtle medicine that is over the vessels;
and this method of cauterizing is milder than that which is done by attraction, for in attraction something may stick to the wound, so that the best lust is satisfied;
then heal the wound as long as it is healthy.
of hermaphrodites
Hermaphrodite is according to two ways as men: one is that between the two joints open like a woman's figure, so that it has hair, and sometimes in cort the urine.
And another way is in women, and on the head of the penis also as a penis and two testicles.
And the cure for man and woman is that you rub the joints together, and cure them as other wounds;
in the second way, of men whose urine jumps out through the skin of the joints, there is no cure.
Tentigo is a joint that sticks to the natural part, as long as it is too ugly to see; And some women have used it great as a hand, and this is the remedy.
It is necessary that you take the surplus of the toxin from your hand or fingers, and wipe it lightly with a cotton swab.
and do not cut too deep, that the blood does not run much, then heal with another cure as long as it is healthy;
and at another time that is born in the mouth of a cow, and employs it, and perhaps it is bad, and it is according to the appearance of a cow's disease, and for this they called him the old "cow disease". If you must cut it, as we have said with the toxin, and heal it until it is well.
Erratic is when the nature of the woman has not yet been discovered, or the hernia is small; and it is natural by birth, or happens by disease that comes;
and it is natural by birth, or happens by disease that comes; or is it through a foreign body, or subtle poison or spice, and is made perfect in the womb, or in the coast, or in the breast, or wherever;
and to understand conception, and childbirth, and perhaps flowers to have;
and the understanding of this is by the aspect of the face.
If it is close to appearing, if you want to know with your two hands or your right.
If it is soft and subtle medicine, and it is near to the liver, if you hurry and put it in there quickly:
put your two fingers together, and the woman is on her back, spreading her legs;
then are the two kidneys formed, until the soft subtle medicine runs, and covers the stench;
then take wool, and soak it in oil, and put it on the place, and let the woman lie with everyone every day, so that he cannot stand.
And if the remedy is tough and thick, then you should chop the plant-like spaulding with a scythe.
If the stench is from a horse, then hang it by the neck and cover it;
and have the medicines that stop the stench, as in this case, of dragon's blood, incense, together with a lot of oil;
then provide a broad blade, so that the wound cannot close;
and let it remain for a long time, and provide a dry cloth;
then treat with other remedies until he is well.
And when the mare becomes pregnant, if it is covered in this way, then an abscess will not form. For if an abscess forms on the mare, one must not touch fire.
hemorrhoids Emorrhoids are openings of veins for which without surgical operation, and when the hemorrhoids are old they become tender;
and we have said in the division the signs of heat, and the symptoms, and I will say here those which respond to cure.
I say that hemorrhoids and the thigh, when they are fully grown in the marrow, and do not appear to the touch unless it be by iron.
Those who are at the mouth of the marrow can be felt, they are those that can be cured.
It is therefore necessary that you put the woman in a cold house, then bind the tender parts to the scales, and cut off at the roots, then powder on medicines that restrain blood, as if it were due to heat and dragon's blood and similar things;
then pour water on its feet against the wall for an hour, then put it in cold water;
and if the fever comes, then let the medicine be made with a decoction of sumac and pomegranate rinds and gall and similar things, and then take barley flour, and confect it with honey and so forth, and make an ointment out of it to put on his back.
And if it stops, that's good. Or if not, then let him have hot towels on his back and not hurt the skin;
then take another, and moisten it with juice of plantain or of oak apple, and apply it to the sore spot.
And when the abscess has healed, then let him stop applying ointment once he is well.
And that which is called "balathyr" is red, and looks like a sharp lance, then cover it as I have said before. Then treat him until he is well.
Various types of abscess can occur in the breast, such as syphilis, piercing abscess, herpes, écoulement, fistules, hemorrhoids, hot abscess, and many other diseases I have mentioned in the division.
It is necessary that I say in this treatise about the abscess that comes in the breast, which is not an abscess that hurts only;
and if you can see the heat of iron, if you look at the abscess when it is beginning to come, and full of heat and fever, and if it becomes red, then you can see it. Then do not hurry to pierce it, but let it die while the pain is relieved;
and then put the patient on a bed, and have two small chairs where he leans his legs, and support his feet in different directions from the leg;
and let their hips be spread apart, and put their arms out on their knees, and bind them well with a good rope;
then suck the bite toward the right side of the mouth, and I bring the instrument with which one operates the mouth of the breast, so that afterwards it comes into form;
and it is necessary that when you see this instrument used, that you place the ring first in order to know the depth of the wound, so that what enters into the instrument does not come out imperfectly and does not wound the patient. and if the instrument is larger, it is necessary to cover the depth of the wound with cloth, so that the instrument does not harm the patient.
and it is necessary that he put the tip of the instrument above, and that he darken the instrument.
And when the abscess opens, and you hold it with your hand, if it is necessary to cover the tip, at the spittle's base;
and when the bowels are empty, if you put wet cloths in the wound soaked in rose oil or dry green oil;
and dip the tent of the wound in the marsh all the way to the bottom, and dip the other end on the top of the hand above the knuckle, wet with water or cooked wool.
then the healer after two days of poultice coming to this, as long as it is well;
and no more raise the marsh and the wound by a hot water and honey poultice, and then water or roots of flowers and arnica are cooked. then recover to the poultice.
And if the wound has closed over the bone, you must not cook it with iron, but treat it as we have said in the chapter on wounds.
of childbirth Artisan is first at the birth that it knows the shape of natural birth, and the signs if you see the woman rushing down, and desires to smell the air.
then the child rushes to come out; then you know that these births are according to the natural shape, and the first one comes out with his head, and the second with him;
and when you see these signs, if it is convenient to press lightly his belly, so that the baby comes soon;
For when he defecates on top of his head, if the second one is with him, and is washed out by good purification;
and what comes otherwise does not come naturally.
For it never comes on its feet, and comes from the neck or shoulders, and the hands, or sometimes on his belly, or often, and is transformed by accident on his throat, and by other bad shapes;
So it is necessary for the dance to be wise and subtle in these things, and to beware of error and deception, and I will show you all the shapes how to help him.
If the baby comes on top of his head by natural birth, and the woman gives birth to grief, and his virtue is weak, then the fair one sits on a saddle, or the women hold her;
and then made of it an oil or fenugreek is boiled, and then poured between the two small spatumiles which are here the form: and then split the second one, and cover with his nail until the moisture that is inside comes out.
and press on the woman's belly until the baby comes out, and if it does not come out, then it is necessary to use a muscle- relaxing paste of fenugreek oil with sise-seed oil;
then make her lie down and cough, and keep her mouth and nose covered for an hour: now let the baby come out.
And if the two hands come out hard, then you must gently twist them back and forth; and if they cannot go in, then put the woman on a chair and raise her feet; and then at the top of the seat on the ground, and paint on the woman, so that she does not fall while standing;
and his hands cannot enter, and the baby dies if he holds his hands on the knife that is placed in front, and pulls out the child, and leaves it even.
from delivery of the child between his feet When the child comes on its feet, so let him come up; and then turn it little by little until it is even;
then stretch it little by little.
Until it jumps just as high as the knuckles, so she is ordered to bend down, and makes her shake with fear; If you jump, then God help you.
And if he does not jump as we have said, then turn him little by little so that he is according to the natural shape. For then he is light-headed.
And if it does not come as we have said, then take muscle from the back, and oil of sisle, and gum melted, and grind all in a mortar; and sit on the nature of the woman inside and away this ointment, then let her sit in water until she is soaked the ribs;
and when it is wet soaked, then let him do a chain of myrrh, and put it off, and let it lie for an hour; then let her sit on a seat, then make her sneeze and straiten her mouth and nose, and pinch her belly lightly, for the fetuses jump now.
of the delivery of the child between her legs and when the fetus comes in this form, if I put the belly his hands poking and poking; then let it be ligated on its neck, and let the feet hang down, and let it lie on its back; and fold his hands poking and poking, then pinch the belly lightly, so that she is emptied down; and if he falls, so don't take your feet and move your body, then move your stomach up, then pour your hands. and the child pokes and pokes; and order the woman to stretch herself as long as the child is.
the delivery of the child who comes with a wide hand hanging down one side at a time it comes to bring back the hand; if you can't bring it back, so the woman stands up and goes;
if she can't go, so make her sit up on a bed, and put her feet together;
then arrange the muscles as I have described;
and if she doesn't give birth, so make her sit on a chair, and then study to bring back the hand; and the child according to the natural form, and makes it shake, and orders her to stretch herself as long as the child is.
The child's delivery from his mother's womb, and he spread his hands wide, and turned his face toward her back. It is fitting that the surgeon clean his hands, then wash them little by little, and dry them lightly.
And when he is clean, if he puts on the muslin bandage of cotton and oil as we have said, then he commands that she moves little by little;
And when you have done this, if the fire is placed in a position, and he commands that it be heated; and then he makes it shake. of this same manner to all the second time
of this same manner to all the second time When he comes in this way for all the second time, if you cut off his fingernail, as long as the moisture is empty;
and if he hangs himself by the neck, so that it cuts off his breath, so that he does not hold back, and the hangman dies;
Then pour the child in, as long as you have put it in the right way, and command the woman that she does not shake herself at all:
of twins For it is known that many are born, and only three or four at a time. and this is not an extraordinary thing, and seldom happens. Two are an extraordinary thing, and rarely live, if one does not know.
Two are an extraordinary thing, and rarely live, if one does not know. I know that, which are multiplied, and are desired by the doctor who devises them, who is tied to the bodge;
and they are not born naturally as all of us do, if we have said it.
And if they are born lightly, as we have said, and the subtle doctor, and quickly and lightly does what he does; and make it so that it is worth doing for salvation. of many children
And they are not formed in the womb of one or two or three or four or five or six or seven, or more than fifteen until they are shaped like a child by the measure of the wise glory, and the doctor knows all this, for perhaps similar things happen to him; Make it according to what is necessary.
of the dead child
When you treat a woman with a dead fetus or an aborted child, as I said in the division, and it does not come out, and you are forced to use your hands; if it is appropriate that you know whether the woman is of sound health, and she has no accident or fear of death;
if it is appropriate that the woman be seated on her heels, with her knees bent toward her chest and her legs raised;
and the assistant applies the poultice to both parts, so that she is laid on a bed as if she were about to give birth to a child;
Then rub the mouth of the pregnant woman with wet oil made from amaranth and fenugrec and linseed seed, then anoint her hands with these oils and these musk ambrosia;
Then place the bottle lightly in the sea, and then take care that he who drinks does not drink too much wine that is suitable for him, and be careful that the one who drinks does not get dressed up so that he comes to his head.
if he puts the wine in his hair or in his throat or in his mouth or in his palate or cuts it with a razor or near the sides, and if he drinks, he will be drunk on his feet, he will fall down or he will cut himself at the edges;
and it is convenient that he hold the bottle in his right hand, and place the cup between his two hands with his left hand, and pour the wine lightly in all of these places until it comes to the empty thing;
then put another bottle together, so that the extraction is even;
and then stand it equally by moving it from one side to the other, so that it can be set, and hold the lower teeth together with a bit of force, like this:
If one part stops moving, if you rub some oil on its two sides and press it in that part, and then pull the other part;
and if one part doesn't move at all, place this tooth higher up or lower down, and do so until it has set completely.
And if one hand comes before the other and cannot return due to a spasm, you must wrap it in a sheet so that it sets completely. Then cut into the joint of the foot or at the neck, and in the other hand also, and between the toes.
And if the child's hip is large and it is stuck in the birth canal, or if there is an acute angle, you must push the thorny spatula between your two hips, and push the angle and extract the spike. where you hold the instrument which is called "almond", from which the form comes with the instruments or chalk that follows this one;
and so I make it fix itself by nature;
and then draw out the bones with pliers, and the head of the shoulder is torn out with force if it does not come off easily, until the moisture that is there comes out;
and if it cannot come out, then break it into pieces with a hammer so you can remove it;
and if it is swollen in the belly or under the ribs, so that it is necessary to pierce you until the moisture runs;
And if he falls on his feet, if it is a light atraction, and if we bring him to the mouth of the mare, it is easy.
And if it is dislocated in the belly or in the hip, so that you must take off the bandages wrapped around the hand; and break the belly or hip, until the moisture that is there runs;
and if his other member is osteitic, and the head remains, then he pulls his hand away completely from the marrow, and draws it up to the mouth of the marrow; then I pour some wine or two, and draw it out strongly;
and if the mouth of the marrow is constricted by heat that has come to it, so that it cannot work any more, then one must provide moist and greasy things; and he provides with plasters, and cuts in acidic, moistening, and softening things.
And if the wound is on his ribcage, and you can make it even, then provide what we have said for a live child;
and if one does not have the power, then he draws it out in pieces, and leaves nothing of the second one.
And when you have done this, provide what we have said for warm, new marrow that comes from the marrow;
and if blood flow occurs, then if it is put in water it is restrained, and other treatments are given.
And I saw a woman in whose womb a child had been killed, then consult another on that one, and it was killed again. After a long time the wound began to swell and then it broke open and there was a great pus.
I was called to treat it, and I thought for a long time, but I couldn't close the wound.
I put on a plaster of strong attraction, and there put an arm, and after a few days another. I marvelled much, for this man's belly has no bones.
I thought it was the bones of a dead child.
I want to bandage the wound, and hold them together as long as the woman was in a better state; and wait for the woman to be longer than ten years, and it was fixed a little bow from its place;
and I have remembered this medicine only that when the master tries an strange thing, he may know how to put help.
Here comes the form of the pressure, where we pull the books;
and at two turns are two shoulders. However, the horns are more subtle than the restraint, and it is made of oak or boxwood;
and the mouth of the horn must be very wide, and the margins of the trees must be, and a length of about one palm and a half; and the two limbs be twice the length of this half palm, or a little longer.
and these two joints are inserted into the mouth of the socket to open when the two horns are turned.
Another form, its appearance more subtle and lighter, is made of oak or boxwood, according to the shape of the claws; and have two joints, as you see, a palm long and two fingers wide;
and when you see the socket opened for all the instrument, so that the woman sits on the bed, her legs hanging down and her feet spread out, then set the two joints together in the socket, and hold the top of the instrument between her knees; then open your hand for all the instrument, just as you did for the claws evenly, according to the quantity that you see the mouth of the socket opened, until the ball makes what she wants;
All these instruments are completely assembled, and they are multiplied by their appearances. And when you have prepared the instruments, then the operation is faster, and higher up for its quantity.
Do not despair about the instrument unless you have prepared it, for its necessity is not excusable.
When the second is retained for childbirth, it is necessary that you command the disease to keep its hair, and then she makes her stand and shake from condition, and her hands are drawn back to the mouth and neck; and if it does not hold, well is it.
If not, if I can take it, and make a hole or cover, and put herbs that can open the mouth of the sick, as calamus, rue, anise, chamomile, cassia and centaury; all these herbs, or none of them, are cooked or boiled in water on the fire;
and then place a tube or hole at the tip of the pot, and the other end in the mouth of the wound, and suck out the vapors that come into the wound;
then make her sneeze, as we have said. If you do not let him get well soon.
If she remains well after this treatment and is not better, order her to soak her left hand in oil of saffron or in a muscadine mixture of alto, and then pour it out again, and do it a second time; and when she has found it, if she pricks it and stretches it little by little correctly, so that the wound does not break at the extraction;
but make her move it lightly from side to side, and then draw it out; then it will come out and fall away.
And if the mouth of the wound is tight and constricted, we have said the treatment of sneezing, and of vaporizing herbs;
and if it is not of all those we have said, so guard that you do not follow the treatment.
but it is necessary that he who is in the mouth of the mare, you tie him to the cunt of the woman, then you cauterize with ointment tetrafarmer. if she gets worse and comes again, it will be fierce;
but first, when the wound is infected with a bad smell in the stomach and head of the patient, and blisters on the disease. So it is necessary to smoke in an appropriate way:
neither of the old have experienced smoking with watercress and dried figs.
The shape of the instrument by which one smokes the woman to retain the flowers and the second is such:
and it is as if to a dog, and put the head gently in the smoke, and the shoulders wide over the fire;
and let the smoke be on the coals, and burn it until it is spent, and begin another.
Many children are born who have not yet had their foundations pierced, but they are cut off by a subtle surgeon. If it is necessary that he who cuts with the surgeon pierce his foundation at his own will, and does not cut with a small chisel and seal the seam so that he does not touch it;
then dip in another moisture with wine and oil, then treat with ointment until it is well.
And if you doubt that it will not return, then place or pierce a hole with an awl, and let the hand remain extended, and be careful when he goes to bed.
And never comes a sudden cauterization of a wound or an abscess; If it is necessary to cover the sudden cauterization: if sooth, if as we have said of the wine of plunging.
Fistulas which come from the foundation are an expansion, and more difficult to come than from the foundation of the members, or in the space between the two parts, if it is one or more fistulas;
and when this foundation is old, if you open it, and a little dampness comes out white or subtle bow, and these fistulas are never persisting;
and are caused by what is in this area of excretion or ventosity when the patient does excretion, and perhaps in leap some towards.
And if fistulas that pierce just up to the bladder, and just up to the half of the penis; and arrive just up to the junction of the thigh, and just up to the notch of the neck.
And so one knows that the persistent fistula is at the foundation, and does not persist: and is that you pierce your second finger or foundation, and pierce a small needle of silver or iron in the fistula when there is no twists:
and if there is twists, if you pierce with a small string of rope or a horse's hair, as long as you feel the string or hair in your finger:
and if you do not feel it, and does not come from perforation of vomiting or wind, nor see as we have said: that it does not pierce at all. if you hurry to heal.
And when the fistula reaches the bladder or the conduit of urine, if it causes urine to flow, and cannot be controlled by medicine.
If it is pierced only up to the join of the crotch, if is the tent that comes up to the place. If there is no twist and the invention of the pain inside, if it is that he comes soon, and does not come medicine nor suddenly by rubbing;
and in these persisting abscesses there is no cure except work, and vanity of foolish dreams that enter into them.
In the one that is not persistent and not old, there is hope of health by fire, as I have experienced, and it is that the patient lies between your hands on his back;
and let his legs hang down to his knees, and let his knees bend towards his belly; Then pour water into a tub, or mud if there is a twist, until you know where the tub comes from.
If the patient feels pain in his back, then pour water on your two fingers, and it will feel like the tub has pierced him;
and is uncovered where you feel between your thumb and the finger next to it, then know that it is a persistent wound; if it does not hurt, then it cannot be cured.
One should try all means to cure some, but most of them do not work;
and the help that can be given, if one heats the fine cauldron according to the width of the fistula, as it is said above; and put all the heat into the tube, until it comes out smoothly from the base; and make it twice or three times, as long as you know that these charred things are like an owl's feather;
and then the doctor of wet tenders bathes it, until that char comes out, and then the doctor of ointment makes a char and binds it up.
If it is done thus, it is good.
If this, otherwise it cannot be healed;
and if it is tried between, and does not pierce until the top which is at the base, and on either side of the tube there is a thick covering of char or of medicine, and you see the tube at the place where the covering begins to move; if the cover of the tube of the fistula is cut off and reset before the tube, and then the fire is applied after it, until it comes to the top of the tube; and will be delivered the test, and shall be strong;
then my god shall deliver those charred trees that seem like a feather of an owl, and none remain thereat.
And if you have a fever, and heat comes between you and the work, then fire cautery or an acrid medicine.
For the fire cautery brings together two things: that is to say, on the one hand, the burning of these charred shoulders, and on the other, the evacuation of blood and drying up of moisture.
then the healer of wet tents will dry or roast it, until its leathery layer is peeled off, and those charred shoulders are roasted in the fire;
then heal the wound of the rusting hard shoulders, and these dry remedies are applied.
For when it is reset, if it is well and does not return to its place.
And if a fistula comes from the foundation itself, and is separated from the body, then it should be cut off or severed from the foundation, and this should be done.
If you feel the tent, and there is within it the fabric or the shoulder or the thing that is about to pierce, if there is no way of comfort or hope except by the administration of one of the three ways:
where you burn it as we have said, or you chop it just to the root, or if you cannot, try and treat it first as mentioned above.
and do not cut it too short, so that you do not chop the root of the hair, and come to the ends voluntarily; then treat it, as we have said;
then treat it, as we have said; if it is healthy again, or you remove the covering and clean it thoroughly after chopping off the root, or with a tent or some other tool; then put on a new skin, as we have said; then study to restore the wound and to keep the fistula in the opposite part of the root:
then study to restore the wound and to keep the fistula in the opposite part of the root: which is a lighter thing for the patient.
And never use this method for a fistula: and is when you put the tent into the fistula, and it is or it costs from the base of the delicate skin on top, so take a tent with a hole at the top according to this form: And I pour out water in two, and pour the tent into all the thread in the fistula as long as it is at the head.
If it is leaking from the edge of the base inside, then remove the thread from that hole, so that you put your finger on the base;
and train the head of the thread, and join the two shoulders together, and hold them apart, and leave it for one day;
and do not restrain it at all, until the thread covers these joints that are between two, and they rub;
then treat the wound as long as it is soldered and healed.
If the fistula does not pierce, if you make it pierce in all ways that you can, if it is not too perfectly enclosed. For it is not good to make the lacing shut too perfectly, and then treat it, as we have said, until it is well.
The shape of the spike with thorns that one makes the fistula should be sharp, part and cut; and on the other hand no, so that you do not cover what you must not cover, as you see here:
There are two ways of causing gangrene. there are two ways of causing gangrene: either because they are deep in the foundation, like a grain of resin, and there are small and large ones, and if there is one or more, they are far from the foundation and at the top of the foundation;
but those that are far away if they have a little moisture, and then again or a little bit of clear water or a little bit of blood, and their color is like that of the flesh;
and the treatment for those who have them deep in the foundation is that you order the patient to sweat by sweating him in chambers until the foundations are far away, and the fils come out; if you hurry, and hold it as with pliers, or if you hold it with your fingernail, then cut it at the roots;
and if they cannot hold them back due to their moisture, take them from the sheet, or from the cotton, or from a piece of cloth. and pull them towards you, then wrap them up and powder them with any hot powders that are in the fire's place; or fire cautery as it is said in the chapter of cauterizing, so that you cure them with other cures until they are healed;
and if its foundation cannot come out, then cauterize the patient with a hot, sharp instrument to wash away what is in the foundation, so that it can come out freely; Can the patient be stretched out, and if his threads are firmly attached to the foundation, then the cure is light;
Can the patient be stretched out, and if his threads are firmly attached to the foundation, then the cure is light; and hold them with your finger or pliers and wrap them up, then cure them as we have said until they are healed, and avoid cutting with iron. If it is necessary for you to add a suture in this way:
If it is necessary for you to add a suture in this way: Take a twisted thread and put it on a needle, then wind the thread around the needle and make the needle go through from the other side, and return the two ends of the thread onto the needle, and if it is wide;
and tie the thread into a knot, then remove the needle, and do the same for all of them, and leave one there so that the blood may run out;
then put a damp cloth on the foundation with oil or balm, and put it on the foundation, and instruct the patient to rest;
and then leave it until it bleeds, and when it stops bleeding, if it is cured with ointment and other cures, until it is well.
at the end or foundation Sometimes there is drying out at the end of the intestine, and by constriction of nature, and when the disease is old and medicine is not effective. If it is necessary for you to rub the scab off with a spatula or your nail from above, which does not allow it to get wet; and then treat him as long as he is still alive as it should be.
and if he cannot be sutured, then start shaving again more forcefully than before, until the wound heals and is scarred. and then treat him as long as he is still alive.
The patient should let the hair grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold them steady so they do not move until they grow. Formica is a small appearance in front of the hole, and goes away completely.
and at no time does it hurt, and you feel it like death rumbles, and it comes all over the body, and more in the hands than anywhere else.
And the doctor must take a feather from an owl's wing, or a strong vulture's feather, and put that feather on the rumble until the purple circle covers the whole area. then turn your hand around all of the feather as you cover the entire area with it, and then fix it completely, and scorch the rumble from its roots.
And if you see, then make this of a dog's or a horse's or a pig's tooth according to this form, and be subtle and draw over it. Ne may percii, por muez tenee a doii, et muez preessee.
And if you feel pain, if the cauterization burns, as it is before or after the application of the cautery paste.
No matter if done with silver enema or oak bark, or with melted lead or moldy wine;
And no matter if these small or large instruments are used, according to the condition they are applied to. These therefore that one introduces in the cure of children and who are weak and painful, are little.
These therefore that one introduces in the cure of children and who are weak and painful, are little. The form of the clister is little and big if it is above wide, or if the belly is tied according to this way:
and I have observed a distension or an swelling, as you see, and a pain in the abdomen that pierces;
and there is a protrusion on one side of the abdomen, and on the other there is a depression;
and either the abdomen is drained with a bladder of beast or parchment, and piercing all around the little protrusions, and between each there is a space of thread, then tightly wrap the abdomen with a strong knot of thread crossed around it, and so gather the abdomen together as if it were a sheep; and when the medicine is inside, if the thread of the instrument in front of it is strong, then cauterize.
This is the shape of a circle:
and let the medicine not be too hot or too cold, and anoint the head of the cauterizer with oil or olive oil or similar thing, then pour it lightly: then the minister holds it with both hands until it is completely dry, then removes the cauterizer, and places the patient's legs against the wall, and lets the medicine come out, if necessary: and if he sleeps a whole night, then it is greater help.
And if you bandage him with a plaster because of the decay of his belly, and the medicine comes out quickly, then wait until he is well.
And if the hemorrhoids are in the fundament or abscess, then let the cauterizer be as subtle as for a child;
This is the shape of a thin cauterizer above where the skin is stretched:
We have said above in the division the treatment of wounds;
Or we will tell you the cures for hands and medicine, according to compleness.
I say that wounds are various according to what they are made, and according to the places or wounds they are made, and from what they are made.
The things that cause wounds are by hitting with a stone, or cutting with an épée or a couteau, or a lance or a fust or a saiette, or similar objects;
or that are made according to the laws of the corps, such as a wound that strikes the neck, or the head, or the chest, or the belly, or the liver, and similar limbs;
and I will tell you the treatment for each wound, and I will begin with simple wounds of the head, for the memory will come in its chapter.
I say that when a simple wound comes to the head and the bone is not broken, if it is by hitting with a stone or similar things, and the skin is all torn and the wound is great, and you doubt much about the apotheosis: If he comes soon enough to the head, if there is no blood from the wound, and if it is applied in the opposite direction of the wounded part;
and abstain the patient from wine and fattening meat.
If he does not heal soon, if his flesh is wasting away, and if he does not drink wine or eat cheese;
and put on the wound, if an abscess forms, wet it with oil and apply a hot poultice or wine that stifles;
and if there is no heat on the wound, if it is fresh and not moved by the wind, dust; I will say a little later:
and if fire has moved it, if he puts on some onions, until he is healed.
And if the wound is great as of a sword-slayer and like it, and the lips cannot be brought together by tenderness, if they are brought together by sewing, as I say to the wounds of the belly, by the seam.
If the wound is open to the bone and dry, and holds only a little blood, then And then heal the wound with medicine, and restore it with hard skin in place of leather, and instruct the patient to eat large meats, such as roasted testicles and bread, and also poultry and similar things.
And if you find leather rot, and it doesn't reach the bone, then cut off the rot completely, and burn it, then heal it;
And if there is an artery in the wound or a vein, from which blood cannot be stopped by medicine, then cut the artery, and if you find it dislocated, then let it return to its place like a thread; And if that doesn't help, then cauterize it.
And if these wounds are small and simple, then the light healing is: Here is that you put in this powder which hardens so that fire moves it.
And the way of the powder is thus: Take incense a part; dragon's blood two parts; chald the live three parts, and the powder slightly, and employ the wound, and holds it firmly, until it is well healed and joined to all its dragon's blood;
and then bind it well, and leave it undisturbed, if it swells; for the medicine should not be removed until it is healed.
And never do we use this clay alone, except that incense or dragon' s blood is not moved, but that fire has moved the wound.
And if the fire has moved the wound, even slightly, put at least half of this powder on it;
but put on some olive oil or grain flour made from water and honey, until it is well cooked; and then he should cure with other remedies until it is healed.
And if the fracture of a bone comes with the wound, and it is small, then extract it gently with tweezers;
and I will tell you here the breaks of the skull.
of the wound of the neck
For if the wound is in the throat, and it is simple, then there is no difference between it and that of the head, but it hurts at the throat where the artery is cut.
If it is a baby, if there is no other device than to let the cure take place and not put anything restricting, because it hurts the baby and makes it retract; and do not put anything on the wound, for the substance of the baby is cold and its circulation is with the brain, which is the highest member;
but be the medicine soft, as hot water in lukewarm water, and mixed with oil of roses, and wash it too with lukewarm water, and other stones of minimal value according to this way, and moistened with oils.
And if the wound is large, so that the scar is long, then treat it until it is healed.
And if the wounds are deep and he is shaved and full of hair, then pierce or cut lower down;
and if the artery has been cut and bleeding occurs, then stop the flow of blood, and cauterize it as well;
and if the throat is cut, or the voice, and the course is maintained, so that the meat goes down, if the voice is cut on the neck of the throat, and does not touch the throat but is put back in its natural form; and then hold it in place and let it rest for a few days, and then treat with onions until he is well;
and if the wound has made an impression on the bone, let it be probed; and if there are pieces of bone, if they can be taken out whole, and those that cannot be taken out whole, leave it until the wound festers and drains, and let the discharge come out and the wound be cleaned;
and if the wound is fresh, sprinkle on the powder I have said. And if there are bones in the wound and it has developed an abscess, then treat it as I have said in my chapter on abscesses.
If it is a lance or dagger cut, and the wound is deep, look at the wound from all sides and massage the patient's flesh: If the wound is mortal, then
If the wound is not profound and is fresh with blood, then put the powder to it immediately so that it does not hold back the blood, and let it rest in the body, and close the wound. However, I do not advise applying a poultice today and tomorrow, but rather leave it uncovered.
If you do not have an ointment, then put a wet cloth on the wound to absorb the moisture and let the patient lie down on the wound for three days, or four, or more. If there is no spasm, nor a painful trembling of the body or extraction of an alien object; Then, when you see that the bones are in place, know that the wound has been saved. Heal this wound with the medicine of tent and other medicines, until it is well;
and if it cannot heal, then know that there is a fistula.
if the cure is as it should be. And if the wound is caused by a blade or knife and is straightforward, or in the back, or at the top, then know the cure of that which is before. if it is large, from sewing;
and if it is small, from powder, and if it has broken into the bone, and has come loose in pieces, then know the wound, and the dangerous parts if they are separated; and if they are not separated, then leave the wound to fester, and then extract with care;
and for other wounds and other limbs, this is the judgment as we have said.
Dou derrompement dou ventre
The breaking open of the belly is great and wide and small;
From the great wound, let there come none of the intestines, or the nerves of the intestines, so that the entrance of the bile does not happen.
and the stitch is more painful, and there comes no small wound than the great one, so that it is not better to put the intestines back in, if they are not put back in from warm to warm;
because the intestines swell so that they feel cold, if they are put back in, and because it is better to leave the small wound alone, because if you leave the intestine at its place than at the others II.
And know that the rupture of the belly is according to IV manners:
the common stitches have in the stitch of the belly, and the stitch of the other wounds of the body and two other proper stitches are common to other wounds;
and nevertheless they are more proper with the stitch of the belly, and I will say each one and will declare.
I say that when the wound is small, and there is no matter of the intestines outside, and there is nothing to put back in it, this is done by one of two ways. or the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestines are swollen with fever.
And when it is cold, heat it in the third way: moisten a sponge or I mool dried cloth in cold water only, or you cook in hot water and cumin and spice, and rinse the intestines until they swell;
and never do this while restringing, and be wet that you are cool by dislodging it.
And when you see the swelling go away, if you moisten the intestines with cold or hot water and cook them, because this keeps the entrance closed to little things;
and if he cannot enter, then make a little cut in the wound with the instrument with which we cut the hemorrhoids;
and the first cure is to put it to bed so that we do not have to chop it off unless there is great necessity;
this is the instrument with which one divides it;
if you cut into the core and then pull it out and form it like this: And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestines protrude, if you return them to their natural place in their proper position, if you can do so, for that is necessary.
When the wound is wide and in the lower part of the abdomen, then you must make the patient lie on their back, and put their legs higher than their head; and if the wound is in the lower part of the abdomen, then put the head and breast higher than the lower parts, and so the opening of the abdomen is in one of the two parts, so that you align it with the other;
and so it is necessary to treat what I have said here, in great wounds and small ones.
In small wounds, however, if you are unarmed, then place your hands over the wound and bind it with a cloth that covers the whole tear to your hand, and join the lips together;
and that is the common way of stitching, and it is that you should squeeze a needle or more, according to the quantity of the width of the wound, then leave some space from the top of the wound, and put in a needle with very strong thread; and pierce the two ends of the leather with the two ends of the thong, which is inside the leather, until you make it piercing from that side, and join the two ends of the thong together, all four together;
then remove a double thread from the needle from two sides, then join the two ends of the wound together, and then leave some space, and put in another needle;
and then lay it on thread as you did the first needle, and do not stop doing this according to what you need with needles until all the wound is closed;
and let the needles be fine and coarse, because the fine needles go through all the cloth, and the very coarse ones cannot enter well: for it is necessary that they are small;
and do not put the needles too far away from the edge of the cloth and hide, so that they go through and open the wound before it is healed;
and then cut off the heads of the needles so that they do not hurt the patient when he sleeps, and put a blanket or sheet over the heads of the needles to hold them in place, and leave them until the wound is healed;
and this way of sewing with needles is more convenient for small wounds, because it requires only one needle or two.
The second stitch is common, and it is that you join the two pieces of leather with the two pieces of thread together on an awl or there is one strong line of thread.
and when you have pierced these three together, I will take the awl to the part where you began, in the way that we sew clothes.
and put space between each stitch the thickness of a small nail;
This stitch is good for a man, and I will sew up an injury that he had or his belly, which was torn by a knife, and the wound was more than two palms in length, and there were intestines about two palms in length, and the wound went into his belly.
I brought him back his intestine when he had been out for 22 hours, and the wound was sewn up after 15 days, and I treated it, and he was healed.
And the miraculously happened that he died, and this is a wonder;
and I did not cure him with ointment, for I was in a place where there was no ointment, nor any medicines; and dip it twice a day in the wound, and wash it with honey water until it was well.
I will now tell you the two proper ways to stitch:
Take the needle and pass it through the flesh from outside in;
When it has pierced the flesh from right to left, so that the thread or stitch goes through the flesh, and you have threaded the needle, and pierce it from the other side from inside out;
and know about this stitch that you also sew as the pelters do fur, and let the fur be on one side, and take it up on the other, until the stitch is finished.
The second way to stitch, which Galen properly describes, so that as if no one were sewing it, putting together the two parts naturally, and applying one of the heads where the stitch goes to the other head in this way:
Place a pin or spike near the mirror above, and pierce that single point alone, and leave the two shoulders in peace. Then turn the needle, and pierce it from the outside part only up to the middle point of the two shoulders.
Then pierce one and then the other from the outside part only up to the middle point of the two shoulders, in the two other shoulders that are on the other side.
And this is the method of suturing and the most common.
Galien thus says in response to that statement, and no one contradicts him: when sewing the belly on two needles, each with its own thread.
And one needle must be pushed from one side and the other from the other, in the manner of those who sew with needles for corroding.
and know that when the breach is in the middle of the belly, then the stitch is greater than those on either side of the belly.
The judgments for the wound are such as they are for other wounds:
and it is that when you find the fresh wound with all its blood, so that the arrow has moved it, if you put back the intestine and the stitch;
and then put on the powder that rubs in, and if the arrow has moved it, put on any ointment that is present, until the wound dries up; and cook the thread, and let the sutures be tight, and the wax; then heal the wound as with others, until it is healthy;
and if you have no medicine, put on, soon enough that it begins to dry up, cotton wool, and stir it twice a day until it is healthy.
For you have no other need for medicine in many cases when the wounds are simple;
and if you doubt that the wound does not make a union with the principal members, then it is appropriate to moisten another light in oil of thyme or oil of roses, and place it around the joints, and cut off the tendons;
and if it hurts or puts on a rash in the bulges, and many times comes, if the blisters of black wine are washed off, and most often the putrefaction comes up to the intestine;
and pierces it inside, and know that when it is the large intestine, it is lighter to be healed than the small one.
The intestine called "jeun" cannot heal when it is still attached to the womb, and this is because of the formation of veins, and the subtlety of all the body, and its nearness to children.
And if the scar jumps out of the wound, it is reset backwards as well as the intestine, while it is fresh;
and if it is old and becomes blue or black, it is appropriate to lay the site that is black, so that blood does not come, for there are veins and arteries;
and wrap what is between the bandage, and place the two shoulders hanging from the edge of the wound to the end so that the extraction when the bones chitter, and the wound oozes.
of the rupture of the boil
When the intestines are torn, and the wound is small, then can one restore it in some men, for I have seen that some were pierced by a bow or an arrow from a lance's belly;
and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and it oozed and became a fistula, and there was vomiting and wind;
I treated him according to what I could do, and did not cease to subdue it until he was healed, and his bones were mended.
And when I saw the man mended, I doubted that the disease had not done him harm in his belly; and there was no evil, but delay in better conditions, and eating and drinking;
and say no experiments that when he has a small wound in the intestine, it must be tied in some way: take three fingers from a big testicle, then join the lips of the wound, and when the fingers have opened the mouth, put it on the two lips, so that she draws her mouth out;
then he covers the head, and this remains in place so that it cannot be separated, then he puts another finger after in the same way as before, until the wound is completely covered; and cut the wound.
This chief if it burns in the intestine, and causes no harm to the patient, and can be tied with a thin thread cut from the intestine of an animal in some way:
take the end of this thread of intestine that has been carefully cut off, and then tie the end of this thread to the end of a thin twisted linen thread, then tie the thread to the needle, and in cutting the intestine, and take it back out of the incision;
and this method of suturing frissons is good only according to the way of faith and hope.
and if the wound is great and wide, most importantly when it is in one of the internal groins, there is no cure except by carefulness.
from fistula or which it is Know that all wound or abscess, when it heals, is called "fistula" in general, and most so when it is scarred and turns into a bowl.
And a fistula is according to the true notion wrong and white, where one does not feel pain, and it is also like the feathers of an owl;
and never clearly in a clear bow, and sometimes thick; and never pokes, and sometimes is enough;
I have already spoken in the division of wounds that any wound that is not healed and there is no cure, it is good only by one of the eight causes: that is to say, by the little of the blood or the color; for his evil. with a sharp edge within, and on the lips, so that it does not grow there; or where there is too much bowels; whose skin is rotten, and the substance is of bad quality; or whose medicine is not good for the cure; or where the corruption is like that of a pestilence; or whose property in the region is late digestion and late health, and goes away by nature; where there are veins or bones:
and I have already explained all these causes and signs, and the remedies of medicines in the division.
Or covient that I do make you know the cure of fistula which is made by oevre of hands.
I know that a fistula can occur in all members of the body; for there are fistulas that come from great veins, and arteries, and nerves, or to the sinews, or to the spine of the back, or to any of the joints of the hands or feet; and if so that comes to the principle member's property, and similar places.
And all the fistulas that are in this way are of great sickness, and there is only toil, and ignorance;
and if there is no fistula that does not come to the level I have said, and you have promised to heal it, and you see it clearly, so take a tent of rain or iron, if the fistula is straight, so ask it;
and if the fistula is twisted, then seek it with a thin tent of vinegar, for the vinegar bends slightly within the curvature;
and if the fistula is very broken and you cannot properly seek it with tents, then let it be cleansed with vinegar through one of the breaks, for it moistens so much from one break to another, and purifies;
and then examine the swelling at your hand, that you know if there are any bones or nerves, and it is completely shaved off, and ask the patient very well about the pain that he feels when you squeeze his hand, and the place where he feels it.
and when you truly know the place where it is, and if it is far from a joint, or a nerve, or an artery, or a vein, or in any of the places that I have told you, whether it is good or bad, cut off the false joint and the corrupt joints that are within;
and then cure it as long as it is healthy, and the fistula is very deep from the right place, so that you cut it perfectly well as much as you can, then you put wet medicine on it until the chief of the fistula, so that the medicine corrupts the excess that has been kept at the bottom;
and then I meet ointments healing the disease, as long as it is healthy;
If it is not healed with this, then let him be cauterized as we have said, and if his bone is corrupted by the abscess, let him take care.
If a vein or nerve is injured in the main members, as we have said;
and if his bone is exposed and there is corruption and darkness, let him treat it with healing ointments as long as it is healthy;
and if it is not healed, and its bone returns to its place as before, know that you have not gone far enough in the treatment:
if it is exposed and kept until you are at the bottom, and all the bone corruption is removed, then restore the joint;
and if it is healed in this way, it is good. If not, know that corruption is too perfect, so you cannot come. if there is no other remedy than to let nature take its course;
and if there is one small bone corrupted, and you can pull it out with tweezers, if there are many bones, pull them out one by one, leaving none behind;
and if the moisture causes opposition and it is hot and humid, and copious moisture and sweat, deliver the bones;
And if you cannot remove them in an hour, put on the wound something that promotes corruption, and leave it there for a while until the bone is腐敗したのです。
then if it is a large bone, such as of the leg or thigh, put on the wound a black substance until all the bone has腐敗したのです。
and if there is a large part of the wound腐rot, and comes up to just short of the bone; if it is properly sewn and covered all the way to the corruption, and then treated as long as it remains solid;
And I will tell you about a hunchback who happened to him in his leg, so that you take example and help in your work.
He was a young man of about 30 years old, who had a pain in his leg from an inner cause, so that the matter came out to the leg, and there was a large abscess, and he had no reason for opening it.
But the mirror, due to his madness, opened it so much that it corroded a lot of matter, and became a fistula, and came to be very dangerous, so that everyone was afraid, and there was moisture and moisture in the body.
and many times I have cured them in two years, and there was no skill in the art of hands until I was called, and I saw his leg and the medicines that were used to cure him, and those that run through the large passages with great pain; and became red in the youth's body, and had an orange color.
I fixed a tent in one of those holes, and then searched all the holes, and I found that one came out against the other on all sides of the leg.
So I hurried then, and копал in one of the passages as far as I discovered a part of the bone, and found it rotted and broken, and the corruption came to the bone itself;
I knew what had been taken from the bone, and I took care that there should be no other corruption than that which I had taken out;
and I began to restore the wound with medicines that are used by long time, and could not hold it together;
and then I began, and uncovered the bone as before, and found continued corruption in the bone, and burned it, and then put the bone back together, and bent over to weld the joint; but I could not so much as cup my hand around one end of the bone, and I took it away from all its ends, then I restored it with medicine; and he was healed and firmly welded together, and it would no longer be necessary to open the wound for the weakness of the patient, who could not bear it, and for the fear of death that I had of him. Car for the evacuation of blood there was often, but he was healed entirely, and gave birth in place of the bone a hard child, and was of good temper and did not have any harm or opposite from all in all, nor air nor to come.
And if the bone is broken in any part of the skeleton, then it should be treated in this way: take a stick, and extend it at the top of the bone which is separated, and and put another thinner line of thread on the other side of the bone, and tie it above the separated part, and let the thread extend to the end of the bone, and then take off the thread from the top of the bone, and uncover the thread where you see that it should be tied, so that the thread does not fray the bone;
and put a stone or a wedge of wood under it to move the chest;
and wait until one can see and feel the corruption, and another time.
And if the bone is corrupted, and does not open, and the corruption is in the middle or in one part, then uncover the whole chest;
then put a wedge under it, and then unpick the corruption from one part to another, and pick the wound long where the corruption is; as we have said;
and if the corruption is in the joint, then cover the joint with corruption, and unpick the bone where it is;
and if the corruption is in the continuation of the two joints, then there is no other angle but to cover it;
and if the corruption is at the base of the hand, or at the base of the foot, then this is a very bad thing, but you must first inquire about that corruption, how it hurts you; and clean in all ways that you can, but that the vein or nerve does not make you contrary;
and know that the incisor and the saws for covering these bones are many, according to the siteness of the bones and the appearance of the teeth, and their largeness and their finenesse, and their height and their smallness, and their hardness; and for this it is necessary that he prepare his instrument to each appearance of work;
and know that the work will show you the instrument which you will need, according to the knowledge of this art, and the testimony of the manner of the diseases; if he thinks the instrument in which you are skilled is suitable for him.
The head may be dislocated by a fall or by being pushed out of place;
and when you have medicated this corruption by the cure of medicines, and it does not profit, if you cover that member to the place where the corruption comes, so that the patient escapes from death by the corruption of the member itself, or by the malice, which is greater, of the loss of the member;
and the signs are that the limbs become black, if it seems that they have been burned by fire, and after that darkness, for corruption of the member from member takes place, and embraces all the body.
if it is due to copper, and if it is caused by the stinging of certain poisonous animals, such as sea scorpions or weasels, then the corruption is at the top of the two bones, if it cracks, and give it no space to come up to the hand.
And if it comes only up to the hand, if the crack is at the joint, so that the corruption does not come up to the arm.
And if it comes up to the arm, if the crack is in the shoulder;
and if it passes the shoulder, then it is death, and there is no remedy except to take all of its virtue.
and until the rust comes where the stone: if it comes in the first joint, then the cap after the other joint;
and if it comes where the stone, then the cap all the way down; and if it rises up the leg, then the cap at the knee joint;
and if it comes above the knee, then there is no other danger to the patient but death;
and the way to cap or sew the member is that you tie it above and below, and extend two ministers one of the lines down, and two others the other line up, and you remove the splint that is between the two lines at a wide space, until the bone is uncovered;
then cap or sew it, and put a linen cloth on each side, so that the silk does not touch the healthy place, and brings another wound and abscess to the patient;
And if the pain comes when you work, then cauterize the area thoroughly, or put some powders that restrain it on.
Then return to your medicine as long as it is complete, then tie the injured member with a convenient bandage, and cure it until it is healed;
And I will tell you what happened to him at home in some detail:
He had a blackness that seemed like fire, and this corruption came first to his foot, staining the entire foot;
And when the noble saw the corruption, he took off the shoe, and was healed;
And long after that the corruption returned to his hand, and came to me, and I put on him things that irritated the skin after purifying the body, and could not stop the corruption;
And he said to me, "I will have you cut off his hand," and I refused, for I hoped to recover the matter; and I also doubt that if he cuts his hand, he will not die, for the virtue of man is weak.
and he became despairing and returned to his country, and he cauterized his hand, and was healed;
and I know of no other way than this that if one has to do it, one should do it.
No time comes when the abscess is in its place, and delays so long that it makes a great assembly of bowels; and then they rot and pierce, and the bowel falls out, and stays in the belly, also as our serfs; and the skin that is above is also as fine as silk, and does not run to the bone, nor to the nerve, and such a disease is called "saint" and is not called "fistula";
but if it is so long that it reaches down to the bone completely, then it is called a "fistula".
and cook it so that you wrap all of the meat, and most importantly when it is thin, as well as fabric. and do not heat it for its corrosion.
If you have cooked the meat and it is still partially raw, and the meat is thin like a blanket, then you should cook it in a bath.
look at whether the breasts are large, and the sweat that comes from them is of a foul odor, then you should clistere with Egyptian medicine which is made like this: take oil and lead and equal parts, and put them to boil on the fire, until the medicine becomes red, and is also as thick as honey:
and then take from this according to your need, and make it with water and honey, and with the ash of the lark, and extract the pus. and leave the medicine in for 2 hours, then remove it by squeezing it out;
make this ointment 10 times, until the sinews are all broken up and the pus is gone;
and never make this ointment with water and ashes, when this medicine is not present, but rather squeeze ash from the vine wood, and pour water on top, then let it flow and make an ointment, until you know that the sinews are well broken up;
and if the patient cannot bear it, neither this Egyptian medicine nor water and ashes, then make an ointment with a little bit of lead; or you make it with honey and wine, that honey has the property to break up and wash away, and the wine makes the sinew bitter;
and when you have done so, and you have engaged that the breasts are well changed, if the ointment of this one who makes the milk come out in it, and it is that you squeeze poultices definitively, and the paint with oil of roses and wine;
or you plaster it with some medicines and ointments, of which I have spoken in treating of ointments;
and if the nipple is small, and the plaster of the clister does not enter, if you widen it slightly with an iron hook, and put a tent of Egyptian ointment or basilican ointment on it, as wide as it is widened;
and if the wound is too wide, so that the cut allows the plaster to enter, and the nipple that falls is higher up or lower down than it should be;
and if you cannot cover the bowstring as you see, so arrange it in such a way that the bow runs to the lowest possible level; for when the bow is complete, if it does not leave a gap, and if you cannot cover the bowstring as you see, so arrange it in such a way: so that the bow runs lightly downstream, and does not leave anything of the bow;
so that the bow runs lightly downstream, and does not leave anything of the bow; and take consolidating medicines to put over the wound, and are on a linen cloth that covers all the wound; then cover as tightly as possible the hole on the side where the arrow went out, since it is sutured again according to the quantity of the hole, and put it over the wound to support the bow, and do not take off the large cloth for several days;
and those who are on the breast of the chest, often for to extract the bowel, and what runs from the bowels, if it is poison or pus or enough or digested or undigested;
and take care if the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess or not, and how much the medicine has spread out and you see the nature that rises on the chest of the breast, then know that the breasts have already started to move, and bring the healing;
and then untie it in the morning or the third day, and when you open the wound, if you change another cloth, and renew the dressing;
And if subtle poisons run long after a while, but you don't despair of health, for health is approaching.
For there are people whose wounds get worse with wet clothes, and those who do the opposite;
and the undigested bowels rise up from the chest after many days, knowing that the breasts are not moving;
and if it is late to hear, and is prolonged, so prepare medicines mixing moist in substance and drying in virtue, as the attention finally, for there is a great part of vitriol, and this is the behind medicine;
take attention finally, and make it with oil rosin, and aromatize it with equal wine in substance;
then the configure and use it;
and that the best made honey cooked thickened, when attention finally is not present, or you take mirr and aloes and incense, and grind it, and powder on the honey when it is out of fire;
and then spread on a cloth, and put it on the chest, and never administer to him an aromatizer long, and roots of the celestial plant, which is also like flour of times and hundredth; and in the use of simples or compounds: grind them, and make a powder, and put on honey which I have said, and use it;
and if the cure is long and this cure does not work, then you will know that corruption has set in fully, and causes impression in the bone, or in hard limbs, or in members; if the cure of the cure of the fistula, as we have said before.
Pancreatic is an abscess that may emerge from the nail of the hand, or of the foot, or perhaps may emerge in another two;
and when it has broken open, and no attention is given, then it may come to the formation of an abscess, and corruption and pus fill up so much at the root of the nail that perhaps it may fill them all up;
and comes the corrosion just to the bone, as much as there is stinking pain, and the shoulder of the two wide bones, and the color flows.
When you treat it as we have said in the division, and the cure does not take, then you must take away all the surplus that has been stored up under the finger nail, and then cauterize the wound afterwards. The caustic is a great help if the bone is healthy, and the nail is healthy;
and if the nail presses the wound and pricks it, and bleeds it, then you should put a hot and corrosive remedy on it to cut off all of it; then he cures with onions as long as it is healthy.
And if the corrosion is in the bone, then cut it and trim it, for as long as the bone is corrupted, it cannot heal.
and if you see the two corrupted, then cut them off as much as it is healthy;
and if it is wild, and gurgling, and smells of great pain, then you must first heal it.
then cut the nail down from above with a chisel at an angle, and be careful that the cutting does not reach the bed of the nail, for the patient would feel too much pain;
and if there is something on it that soothes.
Les deux membres qui naissent dans les mains de certains hommes sont parfois charnus, et parfois osseux, et n'ont jamais d'ongles, et aucune racine de la jointure ne nait en aucun d'eux.
Whoever is born in the middle of the neck does not move, and whoever is born at the hinge joint may move.
The size of that which is chubby should be small: Cut it in its root with a large chisel.
Whoever is born at the hinge joint should be treated with great care: If you keep it covered.
In those who are born in the heart of the joint, if it is right that you cut the rounded part up to the bone, then cut the bone with a suitable thread, and then treat it until it is healed.
The dislocations that come together by nature at birth, or by the assembly of a wound, or by fire, or by similar things.
If you believe that you can cover the one that is withering, so that it repairs itself according to its natural forms; then place between two blankets or sheets wet with oil so that they do not stick together. or put between two thin rags so that the threads do not stick together, as is necessary.
Se soudemens comes to any of its two with the palm, so hold it firm as it should be.
The veins are grossly wrapped with excessive melancholy matter, which comes from many members of the body;
and more comes in the legs of those who go on foot and work and carry, so that others
Therefore you must not at any time administer a laxative to him, but cure him from the base.
The cure with iron is done according to two methods: one is that they are boiled, and the black blood is drained; and another way is that you open the vein and drain it all.
The size should be determined according to this method: first make the leg hot with strong water until the thick blood is thinned, then draw the leg of the patient from above the thigh down to the ankle;
and cut the vein in I place, or II or III, of large size, then slice and draw strongly out black blood to your hand, from one top to another, as much as much of blood the virtue of disease can bear;
and then bandage it, and command that he turns his meat with black pepper;
and start again the evacuation and the bloodletting when veins are clear, and press on the disease.
The healing is done according to this method: Reheals the leg of the disease: if there is hair, then he puts it in water, and bathes it with hot water until it turns red, and opens veins;
and if you don't have a bath, heat it over fire, and then cut the vein at the top of the shin, or in the part below the ankle;
and soak the skin with vinegar, and scald each side until it feels hot;
and when it is red and black, and when it enters or leather so seems as a white cord;
then pour the wine into it until it is warmed by the leather, and then dip it lightly in vinegar, and then cover it with a cloth for three days;
then scald the skin on the vein until it feels hot, then dip it lightly in vinegar, as you have done, and then cover it with another knife, as you have done first;
then cut another size, or more if you need it, then dip it and then cut at the second level, and then treat and dip again;
then extract from one size to another until it has completely dried up, then cut off;
and if you can't pull and lift it out, then put a needle on one of the threads, and tie it up and pull it out, and cut off the thread, and turn your hand back and forth until it comes out. and keep it from slipping, because if it slips, then you can't pull or lift it out, and this causes harm to the patient.
and when you have finished treating it, put wet wool soaked in wine and oil on top of the wound; and treat it until he gets better.
And if it is twisted and bent and wrapped up together, and it isn't straightened out, as we have said, then you must cut it open, but don't cover it up; and pull it apart as we have described before.
The shape of the iron where the thread slips should be curved, and don' t cut it off, so that it doesn' t slip into the vein.
and it is a large loop, because if it were thin, it would wrap around the vein, but it is thick as we have said, and this is its shape:
This vein runs through the legs, in warm places where there are no herbs or trees, and on the ground where there is no moisture;
And perhaps it grows elsewhere than in the legs, and this causes the skin to peel off from within, as if it were crawling and winding between the leather and the skin.
And if the signs of the beginning of this wound are that there is a very great swelling in the leg, then the shape of it changes, and the wound begins to come out, just as the root of a plant does.
When the head is open, if you wrap a piece of cloth around the head from one and a half feet to two feet long, and then cover it with the cloth, and leave the cloth hanging down the leg, and whenever there is no more cloth on the leg, if the cloth is wrapped around the head again, and covered.
and if it is too long, take a part of it, and wrap up the rest, and do not cover it at all in its root as long as it is all out; for if you take it, so it enters the chest, and brings an abscess and corruption to it or there, and causes a bad disease;
for this thing, it is necessary that it be treated little by little up to the chest, and nothing remains of it or there;
and this vein does not come out when it is treated with the palm of the hand or ten fingers, and a great many come to me, to which she was of ten fingers long, and when you take it, if it bottles or breaks, and pierces up to the fundament, so that all comes out;
and the material that is inside be empty, and bring to its place medicines against corruption every day, then heal it as you would treat an abscess.
And in no way shall hands be held to this vein, and least of all when it opens in the joint of the foot, or the foot itself, for it is a great risk, and from which rain comes.
Cure therefore as we have said before.
vers which are born between leather and horse This disease is called in our language "buff disease", because it often occurs in buffaloes, and is a small worm that arises between skin and carriage, and goes up and down all over the body, causing burning as it moves from one member to another, until it comes out of the skin, and then it jumps away;
And is infected with pus caused by certain humors, so that they come towards, spiral, and shine, and are like worms or maggots in the belly;
And there is doubt of its maliciousness, for when it goes through the body, and comes to the head, and enters the oil, by chance it returns, and destroys the oil; and often.
When you see it治it and extractit, then can't one do but once:
So then it is necessary that you place the head up and fixit with a strong knot tightly, then push down and treatit firmly, and let it move freely in the socket, and if you don't findit, then cauterizeit with fire while it's moving:
and the greatest harm that it does, is if it tears the oil, as we have said;
and if you see it coming near the oil, then extractit it carefully, then push down and treatit firmly:
and use the medicine of washing with soluble medicines to remove bad humors from rot, and wash himself with meat that is rotting:
which comes from windiness This disease is called "vakirir" in our land, and it is a pain that comes to some limbs, and moves from limb to limb;
and I saw what I told you. I was called to a sick woman, and she uncovered her arms, and I saw a small swelling in the vein of her arm.
and I poked after, and I saw it rise as quickly as a worm does, as if it were silver, when it cuts from one place to another;
the pain departed from that place, and it entered into her shoulder, and then a poking after came all through the body, until it came to her other arm;
and then she told me that she was twisting all through her body again, as I saw her.
I marveled how she moved from member to member, because I had never seen this disease move in such a way. Anyway, many had wanted to move their pain from one place to another, but I did not want to do so, as I saw it in the woman;
and I thought that this was why the woman's body was so cold, and her veins uncovered, and because her breath appeared to be constricted;
and do not agree with this treatment for those who are very hungry, and have moist bodies and closed veins.
And when you treat this disease and the patient feels that pain, if it does not open as we have said, put a bandage on it and bind it tightly, and then cut it off as much as it hurts; and cauterize the wound;
and if you do not see your hair, take care of those who cause the wind to blow out, as if they were foul pills, and pills of serapin, and similar things.
are various, according to their appearances and according to the places of their entry into the body.
The diversity of them is that there are those who have long points, short points, hair, and welded; and those who have two angles, and those with tongues, and those with pieces;
and that moves in any member in two ways: If a member is principal, as the skull, heart, liver, stomach, kidneys, intestines, bladder, and similar members. When she falls off in any of these parts, and the sign of death, which I will tell you later, you it is appropriate for you to wash out this arrow, because death comes after many preparations; and when the bad sign does not appear to you yet, and the arrow is not fully extracted, if you pull it out, and treat the wound.
And the sign of the skull when the arrow falls and pierces the bone, and the fluid that comes out which is on the skull, is when there is a scabies and sweating and twitching and redness in them, and inflammation and redness of the tongue, and convulsions and confusion of understanding, and vomiting of food; and maybe it will come out of the nostrils or ears; and perhaps it will come out with speech and voice; and jumps out of the moist sore looking like pus, and in such a way that it seems to burn as fire;
and this sign reveals itself, if you have the cure, and extract the arrow if it is embedded.
The sign of the arrow when it hurts or rubs, is that it is near the left breast, and also seems to be pushed into something hard, not into a hollow thing; and perhaps the arrow also becomes pus, and in white color, and comes cold and cold sweat, and faints: then you must know that death draws near.
The sign of the snot when it comes out is that without a plume of foam jumps out of the wound, and the throat swells, and the patient's color changes, and he gazes upward and shivers with cold.
And if the arrow has entered into the covering of the thigh, take care of the small bones; and get great weakness and great pain and sighs; and they move all the limbs of the shoulders.
And if the snot comes out in the stomach, perhaps some meat is vomited up.
And if an arrow is lodged in the belly, and it does not come out through the intestine, then there is no hope for the cure or extraction of the arrow.
And if an arrow is embedded in the bladder, and urine flows out and runs away, and the patient feels great pain: it means that the wound is fatal.
The other member, if as with the face and the neck and the throat and the shoulder and the ajutoire and the spine and the force and the cul and the legs, and the limb that seems to be affected, are safe according to many dispositions. When the arrow is in a nerve or an artery, and it does not come out, then as I will tell you what happened to me, do the opposite.
There was a man who had an arrow embedded in his neck or throat at the root of his throat: I tried it and dislodged the arrow from one side of the ear fat, and was healed without sensation.
And he dislodged an arrow from one side of the oil fat with a stick, and the arrow was reinserted, and only the point poked him in the back, and the arrow was a great green color, and weighed down his ears;
The game was healed, and no other accidents happened to him.
And I saw an arrow from the throat of a Christian, and the arrow was Arabic at the ears.
I saw the hair, and made it grow long, and healed the Christian.
And I saw an arrow in his chest or stomach, and I thought he was dying;
and then that he passed thirty days, but his condition did not improve; I cut up the arrow, and removed it, and I drew it out, and he had no bad effects.
And if there is a Christian who has an arrow in his butt or back, and the wound is closed;
and let the arrow stay inside him, and do not change his natural dispositions, nor find harm in any of his natural works.
And I saw another man, to whom an arrow fell into his face, and the wound was closed; and it delays so much suffering great pain;
and many others' appearances.
And there was a bolt to the king of the Prince, that was him in the middle neck, and was slightly inclined on the right side; and the bolt was all bent.
I was called to heal after that she had been lame for three days. I found the wound to be very tight.
I asked her to try all sorts of remedies, and I did not feel it; and he felt pain and injury in his right ear.
I thought it was from the bolt of the king I put on the leech and the digestive tar, so that his legs did not swell; and I saw the bolts.
and I saw the bolts. I put on the leech after three days, and resolved the wound quickly, and so much suffering lasted for a long time, until he felt the bolt inside his neck;
and he told me. I put the corrosive herbal medicine on the wound for as long as it was open, and tested it, and felt the head of the arrow in its place.
then I tightened the opening of the wound with that herbal medicine, until the head of the arrow was clearly visible;
and I left it for three months, and then I opened the wound again, and the scar was so large that I had to use pliers on one side and pull, but I couldn't get it out;
then I stopped trying to use subtle and ingenious ways to get tools, until one day I got a pair of pliers, made according to the shape that will result from this chapter at the end, so I opened it, and put the wound back together.
And I see that the cartilage at the nose cannot be restored. I reset it then, and it was sewn up, and the patient was completely healed.
Or you told me the quality of extracting certain arrows, so that you put your treatment on those that I did not say, because the book cannot include everything;
But the master doctors compare very little thing well, and on those that are present and failing, they have nine operations and nine instruments for dealing with strange things that occur in this art.
I say that the arrows should not be from the limbs except as per two ways: either at the entrance where they enter, or from another side;
and those that go out by way in which they enter, are arrowheads penetrating into the flesh, and should never stay stuck now.
And if she does not jump now, let her wait until the hocks are rotten inside, and let the birth come.
And if she is stuck in the bone, and cannot come out, let her wait a few days, and let her mud each day;
And then she jumps, and if she does not jump, let him open all the small veins inside very well, until the blood flows inside, and then tie it up.
And if the arrow is reinserted in the neck so that it cannot be seen, and you want to find it with all your strength; and if you feel it, and then take it with any suitable tool;
and if you cannot take it out by pressure on the wound, and because of the depth of the arrow, and there is no bone or nerve or vein, then break it as much as the wound is large;
and if you can take the arrow out, and if it has ears to hold it in place, then remove or bend the arrow until you can pull it out;
and carefully so that you do not break the arrow, and then draw it out more painfully.
And if you cannot pull once, if the hair until the base is rotten, then try, for extraction it is difficult. And if this remedy of blood makes the patient contrary, then administer what we have said about the treatment with his ointment.
and be careful of the incision of the nerve and the vein, and do not try to extract the arrow without danger, soon or slowly, or firmly or loudly;
and set the patient according to the form he was in when the arrow entered, for this is the greatest help that can be given, and if you cannot do so, then follow what the signs show you.
The arrow that comes from another direction, and does not open anything of the body, or if the skin is swollen in a certain place, so that it can be seen or felt:
Cut him down, as far as the hooks can reach, and then extract them: if it were now
And if it is held in the bone, turn your hand roundly until it enters into the bone and widens the bone, then draw it out.
And if it cannot be extracted, then leave it for now, and then begin the extraction again as soon as it comes out:
and if there is an arrow, put it to the whole shaft.
and if there is a splinter, and you have a file, if you file the end of the splinter so that it enters into the channel of the tool;
and then pour on, and if the arrow is filed, pour the file onto the end that enters, so that the extraction may be easier.
And if the arrow is lodged, then it is necessary that you cut all around the place where the arrow enters; if you can, do so, and then treat the wound as it is necessary to do.
and if the arrow has entered or is in the chest or bladder or side, and it is near, and you can cover it, you can cover it.
and keep yourself from covering the vein and nerve, and then extract it, and then sew up the wound, for that is a job. and treat it until it is well.
The form of the pliers that are used to treat arrows are similar to an eye, and thus the shape is this:
And there are many ways: great, middle-sized, and small, according to the size of the arrow.
The shape of the butt-end is also like the beak of a bird, to fit to the tip of the arrow, as this is the shape:
Of the veins from which one heals are XXXI; of which there is head XVI. The two bats that are behind the ears, which are called "dous herbech"; and the two arteries that are in two temples appearing; and two veins that are in two limbs of two eyes, which are called "aspires"; and the vein that is at the forehead; and the vein that is at the head from the nose; and the two jugular veins that are at the neck; and the two veins that are on the lips above the mouth, which are called "augeherich"; and the two veins that are behind the tongue.
Of the veins from which one commonly heals are five in each arm:
one is the cerebral, and is on the left side of the neck, and it is called by lay people "voine du chief"; and the name is called "fasting", and is composed of the cephalic and basilar, and they call it "vein curer"; and the basilar is on the right side, and they call it  "vein curer", and is on the top, and this one which is said, who opens clearly on the navel.
And the little finger is the vein that is between the index and the ring finger, and if it has II rains;
and in the leg and where the foot are III veins: one is located on the back of the hand on the left side, and the second one that is at the ankle on the right side; and the vein that is called "nerve", which is in the ankle on the other side;
and in the other leg are III veins of those.
The ear drains after the ears that help the old catarrh, and causes migraine.
and the quality of the ear drain, as I told you, is that you remove the head of the sick person and rub the place where the veins are with a rough cloth; and then tie the patient's neck with a rope so that the two veins appear behind the ears attached to the head; then place them on your right side, and where you feel the pulse of your right side, sign with your hand;
then take the lance and pierce through the vein up to the bone, then lift your hand up to all the vein in front, and cut it and the skin and the vein very well on both sides, and make the blood flow until you see;
then extract and bandage it, until it is healed;
and I have already said the incision and cautery in the first book.
The two arteries that are in the two temples, if they are of an old age, and سودة, and a customed ophthalmia, and at the base of the tears, to the eyes.
and the quality of the surgeon is so as I say: that the patient draws his chin back until the two veins are clearly visible; and feel the pulse at the base of the tongue, and then sign with the index finger;
then put the knife on the vein at the top of your second finger, and cut it, and then cover the vein, so as you have done with the two veins before, and make the blood flow according to your need;
then wash the patient, and put your finger on the vein for an hour, then put cotton on it; and then make a cast, and leave it until it is healed;
and we have spoken about their operation and extraction, or the beginning of the book.
The healing of a frontal vein is as effective as the treatment for an ancient facial disease, and causes migraines and dizziness;
and the quality is that the patient twists his neck until the vein appears; Then take the instrument which is called "a pit-drill", whose form is this:
And place the point on the vein, and hold it with your hand, or with another thing, and let blood come according to the quantity that you see; Then remove the neck from the patient, and tie the vein until it is healed, and do not work a wide flame.
However, it is not fitting for the flames to be too hot; and the bone is close by, for the bone may break if the flames are too sharp; and the fire may die out when it is thin.
The two veins that are in the two arms should be treated with hair, and for scrofula, and jaundice, and eye diseases, and diseases of oil, and skin diseases;
and the quality of their health is that the patient should remove his hair by twisting it with no rope, as I have described above;
Then the patient and also the sick one, and a little of the long flame a little of the wide flame, for there is no fire. If the flames are too sharp, then break them up.
Then make a fire of blood, as much as you need to, and then tie it with wool, and tie it well.
The pain of the vein that runs through the neck is so great with water and sudden fever, and with diseases of the face, as headaches and red eyes that come into the face, even when it is old.
and the quality of pain is that the patient strangles his throat, then takes hold of the long delicate flame, and puts it between the two nostrils because the vein does not open well on its own, and now it will start to run;
and do not burn too much in the process, and let the blood flow according to your need, then leave it alone for a night, because it is soon healed;
The pain of the two armpits is helped by stretching the breast, and by the trouble of milking, and by many diseases, and by hemorrhoids, and by blisters, and it is said;
and the qualities of health are such that the patient dislodges his neck from side to side, as we have said;
and the master standing over the head of the patient, and the patient cutting one side of a vein, then he heals the vein long and slightly, then treating blood from time to time until it is necessary;
then he does the same on the other side, then he ties the vein, and draws it out slightly so that the patient does not strangle; and leaves it until morning so that the wound is healed.
of the health of animals For the health of the lips: they help to clean in the mouth, and prevent decay of the gums, and splits in the lips, and diseases of the teeth and tongue.
And the qualities of health are such that the patient sits before you, and dislodges his neck as I have said; then he turns the lip and looks at the veins, one of which is on the right lip and the other on the left, and you can recognize them because they are black, and because there are small veins that are black inside of them;
So both of them, and if you don't know them, and if you are in doubt, then do the largest one of each pair, and also do the two veins that are above and below, for it is a middle way.
For the health of the tongue So the veins that are below the tongue, then after the treatment of the cerebral vein, which is for the extraction of the throat, and to the diseases of the eye, and to the diseases of the mouth;
and the quality of the patient if that the disease is between your hands before the sun, and let the tongue lie, and look down on each side a black vein:
So both of them, and do not go too much to perfection, for the veins are below.
The veins that you treat commonly are treated according to two ways:
ou em poinçon à tout i flamme mirton large, ou olivière subtil si com coutés trenchens, et est appelé «anésil»; and are wide and subtle according to the width and stretching of the veins. The shape of the flame is called a 'mirtle', and it is wide as you see it.
And it is necessary to open the knotted veins that appear flat and contain thick blood and turmoil; and this is the form of the flame olive:
and is more subtle pointed, and is for saving the veins that are subtle, where there is subtle blood yellow.
The blood from the base of the nose, which is one of these veins, goes to the throat, neck, chest, and abdomen;
And it comes to the patient who bleeds profusely and who warms himself with the artery that is outside of it. If he severs the artery, and the blood flow comes, if he needs to stop the bleeding, so as I have said; and must not be grabbed by the flame, but cut off like this.
And if the base of the tooth does not open clearly, then you should extract it and change to another. or if there is no pain in it, or if you feel pain in the vein when you press on the arm: then the tooth opens clearly. and hold it to the flame as we have said.
And if you can feel the pulse clearly, then you should extract the arm, touching the spot until you feel the pulse. then mark the spot with a pin, and then extract the arm, pressing the vein with the flame as we have said; and be careful not to hurt yourself in the artery when you mark the spot, because it is an artery. I have received.
And if you see coming out on top as the urine of a child, and his blood is red and thin, know that it is his artery. Hurry up then, and place your ear closely, then lift up your ear if it gets stiff, because it often happens; Let him raise his arm, and leave it like that, and do not move the patient;
and be afraid, and do not move him until he is well.
And if his arm is not stiff and he comes to you, and the medicine is not given to him, if the artery is opened, for the head of the shoulder will be dislocated. and let it stiffen again.
And take a piece of fig tree, and burn it, and take one of the halves and place it well until the other day;
if he has no fever, that's good; if not, if the doctor, as we said, of the powders that stop bleeding;
and the stopping of blood is not too great in several situations for the small wound of the leg, and the ability of the vein of the arm.
The bloodletting in the middle is good if it stops the bleeding from the head and the heart, as we have said;
and the doctor should cut through the nerve that is at the back, and if he cuts too much in perfection, the nerve will burst, and the wound will be painful and perhaps cannot heal;
and this nerve opens many times, and if it does not open in any person by its fineness, you must cut it with the dull tool; and I abstained from the nerve to your power.
And if there is a vein between the two knees, then cut it short.
The relief of the cephalic pain, so that he does not go down to the head and supports the eyes;
and it is necessary to hit the olive flame or the merlin flame, for this is the one that saves all veins, because it does not damage the nerve or the artery. However, it is necessary to seek the lighter one first, and do not harm anything if you fail the first time, and you start again; and in case it injures some men, if you fail the first time, but it does not harm anything.
The quality of the relief depends on your thinking.
The first thing you must know about healing, if healing is only achieved to preserve health and prevent diseases from coming.
and let the healing be done in one of the three veins that are or hurt: This is what the text says: and one must keep to the fast of priests for nine days and in autumn and winter after supper when the sign of satiation appears.
and one must abstain from food on the first day or third day, for two hours or three times a day.
The fast which is combined with illness has no fixed duration, but when need arises it must be maintained day and night in all hours.
and children should not fast until they are twelve years old, nor women carrying a child for four months until seven months. Doctors should not treat very old people who are over sixty years old.
And when anyone does fast, in whatever way, it is necessary that he vomit the contents of a light clistere if he has repressed wind, so that the veins do not draw in the excess of putrid and harmful matter to the principal members;
ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k'il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques;
do not heal those who are too exhausted by meat, or by wine, as much as it may be necessary, or by dropsies; and if someone is healed after a colic, vomiting, cramping of the belly, frequent visiting of women, labor, staying up late, and all other physical activities, or due to something done with the knife or the heart;
then carefully adjust the humors, because he will become fat, through meat, drink, and medicine, if you have it;
then let him take a bath or a dip, if anything does not benefit him, to gently remove the blood from the back of the neck between the third and fourth vertebrae, as we have said;
and keep him away from work, drinking, lust, and similar things;
and so are the bones and joints, and let the surgeon stand higher than the one on whom he operates, and rub his arms twice or three times, then remove the ligature gently, for when it is too tight or weak, he cannot do it without pain.
and then rub the wound with his hands until the veins swell and can be felt.
and then moisten the surgeon's flame with a little old oil, and then put his left hand on that vein to stop the bleeding a little or where he wants to cut, so that the vein does not bleed while he cuts.
For there are veins that run like strings for the surgeon, and some that are so thin with wind that when you put fire on them, if you take it away quickly, they do not bleed, and thus you are from those. and if he opens the vein, if the wound is too narrow, for in these things it is necessary that the surgeon be wise.
And if he opens the vein the first time, it is good; if not, then begin again a little on the edge or above the wound, if the limbs are not swollen.
And if the limbs are swollen and the patient hopes to get well, let him rest for a day or two, and do not bind the arm. so that it may come to a head.
do not enter or bathe, and then begin the operation if he likes it;
and if the fracture is small, or the bone slightly broken and you doubt that it will come out at all, then with great care and skill, break it again entirely;
and work a little healing, so that the legs are swollen. for this happens often, when the wound is small.
If you see the leg swollen, do not recommend medicine, and put on a little oil, because it soothes the body of the blood, and is soft in that place where the oil lies; because oil is soft in this place.
and administer the oil to each wound that you heal the veins, so as to stop up the flow of blood;
and it also makes a treble and bowing noise when put on the leg; so that it is subtle and moves apart when it is too large.
And if there is a large abscess, which happens often, unless the wound has been well treated only once or the opening of the vein is small, then hurry and put on the leg a wet sponge with some heat and a little oil, and hold it for an hour;
and it is necessary that you do this after the flow of blood from a vein, and if it stays in place after a few days without any discoloration or browning, then it does not harm me; and if you see, put on anything of aloe or myrrh made into a paste with juice of calamus, marjoram, or something similar.
And many times an abscess and appearance occur to the blood from the temple:
So then put your hand on it, and if you find the joint soft to the touch by pressing with your thumb, then this is the appearance of illness. So do not put on anything of what we have said, for perhaps in a short time there will be no artery;
but the king makes it dry by curing it with another cure until it is well.
And treat every wound according to the quantity of its virtue, and the color of the blood.
For if it is black inside, then let it go out until it is red; and if you see a lump, let it be thin. and if it is too hot, let it cool down.
And for those who are sick and have to extract blood, we make the wound larger and wider flames.
and for those who are weak, do the opposite, heal them little by little, and heal them by cutting across, not by piercing;
and this way of healing saves from the decay of blood and the entanglement of nerves, and it is better than long healing or wide healing.
And for those whose hearts are in need of healing, one should give moist wine made from pomegranate juice. if it is heated, give III or IV times the juice; and if it is of cold complexions, moisten it before healing with honey syrup or aromatic syrup made with spices, such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and cloves, and sweet syrup.
And if he sweats in health, after the flow of blood, then it is fitting that he smell brew of wine and subtle aromatic syrup, and use the other things which we have said in the chapter or composition for fainting, to evacuate the vein.
And if he vomits up his food and is healthy again, then it is fitting that he is healed little by little according to the quantity of his continuing virtue.
And who vomits after the first wound, and has a strong fever, if he heals seven hours after the first wound, or after the ninth hour.
And who vomits in another place, should he heal on the second day or the third.
For there is blood coming from within the body that causes fever. If a large amount of blood is drawn and the hole enlarged so that it leaks a lot through the skin; then you shall treat all the symptoms of disease, and place your hand on his pulse when he is healthy, so that death does not come from the skin, and this happens many times, when the healing is neglected;
and do not wait until you see that the arm has dislocated again, and make the blood come out a second time, and the hole is closed, so that you press firmly on it; do not do this if it is bent, for that would be wrong;
but leave it until he has healed a second time; or you may apply fire to the tip until the blood that has been frozen at the vein's opening comes out again, and place thereon a small piece of rope soaked in water, and press gently.;
And if the vein has burst, let it go and do not constrict it, as long as the abscess is drained.
And if need be, to drain the blood a second time, if the vein is in the same place, or in another vein, or in the other arm.
The vein that runs through the arm is attached to the vein at the base of the head because it is complex.
And the way of healing is such that the patient dips his hand in hot water until the veins turn red.
Then he should move it gently so that the vein is visible clearly, then now treat it with a needle, not from the wide end nor the long end;
and if the break is wide, and if you heal it well near the joint of the hand, and so he cannot get out of it, then put the hand in hot water, and let the blood run in the water until enough has passed;
and if it is swollen, then don't dip the hand in hot water again, because you put it in more danger than when it was swollen;
and the healing of this vein is safer than all other veins, neither artery nor nerve.
The healing of the savings of the right hand is worth all the diseases of the liver, and this is the way:
extirp the hand, and pour hot water on it, as long as the vein is gone, if we can see it. and if he has a sore throat, and cuts off all of it, so that it does not hurt anything;
and do not trim it too much, for the nerves are all exposed and then put the hand in hot water again, if it has frozen in the wound, and cannot pull it out.
And when you have treated the blood as much as is necessary, put oil and thread on it to hold it tightly together, and do the same for each finger.
The medicine for the left hand is good for the disease of the mouse; and do the same as I told you for the right.
The medicine of the Sophene is good for all diseases that come about in the body, as are diseases of the feet, retention of wind, disease of the kidneys, and similar diseases.
And the quality of his throat is that the patient pours some water on it again and rubs on the vein until it stops bleeding, and lays on top of the joint at the foot. and if the vein is at the ankle, and above it go many ways;
he should cut where it is wider or narrower, or at the ankle, so that he does not hurt himself.
And if you cut on the leg, if you keep away from the nerves that are exposed, and also cut in such a way as when you are chopping.
and let the flames be extinguished.
And if he cannot get them out, put the foot back into the water, and let the vein bleed well.
And if you cut it for the first time, if you start again a little higher up on top because the blood is salty;
do not doubt about the nerves, as we have said, and so do with the other leg evenly.
The leg of the sciatic nerve is at the ankle and its pain goes up to the knee when it is for pain.
And the quality of the cut is that the patient goes in or bath, and extracts from the ankle IV fingers by twisting, because otherwise it does not open the vein;
and if it opens, then cut it in all ways that you can, and crossing; and wait until you have chopped it, for the blood is flowing, and it is very much repinned by many men.
and wait until you have chopped it, for the blood is flowing, and it is very much repinned by many men. And if you don't treat it, so that there is no rain from him who opens or closes the foot, and towards the small toe, and keep away from the nails;
and make so much heat of the wound that you see, and then untie the bandage, and put on cotton and hold it in place; And he is now cured.
Vapourizers are made of horn, or of air, or of glass;
and the ventilation is done according to two ways: either by hurting and drawing blood, or without hurting.
And this ventilation that is without hurting is according to two ways: either it is all fire, or not fire;
and the ventilation that is made by hurting and drawing blood is done in 12 places of the body, so that one is all on top; and the other is broken at the neck; and the other two are in the two coasts of the collar; and the ventuse dislociates the chin; and the ventuse dislocates the two shoulders; and the ventuse on the back; and the ventuses dislocate the two arms; and the ventuses dislocate the two legs; and the ventuses dislocate the two ankles;
and the ventosis does not treat blood when it is a small opening that is scattered in the vessel, and for this reason it does not harm anyone, if only because of the small openings that are scattered in the sea; nor does it suffice if she is administered, nor does it matter if there is any disease that comes from overconsumption, as long as the whole body is empty;
And if by necessity of diseases one needs to be ventosed, or for habits, we administer it every hour in the beginning of the month, and at the end, and also on a daily basis;
For there are those who, when they have to go outside, become very heavy.
And if it is so that those who are vendoring have repletion and reddening in their face, and in their chief, and at their neck, and darkness of eyes;
And those who are vendoring have a drop of blood in their mouth, and have escaped the tongue, and thirst for blood; and if it is so that those who are dreaming, and see with bloodless eyes and confused vision and death and similar things.
And when we see these signs, and even more so when it is hot in the month of July, we order them to be vented after three hours from daybreak.
The physician of the moon helps with the headache at the head ... that comes to the eyes, and it should not come except after the evacuation of all the body.
and this vendoring is in the place of the physician of the head, and it should not come except from those who are of a cold disposition and who have taken a chill, for this does them great harm.
and so it is not appropriate for me to sleep without using it, nor those who have or chief cold diseases.
And those who are cured often become dizzy, and so it is necessary to place the cup a little lower by doubt of dizziness.
The ventilation of the neck is in place of the main vein and the base of the skull, and for this reason it is used for the extraction of the tooth, and for cutting through the jaw, and for all, and for filling;
and so it should be pressed hard because if it holds too tightly, then a stomach or gut or body part will break.
The two ribs of the neck are painful to touch, and they cause blindness and headaches, and choke, and pain in the roots of the teeth, and are in place of the main vein of the base of the skull;
and you should command the physician that he press his hand on the place, so that he does not hit the artery, and does not disturb the blood flow.
The winds that blow from the front are very harmful to the mouth, and to the decay of the gums, and similar diseases that are in the mouth; and is in the position of the two lips.
The windsations of the shoulders are worth illness that comes from heat and swelling.
The winds that blow from the front are as harmful as three veins in the arms, because they draw away blood from these large veins;
And instruct the patient that he not cut too deeply, because his vein is exposed and vulnerable; it can easily be cut and bleed profusely.
The wind that blows from the back is very harmful to the fundament and to the decay; it is necessary that the wind be great and wet, because it has the duty of milking well. And if it should become subtle, then it would break; and cause great wounds.
The legs' windfalls open so widely because they draw blood from all the body, and are the cause of old pains in the kidneys, in the uterus, and in the bladder, and shake the flowers;
and are in the second position of the feet, and the second of the ankles, but nevertheless they weaken the body after a long use, and produce more than two diseases.
The manner of applying the suction cup is that you put it first in a clear place, and suck quickly, and then place it firmly, move evenly, and do not cease doing this until you see the red and inflamed place, and appear the color of blood;
Then dry it off, and put on the suction cups again, and take care in the arrangement of the bodies, for there are some who have very hard skin, and they get sore quickly: if it is necessary to hurt once only, and make large wounds, and a little deep; and suck lightly.
And if the sinew is thick, if it is necessary to hurt twice: the first time for diluting the blood of the big vein.
and if it is very thick, then it is necessary to hurt the third time;
and when we want to extract blood little by little, if we only press once. and if we want to take a lot of blood, then we start again and again;
and if the blood is thick, then we press hard and completely, and the end is that the gush of blood is sudden, and it covers someone who has thick and tough skin, and who has been burned, you should grease the leprous areas with oil that opens and dissolves: if it is in an open wound, of violet oil, or of sweet almond oil, or of cucumber seed oil;
and if it is in the eye, of watercress oil, or of lily, or of chamomile, or other thing that seems suitable.
And if it is too cold and oily, take oil of almonds, or of balsam, or oil of anise, and similar things.
And if they have a sore that is dry and large, then it is not necessary to put oil on, but it is necessary to wash it after the cooling of rose water, or cold water, or water of mulberries, or water of cucumbers, or water of porcelain, or other things.
And he who has moisture, if it dries up like this, or with water of myrtle, and of sumach, and similar things.
And those who have great excesses rise up from old wine, or from water of suet, or from aneth or chamomile decoction, or other like things.
and it is not convenient to take a bath before the vacuum, but after the bath an hour or two;
and do not sleep after the vacuum is taken, and it is convenient that he warm up when he should be vacuumed and when he has been vacuumed.
And guard against those who are healing from colic, and if the sun is too high and heated; if it is convenient that he eat cold things, as pomegranates, endive, and lettuce at the edge, and similar things; and soft porridge, and cheese of goat's milk, and moist meat.
and soft porridge, and cheese of goat's milk, and moist meat. And those who have a cold complexion, if they eat syrup of honey, and fragrant wine that is between old and new, and soft porridge, and soft porridge and small birds and pigeons;
and as he grows older, if he must drink more than eat.
and it is necessary to give to some men once or twice pepper or musk before the ventilation, or after, to strengthen the main members; and be subtle in his drink, but it is necessary that only those who are warm drink it.
The ventosas that are put to hurt are those that are put on the liver, and the kidney, and the podagre, and the belly, and the buttocks, and the rain and the hainche, for this member does not suffer to be hurt on the outside, and we put it on the breasts when it is not healthy;
to remove the viscous fluid that is in the member, as we put ventosas on the belly and the buttocks to ease the member;
and remove the pain, when there is an operation or stone, if it removes by its attractive virtue the operation, or moves away the stone from its place;
and so when one puts it on the liver and the mouse as it is retained wind, and these suction cups are emptied clean for suckling only; and never are they put together fire, nor any times plainness of water, if as the disease of pleurisy, and in such a way one fills the suction cup with hot water or water in which he has boiled herbs suitable for this.
The shape of the suction cup administered to fire is thus:
And it has II width of a half palm of parfont, and has where it goes around the middle I small hole, as for to put in a needle, and is of air, before so that it does not wound the patient when one puts it on the member;
and in the middle is a staff of air or iron, to take a grip, and there are great and small ones according to the diseases and age of those who take them;
For the suckers of children are other than those of old people, and skinny than fat.
And one must put this suction on the limb:
Take the wax candle or ointment, and put it between the suction cup and the limb: let the clarity be at the bottom of the suction cup so that it doesn't burn the patient;
and then put it on the limb, and your hands must be in the pit that we have said: so that when one sucks, if there is steam, and take off the suction cup;
and take the ointment as before, and renew it often, if you need to.
In the suction cup that has been used for pleurisy disease, there is no need for a wick or pit, and it is only used when it is plain of water, and put on the limb only slightly;
and this is the form:
are not created with such small members that they cannot be put into a cup for their smallness, as the lips and gums and similar things; and in their nakedness of limbs, as the deer and does and others;
and the quality of using them so is that when you find limps that are in clear fresh waters without danger, then take them;
and put them into a pot in fresh water, as long as they are friendly and have nothing in their bellies; and then be healed with the cup and the vacuum, then rub the member until it is red, and put the limps on;
and when they are clear, and have 치유, then it is put on, for this is worth more later.
If not, raise the limb up, and then of water, very well, and then squeeze it;
and if he leaves his back too long after the chest of the swines, so that it is moistened by a cold drape, and put on, as long as the swine is swollen.
and if he has many swines, so put on vitriol powder, or scabs, and similar things, as long as they are swollen.
or put on half a handful of peeled peas, and leave them to burn at the fire, so now they will cool down.
and if you have more work, then take other swines.
And if the swines will not take it, so frolic the fire of the blood, or put there a needle as long as the swine gives off blood, and then put them on, and soon as they feel the blood, so burn.
and when you see that they are squealing, so sprinkle on a little powder of aloes and sawdust, or ashes, so they will stop now.
Here begins the book of fractures The chapter of calumny is necessary many times in the art of medicine, and is the restoration of a fracture and dislocation.
Know then, you sons of bitches, that the wise men are soaked in this chapter, that you will never find such a thing in any of the old books or letters.
And for this reason, the science is strange to us in our land, for I have never found any good one.
and know nothing, except that by the science of ancient books, where I have studied so much and treated the science, and by experience, and by the custom of my life;
and I have described in this chapter what is contained therein, and has summarized it at the end, and clearly shown the forms of the instruments that are used, as I did in the two chapters above.
It is fitting that we say in this book the sums of speech and the chapters where wisdom sets forth her understanding, and holds fast to truth, so that those who are experienced may know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
I say that when fracture, dislocation, twist, or strain comes to anyone, it is necessary that you hurry to save the patient from both sides, unless something stops him entirely, as in the case of a weak neck, or an obstruction, or an old man; If he is very thin, or too often hungry,
and do not drink any cold wine, nor any fatty foods, and do not fill yourself too much with meat that fills the veins with blood, as long as you have no doubt about the heat of the abscess, or the expansion of the substance in the limb;
If the patient returns to their normal way of life without considering these things.
And when the broken bones begin to heal, it is necessary that the patient be nourished with meats that produce great thickness, or viscosity, like cooked flour in water, and rice, and eggs, and pies made from goat's milk, and cheese, and fresh fish, and strong wine, and similar things. For with great nutrition healing begins more quickly and sooner.
And know that the bones broken from old age or frail people cannot recover or harden the limbs according to their nature because of the lack of blood in the members, nor those that are too soft, as with the bones of small children;
but do not heal, return to the broken bone and large joints that join the limb together, as much as it hardens as it was before; and not at all of his work, and for this it is necessary to feed him with large meat, as we have said.
And know that the breakers are various in many ways.
For the break of the head is other than the break of the foot or of the leg, and I will tell you in this chapter all kinds of breaks. For there is a break that goes to the shoulder, and another in twisting, as if the cutting of a feather for writing.
For there is a break that goes to the shoulder, and another in twisting, as if the cutting of a feather for writing. And if there is a break with a wound, and a break that is all a small fracture.
And each has its own device, and its own specific tool for restoration, according to what the memory comes back in place;
and is understood the breaking of the bone because its edge is twisted, and open well from the side, and presses by the hand;
and when there is no torus, and the patient does not feel great pain, there is no fracture;
but it can have torus, or split, or small fracture. If you cannot move it by hand alone, but put on medicine that comes here after, and then restrained now gently.
And know that the break which has happened in the arm, and are the two parts separated, it is now necessary to put them in an equal way, so that the nails come out;
and when the nails come out, if he leaves no gap, as long as the abscess is calmed down;
and then make it equal to the wound that you can easily and cleanly, and know that the restoration of it is lighter than the restoration of him who has pieces;
and then hold it, as it is convenient hereafter.
And if in the bone there are pieces broken, if the extension of the two parts is short or long, whether it is hand or foot, or a small member, or two strings, or one string and your hand;
and set the member according to its natural form, so that when the parts of the broken member are restored, you restore them by all means to their places as easily as you can, and keep that by your work no injury or pain comes to the patient;
and join well the two heads of the bones according to the best forms.
And feel it well in the hand if it seems to you that it is not right:
If the dressing is applied well and not too much, and do not press it as those who bring it about by their ovraige, an abscess hot and contracted to the limb, as we have often wanted.
And when the limbs are in place, so that the patient does not move it, neither waking nor sleeping, turning or in any other way; and keep the limb well secured so that it feels no pain. For when one feels no pain, then it is not in place, and it is necessary to put it in such a position that one feels no pain;
and keep the limb well secured so that it feels no pain. For when one feels no pain, then it is not in place, and it is necessary to put it in such a position that one feels no pain; and guard so that it is placed correctly, so that there is no tortuosity when it is restored;
and the quality of the limb is according to what I tell you.
Know that the broken member is diverse in smallness and greatness and form.
For there are small limbs, as arms and legs and similar things: If it is necessary to wrap linens that are soft and fine. and those who are thick, such as the thigh and leg:
If it is necessary to wrap with a broad and sturdy linen, because the broad linen envelops the entire limb, holding it evenly from all sides so that there is no itchiness;
Then tie it lightly, three or four times according to the limb, and hold one hand on all of the linen, then go up above the break and hold it less, so that the break comes a little away;
and soften the linen little by little, until you press a great deal of the skin, then take another linen and wrap it very tightly above the break;
then go back to the sore part of the break and hold it with moderate pressure, not too strong or too gently, as we said in the first line above;
and place between the linen threads or drapes, as long as they are all even, then tie it tightly above the bandage, and then put your well-made splints on top, if there is no abscess or swelling.
If there is swelling or an abscess, place something soothing on the abscess to soothe it and let the swelling go down, and leave it like that for a few days;
then put your splints on, and let them be of half a cane of sawn wood, or of a beam, or of palm leaves, and be according to this figure:
but it is necessary that the splint that one puts on the break is a little thicker and wider than the others;
and be also as far away as necessary for the limb's size, whether small or large; and stretch on the poles also as you did in the first hour, then tie up above it a thread forwardly, as in the first hour on the fracture. then narrow it up, gradually lessening the tightness.
and let the thread be light, not too thick nor too thin, and made of soft linen.
for if the thread is thick, as I have seen in the works of foolish men who make ropes out of linen twine, and that is a great mistake, because the length cannot be equal if it is too thin, and it only deserves to be less than half an inch between each pole.
And if the patient is injured by the hooks of the stars after extraction in their healthy state, then let them be bound with linen, or another kind of rag, so that they do not get cut.
When the wound is with the bruise, and the cure is broken, I will describe the treatment hereafter.
And know that it is not appropriate to extract stars from all the broken limbs on the first day. For when the limbs are large, it is not fitting to put poles before five or seven days, or more according to the urgency of the abscess, which sometimes heats up suddenly.
and consider the method of the ancient empirics in restoring fractures, dislocations, and twists:
and it is that you take flour that holds on the walls of the mill, and confound it with much honey, and put this confection, not too thin nor too thick, and use it, and this is the common way of the plaster restoring the fracture to many dispositions, especially to women and small children, for it is neither too hot nor too cold.
Another way of the plaster restoring the fracture and the dislocation and the twist: take 3 ounces of alum and 2 ounces of saltpetre and nettle and asafetida and gum arabic and myrrh, mixed; myrrh and aloe, mixed; alchich and make it into a powder, and mix it with honey of bees; if the patient's complexion is warm, then use this plaster, for it is of good composition and restores broken bones quickly, and is useful to many people.
Other way to cauterize than by fire: Take mugwort and vinalda, half a pint. Mirrortree and aloe, half a pound. Ointment, six drams. Boil the arnica well and grind it with oil or plenty of vinegar, and administer.
Other way to cauterize joints and broken bones from their place, and to soothe the pain immediately, and to trim the bone, and the wound: Take another new, and moisten it with boiled oil, and put on the joint.
Cysts do not respond well, but they are good for soothing abscesses and properly relieving pain.
Other way to cauterize which restores broken bones: Take dried fig leaves and earth-paeony leaves, grind them together, and make an ointment.
Another way to make an ointment for healing bone breaks and reducing the swelling of an abscess: take fresh milk and mix it with wine, then apply it to the affected area. Take root of vinalda, chamomile, violets' flowers, flour of vitre, each a part;
and crushes, and mixes with wine, and heats the members, mixing them with water of coriander or vinegar, and uses it.
Another way to make an ointment that is more effective than the first one, which is used when the abscess is persistent and difficult to heal: take milk, wine, and water, each in equal parts, and apply it hot to the affected area. Take roots of marsh-mallow, and linseed, mullein, mallowe, and fennel grass, and flowers of violet and chamomile, each one part; and crushes, and mixes with salt water or sweet water or wine, according to the heat of the member, and its rest.
In his book, I hypocras says that one should not put anything on the broken member before it is healed, except a cerote made of wax and oil, and nothing else, and he said that it should be neither too soft nor too hard.
And it seems to me that one should put on the broken member, to restore it, dry things a little warm, such as myrrh and aloe and incense and similar things, as we have said.
Another way to burnish that is good for wounds and pain: Take muck and straw of cows, or feathers of geese, and marsh-mallow, and string it evenly, crushing it, and making it into a paste and lying on it.
And then he undoes it after one day, and takes care that the patient feels no pain, and that his bone does not move from its place; If they do not dislodge by their own hand. And if the pain comes to a head, or itchiness, or a restlessness or swelling occurs, if you hurry and dislocate it, and apply the poultice now;
and take a light cloth, and a sponge of sea water moistened, and dip it in the water, and raise it to the head, as long as the itchiness ceases, and the pain is soothed; then let the member rest for an hour, then put on another dry cloth, wet with water or oil of roses, and tie it to a pole, as long as you are sure of the abscess heating up;
and let the inflammation of the member rest, and be eased of pain, then begin to dislocate again gently, and a little bit of ointment, and do not dislocate it as strongly as before; and carefully as long as he is well.
And if you see that the abscess is chafed and red and painful and swollen all around it, and you have to use poultices and ligatures, then start again, just as you did at first.
If the limb does not respond to any of the above treatments, then do not dislocate it until after three, four, five, or seven days. and never let it rest for more than twenty days, according to what one observes, until the break-up of the joint appears, and approach the dislocation of the shoulder with care;
then take even greater care than before, and let his meat grow thicker, as I have said above;
and know that if the skin dries up more than is necessary, it cannot be moved; then rise immediately after each dislocation, and do so every third day, and let the shoulder rest for a moment;
For in this work, cut off the skin carefully around the limb, and gently remove what is loose, so that the limb may return to its normal position;
It is unwholesome, and if it is done out of fear, and I see no other thing than to make it loose and do it right.
There are many ways of breaking, and various shapes, and the causes are different.
For it has fractures that are made by the impact of a sword, and the neck bone is broken all the way down to where it joins the body, so much so that it comes off like a stump; and this is called "hematoma".
or the sword pierces the bone from above, and it is called  "absolute" fracture.
and it is the wound of those two great fractures or one small fracture.
Or if there is percussion inside, or an edge, or a collarbone of stone, or falling on stone, or similar things.
And if there is a breaking that approaches the tendon which is over the bone, or is under it, and this wound is great or small.
And if there is a wound that closes in the bone as fine as hair, and it is called a "capillary" fracture.
and if the wound is made by a stone or by falling, or by some other thing, and brings in a piece of bone; and if the joint is dislocated as the blacksmith does to the kettles when he shapes them. if between the stone inside.
And if there is more moisture at the top who have or head moist bones, like the head of a child;
and it has all these ways of fracture that small pieces are lost as if they were stars; and I will talk to him in his place.
And let us know all kinds of fractures by traction on them, and by the inspection of wounds, and by the cart that is before it.
The hair appearance is caused by this: when one has uncovered the bone, and rubbed it in, thus opening the black fracture.
In the cure for the fracture, take care as to the accidents of the disease, and if you see no bad accident, such as vomiting, loss of understanding, extension, paleness, feverishness, or hair growing furiously red and other similar signs in many conditions, so it cannot be healed by doubt.
And if you do not see any hopeful accident, and you hope for salvation, then begin the cure.
And when the birth comes first to you, and it is in winter, then it is necessary to remove the bone before the fourteenth day at most that you can do.
And if it is in summer, then hasten to remove the bone before the seventh day, so that the tissue around the bone may not decay, and the accident that we have spoken of may come.
And if the fracture of the bone comes just to the membrane that covers the skull, so that you bend the bent part thus:
and is that you squeeze the head of the sick person, and uncover it on the bone in all ways that you can, and on the figure of the wound more easily than you can, and let the blood come out at the cover of the bone or at the abscess, help yourself to what is necessary, and is that you fill the place with wet towels in oil of rose; and let the wound rest as long as the abscess is calm, and be sure of the evacuation of blood; then begin to pierce the bone, and it is done according to two ways of work:
one way is that you cut at a narrow angle at the front, and this is the form:
And then I bottle another way more than the first one.
And the second way is that you have many different lengths of blades, some narrow and others wide, and sharp, and made of iron:
and in work lightly, so that you do not blister the head.
And if the bone is hard and tough, it is necessary that you pierce it from inside, so that you introduce blades with tangents, not completely through so as not to pierce the bone's end, and must have above the point a margin or circle, so that the point does not pass beyond the bone;
and you will have many, so that each one comes back to its place in the end of the bone, so that you are patient for all tests.
And this is the form of the three ways to be patient:
The quality for piercing between the bones is that you put the stop in place on the bone, and turn it back to its two positions as you know that the bone has been pierced;
Then put the stop on the other side again a little way apart and so do all around, then cut out the space of the bone that is between the pits, and do it more finely than you can, and lightly, as we have said, until you bring the bone to your hand, or to any of the tools that you have there, such as tweezers, pincers;
and make sure that you do not touch the skull or the medicine;
And when you have pierced the bone and treated it, if you can see that you need to remove the marrow which is delayed in the bone from all other instruments resembling an incisors, but it must be more pliable and finer than the other incisor.
and if there is no delay in any small bones, nor scales, if the bone is lightly held to the instruments; then heal the wound with bandages and ointments as we have said.
And the other way to treat it is that which Galen says, which is more effective; and the fire very hot, and this is his word. It is first necessary that you discover a part of the bone, where the break is open; so that when you have discovered that part, you put the head of this lens-shaped incision there, from which it gets its shape.
And do not cut from one side, and this side is water in two places, so that the cutting is towards the bone;
and then hammer a small mallet on top, so that you lightly chop the bone all around, and be very careful of the splinters which are scattered;
If it's broken to the bone, then the bone is a little injured, because a strong bone causes pain and discomfort.
And do not cut from one side, and the part is wet in two sides, so that the cutting is towards the bone; then hit with a small mallet on top, so that you lightly tap the bone all around, and take good care of the tendon that is attached to it; if it is caught on the bone, then carefully cut the bone, for one cuts the bone well without hurting, and without fear.
If you are dealing with very sharp razors, and then with even sharper ones, and do not stop doing this as long as it is necessary.
In each of the other hair-splitting and subtle wounds, you must proceed according to their alignment.
This is not something that can be easily fixed by someone who has not studied this craft.
And if the wound is suppurating, you must take a linen cloth, according to the size of the wound, dip it in oil and put it on the wound; then take another cloth, double it II or III times, dip it in wine and oil and put it on top of the first cloth; and do it as lightly as you can so that you don't aggravate the wound, then cover it with another cloth, and don't peel it off until it has healed completely;
and let it remain so for a day or two, until the abscesses are calm, then remove it, and administer medicines as roots of licorice, flour of times, incense powder, aristaology, and similar things;
and of these things make a powder, and put it on the wound, and administer medicines immediately without stinging;
and guard that the wound be clean, so you don't let it get infected, nor do you let it gather bowels, for when the bowels gather on the cloth of the skull, if they are cut and torn, they cause great harm to the patient;
for when one puts a mordant medicine on it, it burns from above. Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.
And if black comes out only because of the medicine that has been put on it, and its virtue is such, then you should squeeze a part of honey, and three parts of rose oil and one drape of rosin, and put it on the medicine; and then the cure by the methods he knows how to do until he is well.
Know that the two parts of the neck above are never broken, or one by itself, because they are bones.
and this cartilage does not break unless it is forced or twisted, and then heals.
And if one of the two parts is broken, you must insert your little finger or nipple of the neck, and make it even with your index finger at the back, until the neck regains its natural shape. and do it lightly, so that the patient does not feel pain from your work.
And if the break is in the upper part of the neck, and cannot come back to its place, then you must put it right with a small stick at the top of the neck.
And if he is broken in two places, then do otherwise, and hurry to restore the first part the next day if you can.
if not, after the seventh or ninth day, when the abscess has calmed down, then insert at the top of the neck a few strips of linen cloth, if the break is in one place.
And you put one on top of the other on another side, if it breaks. and let the tents be so large that they fill the apertures from which they come.
And no one should restore it without wetting the strips first; each day they must be changed. It does not seem good to me, but it is necessary that they be wet in the preparation of ash of ovend and powder of mill; then leave the tent, until the bone is hard and the cartilage is hardened.
And never put goose feathers in the place of tents, and if it is a sodden drape, and holds the break, and blows the sickness about. Or fare a lieu de quille une branche d'arbre, et la tige pendante; et la tige ne tienne pas par le haut, mais seulement par le bas avec des visages de bois;
And if the abscess comes to birth while you are working, put cotton soaked in oil or a string of hempen twine or a piece of silk; or
And if an abscess forms, so that it is pus, then put there by the side, flour of sizings, and powder of incense, prepared with ash of ovend, then put on light poultices, and do not bind the lou nes;
and if his break is small, he is broken into small pieces, so extract with the suitable instruments to him, then cut the fracture, and the cure of things injangling car, and souding, yes as plasters and ointments suitable to him;
and if he has no pain inside his neck at all, if he cures the tens, and puts wires of lead, as long as he is healthy.
When the jaw is broken and there is no wound, and the break is not very deep, and it is not shattered into two pieces, but rather twisted inside, then one should handle it lightly.
It is convenient, if his break is on the right side, that you put your index finger in the mouth of the patient. and if his break is on the left jaw, if you put your index finger of your right hand into it, and push the break in gently, and make it equal with the other hand from the side, and make it long.
And if the break of the jaw is on the second side, then it is fitting that you equalize the two sides with an extension, until they are even.
And if the movement inside is, or a tear, if you extract it with a gold, silver, or silk thread, then put the wax on the broken jaw, and put a double cloth. and on the loins put a great well-made shield, or a piece of leather equal, long and wide according to the jaw, and tie it to the neck where you can, and order the patient that he rest, and eat light meats.
And if you see that the figure changes, so let it rest for three days, and then put back in place what has changed; and apply plaster to it, with powder from the mill with much chalk or flour of buckwheat, after you have removed the cast;
and on the plaster another light lining, and if the plaster hurts, and the patient's condition does not change, leave it as long as it is healthy; is sometimes healed in three weeks.
And if abscesses arise, if you administer what we have said many times.
And if there is a fracture and a wound together, do not remove any piece of the bone when the wound is healed; If subtle of the ostrich are suitable for this.
And if the wound is tight, if you open it by fire according to your need.
Et when you have boned all these pieces, and there is no delay, so to cool the wound, if it is wide, and put on it I bandages suitable for this, in order to ease the pain, as long as it is healed.
The breaking of them several times before, against the shoulder, and the break is according to three manners:
where it is broken and dislocated in two, and there are pieces, and it is the easiest to restore;
where there is a break with a wound.
And the work if it is so that the break is without a wound, that you have two ministers, so that one holds up the shoulder that was broken by the force of the break; and the other extends the neck towards the part;
then set the break even on both sides so that the form is as it should be, and there is no appearance or hair-splitting;
And if you have more to stretch, so stretch the shoulder of the patient with a round stake of cloth or linen, and make it big according to your need; and hold it firmly, and hold the needle in your hand, so that you make an even hole, as is right.
And if you cannot remove the head of the pole at the end, so that it comes out perfectly, it is necessary that the patient lie down on his back, and place the shoulder pole horizontally, and put the ministers' shoulders under it, until the bone of the pole is raised.
And then place the break on your two hands, and if you find debris, then it is necessary that you split above;
and try to press the pieces together lightly, and if the bone cannot join for any reason, then put the cap on one of the incisions that you have made; but that you remove the needle this instrument, to protect the patient.
and seems like a spoon, and is not hair-like, and should also be as wide as it is necessary for the size of the bone and the ability of the work;
and has two heads, as you see, and one is wide and the other narrow, like the break in the wound that you made when you broke the bone;
and when you are confident of the temperature of the abscess, if the wound is small, or you doubt about the temperature of the abscess, if the wound is covered with linen and tents, according to its quantity.
And if hot abscesses come, if it has oil in it, and water and vinegar, and put on it.
The extraction of the bone, when there are wounds and lacerations, is that you put on the bone the plaster from the powder of the mill and the owl's dung, and lightly apply it, and put a spike on the joint if you need to do so. then take a very long band of a palm's width, then put two layers of linen cloth over it, and the plaster. then take a thin stick of three fingers' width and long, and wrap it around the bandage so that the top of the bandage is even. and put the stick on the break in the bone, and turn the bandage over the neck, and extract the joint cleanly, and extract the ill joint. and the dislocation of each part, and when you see that the opening holds the broken bone in place, and you clearly see that the spine does not move over the broken bone, if it is reduced every day, and when the ligature is removed, if it is restrained;
and place the patient on their back, and put a small board under the shoulder, in order to raise the dislocated part upwards; if the fracture of the arm is eased by the alignment of the shoulder, or you tie the arm to the neck, and no bad accident comes about, until 20 days have passed;
then start the treatment again if you see that it is necessary, and hold him back and leave him like that until he has recovered;
and she has been restored in 28 days, and in some men less.
of the dislocation of the shoulder
But if the shoulder is broken, or out of place and does not move smoothly, and it only hurts when touched.
If you reset it according to its natural shape, and do so in all possible ways that you can.
Then put on the shoulder with a powder of the mill, with plenty of flour, and light strokes, and put it in a double drape. Then put on a large and thin board, a little wider than the shoulder, and descale it at the edge of the shoulder, if you employ the hair of the cloth, so that the board is even.
And then tie it with a large and strong bandage, so that the board does not move from its place, and inspect it every day.
And each time that it moves, if you tie it again, and make the board even if it is out of place, and let the patient lie on his back.
And the shoulder is reset in XX days or in XXV.
When the number of days is completed, if it dislocates again, and be careful, for it is not bone that moves so easily.
And if a piece of the bone projects forward, and there is no smooth surface to stop it, then make it up and bone it over, and do as we said in the breaking of the jaw to relieve an abscess.
of the breaking of the pie
The feet are never broken in midair, but this happens sometimes; But it often breaks at the bottom.
And when it is broken in the middle, if it leans towards the side, and causes great pain to the patient, and there is no alane [a kind of plaster], then sometimes it vomits blood, and opens the veins in the broken bone, and it smells bad.
And the reset so that the patient lies on his back, and put a cushion between his shoulders, then press the shoulders together, and carefully join the ribs with your hands, and adjust them in every way as well as you can, until the bone figure is as it should be;
Then put on plasters and stoppers above it with subtle salt or another light stuff, and wrap it in a garment, and lay it on the broken bone, so that it does not move; and turn the loins smoothly to the back, and hold it forward, and release each hour, and if it relaxes, so hold it.
and if it is necessary to separate it, because of corrosion or because of itching that comes to the place, or pain or abscess, if you hurry, and separate it, and scrape the plaster, and apply it in a way suitable for treatment;
then remove the plaster, and hold it until it is healthy.
the break of the ribs
Know that the breaking of the ribs does not come except in large lumps behind the back, and at the top inward, and do not bend them too much except for those which are painful. and the smell is good to the question how it was done.
And restore them so that you make the break even, as it is fitting. And then put on plaster, and hold it with a stake, if you need to.
And if the breaking of the ribs goes inward, then the patient feels great pain and a stinging sensation, as if it were crying, because the bone does not stretch the skin. and let it cool with water, and every day and vomit great quantities of blood, and this is a deadly disease, and the old ones have great pain in their limbs.
And if it is necessary to administer meat that swells the belly, in order to push the break away.
We do not make this, unless hot absesses come, if it has not come. And if it has come, let the healthy one.
And they said that one should put leeches on the wound to draw out the pus, and this is apparently reasonable; However, doubt remains that leeches do not attract excess fluid to the wound due to their weakness.
And they say that we must cover the place with another moisture in oil, and put tents between the ribs to make the space even, then it is cured of the cure of plague, of meat, and of medicine.
And if the patient feels great pain in the bone that touches the wound, and doubt remains with the patient, then it is necessary to split the skin of the chest, and it is necessary to put a tool there to protect the wound;
and then one must cut the bone lightly, and then sew the two lips of the wound together, if it is large, and treat it with plasters until it is well.
And if abscesses appear, if they are put on drapes soaked in oil and placed on the bed.
and treat while the head of this, which is due to an abscess, and is gizzing along the back or side where it is necessary, until it is healed.
and also at the back.
And when this has happened to anyone, and you can see whether he will be well or not, if you notice that his hands are softened and swollen and dead, and cannot move or extend them, and when you prick them with a needle, if he does not feel it.
Know that it is fatal in many cases, and if it does not move and feels well when it is stretched out, know that the joint of the bone is saved, and that the patient is cured, if one puts medicine on it.
And if similar things happen to the back, and you can not know whether it is healed or not, if the bones are softened, and if the accident that happened was due to a fall, and on the back has windiness and excretion without will;
and when it is treated with a poultice on the belly, if there is windiness and excretion without will; And when it is soothed on his back and he tries to move, he cannot. Know that it is deadly: If I don't work hard at my healing.
And if this accident does not come to him, it is the lighter thing.
And the cure is that if you treat an abscess with hot oil or oil of meadow mustard, until it is calmed down;
then put on one of the plasters, drying it and binding it with a bandage, and command the patient to rest; and don't sleep in that part where he feels pain until he is healed.
And if some bone comes loose, if you cover it with poultice; and set the bone, then join the two lips of the wound, if it is large, with a stitch, then treat it with ointment made from vinegar, until it is healed;
and if the bone of the shoulder is broken, which is called the "shoulder joint", pour out your poultice from your left hand, and hold it even with your right hand, then put on the plaster and wrap it up, if you need to;
And hold it in place, and if there is an excess of bone, cut it off, and the bone, and heal the wound until it is healed.
For the fracture of the shin bone
May it happen that the bone of the hip is broken, and if it happens, may there be only a little reduction at the head. And make it long, and decline it in the parched, and comes to the patient pain at the place, and swelling, and that which breaks.
And the setting-right that is, you extend your hand upon it, as long as you are on the break; and know what is the break and the form of it;
And if the break is at the head, let it be made equal, as long as it is in its natural form.
And if the break is long, or it declines inwardly, then make the patient lie on his stomach, as long as the setting in place of that break is convenient to you. And when you have made it equal, put on it a plaster, and then put on a wooden or wooden stake, and hold the break so that it does not move;
and set the bones back together along the sides, as long as the hole is even. And command the patient to sleep on his side or back.
And if there is a fever, if it does not cause a fever, as long as the abscess is calm, and put on what we have said above; and then return to restoration, and hold it firmly as necessary, if there is no bad accident;
For the dislocation of the shoulder
The shoulder accessory is that which is between the collar and the head of the shoulder, and if it is broken, then one should restore it according to one of the two ways:
where one is that you take a strong rope, according to this form:
And tie two knots in the rope, and raise them up high, and cut the sick person on one side;
then tie some arms of the rope to the beam, so that it comes down to the ground, and take one end of the rope and hold it with a strong hand behind; then, after having raised him up with your feet, let him fall on his back;
Then make the mirror even with his hands together, as it returns to him as it should.
And the other way is that one sways the sick person on his back, and he lays his hand on his throat, then orders two ministers that one bleeds who is on the breeze-block with his hands, and the others bleeds all over the body, and extends each to its side.
And if you see that the extraction is too strong, then strip off the flesh of the wound, and on the wound, and each minister extends to its side.
And if the mirror is close to the shoulder blade, you should put a rope around the shoulder and another one across the chest, away from the mirror.
And if the mirror is away from the chest, you should put the rope lightly, without effort, as the mirror is even on its side and on its height;
Then make the mirror equal, as it should be, and hold it in place, so that the incisions do not move.
And if the incisions have come, do not hold them in place for more than seven days, and put a wet cloth and oil on it, until the incisions are healed;
Then hold it in place, and the way to hold it is that you put plaster on the mirror, then join the arm to the shoulder, and put your hand on the shoulder or the chest;
and wrap the cloth around it, and support on the shoulder, and on the arms so that the arm is in line with the elbow, if there is nothing to defend it or if the bone has not been broken.
And if you doubt that the bone does not move, use stakes, and place over the fracture a wider and stronger stake than the others, and keep between each stake two spaces, and make each stake as large as it passes three spaces on both sides.
Then support on the stakes, so as I said at the beginning of the chapter on the paste over the fracture, stronger and less by moving away.
And if you see the setting of the stakes and the support, as we have said, in the hour that you restore the broken member, and doubt the incision, leave it tied for seven days, as we have said.
then watch each for three days that the itch does not spread to place, or that the healing does not come to the member because it is too constricted. If the adhesive, as we said.
And if such an accident does not happen, so that the dislocation is not relieved within three days or more, and the patient sleeps on his back, and has his hands on his stomach;
and put a clean piece of linen around the shoulder with care that the figure of the member does not move, or that the ligaments are not relaxed;
if it is given by the virtue of medicine, and he is given the food that we have prepared in advance, in such a way that the food is at the first subtle level; and when it begins to recover, if it is heavy.
And it is proper that the shoulder and the leg should be recovered in ten days altogether; And then he must untie and administer baths and medicines for relief.
And if the contraction is bad and tight, it should not be unbound for one or two months.
of the fracture of the arm
The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the "humerus," one of which is small, and this is the one that connects to the hand.
and the other is large, and this is the one that goes back towards the little bone.
Perhaps the large humerus can break alone, or perhaps the small one, and maybe both together.
When the small humerus is broken, the healing is easy, and so is the recovery;
And when the large one is broken, the healing is bad, and more painful than when both are broken together.
If it is the small flail that is bruised only slightly, if it is necessary to stretch it lightly and make it even.
If it's just the large humerus, then we need to extract it with force;
and stretch it out on a table, and turn the hand so that the thumb is higher than the other fingers, and the little finger lower than the others, and let the patient be stretched out across it, and the thigh in front of him higher up, so that the patient doesn't feel any pain;
then extend the ministers their arms to the dislocation of the shoulder to his hand, or to his neck, and other ministers to another above.
Then make it even according to its best form.
And if in the breakage there are pieces, let each one be placed in its place, and if one of them does not hold fast to its place, you shall put a pin through it, and you shall not restore it to its place, but mend it on the bone, as we have said before.
And if with the breaking there is a wound, I have spoken of it in the singular chapter; then take the cure.
And if in the difficulty of restoration of the wound there are abscesses, then dip a cloth made of oil rosin and white wax, which is neither too hard nor too soft; and I will drape it gently over the top, until the abscesses are calm.
And then the oil, and I put the plaster of the powder of the mill with a lot of wax, because put the splints, and the splint of the break is next to it, and a little more wide than the others;
and know that he should have six splints or arms in various positions: so that the fracture is in one of the bones, or in II.
and stretch it over the break more than any other part, and always less by stretching, as I said at the beginning about the paste; and let the drape that are over the break be soft and wet, and not hard or rough;
and let the drape that are over the break be soft and wet, and not hard or rough; and let the fabric, which is stretched, be of linen, not too thick nor too fine, as we have said.
And restore the member and the ligament after a few days. And if some bad accident comes to the limb, such as itchiness that comes to the limb, let it be soaked with lukewarm water until the itchiness is relieved;
and let the limb rest neither tight nor loose.
And then begin again with the extraction, and if the ligament is relaxed and the bone is dislocated, and similar things, then address it.
And if it is necessary that the healing not be affected by the member, because it is too constricted, then soften it slightly and leave it thus for a few days, until the healing has improved, and then extract it.
And if none of these things that we have said comes to the illness, so do not cut off until after 20 days.
or, in the case of wounds, then wrap his hands around his neck, and make his necks even, and prevent movement and injury, and let him sleep on his back;
and knows that this breaker is cured in 30 days or in 35, and perhaps in 20, according to the qualities and complexions of virtues.
of the break in the hand
And know that at the back of the hand and to us the two have few breaks, and there comes but a little pain many times.
And when the plant of the hand is broken or swollen, so that the patient cries out, and sits straight before him evenly;
then place his hand on the tabletop, and spread out the minister's bones that are broken, and make them even the mirrors, as long as they are well joined;
and put on plaster and staw, if abscesses do not come, then he puts a stake according to the quantity of the place; and be wrapped in a sheet of linen.
And if the breaker is in the armpit around the belly of the plant, so make a spike of linen, and order the patient to strap it to his broken plant; and then the stretching of a long rope, and its string is as great as the palm of the hand, and is stretched, as it should be.
And if it is broken at the back, so that you put a steele on, and another desoze in the plant, so that the hands are open and straight, then tie it completely around the hand, and stop the blood between the two.
If it breaks on either of the two sides, let it be pulled out, if it is caught, so that it remains equal, as it should be; and stretch it with the palm, and if you see that it has a small straight stake to lift the break, and does not move;
and if the break is like either of the two sides, that it is equal, and binds with the sound one who is after; or you bind all together, so they do not move, or you put on a stake, as if it were caught;
and take care in the restoration and arrangement of the abscess, and protect him who comes, as I have said.
The bones of the hip are often broken, and one can clearly see them when they move forward and backward.
and the restoration is good if we lay it on top of the fracture, and another above it. And the patient lies down, then each minister extends his bond to his side evenly;
is when the fracture is closed up.
If the fracture is close to the root of the rib, then one of the ties is on the inside of the rib, and the other ties are on the outside of the break.
And if it is near the knee, then the bond is loose and the extension downward;
then set the bone evenly with his two hands as it is in its natural position, and then put the plaster, and the bandages, so that there comes no blood.
And if there is a fever, let it rest, then return to your work and your treatment; The time is made in such a way.
It is necessary that you wrap it up tightly on the wound with a hard cloth twice over or three times over, and leave aside the excess, then turn the leg around so that the heels come to the root of the naissance, and tie a long thread between the thigh and the leg, free the knee from the thread, and bring the head of the thread up.
then turn around on the leg and on the thigh the bandage, then put on the wound some wooden splints, and put a splint on the bone of the leg;
then employ the fire between the leg and the thigh of linen threads so as to make even the tying, then begin to tie in form III or IV on the wound; and when you go up on the wound, and less the tying;
then take the two ends of the thread that you have tied between the leg and the thigh, and tie III splints that are above them, then go back to the end of the thread at the head, as far as you come from the foot;
and restrain, so that it does not move from its place, then let it be, then if it comes to an abscess or floreat or other. And if it happens, if it dislocates, and moves back in place, and comes again, as we have said many times;
and if there are pieces of bone that he grabs, if it is necessary, let him do it; and if it cannot be done, if it is necessary to split the place, and pull hard; and treat it as we have said, until it is healthy.
And never break the pelvis in this way, as when the shoulder or arm is concerned;
however, in the restoration made in this way, the patient does not become ill.
And know that the chest is restored in a day, or less or more, according to the diversity of complexities.
that in the pit of the knee there is little fracture, but it bleeds many times.
And if it breaks, unless it is only a crack or a hole, and comes to all wounds, and not wounds, and this feels wrong.
And the restoration is such that he places what is long at its two ends, as much as it can be assembled so that it can move;
and then set the plaster, and I put a round stick, if you need it, and hold it as necessary, then return all the dispositions that we have said in other breakers, like hot abscess and other similar things; and then to each injury what he deserves, as long as he is healthy.
the break of the leg
knows that in the leg there are two bones, of which one is called by right "mustelz", and the other is called "foscile";
and all the breaks are like those of the arm, and so its restoration is also equal to that of the arm, and the work is complete. And if the two bones break together, then the leg returns on all sides.
And if the bone is broken, then turn back.
And if the large bone is broken, there is great pain, and it can be seen clearly; and return sober.
Then extend it, and make it equal, and bind the tendons equally;
However, if it is broken, it is ugly, and there are many pieces, then the extension should be lighter and less severe; and equal it according to your art.
And when you have finished your work, take two long hair-braids and purple them the legs from the ankle to the foot on both sides, and let them be long enough for the feet;
then wrap them around the legs above and below, and bind them together in the middle, and at this bind the legs so that they do not hang to one side or the other, and so it is good;
and there are no berets on the legs, and if necessary, put one leg forward to prevent movement, and properly make this wound in the fracture or where the injury is;
and move each leg every day to see if there is an abscess or another accident; if the patient as long as he is healthy.
of the fracture of the bones of the foot
At the ankle there is no fracture, but at the foot there is a fracture in some cases, and in many cases it does not happen, but only is injured.
And if there is a break in the bones of the foot, and you see these bones rub against each other, if the patient as long as he is healthy. If there is a break in the bones of the foot, put your foot on its own, so that where the bones are raised, then press them together until they come back into their places;
then put plaster on it and press it down, and make a small table of II flat boards, then tie it to the foot in front, and then that you have wrapped bandages around it, and other things that you need to do.
When three or four days have passed, if the joint is still dislocated, for you will find the bones even, whether they are broken or not.
And if there is one of the two broken, then restore them, as we have said about the bones in the hand; and then on the two side cut a stone according to the length of the two, and one little more wide, and then set in the foot that I said, and draw out with care;
and if there are II or III, or more, cut on each of the two a stone according to its quantity, wrapped in a linen cloth, and draw out the foot that is sore with care; and let it be standing on the head of the foot that is sore so that it well shades it;
And you must not forget the other things that I said to break with care, as soon as we have said; and cut each accident as it comes.
the break of the bone between the knuckles
When the woman's bones are broken, if she is made to sit wide, then she leans on the back part and is held by behind;
and fill the bag with the cotton of the disease, and put it on as big as I am.
Then bring the woman to stand, and tie her neck and back little by little, and then let the cotton go, until it comes to the entrance of nature, and returns the bones with the strap.
and when she goes to urinate, if the cotton comes out, and when she has finished, put it back, and do so for seven days or more. then the break will be healed, and if you see anything, take a bladder of beef, and tie a cord to the peritoneum, and pour all of the bladder into nature. then blow into the cord until the bladder is inside: and nature will bring back the break;
then fill it with cotton and leave it like that for a few days, until it is well.
And when the bone of the arm is broken, or that of the woman, so as to restore it as we have said in the leg bone;
and these fractures are not hidden from him who puts his study and use into them, and hear my book.
For the fracture means many different things depending on the right path of restoration: Let us then begin.
In the groin, when it is broken, take an goose's neck and insert it into the groin; Then wrap around the drapelets, and leave it for three days or more, and it will be healed without an hospital.
of break with wound
It is necessary for him who has broken with wound, great or small, such as the hip bone or shoulder or similar, to be healed now, so that the wounds which we have said bear witness to it.
And if the wound heals, if the vitriol burn remains, if you have nothing else, then start to restore the broken one in the same hour or day, when the blisters come.
And if the blisters come, if you leave the restoration until the next day, as long as the blisters are calm, and do not touch them on the third day or the fourth, because you would bring about a bad accident.
And if the broken bone is visible on top of the skin, then you must put it out of joint lightly with your hands, in small extensions.
And if the extensions do not appear to you to be equal to your hands, so that they can hold this instrument which is made of iron, which has seven or eight long fingers and whose breadth is determined by the quantity of the wound; and for this reason it is necessary that he take three or four times the amount of the medicine according to what is needed in each healing of a broken bone.
and be round and a little thick, so that it does not press on the member when it is wrapped up, and be larger in front and thicker in the middle: thus:
is called "palatine", because it is necessary that the curved head be placed on the top of the prominent bone; and be stretched out once, until it recovers, and be even one against the other. And if the break is subtle and the instrument cannot take the bone well, then you must chop off the head of the bone as long as the instrument has the power to do so.
And if you cannot bring back the bone, as we have said, with the help of an appropriate tool, be it a chisel or a saw, at your power:
then remove what is left in the bone with sharp and small cuts.
And when the bone has been set back in place, and the patient feels great pain after it, know that it is not in its natural position.
If it is in its place, then soak it in black vinegar, and properly so if it is in a solution. and do not put anything on the wound except oil, or anything else that has oil, so that it does not cause inflammation and corruption.
then administer the salves when you have set the bone, and leave the wound uncovered, and cover all around it, according to the size of the wound, and take care that the wound is not pulled with the break;
and many times have done this foolish trick, and have caused the patient to die or be corroded once; and let the extraction be softer and less painful than that of the other breaks.
And if the wound is bad or large, and you doubt that a bad accident will not come, as we have said, and you feel pain at the site, then it is not good to put any salves on; but wrap tightly in linen, instead of wool, hard cloth, and tie it tight.
And when you see after one or two days to form a boil on the wound, then if you have put anything that you have put on all over, and you put a healing ointment, as a four-fold ointment and its likes.
And it is necessary that you dislocate the limb twice a day, in the morning and at night, until it is healed and sound.
And it is necessary that the limbs are arranged in such a way that the boil runs down轻松.
And if every day it passes and he cannot join but runs together, knowing that there are little pieces of bone, so that you must cut the wound with a knife, and all these painful pieces that come out.
And if a fistula comes to light, or any other kind of corruption, then it is necessary that you cure it according to what he says in his chapter above.
And when the bone is broken and opened up on the member, as the hip bone or shoulder bone, and other similar members, do not pull it out, for many times death comes from it, but leave it until it putsrefies.
Maybe it will heal itself in about 20 or 30 days, then treat the wound if you can;
and if you can't, let it be.
We often come after the health of the broken one, especially when it is near a joint, and an ugly thing it is to see the shape of the member; and maybe can't do the natural work of the members.
Take care, then, if we free it: if he administers harsh medicines, as aloes, incense, myrrh, and sulfur, or any of these things alone, or all together, and mixes them with wine infused with vinegar or with a lot of ink, or with honey; and place them on the neck in steps, and hold them firmly, and do not let them slip out of your hands every day;
and place them on the neck in steps, and hold them firmly, and do not let them slip out of your hands every day; and then dislodge it, and start another one, until the knots are cut;
or hold onto a piece of canvas that is well made; for the property of canvas is that it cuts off all the swellings from the limbs;
and if the knot is already hard like a stone, and it needs to be opened up, so as to cut off the surplus, leaving what appears to be the excess; or hold onto a razor at all times until it is cut, and treat it until it is healed;
the member which is weak after the jail
When the break in the bone has healed, and there are still weak and delicate limbs, this may happen because of: because one is because it was tied too tightly, and was not tied as tightly as it should have been; Or why is there too much hair, and cannot come to the member's recovery? Or why is there a lot of inflammation? Or why are there great movements, not in their hour? Or why does the patient have little blood in his body, and is weak?
And the cure is that you make the patient eat, and make the body tender, until the blood increases in him; and give him baths, and give him joy and massage;
then put poultices on the member, so that the poultice attracts the great recovery, and is wet often with warm water, until the recovery runs to the member; and return it to its natural shape.
two limbs twisted after sickness When the member is twisted after the restoration, and the bone is broken open, and the form of the member is ugly, yet does not lose its natural work:
If you don't believe the foolish people who say that a member should be broken altogether when it is new, and many foolish people have done this in our land;
and these chapters are to blame, and great evil comes from them, and perhaps death;
However, if the joints and tortures are hot, or if herbs with a soothing action are cooked, as well as leaves of mallow, roots, and melilot, and similar things;
and if the patch is made with a soothing substance, well done like a good squirt, and you take the musk of mallow, and confound it with linseed oil or seed oil, and make an ointment;
or if you take fig leaves, and grind them with hay of coleswort, and other medicines that soften the feeling of pain.
And never is the neck moved by constantly and long-term friction with moist hands. And so let there be movement in each limb every hour.
And if the curvature is strong and stiff, as in the case of a stone, it must be cut with a sharp knife lightly. and put on leach-cloth and study in the cure.
Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
When dislocation comes to anyone, if it is now brought back by gentle movement.
For if one delays, if the veins swell, and by chance if one puts it back at the same level;
because it is not good that one moves it when it is swollen: it often brings spasm and other pains;
however, when it comes, make the patient well, then let it be, as long as the abscess is calm;
then raise the member with hot water and oil, then move it lightly, and mend each member as the cure comes to its place.
And I have ordered the antidotes for dislocations of the shoulders up to the tip of the finger.
Note that the jaws may be dislocated upwards, and the dislocations of both are according to two manners: They are a little bone from their legs, and slightly softened. They are completely dislocated, and hang down to the chest, and cause saliva to flow from the mouth so that they cannot hold it in, nor close their mouth, and wrap their tongue around with words.
When the dislocations are small, return them with many different positions.
If it is complete and finished, then you must take her to the hospital right away, do not delay.
And in such a way that the minister of the sick person ties the head, and pulls it with a little rope from one side of the dislocation of the jaw inside the mouth, so that the dislocation is on two sides. and the other two hands are away, to make it even.
And order the sick person that he soften his jaws, and move them in all directions. And let him set his head to rest at equal intervals until it is back in place.
And if it is brought back, most certainly the two jaws are together, so they are raised with hot water and oil, until they are gently reset.
Do not tarry to bring me back, as we have said.
And when they are brought back in even fashion, and the mouth of the sick person is well sealed with a mollifying balm, then put it on drapes moistened with oil and wax, and then lighten it gently by moving it.
and let the sick person sleep on their back, and have their heads between two pillows so that they do not move to the left or right, nor make any effort to turn over, but eat light food until the pains are relieved and the jaws are set.
and then let him eat lightly, and do not bother to open the mouth for eating or drinking until the jaw is well set and healed.
And if the two jaws cannot be reset to their places within an hour, and are not restored to their natural positions, then fever and heat set in customarily, and by chance there is an upset of the stomach, and by chance vomiting of clear fluid.
And when you see this, then know that it is a sign of recovery. and many times dies those who have it, in nine days.
does not dislocate from inside the neck in the continuation of the windpipe and is dislocated at all times from the outside, and it can be felt clearly.
And the cure is that the patient lies down on his back and extends his arms. and then press the joint with your palm, and it will come back;
then put on the plaster and bandage, and holds it in place;
and the shoulder that is next to the neck cannot be dislocated; if not, and if it dislocates at all, then you put it back in place, as we have said;
then put on the plaster and bandage, and holds it in place, and instructs the patient to rest as long as he is not well;
and also the head of the shoulder, when it is dislocated from its place.
of the dislocation of the shoulder
Know that the shoulder can only be dislocated in three ways:
is dislocation due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation. and the second is at the foot of the leg. and by chance it dislocates at the top, and there is pain.
and do not dislocate behind for the shoulder, and do not dislocate inside for the neck;
and many times it dislocates forward towards the axil, but at those who have dislocated their shoulder, because that is very serious, for that one will often be hospitalized;
at those who have enough dislocation, they are healed, and return to their normal state.
And sometimes it happens that some men have a hit or a break, and the shoulder swells up with hot fever, and one believes that it has dislocated from this.
So then you must test it out, as long as you are certain of it; and then begin the treatment.
And there are two types of dislocation when it goes down towards the axil, and there is a difference between the sick shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find between them a manifest difference; and you will find at the head of the shoulder a pit, and remove the collarbone from the shoulder blade, as if it were an eye. and the patient cannot bring his hand to his nose, nor make any movements;
and if it is dislocated above, then it is not hidden, for you can see it clearly at the table;
and this type of dislocation cannot be fixed unless it is new, or the patient has fallen ill.
And the method is that the minister hold the patient's hand high up, then you remove the collarbone, and push the joint back into place with force. and the minister holds the hand high up, and then puts it back in place; so come to the hospital.
And if it does not come as we have said, that the patient be bathed in hot water; and administer moistening and soothing preparations, as is done with an infusion of alfalfa and fenugreek and melilot in water, and let it be prepared;
then bring the patient to lie down on their back, and fasten a strap of equal length on one shoulder, neither too tight nor too loose, then put the foot of the affected leg on the strap, and gently pull up the head of the shoulder with your hand;
and others minister to the patient's head so that he does not move around; now bring back the shoulder, and see if it comes back in this way:
and let a more experienced person be present who is larger than the patient; and turn him away from the side, and fasten the shoulder of the patient, and lift it up so that the patient hangs; And other ministers draw the arm of the sick man down towards his navel. And if the patient is too light, with nothing heavy enough to hold it, the dislocation comes back again.
And this is how they do it in another way:
and stick a long piece of wood into the ground, so that the head is as far from the ground as a pistol, and not too thick or too thin; then it is placed under the sick person, but with a bed sheet over them, and the sick person is lying on the long wood;
then their hand is extended down from the other side forming a shape, and the joint will come back to its place completely;
if it does not return to its place for all these things that we have said, then this is the treatment: Take a piece of wood from two arms long and three fingers wide, which has the head at right angles to the end, in order for it to fit perfectly under the body, according to this form:
and then place it on top of the head with a long cloth, so that the patient is not injured, and then remove it from the patient's head;
and extend your arms above the post, and place the shoulder on the post, and the arm at the top of the patient's head, then put the arm on a beam of a beam that is wide, and let it be extended down, and let the body hang from the other side: the joint has now been realigned.
And when it is ready in any way, so that you put an equal wool thread on the axle, then put the plaster prepared with powder from the mill, with incense and aloes of the egg, all over the shoulder and back, then remove the axle gradually, and tie the thread to the plaster, and embrace the hand at its neck, and let it rest thus.
And it is necessary that he stretch a little, until the members are comfortable, because he will heal faster;
and then stretch more after 5 or 7 days, and move him; and if he is firm and has not become softened, then he is healed.
And if the joint has come out of its place due to moisture or any other cause, so that you make three piercings in it, as it is placed before or with the plaster of the piercings.
And if you do all this, and he relaxes after 7 days, and the joint does not hold, and cannot raise his arms upstream, then you know that the nerve at the top of the shoulder is cut or stretched or weakened; and knows that the joint never was set in its place.
the dislocation which is above the hip, and the breasts, or behind, so is made by impact, and stretching of hands, and I administer another place;
and treat as long as it is healthy.
And if after the recovery comes grit to the member, and late movement, then the patient uses it many times, until that grit is healed, and returns to its first nature.
of the dislocation of the shoulder
Knows that the joint at the neck is dislocated and returns to its place;
and has dislocated from all sides, and most of all in front and behind, and the dislocation is not returned to its place, for it can be seen well and felt well; and is dislocated according to each figure. And when you join the ill shoulder with the sound one, if you can see it clearly. For the joint is decayed, and cannot bend the arm, nor touch its shoulder at all.
And it is necessary that you reset it in such a way as the legs come together, for if the legs come together, it would be painful to bring them back, if they were brought back;
and may not be reset from all sides, most of all when it is behind; It is worse than other dislocations, and causes great pain, and sometimes it leads to death.
And the restoration is such that, when it is like this, so that you can bring it back, you extend its hand with your two hands; And its arms spread out, and the hands face each other at the elbow joint from behind and in front, and push the joint into its socket, or at the root of the palm, until it regains its place;
And if he is dislocated in front, so he returns when he doubles his hand to his hand, and proud of the root of the palm that is dislocated.
And if it does not return to its place, then administer strong extension;
and two ministers extend the arm, and turn it two ministers, so that he does not move at the extension;
Then turn the arm of each side, then you have wrapped a long and wide double cloth around it;
and when you see the joint of the hand, if it is not oiled to soften the joint, then push the joint together, until it regains its place;
and when it is in place, put on plaster dry with ointment of sheep fat, and strain it, and hold the arm at the shoulder of the sick person, and leave it for a few days, then remove it.
and if the joint is stable in its place, then release the splint, and leave it;
and if you see that the joint is not well set, then begin again with plaster and the splint, and leave it in this way for a few days, until it is firmly set; then remove it.
and if he feels pain after reducing the joint, and it moves, then bathe and gently massage it, and press until it is relieved; or put on the joint a lamb's wool grease, then leave it for a day and a night, then the bone, and let it enter or bath; and when he sues, he rubs the joint well, then puts the young on top, and then goes in or bath; and so does it twice or three times until it is healthy;
and if you want to see, put it at the end of a wet cooked bread and strain it out;
then return to its position.
The dislocation of the hand
The joint of the hand is dislocated, and recovery is lighter than that of other joints. However, it must be returned to its place carefully when it is dislocated, in the middle of the movement so that the bones do not hurt or come out with a hot poultice.
And the way to do this is to put the bad hand on a table, and spread the fingers out wide, and look at them so that you make them all even, then put your palm on the appearance of the joint, and press it down until it comes back to life.
However, it is necessary that you look to see if he is well placed. Then put the patient's back hand on a table for extension and retraction. If the dislocation is at the back of the hand, place the patient's palm down on the table and spread out their fingers.
If it returns now, that is good. But if not, take the patient's arm and hold it so that the elbow joint faces upwards, and let it rest in this position while we continue.
And if he cannot bear it, and you are unable to put him back in place after several days, then the joint will be twisted.
And do not let the patient use his hands until his fingers are no longer swollen and he is able to grip things firmly again: Then know that the nerve is cut, or an artery.
if there is no other way to extract it but by means of a delicate cautery tool, and perhaps nothing else.
And when the hand is in place, put it on the pus as we have said, then extract it and leave it for 5 days, then take it off and leave it like this.
If he can't move it well, and there is no fracture, if the hot water makes it moist, and rub it until it heals.
of the dislocation of the two fingers of the hand
No time do you dislocate the two fingers at each end, no time at the back of the palm or belly;
Then put the two together and hold them close to the joints until they come back into place, then support the head of the two with your hand and turn it towards the part where they are joined;
and leave it in that position for a day, and then make it even;
and do not tie it up as we have said, and untie it by day, and let it move, and then tie it back up;
and do this often, as long as it is tight, and in the same way if it has been dislocated at the bottom of the palm, and do so as you have done before until it is well;
and in the same way when it has been dislocated on the other side.
of the dislocation of the two fingers of the hand are not displaced at each end, nor on the back of the palm or belly; then they are bent, and shift the dislocation to the pouche until it returns
When the neck or collarbone is dislocated, or multiple dislocations occur, there will be no cure unless it is quickly treated, for death comes swiftly to the patient.
And the signs are that the excretions jump forth without will, nor can they be contained, and many times some member is softened, or both feet or both arms or one.
And many times the skin changes color in four parts;
who changes color behind is called "gilbositez":
the cure is that you reward it if the gilling has come from childhood: if there is no cure or recovery from all this.
And that which comes from falling, or from blows, or from similar things, the ancient ways of curing with big words, or it does not at all bring great benefit;
But I have simplified it according to my intention, and I have formed instruments in various ways.
I say that in the gilling which comes from the back before, there is no beginning nor healing;
and I say that comes straight down the two sides, and can not be cured anyone but who properly comes at the back, as I said;
is that the patient is lying on his face in an even position, and has a poultice applied to him so that he does not blister;
then put a hot tong to the head on the ground shaped, and another one under the chest, and tie a bandage around the patient's body above the malady, and another one under the hips, and at the knees, and at the ankles;
and the two know the ropes, one to the head and the other to the chest between the two tongs;
and are firmly tied, the rope as we have said, and the mirrour places its hands on the spine shaped, until it revives.
And if it does not recover with this cure, then take a tumbler of three long arms, and cover the wall with it, and put the patient on one side, and pour the water from the tumbler over the spine covered with the wall, then place the middle of the tumbler on the spine; and set the mirrore upon the other head of the table, and press it well, until it comes back to its place;
and if you see, do this with your hand that twists. And so that you set the two torches on the head of the sick person with a long pole, and between each torch, opposite and aside, a palm's width of space;
and in each torch put a peg where the twist comes, and let the torch be firmly rooted in the ground so that it does not move;
and between each two torches put one torch turning, so that the line turns, and set two small torches of a palm' width long, to turn the twist;
and then let the line be laid that is among the torches to the twist opposite the head, and the other line toward the torches, and each minister twist his own line, and the master put the pegs at equal intervals as we have said.
And when it is even, put on dried plaster with much honey, and then the patches, and then the wood from a tablet of three inches long, which turns red when it comes into contact with the gangrene and the part of the spine that is healthy, and tie it with a thread, as we have said, and use subtle fasting for the patient until he is well.
and if nothing comes in the end of the health, then administer softening and soothing medicines with the wood that we have said above. and never give a piece of plaster, and never does the appearance come in the lower spine at the back, and be careful that it is not dislocations; This is the bone that opens, for one should not have any presumption: for fear that death might come.
It is known that the hips and shoulder joints only come from dislocations, not at all like the other joints.
and the hip joint is dislocated according to four parts: behind and in front;
and more behind them, and less dislocated in front and behind.
And the knowledge of its dislocations behind is that when one joins the sick leg with the healthy one, it is farther away, and the sick knees are higher than the healthy ones, and the sick man cannot double his knee in fire; and the legs that are swollen with heat from an abscess, so that the head of the thigh comes out.
And the sign of that which comes outside is that this accident is opposite to those before.
And the signs of him who is in front are that his leg is straight according to the fittingness; all the way, don't double up on the knee pain, and if you let it walk, you can't do it before, and hold back your urine, and swell the ankle, and when you go, you go over the heel.
And the signs of him who has been behind, if he cannot spread his knee, nor double it, and is this leg more twisted than the other, and the ankle is softened, and the hipbone is in its place among the ribs.
Those who come to this dislocation appearance should know that if the dislocation is old, and it delays according to its disposition, there is no treatment; and it doesn't make sense for him to have presumptuousness.
And in those who have a fresh dislocation, and there are four ways of dislocation, if you hurry to restore the joint, and turn it inside out and outside in, and move it to the right and left; So that it may return, and there is no need for any other treatment;
If it doesn't return in this way, you must prepare a strong minister, and hold the leg very strongly with both hands, or tie it where it is tied to the knee; and other ministers extend their hand above in a certain way that he bottle his hands of his asses, then he strangles with a string on the cunt; and other tings take the hair from the loins;
and extend upwards and downwards all at once, so that the patient is raised up from the ground all at once, and remains there.
And this way of extension is common to four resemblances, and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, it is good.
If not, then one should put a cure to his appearance.
When the dislocations are in the back, you must lie the patient on his back, then put the string on the root of the cunt, and the line that is out of its place, then extend the line upwards towards the anus, and downwards towards the root.
Then other ministers take his arms, and embrace the big line of the cunt of the patient, and extend it to both sides in a certain form: If he returns to his place now;
and this method of dislocation is lighter than others.
And if you cannot hold it in this way that we have described, then it is necessary that you tie the two feet of the patient together with a strong rope from the heel, and on the thigh, and extend the sore leg twice as far as the other;
then hang it by the neck of a post, and be hung from the ground two long arms;
and order one minister to embrace the head of the patient, and have other ministers hang with him who embrace the hips in a way that the joints return quickly;
And when the dislocation is away, so the patient lies down as we have described in the one who has giddy-head, and remove the rope from the leg properly, and also on the waist;
then put two sticks, one at the head and another at the feet, then stick a stick between the legs of the sick person so that it fits into the form; and let hang damp towels inside, so that it does not burn the sick person, then extend each minister towards him, and let him put the dislocation in his hand at an equal distance from his body.
If it returns, it is good.
If not, set on .ie. a table, and press it thus as we said in the gibosity, and lay the patient on the sound side.
And when the dislocations are in front, if it is necessary to extend the sick leg quickly, and according to what I have said; and let him put his pain on the sick leg, then press with the other hand, and extend it towards the knee;
And if the dislocations are at the back, if it is not necessary to extend the sick person backwards, do not lift him up from the ground, but rather let him fall backwards as he was lying; so that he falls on his two hind legs, as we have said when lying down on the two legs; and over his face, and the leg extended as we have said above, and must all be pressed together on the joint at the table; and will be at a point when the patient extends his legs, and they shall be even; then fix the knees, and put on the plaster, and extract a bandage, so that the ankle does not move; and rest for three or four days, then remove it, and put on the plaster;
and if you see that they are even, then extract it, as before, and leave it for three days;
then remove it, and let him walk loudly, until the limbs are comfortable.
from the dislocation of the hip joint
The genius is dislocated according to three manners: that is to say, inside and outside, and behind.
and do not dislocate in front.
And the signs are that you instruct the patient that he bend his leg to his crotch, and if it does not bend to his crotch, know that it is dislocated.
and the reduction of all is that you make the patient sit upright, and extend his leg if he can, and place your back on his face, and place his foot on your feet;
then take his knee between your palms, and draw back between your two, then bend the two ribs of the knee together; and other ministers extend his foot, until the genoux returns to its place, and the signs are that he bends his leg to his crotch lightly;
and put the plaster on, and make the leg bend at the crotch, and keep it together firmly for three or four days, then remove it;
and do not work on the patient's pain, as long as the limbs are comfortable.
And if the members are not at their place, if one administer a strong extension, as we have said in the treatment of the hip, until they are healed.
of the dislocation from the heel
The heels are never dislocated, nor completely displaced inward or outward.
and the signs are that the ankle is dislocated, and try before the part where it has been displaced:
let them stretch lightly if they are light, and they must extend lightly with their hands when they are slightly bruised.
And if it is displaced from the top, you must make the patient sit upright, and tie him down except for the leg, above the ankle;
then train the foot with your right hand, and then with your left hand twice, and then raise it up, and blow on the foot well up;
and do this twice, as we have said, blowing and training the foot;
if it comes back, it is good;
if not, then begin again, because it returns;
and if it cannot come back in this way, then take the sick person on their back on the ground, and place a hard pass firmly in the ground between their legs, and tie the drapes around, so that he does not hurt the sick.
then wrap the minister's hip, and another minister extends the leg to its hands or ties it, so that he lies on the neck of the stone; then extend each minister equally, and the pass should be close between the sick person's hips to hold the sick person down;
then place the mirror of dislocation in the minister's hands, and another minister ties the healthy leg to the side, and the dislocation will come back slowly.
And when it is set, then apply the plaster and press it down, and strain it well, and tie the foot to the leg, and guard against the joints that are on the back of the ankle, so that the ties are not too tight;
and leave it II days or III, and bind it loose, if he draws.
and release it on the third day or fourth, and protect the patient from going out for four days; and if he goes before that term is up, it is not yet certain that he will not dislocate again.
And if the abscesses come to a head, so that you calm it, as we have said elsewhere, until it is well.
the two When the two are dislocated, so that they are nicely extended without work, and this is a light thing.
And if the dislocation is in any joint of his back or foot, then you must make the patient sit upright on a flat bed or chair, and put your foot on that which opens these joints, then press your foot firmly, until he regains feeling;
and when it is healed, and does not open anymore, then place the sole of his foot on a table at four corners, then press firmly, and leave it for three days, then release him; and let him rest, until he is well.
of wound and dislocation together
When a wound comes with a dislocation, and it is restored, many times the patient has died:
If you are not presumptuous in the cure, if you are not skilled in this art and have not used it for a long time, and if you are not compassionate and merciful and slow to anger, do not be too hasty.
and at the beginning of things use soothing ointment on an abscess, and leave the patient in God's hands if you see no hope for health; and when you see hope, now set the limb back in place so that the abscesses may come;
and when the limb is in place, administer soothing ointment to the wound and treat it with dry poultices as appropriate;
and if there has been a fracture with joint displacement and some small bones have broken, then do as we said for simple illnesses;
and keep yourself from going down the path of fear, according to what I have said, for it will bring you into difficulty according to your Creator, and for the sake of saving your life and your body.
