O you, dear children of mine, I have completed this book which is the final word on the science of medicine as a whole, and I have finished it with its explanations and declarations. And it came to me in a vision that I should complete this treatise with this book, which is part of the work of hands, that is to say "surgery".
And because the work of hands is dealt with in our region and is strange to all and every part, it is very rare in science and practice, and is not delayed by the little descriptions in books of the ancient ones that the hands have moved. And from this has come error and vanity, and intentions are closed and science is distant.
I believe this to be alive with the order of this practitioner according to the path of exposure and statement and acceleration. and I will come with the forms of the tools of cauterization, and of other instruments of the work, with the aid of the statement and preparation of him, as is fitting.
And for the reason that no good master of hands is found in our times, the art of medicine is diminished. And he who meddles in this should overcome in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, as far as he knows the judgment of members, and their shapes and connections and separations of bones, and has knowledge of bones and nerves and veins and the number of joints, and the movement and moving veins and the resting and non-resting places, and the place of their issue.
And for this do I say that it is not good with the non-moist, and with work is little; and more often in the art of hands.
We tell you in the introduction of this book that who is not knowledgeable about the things before mentioned should take care not to make a mistake and harm men.
since I have often seen many of those who meddle in this science and abandon themselves to it without experience.
For I saw a foolish man who pricked an abscess on the scrofula of a woman or on the neck; So many deaths occurred that women died between his hands.
And I saw another wonder, a stone carried by an elderly man; the stone was large; he took with him a piece of the bladder, and died honorable man within three days.
And I have seen some who were called in to treat the patient and saw the condition of the disease and the size of the stone; and if they treated him, he would surely die.
And I saw another wonder, a duke of our land who had his leg broken, and with the break there was a wound;
and the mirages of ignorance restrained the break over the wound as if by strong ligature, and left no scar on the wound, and left it thus; and so I finished;
and he commanded that he should not remove it;
and he waited until the leg was completely healed and the wound closed, and came to perdition.
I was called upon to go to him, and I hurried to remove the leg; and when I dislocated it, he was at peace and felt no pain.
But all the ways of corruption were already confirmed in that member, and it cannot be healed;
and the corruption did not cease to spread through the member as long as the members were completely lost.
And I saw another wonder that will destroy the abscess and putrefaction, and then inflame because of the evil of its lordship.
For leprosy, when it is infected with melancholy humor, does not come to an end except that one touches it with iron if it is in a suitable place so that one can completely remove what is corrupted.
And for this, fine children, you must know that the work of hands is divided into two divisions: that is to say, work in which there is danger in many dispositions;
and I will show in each of the books of this book where there is fear and danger.
For you must keep it so that the wrong man cannot speak ill of you.
Take your weapons in agreement, undertake your ailments lightly and firmly, and use the best way so that, by the grace of God, you come to salvation and are freed;
and leave the expectorable diseases of pain health.
and keep your arms away from that which makes you doubt, and have faith that you can come from this world to the other of glory.
Galien adds in some of his admonitions: Do not take on the care of a sick person unless you are called a fool.
I have devised this treatise according to III chapters.
The first chapters are fire cauterizations and medicinal water cauterizations, and the chapters ordered of meat just until the feet;
and forms of instruments, and iron tools for cauterization, and all that is necessary in the work.
The second chapters are about cutting and drilling, and suction cups and wounds, and extractions of arrows, and similar things;
and the chapters ordered and forms of instruments.
The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and torsions and similar things.
and it is ordered that the heads of the bones be cut off, and the forms of the instruments be formed.
Thus, let us remember the work; it is necessary that I give you the quality of aid and the harm of each complexion.
I say that the qualities of help, and harm, are the most distant words and subtle knowledge and secret responses have been said.
and of these many wise men spoke, and agreed upon this.
And I am satisfied with few words, for I shorten the length.
I say that cauterization helps all complexions or it has matter, except for one complexion: that is to say complexion with heat and matter, and complexion with dry and matter.
In a hot and dry complexion together with matter, they devised nothing and said that cauterization is great help; and the other said the opposite: what fire cautery is good for disease that comes from heat and thirst. For the natural power of fire, if it is hot, and should not be used to treat a hot disease by heat, nor by thirst;
and says that what opposes it does great help for a hot and dry disease that comes from within men. For when you compare the body of man with the fire's moisture to the skin, you find the body cold.
And I agree with this word. For I have never found it by experience.
And all roads, don't meddle with fire except he who has experienced it and knows by long practice the chaplet of cauterizing, and the diversity of complexions of men, their dispositions and causes of their diseases, and the remedies and space of time.
of other complexions we have no fear, nonetheless with cold and moist diseases. And all the hair should come together and agree with the fire cautery.
And know, children, that fire cautery together if there are secrets of healing, and much greater goodness than medical fire cautery.
For fire is simple, and comes only to the member that is cooked, and does not hurt any other member at all.
The burning remedies come from one member to another by removing, and bring to the member great relief of disease; and perhaps awaken the disease.
Fire, because of its height and the goodness of its substance, does not produce this unless there is an excess.
And I have found this by experience and through the length of service and study that I have put into the art, and it is based on the truth of things;
and I apologize for the length of the speech, for it does not please me that you should learn the secret of fire from another, and the quality of the work, how it dispels the diseases of the body, as the philosopher says in demonstrating; or receive it in your thoughts.
And know, son, that they should be made in what time they should be performed, and they should be prayed.
And I say that cauterization is suitable at all times, because the harm that overtakes is due to the aid of cauterization; and most often cauterization is done for necessary and urgent pains that cannot be put up with until the time when greater evil comes to the limb.
And I do not think ever, dear son, as they do so foolishly. For the disease that is cured by cauterization has no return. and he should serve in this way;
and he should serve in this way; but he does not know how to cauterize, for a cautery is only medicine that moves the complexion and dries up the humors that cause pain; and it is superior to medicine in terms of its swiftness, and because of its virtue and majesty.
And they can achieve what the disease will do according to the complexion of the patient and the location of the disease and its virtue;
and they are gathered together in it the excesses by the acquisition of meat and similar things, unless cauterization is administered at the place where he has lost some excess and moisture, so that cauterization by the heat, and the similar things, and the pain does not return. but this did not happen.
And many people do not understand why the last remedies of medicine are called, and it is seen;
but they do not believe that the last remedies of medicine are worth anything, but their intentions are false, and this is a remedy of medicine because when we administer ways to cure in any disease and they don't work, then let us administer this remedy, and it works.
And so open well that the fire cautery is a medicine derived from the entrails, not according to the intention of foolish lookers.
The ancient ones said that the gold instrument is more effective than the iron one, and they only mentioned the quality of gold and its high substance;
and they said that the fire of the cautery does not cause blisters, but this is not true because I have tested it, and I found that it is true in some people;
and a gold cautery works better than an iron one, as they used to say. And anyway when you heat the instrument of gold, you are not yet when it is warmed by the color of gold, and soon cools down again;
and if it is overheated; if heated in the fire; then there is sufficient obstruction.
Or vos ai ordeneit cet chapitre des lou chief jus'à piez, pour ceu que li voie soit plus legiere à trover.
The olive oil cautery is useful for a moist and cold forehead, and also for a multitude of problems in the hair, and in the ears, and for many kinds of headaches and pain in the jaw and throat, and especially for all manner of diseases that come from coldness, such as paralysis, swelling, apoplexia, and similar illnesses.
The form of this cautery is that the patient should be purged by a soluable medicine which clears the head (III or IV), according to what the virtue and ease and the custom of the disease allow him to bear; and then make ready the head of the patient.
And then make it sit crosswise between your hands, and place his hands on his chest;
Afterwards, put the root of your palm on the root of his nose between his two eyes; and let your two hands come together, so that it bleeds from the bridge then heat the cautery which is called "oliver", of which this form is: And place your hand slowly and carefully, little by little, while moving it. then release your hand slowly, and feel the joint until you feel the bone just a little. and if you don't feel it, start the fire again as I told you, until you feel the bone.
after, take a piece of string, put some cotton on it, and place it over the joint, and leave it for three days;
after, put some damp cotton on it. and leave it on until the bone starts to hurt; after, treat the wound with a poultice called "tetrarch", until it heals.
And they say that as long as the wound is left open, it will heal faster. and so if they help.
And said the ancient that the longer a wound remains open, the more it will putrefy; and therefore if the fire should burn so much of the bone as to be consumed, then remove what is burned from the bone, and let it be cured.
And so the other one that should be cauterized should be done with care on, and press so strongly it moves the bone as far away as I can put in a woman's vagina to get the humors out.
and so the wound must remain open for a long time. after, one must cure and take care of it.
And these two ways of cauterizing do not seem good to me in all cases, except in some men where there is doubt.
and it seems to me that I should let him be.
for the shoulder is weakened by continuous solutions of nature, as we witnesses in other limbs;
and even if the shoulder of the sick person is weak by nature, and the first impression of cauterizing is more saved and softened for me, and I use it in such a way that it can be cured;
When in all the head comes chronic pain, and lasts a long time, then the patient must use herbs and pills which are called "cochineals", and head purgation and oils and poultices. and if one does the cautery that we have spoken of above, and it is not useful. Take care that the head of the patient is of strong nature, and that he is not too cold; then cauterize him with fire a little as we have spoken above. After, make the fire cautery on each horn of the head up to the bone, as we have said before, and make the fire cautery where it is called "vessels"; and put them in places where ventouses are placed; and adjust your hand so that you do not see the bone at all: The patient feels an even greater amount of pain with this treatment than with others, and I will speak of it later on.
And it is necessary that the corns be cut more finely than those from which one cuts the hair of the head, and this is the form:
To cauterize the head. When sudden pain comes to a part of the head and extends all the way to the oil, and the shoulder is clean with medicinal oil, and all other treatments I mentioned in the section on diseases have been performed, then there is no benefit. Then it is treated according to two methods, namely with medicinal oil and fire.
The medicinal oil treatment is done by prying open a tooth with a lever and then cutting off the bark and peeling it down to the bone in two pieces, and then applying it to the head where the pain is in one part, so that you can remove the bark from the leather.
and when it is set back if the strapping and restraint are good and left so for XII hours; then unbind it and treat with oil of garlic, and leave the wound for II or III days; then put on cotton dipped in butter as long as it can be made to adhere;
After the treatment with ointment as long as he is healed;
and if you see that any of the medicinal preparations I have written about or one of the treatments for burning medicines are effective;
The fire cautery if it is according to this manner. Heat the fire cautery so that it is hot:
And it is called "clos" because the head is made in the shape of a cloak or has a little curl, and is shaped in the middle to a small appearance;
and place it on the painful spot, and hold your hand and turn the fire a little bit, so that half of the heat of the cure is burned;
and place your hand so that the artery does not burn, which is far away, and abundant blood flows.
After putting cotton in a string, and placing it on the area for three days; then put cotton wet with oil on it, and then treat the area with ointment until it is healed;
and if you want to cauterize this headache with the cautery that is called "cultellare", do so at the tip, and be careful not to cover the artery in this headache that is not old.
of headache
When you treat the headache as we have said before in the divisions of diseases, and do not benefit from it, and see that the cautery in front of the medicine and the fire does not suit it, then you must heat the cautery that is called "cultellare" until it is white;
and so thus on the limb aching a line of half a foot long, and hold your hand once, and strain that you do not cover the artery and that you do not come to the bone;
and beware of the jaw which moves when it is pulled, and the joint does not rest but shakes and spasm comes to the disease, and beware of the separation of blood from the artery when it is cut, or separation has great fear and more for those who do not know it, and who are not students and tested; and leave the work in mid-air;
but I will tell you how to strain blood when the artery is cut, and I will show you at this place in this book.
And if you see that this fire cautery does not suffice to the disease, and the patient is suffering, cauterize him in mid-air as well as we have said, and heal the wound until it is healed;
and if you see, administer the cautery that we have said or chapitre of extraction of the artery, with the cautery that has II knives; and this cautery is better than that and more helping.
for pain in the ears from cold
When there is pain in the ears from cold, and one has applied the liquid medicines and other treatments we spoke of in the division, and the pain does not go away, then heat this poultice that is called "poins," which has this form:
After puncturing all around the ear on the sore side, or around the two sides where it hurts most, and moving away a little from the root of the ear then that you have found the place of the ache; and there are X points inside each ear;
After healing the place as long as it is healthy.
of the torture of the mouth
The torture that must be cured by cautery is only effective for those that move with fluid, as we have said in the division of illnesses;
and not to use cauterization for similar things that come from scorching and spam of nails.
When you heal this similarity of torture that moves with fluid of water and purging of head and gargling, and this does not help, then it is good that you cauterize the disease with three cauterizations: one at the root of the ear, and another a little way back from the temple, and the third in the joining of the two lips.
and place the fire cautery in the healthy part, and make a fire cautery at the top of the ear near the corner of the head, and another in the temple as far back as one small finger. and leave the fire cautery there until half of the cur is burned away.
This is how the fire cautery should be made:
And it is the shape of the scalpel that we have described before, but it should be slightly thinner and the blade slightly thicker.
After fire cauterizing as I have described above, until he is healthy again.
When the apoplexy is old and you treat it as we have described above, and it does not improve, and the patient has no fever, then make four fire cauter II under the two horns of the head, and I cut off the head, and I put on the vastez as we have said before, and cautery to the mouth of the stomach.
and be cured as we have said before.
of chalk
For this disease, give the patient many years and pills to clean out the brain;
after all, remove the head of the sick person, and put on the scalp a plastron of saffron which is written or the preparation of plasters;
is this way to cauterize So if you do so as I have said.
If he is healthy then, good; And if he is not, then he shall have three cauterizations of the cut head descending as far as the collar, and two inches of space between each cauterization;
and the doctor does so as well, and if you see it wriggling, the patient is suffering, then do the fire cautery in the middle; and if it is necessary, II others above the two horns, and the doctor until he is well;
and be the cautery that is called "oliver", as I have said before.
It is necessary that the head be cleansed of years and of what we have said before;
after washing the head of the sick person, then do the fire cautery on the head and on each horn, and behind and III on the spine of the neck;
and if you have more work to do, and the body is moist and the patient is suffering, and the disease is severe, then do four cauterizations on the spine of the back; and let it burn until the hottest one is done, and lower your hand; after the cure as long as he is healthy, and the cauterization which is called "olive" that we have mentioned above.
of epilepsy
of the epileptic should only use fire cauterization if it is phlegmatic; first, the brain should be cleaned of years and other cures that we have mentioned in the division when the patient is great and suffering from pain.
And if it is a child who cannot tolerate the poultice, let him gargle and chew the head with boned meat often;
after the king has eaten rice in the middle, and I apply the poultice according to what we have said above, and I apply the poultice on the vessel, and on each horn; and if the patient is far away and suffering, apply the poultice as I have said to those who are paralyzed and have a softening of the ribs on the spine of the back and neck, and apply the olive poultice according to the way I have said.
If the patient is a child, do a delicate cauterization according to this method:
When, by reason of melancholy, there are excesses or corrupted wetness and thick fluid, then the cauterization is of parts as we have said to him who has paralysis.
And if, by reason of melancholy, the excess is declining into melancholy, and the patient's spinal fluid is moist, then give him to drink something so that his brain is purified, according to what it is before in the division.
after the king has eaten rice for the sick person; after make a turban of linen well made, as well as a circle, if he puts it on the king's head;
and the sick person is placed, and well supported on all sides;
after presenting the linen, and dry with old butter; and heat it moderately over fire, so that the two may drink of it without suffering; after vacuuming the circle from within by drawing up the head, and allowing it to cool;
and do this for the sick person every week with good governance, until he is well again.
If you want to cauterize yourself by making many punctures all over the cauterization.
This way of cauterizing wetttens the skull slightly;
and then put on cotton wet with butter and linseed oil.
of the eyes When the hair comes first as long by the signs that I said in the division, then begin and do drink to the patient purifying thing the head, and the ward of all moisture, and let it sweat or bathe many times on an empty stomach.
After he has sat down again, and made a cauterization on his head, and made two cauterizations on his temples if he is disheartened at one time and not at another, or if one is disheartened and the other not;
and wrap all the fire cautery around all the veins and arteries that are exposed, and let the cautery be long according to the width of the temple;
and guard against the loss of blood, and if you see too much blood coming out, stop it with a cloth so that it does not come out.
And I will teach you how to stop the flow of blood during extraction of arteries and incision, how to stop it;
and never does one make a fire cautery or hurt while exposing the two bones behind.
and one can see that it is an excess of cold, humidificated things, then make the fire cautery that I said at the beginning of the descent of the tears: I cauterize the scalp, and I cauterize over the two temples, and I cauterize where the hair meets the bones. And if it is needed more, if the cauterize bleeds over the brow to all small cauterize.
When you treat it according to what we said in the division, and it does not benefit, then just drink three nights' water. After he has raised the scalp, and he makes a cauterize at the middle of the olive oil cauterize; and make two cauterizes of the cauterize that is called "clavis" over the two brows, a little shaved on top.
And guard the artery so you do not cover it.
And this is the form of the cauterization which is called "clavis":
When the paper of oil is softened by disease and moisture, then the cauterization with this cautery which is called "oliva So that you know how to make this form:
And if you see, make two cauterizes over the two brows as long as the brows are;
and do not let go of my hand except that as long as the third part of the paper is burned, according to the way I have said.
of the hair that drips oil Until such time as the hair of the oils is turned into the parched skin, and they grasp the oil, then do I make cauterizations according to two manners: that is to say, by fire, or by burning medicine.
For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
When they have grown and are even, then put the patient into your care; after signing on the paper of the hairs a figure which is also like the feather of the pine tree, and is the beginning of the sign of the hair;
and then I dip cotton in wax and musk in oil on the palm of my hand, then heat the cauldron so that this is its form:
After cauterizing the figure you have marked little by little many times, that the scar be burned in place;
and the signs of the health of the work are that you see the paper退退, and the hairs rise to the point of the oil;
then raise your hand, and leave it like this for three days, then I dip cotton in wax until the heat is hot; After the cure of ointment as long as it is healthy.
And when these come, and the paper is soft then start again the cauldron in the middle, as you did first;
and when the hairs are gone, if the cauterization is done so that the paper returns to its natural position, and is even, and does not touch the hair to the oil.
The medicine's fire cautery is that you instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even, then make a parchment in the shape of a laurel leaf;
and take French soap and hot salt, each one of them 1/4 ounce, and grind them together well; and do it carefully so that it doesn't cool down, then in the same manner as you made the shape of the laurel leaf, put the hairs on the parchment; and if the disease only affects one side, then treat it alone, and also treat the other side; and dip cotton wicking in oil that's moistened with alcohol;
and if the patient is in your presence, then hold the head of the disease towards the medicine, and press it gently and frequently so that the patient feels heat from the medicine, because they also feel heat like fire;
As you have done for so long, if the medicine sticks to your tongue. And when the mortification has passed, then raise up the place of aw, and note if you see the paper raised as it was raised by constraint of fire or by incision; and if it is so, then it is well.
If not, then put back the medicine on the place where it has not worked, as long as your hairs are long and even, and your eyes held fast;
and put on cotton dipped in oil as long as the curative is hot, after treating the place of the wound that is called "dyaferens" and others, until it is healed.
And if you must guard your wound well, by great care so that it does not break out with the medicine's hairs.
And if the paper becomes soft after it, and the hairs grip in the oil, then begin again the medicine on that place which is softened by the paper properly, in the same way as you have done before; after the cure as long as he is healthy;
and this is the shape of the funnel of the milky way:
And know that the eyes of men are different in size and shape, and according to this they are constrained;
and is not reused straight way to him whose study is this art.
For the cure of a fistula by cauterization:
When you treat a fistula as we have said in the division of diseases, and your treatments do not benefit, then it is necessary to apply cauterization according to this method.
Instruct the patient to put his head in your lap; and hold the hair of his head between your hands so that it does not move or fall;
after wet a cotton ball in wine or juice of cherry on oil;
after heat the cautery which is sharp;
and place it on the head like a feather of a dove, so that the tip of the cautery is:
if you can see, if you point from one head to the other, and if you cannot see, if it is like a tent;
but all the same, he who is the master of the craft must move according to your need.
After pressing, the fistula has been opened and treated, and it is dried up; and if it is closed, so that he works, and treats it furiously;
after putting the fire cauldron in place, and holding your hand over the cauldron at the part of the neck above the oil, so that your hand does not go mad; and put the fire cauldron in the oil grease, and spoil it.
If you come to the cauterization just to the bone, it would be good. If not, then restart the cauldron again once more, and if you need more, let it lie for three days;
afterwards I put cotton soaked in oil on it, and the cure of the drying ointment until it is well, and if it is well for forty days, then put the corrosive medicine until the bone is uncovered; and let him rest according to what he came to his chapter.
And I have a way of cauterizing fistulas, which no one of the ancients mentioned. Hear a pipe, and seal the hole; Then put in the edge I have a subtle instrument so that it is the form: and I make in the quantity of one .Z. of pound; and hold your hand firmly, and do not move the patient so that the pound does not run into its oil;
and it is necessary that one put on the oil to the patient wet in a basin of water or in a vat:
the pound so as to close the hole of the fistula, and he is healed by marvelous health.
And if the fistula is healed by the cauterization that we have spoken of, it is good. But if not, then it is necessary to give a pound to the nose, and to bring back the fistula to the root of the nose according to what one should do in his own place.
crevasses on lips The mouth sometimes causes crevices in the lips, which are called "hair," and sometimes in the lips of children.
When you treat these crevices as we have said in the divisions, and the cure does not benefit, then a small surgical cauterization is performed according to this form:
And put him firmly in those crevices until it comes up to the edge;
After he has cured the head of cerotomy as long as he is healed.
When an abscess forms at the root of the throat or in the palate or at the roots of the teeth after a pustule has rotted and fallen away and becomes a fistula. and you treat it as we have said in the divisions, and it does not benefit: then it is necessary that you have fire cauterization according to the quantity of the fistula; after the piercing or opening of the fistula, and hold your hand until the iron comes out from the bottom, and behind it;
and do so once or twice after the treatment we have said above, until he is well;
and if it is cured in this way, it is good; and if not, then uncover the place and remove the rotten bone according to what you will find in his ointment.
When the teeth are softened by moisture and the gums move, and you cure it with medicine and that does not work, then put the head of the sick in your healthy one; After heat the cautery so that its form will come out later in a certain way so that you put a chain on the teeth;
and place the hot cautery inside it carefully, and hold your hand so that the patient feels the heat coming from the root of the teeth;
After remove your hand and start again the cautery according to your will;
After fill the patient's mouth with salty water, and leave it for an hour and rinse thoroughly.
And in this way the tooth that was moving is stabilized, and the gums that were softened are tightened, and the moisture that corrupts is dried up.
of the teeth
When the toothache comes from cold, or there is coldness or swelling, and medicines do not work, then it is necessary to perform the cautery according to two ways: and cautery with butter and fire cautery.
with butter cautery is such that you squeeze butter from a cow, and the tip into a teaspoon of iron or gold. then take cotton and wrap it around the tip of a needle, and squeeze it into butter, and put it on the aching tooth gently and keep it until it has cooled down;
and then often as its virtue comes to the root of the tooth, and if you see if moist wool and cotton in butter freeze, and put it on the aching tooth, and put it on hot iron until the fire comes to the root of the tooth.
The combined fire cautery is such that you squeeze a iron or gold wire, and it is thick so that the fire does not come to the mouth of the patient;
then heat the cautery, so that it comes out as follows, and put it on the tooth and keep your hand until the cautery has cooled down;
Make it often, for the pain will be worse the next day or the day after.
And the patient should fill his mouth with good butter before applying the fire cautery, and then swallow it.
This is the form of the cautery:
And make the cautery on the patient's lips that you desire, and according to your ability;
This is the form of the needle:
of the scrofula When the boils are of cold moisture and do not respond to medication, then heat the needle so that there is an opening for the fumes to come out from the one side of the cautery and go out through the other side;
and put the cautery hot on the abscess once, or where it is necessary, until it comes to the bottom of the abscess;
and if there is an abscess, make a cautery according to the quantity of the abscess, and leave it like that for three days; and with cotton wet with oil until the burn has healed;
after treating with ointments and poultices until it is healthy.
When the moisture overtakes the skin of the shoulder, and most importantly when it comes from cold temperature, then the patient should be emptied first by giảipharmacological means;
after you have made a cautery at the root of the throat, and keep away from the throat, and only add a little.
After you have made another cautery at the joint of the neck at the base of the spine, and let the cautery that is called "clave" take shape in front of us;
and treat the wound as we have said above until it is healed.
When all illnesses are caused by cold moisture, and the patient has no fever or chills, but is an old disease, then make cauterization on his legs with fire .II cauterize at the roots of the hair; and another cauterization pour out the milk between the breasts;
and let the cauterization which is called "clavicle" according to the shape that has been said above.
And if you see it, make a cauterization by poking at all the cauterization that is called "poins" so that the shape is as said above in the illness of the ears;
and let the pokes be only up to XXX, or until it hurts.
After care according to this which is before said, and let the cauterization be to three rains according to this form:
And because these are lighter cauterizations, because you do them in three at a time.
of the dislocation of the shoulder
When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation. Afterwards, make the patient lie on his back and on his side; After remove the ring which is inside the tickle, as you must do with your left hand.
and if the joint is dislocated from within, then heat the fire which has two ends, this is the shape:
and cauterize the ring as far as it pierces the skin, and came the figure of the fire together with four cauterizes;
and for this one is made cauterize with the fire which has three ends, for the figure of cauterization are four cauterizes;
and the nerve according to the subtility of a thread and this is the shape of the fire which has three ends:
And no time is placed on this nerve because there are eight cauteries.
After put on the fire for melt with silk; After let rest the patient, and do not move the members by long time until it is well conforted.
And if it is dislocated above, what thing comes out, then do cauterization on the thick part of the cautery, or many cauteries pierce it.
And because the joint is closed, and the moisture is dried up and the patient is healed.
When in the stomach come coldness and moisture as it is drawn away from its color, and multiplies the cataracts to him, and is mannered in the usual cures and does not benefit, then the patient should be placed on his back, and his legs and hands extended. From now on after the fire make three cauterizations of the hand with the blade of the pis per quantity of two, for all cauterizations clawed, and two cauterizations distant the two sides so that the form of the cauterizations is at three angles, and there be a space between each one and another so that they are not joined together when they move rottenness;
and let the cauterization be so perfect that it burns both parts of the hand, and the form of the cauterizations is according to this form without stirring:
And if you see cauterized with a large cautery in the stomach according to this form;
and whoever is afraid of this cautery, cauterizes by piercing and signing on the stomach in i. point according to the quantity that you see of one inch; then cauterize all the cauterization which is called "point".
After the treatment of the cure we have had before, as long as he is healthy.
As for the liver, it comes with pain from cold and moisture and a great windiness, as long as it is excessively removed from its natural state by the excesses. And the patient is cured of what we have said in the divisions, and it does him no good, unless he becomes sullen on his hemorrhoids; and the sign of three cauterizations according to this form and this figure and this quantity on the liver, let the hips be spared, for from which comes the cut of the womb;
and there should be space between each cauterization equal to the girth of a thumb; and let the cauterization of the long neck, and do not press out much blood with one hand at all the cauterization;
and be burned only halfway through the cure, and let the patient lie on his side;
and if he cannot, then let him lie down on his side, and extend his legs, and lift up his breasts.
And if your will is, then cauterize these cauterices of the cutlery, if you are subtle and wise in this art, and beware that you do not burn all of it, for you would parch all the body; and that it does not come to a boil, because the meat is very subtle in place, and your eyes to see it.
When he has an abscess in the liver, and you can know if it is in the flesh of the liver or in the sacking; if it is in the flesh, then the patient's pain will not be too great;
and if it is in the sacking, then the pain will be very severe.
And so when this treatment was finished, if the patient began to sneeze, then he needs to rest on his head.
and then sign with your hand at the place where the abscess is, and then heat the fire cautery that looks like a rod, from which comes this shape: And cauterize it as long as the wound is burning, and come up to the top, so that the skin is all burned;
after the treatment according to the treatment of abscesses until he is well;
and it is not necessary to use any fire but those who have studied medicine for a long time in the art of medicine, and by which these diseases have never been corrupted.
And cauterize I cauterize until the wound is burned, and comes up to syphac, until the scar is completely healed; after the cure according to the cure of the abscesses until it is healthy; and only one who has studied long in the art of medicine, and by which many diseases have been corrupted no time.
For the pleurisy cautery
The old ones said that one must do with root of aristologue, and in this way too: take a root of aristologylong, the largest that you can find, and dry it, and also make it as long and as thick as your two fingers; and the gurgling in oil, and hold by fire, cautery cautery between the jaw and the throat, and two small cautery one little cautery going down to the part that is soze the beard;
and two small cautery one little cautery between the fifth rib and the sixth, inclining behind a little; and one cautery under the penis, and another on the stomach, and one between the two shoulders, and two ribs above the back of the cautery that is between the shoulders;
and do not squeeze my hand, but make it open widely as when you are smelling something.
And no old man uses fire cautery like a razor, and they sweep it and put it between the ribs until it comes to the abscess; and wait for the pain, as we have said in the abscess of the liver.
But in this work there is fear or the patient dies now, or a fistula comes out that cannot be cured.
of the mouse
When you cure the disease of the mouse according to what we have said in the division of the cures, and it does not benefit, then they took three ways of cauterizing which are all good.
III or IV cauteries, or according to the length of the mouse, according to the shape of the fire cautery which we have said above.
and do not press your hand on all the cautery, and let the patient sit down on his back;
and another way to cauterize that you heat the cautery which has 2 nails, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder;
and place the knife which is at the mouse's end, where the cut of the patient comes towards the left, and let the elevation that you make with the knife be according to the knife, according to the length of the body, and the cautery be according to the width of the body.
Afterwards, you will pour the 2 nails that are on fire until the knife is pricked from the other side, and then take the cautery away quickly, and thus there will be III.
And if you see, cauterize all the cauterizations at three nights.
After the patient has been infected for a long time, and it is clear that one of the two cures mentioned earlier is needed, then it is necessary to try both at the same time.
cautery does not work for droves, except in the way called "asclepiades".
When you have cured it according to the ways that we have said in the divisions, and your cure is not successful, then it is necessary that you do four cauterizations around the boude, and one on the stomach, and one on the liver, and one behind the back on the spine, and one place on the pis; and let the cauterization be well placed near the cure.
Afterwards, leave the cauterization uncovered for a long time, and do not leave the cure of the patient uncovered after the cauterization; and the healing would hurry, and the two intentions would be together with the help of God.
The shape of the cauterization for the stomach is the key that we have before described; and its two sides are olive-colored, according to what has been said above.
When the feet are swollen in the person who is hydropic and are pale yellow in color, it is necessary that you cauterize on the back of the foot between the index and middle fingers; and hold your hand with the cauldron without turning.
And do not enter too deeply, lest the pale yellow be burned, and let the cauterization be according to this form:
After, make two cauterizations on each leg at the point of the scalpel; and let the cauldron be long, one behind the knee in front and the other before, between the leg and the thigh;
and leave the cauterizations on for a long time without washing, so that the blood comes out;
After the treatment described above, you can then proceed with other treatments which we have mentioned.
When the solution of the stomach comes from cold and moisture, as long as the virtues retain and digest that are in the stomach and in the intestines are affleurant, and cannot be cured by methods of treatment; and you see the patient very suffering and of great virtue, so do I grant cautery on the stomach according to what he has spoken before or cautery of the stomach, with the circulating cautery; and four cauteries around the navel with small needle-like cauterization, and two cauteries on the hips.
And if you see moisture abundant and the patient suffering, then make fire cautery on the knuckle, and I make cautery on each finger, and II small cauterizes in the stomach to take away the great one, for the cure is profitable when there is good help.
of the treatment of hemorrhoids
When the hemorrhoids are at the foundation, or one or more, and are old and are large cold and moist corrosion, and are cured as we have said in the divisions, and does not benefit, so do cauterize: and III on the spine of the back, that which is all from away is seared little by little in tripling, and I sear the navel two times;
and if you think that his stomach is cold, and the meat does not cook, and one sees swelling of the face, then the face is seared with cauterization as said before, and another on the liver, and another on the cheek, at all cauterization with needle-like cauterization; and leave the fire cautery long ten. After care, let him rest as long as he is healthy.
When you cut the skin, if you heat the fire cautery that seems like a razor, and then put it all ablaze on the cut skin; and I leave so long my hand that the cautery comes to the birth of the vein, from which it does not move away;
do this once or twice, and if there is blood from the skin, then cauterize it each time as we have said; after the treatment with beneficial oils as long as they are healthy;
and if you cauterize with a large fire cautery on the skin, it will be more effective.
When the patient cannot bear to have the wound lanced or opened, which we will tell you in your place, then comes a disease that cannot be healed except by cauterization.
When there is no outlet for the blood, and it has risen and become thick with pus and moisture, then you must try to provide a small passage for it, and be careful that you know how much of the remedy is perfect.
After heating the fire cautery that seems like a razor, and then pour it into the fistula according to the quantity that it has entered, and then restart the cautery as long as those cors are burning and corrupting, once, or twice, or three times, according to the quantity of the bespitting;
and protect against deep nerve injuries, and great veins.
it may cause a fistula in the middle of the bladder and intestines, so protect these parts, and never cut through the flesh, and think that it is not permanent;
after healing the wound as long as it is healthy, and if the members are broken, and the matter has been solid for a long time, then know that the wound is completely healed;
and if the matter has not become solid, know that the wound is twofold, and the bone is rotten at the root; and in this way as we will say about one of these.
When the cold pain comes with rain and strong wind, and does not respond to a woman's treatment, then you must use the fire cautery on both sides of the rain as we have said before;
and if we cauterize them with milk, then there will be three cauterizations in a row, and they will be more effective.
of the bladder When the bladder is soft and weak due to cold and moisture, so that the patient retains urine, then make cauterization in the lower part behind the bladder, where the hair of the testicles grows, and one on each side, and let each cauterization be as long as a fingernail;
and I make cauterization behind the back, where there is tickling;
and let each cauterization be claw-shaped according to the shape described above.
When the marrow is cold and moist, and does not allow for conception, and the flowers are withered and their termini are delayed; and when they come, there is great pain: So then it is fitting that he has III cauterizes in the loins, as we have said in the cautery of the bladder, and two cauterizes for the back.
and let the cauterize be claved, as we have said.
When the viscous moisture descends into the pelvis of the hip, and for this reason it moves from its place, and the sign is that the thigh is longer than the other when measured together;
and it is found that the department of the pelvis is wet, so it is fitting that you cauterize the patient on the pelvis with I cautery resembling a circle, and sign before the place in the circle around the pelvis as it turns, so that the pelvis is within the circle;
and if it be such cauterizes as those with which one cauterizes the stomach.
And if you do not have this ointment, make three ointments of the great olive, and let these ointments be also perfect as all the curers.
and treat it until he is healthy.
of the hip pain When the pain comes in the hip box, and it is from cold and moisture, and the patient is cured of that which we have said in the division, and the cure does not work, and the disease is old: Then you must purge the patient of large humors with foul pills, or other bad-looking pills. After this make a cautery;
and the way of the cautery should be according to two ways: that is to say together burning medicines, and fire cautery.
Fire cautery if it is according to many ways, of which one is such:
You shall cauterize the hunchback's back with three triangular cauters according to this form, and do it with great depth and wide space between each cauterization, having the cauters olive-sized.
No time is spent cauterizing in the middle on top of the hunchback's hump, for there are four according to this form:
And if you see, if you cauterize with a circular cauterizer as we have said before in the dislocation of the hump.
However, do it in such a way that the circle contains all the hump, and let all the meat be burned.
And this is the way it is done in sciatica, when the pain remains in the hip and does not reach up to the thigh or up to the leg.
And if it comes up to the thigh and leg, make two cauterizations there where the patient feels pain, and one above the ankle with three parts; on the left side a little.
and let the cautery of the teeth, and let the thickness of the cure be burned.
and if the patient feels that the pain extends to two or four points or eight points in the cautery called "points And if the profession is done, he does it more
and if he feels that the pain is in his knee and goes up towards his thigh, you make a dental cautery or circular cautery, and be sure to keep all your cauteries so that you do not leave them on for too long, burning the nerves and large arteries, and causing the patient no more harm and contraction.
And I have seen many who have done cauterization on the heel of the foot, and left them so much that the leg was all twisted, and the toes as well, and they were pierced and corrupted all the toes. After a solution to the belly from which he died.
And if the pain is in two parts together, do cauterization in one and the other, according to this way.
And the wise men say in the cautery of the hach, how it should be done, make it so thick or less thick as a fingernail, or a little less, and between the fingers and between each finger a space as large as a nail.
and let the bars of the harness be over two parts, and let them also be like knots, and there is one hand with iron well made;
This is the form:
And let it be heated until it is all red and hot, and then put it on the box of the sick hip, and turn it around the lower back;
and cauterize once again, and let it rest for three days; and then make an ointment of butter, and leave the open wound long; after the cure of ointment until it is healthy.
Albucasius says that we use little of this cautery because of its fear of his breath, and who uses it little;
and however good this is a cauterizer, who can bear it, and where he afflicts himself.
For the hot medicine cautery, if you make an instrument between which [the margin] of the hole is, and of rain or iron to a long wall, and in height it has two of us, and between each the quantity of the thickness of a dove; and are above and below, and join together according to this form:
After you have put on the box of the hip to the lying patient on his back it is in order, and press your hand very much on the box of the hip; After you have cut out between the two circles of hot wax that is heated in a pot, and let it rest for an hour, and suffer the patient the heat and the pain of it.
For it gives a burning taste also as fire does;
and when the taste has passed away, you take your hand with the instrument and raise the hip of soft wax, and leave it thus for three days, and put on butter as much as that which is black from the scorching is taken away; and let him leave three days to perspire in this way;
and this would be the following help after the treatment of onions as long as it is healthy.
And if the pain extends only to the thigh or only to the leg, make the instrument that you hold according to what you did in the hip gradually;
and this is the way of hot water, and I have written or treated of the correction of medicines. Take alkali and live charcoal, as much of one as of the other, and grind them together and put them in a nine-pot. or there is a small opening where the point of a rasp enters;
or there is a small opening where the point of a rasp enters; and place there another pot that can be well plugged with ash, and put on alkali and warm water and soft water, until there are two cups of powder that you have well mixed in your hand;
and leave it thus until it has become very thin with water and ash, then take all of this water, and pour it over alkali and alkali as before.
And then if it will be wet and is treated with a medicine's excess and other members' cauterization.
For it performs the same work as fire does, and if with other medicines one cauterizes well the wound with a mixture of thistle, myrrh, and salt mixed together.
And Galiens tells us of a remedy in which a noble man was cured of the pain in the hip and sciatic leg, and he drank it, and said that another did not cure him, but he was healed in one soul when this remedy was made, and he bathed himself as it is taught hereafter.
And it is said that you squeeze green and dry lead with a little fat, and put it on the wound and leg or thigh where the pain holds, and leave it.
and he leaves it for three hours and by the quantity that the patient no longer feels the heat.
And then let him enter or bath as long as his body is a little warm, and make him enter the bed, and the pain will go away all and he will be healed.
And know that no one should use fire cautery of such medicines, except after the evacuation of blood.
And Diachorides says that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with goat hair, it helps a lot;
and this cauterization must be done in such a way. Take another, and oil it well, and put it on the crease that is between the thumb of the foot and the other which is called a flick.
After take dry goat hair, and hold it in fire until it becomes charcoal, and put it on the wool, and leave it until it is burned;
and again try, and do not stop doing so as long as you think sensible that it comes up to the thigh, and that the pain is stopped;
and this way of cauterizing is called "cauterize of goat".
of the pain at the back
When pain comes to the back, or by sitting down or by pounding, or by too great an evacuation, or by the appearance of expanded cold material, no one of these appearances is worth cauterizing, except that which comes from the infusion of cold material.
It is appropriate that after the patient has voided any foul pills or similar things, you do it on his back, where the pain persists, three lines signed with an inch, and in each line five cauterizations or more according to the virtue and the quantity that the patient can bear;
and be done cauterization according to the cauterize which is called "poins";
and if you see, do three cauterizations or four at the cauterize with a blade according to this form:
Many times this disease comes to small children, and the sign of the beginning is that they have tight posture when they stand up, and fear; and you will find in the back of the spine of the two and in us the appearance that comes on top of the others.
When you see this person and you see him healed, if he is cauterized with the cauldron of fire according to this form. Let the fire cautery each part of the spine evenly.
And if you see, then cauterize around the spine with a piercing cautery two or three lines, and let the burns be close to each other.
After cure the area until it is healthy according to what we have said, and be careful not to apply cauterization to a ganglion that is in a nerve's spine.
of the joints' pain
When the joints hurt from moisture that spreads to each limb of the body, and when the pain comes in pieces, which the people properly call "gout," and when it is from a cold cause and medicines cannot cure it, then it is cured by cauterization in this way:
make the fire cautery inside the joint of the foot, and let the cautery be olive oil according to this form:
And if it is necessary for you to hold on the face of the foot, make a fire cautery with all the fire cautery that is called "no point". And if the pains come only to the knees and to other joints, and it happens many times, make cauterization on each knee with three cauterizations or four of each part, all with olive oil cauterization;
And if you have more work to do, if you make it more, but do not hold your hand firmly except when the spine of the knee is burned.
And if the pains go down to the knees and back, administer the cautery that we have spoken about in this chapter.
And if the pains are in the hands, then make a point to enter the fingers two lines.
and if there remains any pain in both, then make a point on each joint and on the hair of the hand;
and if the pains come just as the cuts or just as the shoulders, then cauterize each part, and give good government to the patient and apply remedies.
Because if you do good management and you purify the pus, then you will be healed with the help of God.
When a rupture occurs in the face, and the flesh falls down to the bones and is newly happened, so that when you cure him, he should not rub himself any more; and let him use things that cover his belly, so that the end may come off his belly;
after he has made himself sit on his back between your hands, and commands him to let his hair grow until the boil is healed, and brings it to your hands, and signs from one side of the wound on the bone with the fingernail, and all that looks like half a circle above the neck;
Then heat up the cauldron of which this is the form:
as long as it is white and it seems solid. Then put the balls back in their place; and the assistant dyes his hand so that it does not turn back;
and operate well on the patient's legs, and put a cloth and an assistant on his legs, and another on his feet that will dye his hands;
then place the cauldron on his signet ring on all your hand, and keep it in place until you reach the bone, and if you don't hit it the first time, try again a few more times until you do; and be careful that the flame does not escape when you operate with the cauldron; so you don't burn it; and so that by chance the patient doesn't die, or any other harm is done.
And know that when you come only to the bone with the fire cautery, your work is worth nothing.
And it is necessary that the cautters of children be subtle according to their measure, and of great people also great according to their measure;
after three days cure leu the fire cautery so that the ostentation is cured;
after the cure other treatments as long as he is healthy, and lay the patient on his back for 40 days with the wound well soldered;
And it is necessary that its renewals be prolonged, so that the boil does not rise when he goes to bed.
And after 40 days, when he wants to get up, a well-made bandage is given to him, and it is applied for another 40 days;
and has good rest, that he works little and guards against too much drinking and eating, and against high-pitched yelling;
and when he has taught this instruction, then he is completely healed.
And I will say hereafter the cure of cutting in his chalk.
When wounds come in other bellies and are connected, and you see that they no longer grow, then you make the fire cautery according to its quantity, and burn the third of it. after the cure according to what we have said;
and none of the above said that one should cauterize with the cautery at three angles according to this form:
but first the sign the place of the navel and make a line through the largeness on the rupture, and another away from it, and all your hand in every cauterized claw.
But the first cauterizes are lighter and softer.
of ancient pain in no member When pain comes in no member, or from sitting or from hurting, and this pain lasts a long time, and the cure of medicine is not useful, then it is necessary that it be cauterized with fire which is called "poins", and make the cauterize according to the length of the member and its smallness and its weakness and its virtue and its location of torments and its pain.
if he is healed with the first cautery, it is good;
this name, begin another cautery on top of that one, for the custom is that it must grow in the member closest to him, so that you make the cauteries until the patient is healed.
The meseile are not aided at all by cautery, nor do the diseases arise from the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy alone.
If you see that the disease is at the beginning, and it is healed according to what we have said in the division, and does not stop or stay, and you doubt that the corruption will spread throughout the whole disease, then you make five cauteries on top: I cut off the head at the neck, and the other goes to the front at the end of the hair. and I behind at the back on the nape/neck;
and I leave it so that the fire cautery comes to the bone, and so that the wind/steam of the bad humors can come out,
and I cauterize on the top according to what is in front of it.
And if it gets mixed everywhere; and it loses clearly, if you set the fire cautery that we have spoken at the head, and I cauterize on its neck, and II cauterizes on the spine of the back/neck, and VI cauterizes on the spine of the back/neck, and I great one on the top/skull, and another small one, and II on the shoulders; and 2 on the knives, and 2 on the tendons of the foot, and 1 on each joint of the hand and the foot, and on the creases of the hands;
and beware of the nerves that are above the knees when you stand, so as not to burn them;
and do not make any fire cautery on the bone of the hand, and one other on the bone of the stomach, and one other on the liver.
And know that the more fire cauteries I make, the more help I give, and the more benefit it brings;
And know that the patient does not feel pain at the fire cautery as much as the healthy person feels it, because the body is already so corrupted;
And it is necessary that the cauterization be great or small according to the limbs and joints, according to what you will find in the manner of irons.
After care let him sit with flour of times with honey and other cures as long as he is healed.
When the swelling comes on any member and is cured with medicines, oils, and plasters, and it is not yet healed, then you must make fire cauteries on the member according to its size and smallness;
and let the cauterization go a little way into the flesh of the back. then the doctor applies ointments as long as he is well.
And do not apply fire cauterization to the hand and foot and back, at the exit of the nerve that disposes the member, and thus if it is fractured;
and in no way does one interfere with them unless one knows the members and outlets of the moving nerves of the body.
When the disease that is called "albarias" is awakened, and the medicine of it is useless, then let the cauterization be made with a small fire cautery, according to the quantity of flesh of the back, until the blotch is moved, and its color is changed;
then the doctor applies flour of times and lentils with oil of roses and leaves of plantain, and blood of turtle and blood of almond, each a part; and make them all together, and bind them with a cloth, and keep them in place until they are well.
the cure for syphilis by cautery
When the itch begins to appear, and you see it stopping, if you cauterize with a fire cautery that seems like a circle, all around the itch's circumference.
And moreover, the surgeon should tell you to make a fire cautery at the center of the ulcer;
and moreover, this does not seem good to me, because I fear that it will become ulcerated and corrupted, and I have never seen it come about;
and the most right thing is that it be cauterized from within, at the cautery that is called "circular", as we have said in many cauterizations.
When anyone has a disease that is called "adebelati", and it delays dying or because of the excess blood that it makes or because of the eagerness of the sick person when he is very old (that is to say, too much) and he has little blood, or because of the age; and you see him hasten to die: then cauterize it with small caustics while pricking; afterwards leave it like this. For she is eager to die.
And if you pierce it throughout the whole cautery, let the cautery be very hot.
And put your hand in the middle of this disease called "adubelati" as long as the cauterization has penetrated the cure, and is such a cauterization that the patient feels the heat in some way that the course of the pus is controlled.
After the cure until he is completely healed.
Another kind of disease that is called "corrodens", and is nothing other than a putrid mass of a member, because it corrodes the members as much as the fire dries up the wood.
If you see a disease in which there is suffering, cauterize it together with fire, then heat the caustics little and much, according to what is good for the place where the disease is located;
afterwards cauterize all of it until you are exhausted with the corruption, and there is nothing left of it, so that all that is corrupted is burned up.
And then leave it for three days, and put on the burned areas oil to soothe them with as much as the burns of fire are healed, and all corruption.
After the treatment of onions that generate heat.
And if after three days a healthy scar does not appear, this is good;
and if not, then start cauterizing again on the part that has remained corrupted.
And this blister should never be cured with water medicine instead of fire cautery;
but all the way fire cautery is of greater help, and I have already spoken about the cure of the acute medicine in division: take it when you need it.
of onions that come to the tips For sometimes it happens that at the tips by default a disease is born which is called "close" according to our intention, and it is a large infected thing that bleeds the foot.
And the cauterization of this disease is according to two ways. It is known as fire cauterization and water cauterization.
Fire cautery also is like a pen of a vault, and must be made of good iron to the measure that it can pierce the nail from all sides, and that there are subtle margins;
after you have put it all hot on the nail, and turn your hand completely around the nail as far as it comes to the tip of the nail; and let it stay like this for three days until it begins to move by itself; then make an ointment of wild mulberries crushed with salt, and let the ointment be on it all night, and the nail will come out and will be uprooted from its roots.
Then treat the infected area with poultices until it is healed.
And if they are converted by many delays of the heart, and often happen to the hands and feet, it is necessary that you bring them fire cautery. and in this way: take a nail of iron or steel, or a feather of pigeon, and put it on the claw and the toe, that is to say, to cure warts. and put the nail on it so that it burns all around, then put a little hot water on it, and hold your hand firm, and press your hand in turning so that the margin of the nail comes to the root of the claw, and may find the hot water way deep to the root;
and suffer the patient a little pain of the hot water for an hour; then leave it in that state, and it will come off at all its roots.
Make an after another, as long as you draw out all those who are in the body, then cure the pains that generate heat.
When there is a trembling from cold, or fever, or any other illness, then you must make four cauterizations or three on the spine of the back and one between each spine. and one at the feet, and one on the stomach with olive oil cauterization;
if it will stop shaking, and quickly heal from cold illness.
No one appears on the body by way of sweat, or pustules that emit pus, which come from corrupt humors.
If it is necessary for the first time that cauterization be made on each head of the pimple: a fine tip from a fir branch, so that it catches fire, or from a root of arzila long, or with a spherical cautery.
And never make the cauterization at the beginning, according to this method, and they cannot grow anything bad before that, but the excess is broken off, and they are healed;
but it is necessary that this is done after the evacuation of blood.
often occurs great disturbances of blood from the artery that is cut to the wound that comes to the surface, or incision of the abscess, or cautery of the member, and similar things; and it is a very bitter thing to smell.
And whenever one has any, if you quickly put your index finger on the vein wound, and strain it as much as the blood is quietened by your finger, and that drop no longer comes out;
then set on fire the olive oil caustic with small and large ones as long as they are all red;
then take some, or large or small according to the wound and its location, considering that the artery is cut, and put the caustic on that vein where you hold your finger, and keep the caustic in place until the blood is stopped;
And if he pricks when you lie on your back, and the cauterization has ended, then take another of the cauterizations that are in the fire quickly.
And do not stop doing one after the other until the sun is extinguished.
and guard that you do not burn the nerve which is dear, and that another ill will not come upon the patient;
and know that when the sun is cut short of the artery, one cannot well stop it flowing even if the artery is large, unless by one of the four ways that we have said: or by fire cautery, or by extraction when it is not yet treated, or by a strong knot of thread, or by medications put on which have the power to stop the flow; and let him lie and be held fast together.
Who can bring about a good healing of him tightly bound in fabrics or placing burning things on, or other similar things, if it does not help, then do not do it.
And if this happens to anyone and he has neither seen nor applied medicine, then he should put his index finger on the wound of the vein as we have said, and hold it tightly until it is stopped flowing on the wound and on the vein; and do not move his back, but wet it with cold water often as long as the sun is hot so that it freezes and thickens and hardens.
and make incisions in front of those who need cauterization and medicine.
We have told you in the first chapter about all diseases where fire cauterization, burning medicines, and the causes and instruments and forms of cauterization are needed;
and I have put that head of the shoulder on the ground, and I will go through this chapter in this middle way for those who are dislocated more lightly than those who are broken;
And so since I have begun to speak of this, it is necessary that you learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first chapter of the cauteries, and therefore greater caution is required.
For in the work of this chapter there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
And I advise you that you do not undertake foolishness. For in the manner of men come in cures. where there are people who have so much fear of their disease that they die easily from the effort of trying to get rid of it, and from the great magnitude of their illness; and from these we must have fear.
And from these I will tell you the story, and say: Wait, I am old; and the illness is spiteful.
It is not appropriate that you grant consent to those who come to you with this behavior, but rather put more trust in your honor than in your convenience, and do not open widely but carefully from him of whom you are certain, and from whom you might have received something and taken it at a distance;
and use divination and indication in the treatment of your patients so that health may be restored.
and who will help you achieve great renown, glory, and memory.
Very dear son, Our Lords give you good understanding and justice, and if you will, may you seek the holy inspiration of His hand, amen.
Or I have ordered you this chapter in discussing by chapters, according to that which is before or the chapter of the cauterizes, which I have devised from the head down to the feet, so that you may find more easily that of which you will need.
I know that this disease often occurs in children when the child's throat is too strongly constricted.
and it never happens because of a repeated response, which one cannot predict.
And I have never seen this disease affect anyone but children, and all those who have it die quickly; and for me it seems that I should be more careful in performing the treatment.
And I saw a child whose shoulder was swollen with fluid, and whose head grew heavy each day until it could no longer be supported;
and he believed that he was dying because the moisture had gathered so much that it entered between the skull and the bone, between the jaw and the bone;
and if they are such that the moisture is between the joint and the bone, and the abscesses are small, then you shall split through the head a wide split;
and so far as we, until the moisture runs;
and put this in the form of a spikelet:
If the moisture is deeper, and the abscess is larger, then make two incisions in the manner of a cross according to this form:
And if the moisture is out of the bone, and you see the signs that the head of the spine is split on each side, and the liquid jumps out when you press it with your hand, and it does not close back down: then you shall split through the head three splits according to this manner:
And after the incision, extract the moisture all at once. After, hold the splits covered with cloth and powder, and put wine and oil on it, and leave it like that until the fifth day;
then let it dry out, and cure the wound with bandages and ointments, and let the head be extracted evenly, and give the patient dry meat that does not have moisture as much as the member is comfortable and healed.
And another way of incision is that you look at where the large size of the abscess, and the gathering of the sharp.
For it is never before; it is never behind; it is never on the right; it is never on the left.
So size where the abscess opens, and the filling of the sharp, and do as you can do it;
and guard against covering the artery; and give him blood, so that the patient dies of blood loss and the evacuation of moisture.
If a person has a disease called "cough," and the illness is old, and the benefit of medicine is not there, then the final remedy is to cauterize with what they will block the two arteries.
It is therefore necessary, when you see them covered, for the patient to raise his head; afterward rub the neck with a rough cloth until the arteries are visible, and then extract the patient's collar from all the cloth; Then look at where the vein enters, and their leys [veins] from one side to another are after the ears, and few are answered.
Then mark the veins at the nape of the neck, and cut them both from one side to another with a small chisel  [spatumile] until the bone is reached, and that may be done by means of a broad chisel at the back of the neck.
And if you see, bottle the sperm of cows from the vein and the skin above, carving too much like I should on a tree.
When the vein is cut, let it flow continuously upwards without stopping.
And if the artery is not felt at the touch, then you must measure the quantity of space of three fingers, and then sign the nape and cut to the bone.
And if it is necessary to put the blood on fire then there are six inches [6/8 inch], and perhaps a little more or less, according to what the patient can endure, and the repetition of the artery.
Then look at the wound: If it remains on the bone of the sciatic joint, if the copes that aposteme [abcess] don't come out, then extract the wound and wrap it up, and the treatment of the wound until it is healed.
of grinding When the old man's hair begins to gray, and he has catarrh due to the moisture of tears and heat in his temples and aged skin and similar things, he is treated with medicine by means of remedies for medicines and none of them benefit him, if we extract the arteries from his temples and cauterize them, as we have told.
And the method of extracting them is that the patient makes his hair grow again on his temples, and hears the artery that opens in the temple, because it opens well by its beating, and is not too quickly extracted except in some men who are too cold;
And if it is extracted, then the patient removes his clothes, and rubs the place with no rough cloth, and raises the place with hot water until the artery appears clearly; then take the sputum of where this is the form: then peel the skin lightly until you reach the artery, then tie it up tightly like pinches, and remove the webbing that are between each part of it;
and if his arteries are thin, then turn it to the point of the hook, and then cut off that part according to the quantity of II shoulders. For if it is not covered, then does not save all in all.
And treat the blood of the VI /, until III;
and if his arteries are large, then you must thread them with a strong double silk thread, so that blood does not come out before the wound is healed, and comes out again after the blood has come out;
then cut off the surplus that is between the two threads at that same moment, and then, if you see it, with the cautery cutellaire, as far as the bone as soon as the shoulders are cut;
and that is the operation, if the patient does not have a fever and has a warm complexion. For the cauterization is done to end the moisture: For by fire it is more helpful against moisture.
For in the extraction of arteries, it is necessary to fill the place with fine cotton cloth and put it on well-made tents;
and when they are removed, let there be dry medicine that makes a chime, and of tents, until he is well;
and without any wound of the artery as you perform it, if you hasten to cover it with fire, or you employ the place of vitriol and extract it with your hand so that the wound is closed; and if you do not have fire present, if you put your finger on the place until the wound is frozen, and dip the place in cold water again and again, and extract it as it should be done;
And there should be between the two knives one inch of space, and then when you have tied up the two ends, and you rub hot iron on it until it comes out to the bone, and cut the vein in two places; and be separated between the two shoulders because it is not souded with this fire cauter of all things;
this is the form of the cauter:
and the one that is wet and lighter in weight for the extraction of the artery is that you cauterize the vein from both sides, but let the cutting be well done so that it lasts longer on heat. Because when the instrument is too soft, then it holds less heat.
tears When the tears of the eyes come down from the veins that are on the forehead of the head of fire, and it does not benefit from medicine that is done to it, and you see the face of the patient turn black, and feel a feverish tremor as if it were shivering; and the oil is tenacious and moist so that the hair of the scales falls off, and the scales are burned, and scorched by the heat of the tears, so it is necessary to have this cure; And they called it the ancient "cure for cuts", and this is what you do to the patient who has this disease on his or her hair: make three cuts even along the length of the forehead.
And they called it the ancient "cure for cuts", and this is what you do to the patient who has this disease on his or her hair: make three cuts even along the length of the forehead. and one of the cuts should also be like two, all the way down to the forehead until it reaches just below the nose, and the other two cuts are on either side of the forehead above the temples, and you must not cut into any arteries that are above the temples.
and remove your hand from the lower part of the two mandibles, and each wound should have three doses joined together;
and have ready a sponge and motted cloths to wipe away the blood, then dip the sponge in both sides of this form:
from the incision that is supposed to be on the temple until the second incision; and scrape off all the flesh that is between the two cleavages entirely to the bone, and then do the same from the first incision until the second, and then draw out this blade forcibly. If you add water to the first cut of the instrument called 'charnel', and it is very sharp on one side, and soft on the other, not sharp, and this is its form:
And put the edge of the cutting tool toward the cheek at the corner, and let the edge be soft toward the bone, and dip it until it reaches the middle cut.
And scrape off all the scales that descend from the head to the flesh until the incision is continuous up to what opens at the cleavage, and then do the same in the middle cut until the other side;
and then draw out the blood evenly, and press on the vein so that the blood comes out;
and then put in each cut a tent of wet linen, and place drapes soaked with wine and oil and vinegar on them, and watch so that the abscesses do not leak;
and for the third day let him lie in bed, and I will bring a great amount of fresh water, then the remedy with basilicon oil mixed with rosewater, and other remedies that are used to heal wounds, until he is healed.
When there is no catarrh by habit, and you see the hairs thin and short, and weakening of sight, and burned paper. and the hair falls out, and where it grows in there is sharp pain in the patient, and he coughs up phlegm; Therefore, because of these accidents, it is clear that this matter and this catarrh do not come from many veins, but from one; and the remedy that is given to him, if it is this one, then it is right.
And it is that you instruct the patient to rub his forehead, then make a deep incision in his forehead, and another one from left to right. And begins with the incison on the left temple to the right temple, and be the incision up to the bone; and keep your hand away from the nerves of the temples that move when one chews;
and when the bone is uncovered, so suck all the blood with a sponge, and then tie between the two lips of the incision and put cotton wool, and bandage it with linen; and then hang them over a drape soaked in wine and oil, and keep them warm from the abscess.
When it is extracted, if you rub the bone as much as it begins to bleed, then treat it with dried things, which cause dry matter to form.
In this way: Take 2 parts of flour from bread, and 3 parts of colophony, and make an ointment; And apply it to these wounds to cause dry matter to form everywhere.
of the bumping of the ears
All those who have an ear are one of the four things: or grain, or beast, or a small stone, or similar thing as iron; or seed, if like peas, beans, or peas; or flowing thing if like water and easy to move, and similar things.
When it is in the ear a stone or some other thing that does not fit into the ear, and does not enter it, put the ear to the sun.
If you see the stone, if there is no drop of violet oil or oil of sweet marjoram, then apply extraction; and let it sweat from heat, and it stops the nostrils when the sweating comes, and puts around the ear pieces of linen or wool; and let the ear be up.
Mouth times a great remedy comes;
and if it does not come out strongly, then he is given extraction with subtle pincers, for the form is:
If it comes out strongly with the pincers, it is good;
if not, then extract with the small sharp tool;
and if not with the sharp tool, then make a small hole in the ear canal or pierce the ear lid firmly, and stop the one who is inside the canal with soft wax so that it does not come in with the cannula; then let him sweat strongly, for many times it comes out strongly as we have said;
and if it does not come in some way, so take the glans, and place in some certain instrument that is right for this, and put a little cotton around it; then press the glans on stone or something, and practice well.
And if it does not come out with all of these things we have said, then you must hurry to cut the ear in such a way that the abscess comes out and spasm;
and the way of the cut if you do first save the patient from the head injury, and remove the blood according to the measure of its virtue, then place the patient between your hands and turn the ear up, and make a small cut at the root of the ear onto the fat or where it depends; and let the cut be like a moon, as far as you come to the stone, then the bone according to your power, and suck it gently into your mouth;
and the treatment as long as he is healthy.
And if it is a tooth that hurts and swells, then administer an extraction;
and if he cannot spit, then administer a thin spit-like substance according to this form: and incise that grain.
But do not use this when you think that the tooth is moist due to moisture in the ear, as many times as you have used it;
then extract with thin tweezers and with a pick, as we have said, so that the extractions are ordered.
In the water, then, when he spits in his ear, the patient should use an elder's cough first, and widen the ear with old cotton. And be careful about that ear where the water is. if it falls there, it is good.
Or if not, then take several pearls according to the length of your finger and make them light, and heat them a little by the fire; and put the patient a little pearl in his ear, and cut off one of his other teeth, and fix it with another stone on the stone that is in the ear; and do not cease to make a stone on top of a stone until the water comes out completely, and so it all jumps up completely;
and if you see, then take one joint, and dip one of the ears in water, and the other head burn with fire until the longer joint is burned;
then make another part of other joints until the water comes out completely, as we have said in the stone.
In the extraction of the arrow, if it is a small one, like a flea or a similar thing, treat it as we have said in the dislocation.
but if it is a big one that can be felt, then arrange for the extraction of pincer-type things; and this is the lightest thing to remove from the ear.
In the extraction of worms from the ears, when you treat them as we have said in the dislocation and in the treatment of distillations, and the cure does not benefit, then you must look at the ear towards the sun; If there is no opening, if the trail is small pinches, and if it does not open, take the grip of where this is the shape.
And it must be tight below and wide above. And pour out the thinnest chief in the ear according to the quantity of the suffering of the patient, then suck all the form: do this often as much as the whole blood comes.
And if they do not submit to be taken out, then stop it with cotton in the ear as I said in the stone:
and if they do not come out as we have said, administer distillations that the old ones have tried in the extraction of worms, and you will find them or the treatment of the distillations;
and if you distil your oils and medicines in the ear with all this instrument, where this is the form as you see: And of silver or gold are you made, of small holes, and above them for distillation.
and to press into the instrument of silver made well for this, and you take the razor and wrap cotton around the tip facing forward; then you pour your oil or juice, and what you take of your medicines in the line, and the line is in the ear;
then pour into the razor all of the cotton, and press your hand slightly while distilling or moving the oil out of the ear; and the patient smells inside, and the distillation is a little heated like this so that it is distilled in the ear; and keep it from being too cold, for the medicine would not be so good.
of the bumping of the ears
No child is born who does not have small holes in their ears;
and these same things happen to the ears because of the piercing of a wound or of a needle going into the ear, and this piercing sometimes comes out completely from the ear, so that one cannot see it.
and never does the hole go deeper than the eye can see.
That which has come out completely, so that one cannot see it, is a serious wound for many people, and in this case, you should put the patient's ear in the sun. and look inside: if you see the operation clearly, if the wound has already been cleansed of its pus, and here is the shape:
And be smooth and clean in front and behind, so that it doesn't hurt the ear.
if the wound is a needle or a pin stuck in the ear, if there are only few small wounds, and clean it lightly, until the needle is completely out.
And if the swelling is completely in the ear, then take a fine and light razor and heat it slightly on the fire, and then put the bar of the ear.
If you feel the swelling that causes the patient earache, then do so lightly and be careful not to injure the ears.
Then put in the ear a small piece of felt according to its size, and moisten it with Egyptian ointment. Do not do this every day until the wound is healed, but take a small piece of felt and moisten it with rosewater, and powder with vitriol brew.
And if you see the ear drain, so that you take out the felt and remove another felt moistened with rosin oil, which is made of rosewater and wax, until the swelling has subsided; Then treat it as long as it is healthy.
And if the pain comes, dip a sponge and a cloth in cold water and put it on the ear, and use other treatments that the doctor uses to relieve the pain which are or to treat the distillations.
Apply hot water to the hair when they are moist and dry, so that you pull them with nail files and tweezers, and cut off a small piece of their roots; And then put on top of the vinegar.
And if it is not peeled, then the fire cautery, with the subtle lens-shaped cautery, and the fire cautery after incision makes the muscles move.
and often repairs, so that nothing remains attached to its roots; And when they are cauterized with fire, if the roots are burned and do not return again.
of the grate Often come in papers some hairs that seem like grumous things in their form and dureness, and for this reason this disease is called "grinald", and is a mass of moisture thick in the paper on top and inside; The treatment is as follows:
The treatment is as follows: take care that the grinald moves from one side to the other, and this is a light thing to know;
do the fire on each side in turn, then scorch it lightly, then take it with pincers and cut it off.
If you cannot cover it without piercing a little bit of paper, then do not harm the patient.
And if the break is large, then join it with a stitch, and heal as long as it is healthy;
and if it is small, then do not use force, for with time and without force, it will heal itself and cause a scar.
And if the piercing goes from the outside of the ear towards the top, then turn the paper over and pierce it with tweezers, and cover and press from both sides;
and if the paper is moved by the incision, then do not harm.
and when the piercing is covered, let it be oiled with salty water, and heal the place where it causes a scar as long as the patient remains healthy.
of the fat of the hairs Exinch is a grease that is caught in the webs of paper on top of it, and this happens more often to children than to adults, and grieves them much, and they come with catarrh in the mornings, and cannot look at the light of the sun because their tears hurry to their eyes;
And so when they lie down on their faces, and sleep on it, and their paper is wet above their chins which swells and changes color because of the Exinch that forms in the oil. And when you press the place between your two arms and feel the pain between them.
And the way of this treatment is that the patient puts his head in salt water;
and then he takes a linen cloth, and sets up a tent in the form of a circle according to the quantity of Exinch in each part, and then puts it on him; and press with your hands from both sides so that the Exinch is assembled into the circle;
And cut into the middle of the moisture with a sharp spatula, making a split that is not larger than the wound made to the vein.
and make the skin smooth all the way until you come out. And in many places it comes out of the split, according to the shape of a piece of white fat.
So remove all the bandage between your two hands at the end, and turn your hand to the right and to the left until it is well spread out.
and keep your hands from touching the split, so that you do not come into contact with all of the spatula up to the oil, so that you do not dirty it.
And if the extraction does not come out in the tightness of the split, so that the split is slightly opened, just a little;
Then, as we have said, then take out with care, then moisten the wrappings in water, and put them back on, and draw from the bandage.
And if there are such men who grind salt and put on it to corrupt that moisture which is delayed.
Then heal him as long as he is healthy.
And if it comes to the place of an abscess, then the healer pours water and soothes it as long as he is healthy.
of hair from papers When hair grows on paper that is not natural to it, and becomes wrinkled, if it damages the hairs, and causes certain diseases as usual tears and softening of the papers and scabs, so much that it is a cause of hair destruction;
and is the cure according to four ways: or by fire cautery, or by medicine astringent according to that which it is before, or by plaster of cautery, and is made or by incision and stitching or by cutting, according to what I will say.
It is necessary that you put the head of the disease in your right hand, then turn the paper of oil to your left hand;
s'elle est convertie, c'est boin; if it is converted, that's good; if not, pour an aiguille on all the thread above; and let this be the margin of the paper where the hairs grow out from these hairs, and lead the thread above all the paper, and turn it back to the razor;
then make in the dislocated part of the paper, dislocating the hairs, all the spine completely covering, from the big tear until the small one;
then remove the thread, and place on the paper a little piece of cloth and drape, then sign on the paper a shape like a pear, as if it were a mirth, and moreover, the shape must be according to the quantity that you want to lift up the paper which is devised to all.
And if it is necessary that much of the paper be lifted according to what you have determined, so that the paper softens;
and then stretch out all the spine on the two lines that you have marked, and start with great pain until small; and let it be one of the cleavages near the hair in the thickness of a root, then pour the vinegar into one of the two angles where cure, and then scorch it all;
then join the two lips to a stitch of a needle with very fine thread, and wash the blood, and make air the excess of the threads on the two loops at nothing sticky, if you see to do this;
and if not, if you are not cured, then leave the stitch and the threads until three days or four;
then cure the wound without a stitch of drying and constricting things, for the paper is relieved at the sound of the wound and the gathering of it, but the stitch is dead (as the old say), and it is painful work; and if in another way:
and if in another way: is that you sign the paper with a mold that is also like the fur of mirabene, as we have told, at three times you will reverse it according to the form that is here:
and then chop off who is raised to small forces equally according to the form which is here:
And if you cannot hold the tweezers, and the thing is not even, take a needle with a thread, and sew the shape: and bottle another delicate thread, and the second strong, and the third small, and join together between your two threads evenly:
then move your hand evenly, and then cover all the skin with which you have signed, as we have told, then join together the two lips of the wound with a stitch, and treat it until it is well;
and if an abscess comes to your incision, so that the pain is relieved by a poultice and similar soothing ointment;
and never has it happened that the hair of the paper is converted:
if you use what we said about the incision;
but the stitch between the two is more artificial.
The treatment of wounds is done according to this form: and you turn the paper and put it inside according to what I said, and then make two incisions by art, and two sutures very long as the paper is and as narrow as the thread that is used for the sponge. and tie like two shoulders on each side where you hold the threads;
then join them very gently over what rises from the paper by oil, and strain the two incisions of the two parts together; and leave it like this for a few days, and the wound that was drained will get better and heal on its own,
If it is late, if the cup has one force, then heal it as long as it is healthy;
And when the wound is sewed up, and if the paper is lifted up, and they will no longer feel the hair;
And this is the form of the two claws that you will make according to this figure, and according to this quantity of long and wide:
The ovraige is such that you press a very fine needle, and you pour a very fine and subtle silk thread; Then join the claws together very subtly, and make the length of the threads one palm's length of yarn;
Then arrange the other thread of fine silk briefly, and tie the claws with a very subtle thread;
Then place the patient's head in your seat;
And let the sun be bright so that the ovraige is subtle and small, then pour the needle into all of the hair at the root, and make it go through the paper quickly as you draw it up from the natural hair;
Then pull out the hair up to the jaw, pour it into the jaw, if there is one or two or three or more.
then pull your hand out so that the hair comes all the way out to the jaw in the paper with the natural hair.
And if the jaw is treated and the hair does not come out with it, then draw the jaw back with all the thread you have ordered, so that the jaw comes out from the hole above and you can see it with the eye.
then draw back the jaw and the thread, and when the oil comes out and leaves it for two or three days, let the hair grow in its place and the hair grows on top of it;
and if the hair is short, then accompany a long natural hair with it, and lift it up or leave it, so that it is extended and then let it lie down.
to prevent oil damage Now this disease, which is called "bleeding," or where the poultice comes in contact with oil, there are two ways.
one natural, and another unnatural.
And there is a doubt and fear about injury, or a cut, or a cauterization, and similar things.
And the way of treatment in this is that you tear away the skin, and separate the lips from it, and put linseed inside, and keep it until it is healed;
and you should not use for the treatment of it things that dry and constrict. For if you do this, the disease will come back worse than before;
but treat with things that soften, as fenugreek; And the water of the spring or the ale be boiled, and the seed of flax be cooked, and the oil of dill be melted in none of the oils, and wrap it up, and treat with it.
And the treasure of your remedy is that you put yourself on guard so that it does not harden according to the shape that it was before.
and the remedies that we have said are only effective if we address this disease, so that it does not return according to the shape that it was before.
This disease, which is called "axacrati," is natural and accidental.
The accident comes from wounds and slashes and cauterization and similar things;
and the way of this chapter is that you take a needle, in which it has double thread, and throw it into the flesh, and pierce it with the left hand so much to the right, that the thread comes out at II shoulders of the flesh;
then put the hook above all the needle, and the cap above the wide spike. And if the shape of the paper returns according to what it should, it is good;
If he does not, take the razor and put it in the split, and turn the paper over, and make two splits where it sits inside the paper.
and let the two splits of the two angles of the incision that you have made be joined together so that when they are put together, their shape is like the shape of a letter which has no «I griesche».
then cut off that piece, according to the quantity that its sides are apart, from that which is inside the paper, then attach the two separated parts, and sew them together with a thread of linen;
then use the medicines that we have spoken of to soften it, and wrap it up, until it is well.
And if the disease comes from a split, or a stitch, or a cauterization, then it is necessary that you make a straight split in the hairs of the papers, and according to what is said above; then separate between the two leaves of a tent, as I said;
then separate between the two leaves of a tent, as I said; and it must be done the preparation according to the form of the disease, for it is many different in form, and the master surgeons order everything so that it may return to its natural form;
and the patient himself, according to what is required for preparation and instruments in various situations.
When this weld is made in such a way that the paper above is welded with the white of oil, and cannot move or perform its natural work, then it is necessary that you should burn the tip of a razor on the paper, and blow it up.
and spread them out as pinches, until you have what is suitable for the subtle spaulding, which should not be too sharp or too fine, so that the patient does not suffer from the too sharp spaulding which might blister the oil;
and so your incision, from which you peel off the gathered one, lightly, so that the paper returns according to its natural form;
and it is healed all that has been gathered, and does not go into the sharp salt water, and the lifting of the soft water, and the chain;
then place between the paper and the oil a tent of linen, and put on the oil wool wet in abundance of ointment; and after three days use the chain and the dry things until it is healed.
Know that the finger is according to two ways: she is nervous and seems to I dry medicine, and another that is not at all nervous, but seems to be white frozen moisture, which when you touch it with iron and heat it with pinches, so can't anyone;
and both appearances begin to spread towards the great tears, and grow less and less until they cover the whole sight and light and motion of oil.
And the way of incision is that the patient puts his head in your lap, then he works on the hairs; and give the paper to your hand, and twist the fingernail with small tweezers, and lift them up; then take a needle, and put a hair of horse, or cow, or bull, and thread it firmly; and double the needle's point slightly and thread it through the nail, and pierce it completely through the nail, and tie the nail with a thread and lift it up, and peel off all the nail that remains on the toe of the nail where the pluck comes out and the silk on the hair until the head, then cut the remaining one in the root of the tears with an incision very thin and small, and leave the natural tears or tears usually come; so that by the incision does not go the course of the tears:
and never stretch the finger at the knuckle alone, and on the wire, as we have said; then burn it all off with fire so that this is the shape:
And keep so that the spindle does not touch the raw wool and tear it, and that the needle is not pierced;
and after the incision pour a little oil of sesame, and a ring made of limestone, and leaves it until the next day; then he cares for this as much as it is healthy.
And if the finger is not nerveous, and you cannot put in the needle, and this shape of the joint with medicines is cured many times;
and they are born as I have told you in the division, and if you see it covered, so work with oil of sickness, and take a light spindle according to this shape: And raise the finger slowly, and if you see it slim down little by little and its root is pressing hard, then distil from your mouth in the oil collar made of litargyrum and dou collar red and brown, and stop the oil until the next day.
If any thing is opposed to oil in the flesh, as an abscess is, then milk, and first treat the abscess while it is sound, then begin again the work as before until it is sound.
then begin again with this same work, as much as it is all boned.
If the appearance of the flesh of the arm hurts in the oil, then suspend it for a moment, and dip some part of it, not all at once, so that tears do not come;
then distil in the red oil collar which is made of litargyrum.
Some men have never had a red hair, and they peel the prunelle and bind it to papers and turn it towards the sun, and seem like a rose of basil.
and the head-injury if the patient places his head in your lap, then he turns the eyes, and twists all this in the shape of a hook with appropriatehooks, and supports it with force;
then cut the first layer, and keep cutting all the way to the end, and be careful not to blight the oil at the head-injury;
and be the incision of the spatumile that we have said in the incising of the nail and with small efforts so that one oste the sebene, if like the form after this chapter shows it;
and when the incision is complete and all the bone is cut, then employ the oil of seil or you distill colier red and similar medicines corrosive, and put on the oil a cotton with admixture of ointment, so that it is assured of an abscess heated;
and if I do not delay, and the sun rises, and you doubt an abscess, then leave the oil and cure the abscess with things that calm an abscess;
and then return to your work as long as it is healthy, and in this way make a paste that is mixed with oil by this appearance.
But first you should know that you should adjust the cure of each weak oil according to the natural path; and from the accidental way, in iron work;
and do not put your hand into any of these works until you see that the members are suffering from that work.
are red that are covered on the oil, and endure his work and weaken the oil all the time.
So the first thing you should know is that if you see that the oil is good, healthy, and strong, and there is no other disease than health; then mix it with some water in this way:
Tell the patient to put his head in your lap, then suspend those veins completely according to his wisdom, and let the incisions be subtle twice as much according to this form:
And are two oils by degrees in one degree according to this form:
Then bind those veins with care, and wash the blood every hour another one, until you see remove those veins away from the oil;
and keep that you do not blur the oil at the tips of the needles, and make this work before noon in front of the sun, and be very hot in your work so that you don't overheat those veins;
and when you have done this, if distill in the oil green and red essence to corrupt what is delayed of the stink;
And if you do not have the power to bind all of that in this hour, then make a plaster on the oil of soothing things for the pain of the hairs, and leave it for several days until the pain is relieved and assured of an abscess being hot, then begin again according to this method which is before until he is healthy;
and this is the form of healing:
The wound is called a fistula:
when you treat it with fire cautery and medicinal herbs as I have described above, and it is not healed, then cut open the abscess at the root, where it must die, and drain all the moisture until the bone is exposed.
And when the bone is exposed, and you will see corruption and blackness, then this is the form:
and it is called an "aspire chief", and be done from head to foot, and be poked as with a nail as it is in this form:
And place it on the corroded part of the bone, then turn it between your two hands, and press with your hand a little until you feel that corruption has been removed:
and do not make this again, then return to the place of medicine drying.
if the leather is tight, and it has not been washed for a while, and the core of the bow is also tight, and remains so for 40 days, and there is no sign of an abscess, and other bad things do not happen, then he is healthy.
If not, if there is no other remedy than to bring the fistula to the perforation of the nose according to this form: and it is that you uncover the bone the second time with iron, and with medicines that dry, and when it is uncovered take care that the iron is at three angles, and the furrow is smooth until the top, as you see here:
then put it on the bone with the limb, and keep your hand away from the oil I pick, then turn all the iron until it pierces the bone and the patient feels pain according to what he experiences when holding his nose;
and when you restore the place of dry medicine, as I have taught you, and when the horse becomes hot and toughens the limbs, then bring the matter to the nose. is less burdensome for the patient.
When all limbs are open everywhere, and there is no disturbance to the nose, nor reduction, if it comes that you lay the patient down;
then the healer, then put leechers there to suck without hurting to extract, then put on oil, made from acacia and aloe and incense and sarcocollus, and then strain the oil, and apply it with bandages and sheets;
and the manner of the sheets that you take enough soft sheets, and double each one in four, and then put one on top of the other according to the quantity that the limbs need;
and then extract from above a hard bandage, and start again the suction to avoid hurting;
then remove the suction cups and leave the oil extracted day and night, and it softens over time, so you must remove it all;
then remove the bandage after day and night, and if you see the oil heal, it is good;
if not; then start again with the plaster and linen, and the bandage and suction cups until it is well.
the breaking of a thread from a woven fabric When the dislocation comes in the wrapped cloth, then open it, and comes out like grains of resin, and is likely to see;
then if you see it covered, the wrappings are such that you stick a needle into the root of the part below until it comes out at the top, and then stick another needle where there is thread from the arm; and pierce it, and leave the first needle according to the arrangement;
then cover the head of the thread with a double thread and tie a part of the vein, and tighten it well, then remove the needle and put another oil in abundance of vinegar;
and leave it until the thread rubs against the vein, then heal the oil with comforting things until the wound is healed;
and the wound is never restricted by the vein in any part of a circle of cloth, until it is healed.
And if the hairs are of great appearance, if he pierces it with a fine spud that comes perfectly from the oil, and drives away the moisture of the albuginea and cuts the hairs, and enters again so soon;
then remove it until it is healed.
This disease which is called "Alcunnati" does not exist except in oil, resembling water descending, and it is not water;
and the manner of this appearance of the opening is that you make sit the patient on one seat dressed and straight, then take the head between your two hands, and move it while you see the bow come up to your hair. then let him lie down, and do not get up or be upset, and look at the patient's things so as he wanted.
and if it does not get up, know that it is acute, and the moving of the bow should not be dressed as we have said.
if you sit the patient between your hands, then take the thin spatulum and set it on the corneal membrane I spot by the continuance of the connection with the corneal membrane and the crown, until the bow comes out.
and when it is out, if it is mixed with hot liquid honey, or sharp water or fenugreek is boiled and honey, then be cured by another cure as long as it is healthy.
of the oil We have sharp tools in our division, and what is needed to pierce. If we work according to health.
It is necessary that you put the patient in a cross-legged position between your hands, away from the light of the sun, and press firmly on him with oil.
Then put the oil paper in your left hand if the hairs are on the left, or in your right hand if the hairs are on the right.
Then take in your right hand, if the hairs are on the left, the instrument called "almagda", or in your left hand, if the hairs are on the right.
Then place the point of the instrument at the center of the hair by its thickness with a rakes of oil on the part of the smaller wound, then press the instrument called "almagda" firmly, and turn your hand back until it pierces in the oil's blubber, and feel that almagda comes to the hollow thing;
and the measure of the vein of the eye must be at the perfect end of the space that is from the apricot up to the end of blackness; is the crown of oil;
you will see the bone in that paper because of the clarity of the transparent horn, and put the instrument up to the eye where the water is, then express it out one way at a time.
If he is now sitting down, then see the patient in front of him and the instrument in his oil.
Then rest for a little while, and the water comes up again, put pressure on it with the instrument, and when it is firmly in place, gently extract the eye turning your hand this way and that;
and then put a little drop of gem water in it, and remove this oil from inside it. Then place by the side the oil of spikenard or another moist oil in a cup and in plenty of wine, and mix with the healthy oil.
Now, and those who are of our group, let us put on quickly with plenty of wine.
If the almagre cannot enter into the oil because of its hardness, since there are some men who have very hard hairs, then you must squeeze the instrument which is called "alberit", from which comes this form:
And so pierce the conjunctiva only, and do not go too deep, but make a small hole then drop in the water, as we have said;
and when the work is finished, prepare for the patient a dark place to sleep, where he sleeps on his back.
and be free from all movement, and eat light food, and do not move his head to the right or left, and tie him according to his condition for three days.
then remove it in the same dark house and test his sight, and let him see a few things, and then he is tied again until the seventh day;
and do not do this while the patient is still suffering from the incision, but it is necessary to keep him quiet, so that the blood does not flow.
For the abscesses, when they are ready, you must remove the dressing before the seventh day and clean them up.
and when he is calmed down, so that the sight turns inward and sets on his cheek, let it hang down all day, and be in that dark house.
Then take him out of the house little by little, and turn him around.
and know that no one should meddle in this case. And one came to us from the Land of Jerusalem who told us that in their country they still made almagre by grinding, for which they sucked the water, but I have never seen any such thing in our country, nor have I ever heard of it in books of the ancient ones. and perhaps this is a new thing.
And these are the appearances of the shapes of almagre, so that he who does not know them may see them.
and let there be pure copper: And let the head of this middle substance be, and behind it in three angles acute.
No time are born or are diverse eggs eggs laid, of which there are some who seem scorpions at mouth pies;
and if there are such eggs or if there is an egg with green color and if there is an egg with good color. In this case of these eggs that is green, and not encrusted, it is convenient that you seat the patient between your hands towards the sun;
In this case of these eggs that is green, and not encrusted, it is convenient that you seat the patient between your hands towards the sun; and open his nostrils, and apply the egg to those eggs, and dry them firmly; Then take this that you can hold in your hand of a fine blade made of iron from one side, as long as you see that this egg is all bone;
And if there remains nothing of it that cannot be covered, if you open it with all the delicate instruments lightly, so that nothing stays; and if he does not soar up, or an abscess, so much sear as it is necessary;
and if it is malignant abscesses, hurry and cauterize as soon as the sweat is dried up and all the pus is drained, then apply oil or vinegar to the wound immediately and thoroughly. If it has been operated on, and moisture enters as far as the palate, know that he is healthy;
and if moisture does not penetrate so much as it should, know that there is no bone above it, and the instrument will not cut properly:
then you must insert a piece of linen thread that is neither too thick nor too thin, and wind it around each knot with enough space or less between them as needed; and place the patient's head on the thread so that it supports his weight, and draw it by the nose while smelling so that it comes through his nose into his mouth;
and many times teach the child to use the pot, and this is a light thing for him who must do it.
and then take the head that comes by the nose with one hand, and the other head that comes from the mouth with the other hand, and tie them together in turn while we are spinning like this.
Make it so that you can hear that the new one has been corrupted, then treat the thread, wash the blood, and wet the thread in Egyptian salt, and then put it back on the nose as before;
Make it so that you can hear that the oil has been corrupted for three or more days, as long as the thread is delayed from the car;
and then put on the nose a string of linen for some days as long as it is healthy, and if there is a need to use dried medicines, do so.
and this is the form of the instrument for purging the head, whereon one distills oils and medicines or severs.
And be of silver or gold, resembling a lamp open, as a chain, and conduct it also;
and if you see, then make a closed chain, and be the instrument plain for purging the head;
and I always hold the head when one heats oil or any liquid.
from the chest to the neck
Many times a pain arises in the head from a disease called "thunder", and increases and becomes great enough that it is visible with the eye;
And for this you must kop it at the beginning, and the bone all over, then put fire on the cautery or medicine;
and if you delay koping it until it is great, then take care if it is hard, of its color, of its poor sense:
If one does not touch iron, for it is an abscess that is inflamed, because when it is touched there comes great evil to the patient.
And if the abscess is caused by a soft touch, not by a sharp object, and you see that it can be covered completely, then empty the patient and cover it without fear, and heal the place with dry and restraining things.
Saiches that when solu[t]ions of continuance comes into one of these ovraiged cartilage, i profit poc, fur that in some men.
It is therefore necessary that there be no doubt if the wound is fresh throughout; and then join the two lips with a stitch, and then heal it as long as it is healthy;
and if the lips are twisted on one side or the other, then it is necessary that you peel all the parts of their skin as long as they heal, and then join the two lips with a stitch, and tighten them, and powder them with dragon's blood and burnt incense; and on the powders a piece of plaster from strong or other plaster that bonds, and leaves it until it falls by itself, then heal with ointment as long as he is healthy.
The method for suturing is that you assemble the solution thus: or with needles, as we have said in the method for suturing the abdomen; or with thread, as I have told you.
of the lips
With hands at home inside the lips of an abscess seem like grains of sand, and smaller and larger;
then you must turn the lips, and cut each notch, and take it with pincers and cut it into each part;
and then apply the vitriol paste after the incision, until the scar is stained;
and then let it rest, and heal the wound with dry things as long as he is healthy.
Many times, he comes down on the gums with a sharp edge, which the old people call "albula".
If it is convenient that you hold it with tweezers and cut it at its root, and let the bow or blood run;
Then put thereon the vitriol powder, or other restraining and drying powders;
and if it returns after the incision, and often happens, so that when you cut it again, and cauterize it; if it does not return after the cauterization;
No times are assembled at the top of the teeth, inside the mouth between the gums, sharp and rough things; and no times are the teeth black and yellow and rotten, as long as the corruption comes to the gum, and the teeth stink;
If it is necessary that you hold the sick person between your hands, and his shoulders are in your presence, and you lift up the lower parts or the buttocks that protrude, as long as there is nothing to delay it; and do so with black and green, and yellow and other colors, until they are all mixed together;
and if one does not take the first cut, it is good; if not, then begin again on the second day and the third, until you have all lifted up;
and know that the teeth have to do with different kinds of tools for grinding, according to what the doctor demonstrates, because the rasier used to remove the hair from between the teeth is of a different shape than that which grinds the teeth; and these shapes and others are fitted with you.
It is necessary when you cure a tooth of its pain that you draw it out as soon as possible, for this must not be done at all. for it is a high-quality substance, so there is no excuse to delay drawing it out.
So then when the patient is in pain, you must be certain of the toothache. Often the pain of the patient disappears, and he believes that it is in a good tooth, and he makes the tooth that hurts him be pulled out; and yet the pain does not go away for this, until the evil is extracted, because we have already done it to these patients;
and when you are sure of the tooth that hurts, then it is necessary that you scratch the tooth with a strong spatula to protect the gums on all sides;
then you put it in your hand or in small pliers very carefully at the first hole and hole, until it is well extracted, then he grasps the pliers firmly; and let the head of the sick person between your knees, and hold it still very well so that it does not move.
After removing the tooth correctly without breaking it, and if it does not fall out on its own, take one of these instruments and gently place it inside each part, and move it as you did before.
And if his nose is pierced and bleeds, then you should fill it with gauze, where the piercing is; and if he is held with subtle tongs so that he does not break when he is extracted;
and it is necessary to cover the wound on the gums in order to extract the tooth.
And you must take care not to break it, and if a part remains, and return it to the patient by the wickedness of the root, causing greater pain than before.
And be careful that you do not do it like the ignorant surgeon who, because of his haste and recklessness, often breaks the carriage, and does not administer what we have told you;
but bring it once by the root of that great disease so that it does not hold on to anything, or by the carriage that it breaks, as we have often wanted;
and when the heat is removed, wash its place with wine or sesame oil and linen.
and when it heals over, so that often happens, if you employ the place of vitriol crushed;
and if it does not work, then cauterize.
The shapes of the instruments, so that the teeth first move slowly, are long and thick, so that they do not double up when you draw the tooth;
these are the forms: And let them be of thick members so that they do not bend when you pull it, and let them be of good forged iron, and let them have teeth for holding it in place.
of the root of the teeth When the root remains in place at the extraction, if you put cotton wet with oil or butter on the place for one or two days until the roots are soft, since the claws that are called "algefri" seem like a fingernail;
and inside make it as with a file, and this is the form:
And if the roots do not want to come out with all these pliers, then you should strip the flesh completely around the root, and put the instrument that is called 'althali', that is to say file, which is this shape:
And let it be big or small so that it does not break, and its root springs up from this, it is good.
if not, if you aid yourself with all the instruments, whereby the shapes come after:
And if one helps with this instrument that has two heads, from which this form comes: and other tools that are in front in the rationale of the dens, and from this instrument which seems like a pair of large pliers, of which here is the form:
and let the instrument be big so that it cannot break, and know that many of the thick instruments are; and also other instruments, which are not counted;
and the master sagacious tries his instrument himself according to what his work and the disease demonstrate to him, because there are many diseases for which the old do not teach instruments, but if it does not break the carriage or other bones on which it rolls, or on which he is laying, if he seeks the instruments that are appropriate to it, as I have told you, and helps with gestures, whereby this is the form:
And let them be large and strong holding to hold the bone, so it does not escape, but it can hold and cut off.
and then restore the place of the medicines that fit this, and if there is putrefaction in the bone, and it is small, if the doctor has all this instrument.
When the teeth appear not straight according to the natural shape of the body, and the form is ugly, especially in young women, it is necessary that you know if the root is not beyond the tooth, and is not in its right place, and can not be sewn or filed.
then the extract: and if it is aerated with the tooth, take this instrument whose form is similar to a small needle, and made of iron as it were:
And the cap fits tight and tight to the tooth's durezza, and so that you do not move the others, and if it seems that it can be filed, then take a file of this shape:
and it is also like the file where we make needles;
and by little and little he pulls his teeth out, so that it does not move until it makes a sound.
and then smooth it all down with a rasp, and its hardness is too great and it blisters the tongue, so it is necessary to sharpen the razor until it is even, so that it does not blister the tongue or corrupt speech.
When the teeth are loose in front, whether by pounding or by biting, and the patient cannot press on what he is chewing so that he does not make noise, and you have cured them of constricting medicines, and that does not help;
if it is necessary to restrain it with a gold wire, for the silver wire becomes green and rotten, but the gold does not move at all;
and let the wire be neither too thin nor too thick, according to the quantity of space between the teeth;
and if you want to put in place the teeth, take the wire and double bottle between the two teeth healthy, then put the heads between the teeth of meat, if there is one or more, until you have cleanly up until the healthy tooth on the other side; and then start again with the covering up until the part where you are starting, and hold your hand gently and cleanly as long as it doesn't move;
and let your hand be at the root of the tooth so that he can't escape.
Then take the heads with pliers, and assemble them together, and put them between the healthy tooth, and so that he doesn'blece the tongue;
and then leave it as tight as it can stay, and if he falls, or the wire breaks, hold it with another wire;
If it was to take long, it will last all its time, and this is the shape of the bones and the appearance of the joints of the two upper limbs, as you see:
And when a tooth falls out, if it is put back in its place little by little, as we have said:
And if one is not skilled and patient, and does not do it little by little, and a tooth is put back into the socket, as we have said, and delayed and served thus for a long time;
And never is it good that comes out of the tongue or nature, which one is born with: or by an accident of a seared wound;
and the work is such that you open the mouth of the sick person, and hold his head in your hand, and raise his tongue:
and then sever the nerves of the limb as far as the tongue is detached from its bed, and if there is any pain or not, and this is due to sudden injury from a wound, so that he severs the ligature and cuts the nerves;
and be careful that the cut does not go too deep, lest the artery be severed;
and when you have done so, raise the level of the water and thus dry it with linen;
and let the patient have each night, so that the ligature does not close.
And if the blood comes out again, put vinegar on the wound; and if it does not stop, then cauterize with the slow fire, which is good for this; then treat with other treatments until he is well,
and if you see a dark or hard-colored sore that the patient does not feel, do not touch it, for this is a cancer.
and if it is declining towards the blench, and there is moisture, if he gets the oncine, and he rubs with a thin spatula, and frees it from both sides; and if he comes to your aid, put vinegar on it until it is blistered, and then return to your aid as you draw everything out firmly;
then lift his arm up and down and stretch it, and cure him with other cures until he is well.
of the throat abscesses Once inside the throat are the "goda" which are called mandibles, and they are properly called; when you cure them, as we said in the section on dislocation, and if they are not cured, take care:
If the abscess is small and its color is pale, then do not touch it with iron.
And if it is red and its root is large, then do not touch it with iron, also for the pain of blood; but leave it until it has stopped bleeding, and then you will remove it, or it would tear itself apart;
and if it is of pale color and its root is thin, then prepare the instrument to cover it, but first look to see if the abscess is hot and inflamed.
Then make the patient sit in the sun and let his shoulders be warm, and let him open the mouth and place the finger between his hands, and press the tongue towards the instrument, so that it is shaped like this:
and be of silver or of fine gold as well as our knives:
And then press the tongue on all this instrument, and you see the abscess, if take the onion and put it in amber, and try harder than you can.
and don't try any threads with it, then wrap the instrument, so this is the form, that seems a strong one; and all the time the head are curved, and one side to another, and they are very sharp, and is made of iron where or of anvil:
And if you do not have this instrument present, if you take off the cover with pliers, here is the form: And be trenchant on one side, and no name on other side;
and when you have copied one of the ambers, if copy the other according to the same manner, and after the incision gargarize the patient with hot water, and very easily, and let it stand until it is well, if gargarize the patient with cooked pomegranate juice, or dried leaves of mirth, and similar things, as much as the sun is set; and then treat until he is well;
and never emerge in the throat other abscesses than the two mandibles, if they are removed as thoroughly as the two mandibles.
And I treated a woman of an abscess that was within her throat, namely a small abscess.
and had very tightly closed all the throat so that the woman could neither breathe nor drink nor eat and would have died if she had stayed like this for a day or two.
And the abscess was so raised that it had risen two inches on either side of the opening where it was growing.
So I hurried, and stuck in one of the oesophagi, then pulled it firmly, and pushed a large portion of bowels out;
and then refitted it again on the other side of the opening of the nose, and shut his mouth and pressed his tongue;
Afterwards I stuck in the oesophagus into these abscesses, and filled a part of it, and let out only a little bit of blood; and then cut off the woman's throat, and now began to drink water and then wine, and did not stop cutting that abscess for a long time;
and the abscess then closed again, and filled up the space that I had emptied, until it became very thick;
then I set it in place and cauterized it inside the throat: so that it stopped growing;
and then I left those parts, and only God knew what would happen to me next.
of the eye
When the wound heals up and the woman runs away and is far away, it is called "perpendicular".
And if she becomes pregnant and grows fat, she is called "wound".
When she has healed, as we have said in the dislocation, and her healing does not benefit, and you see that the lower abscess is calm and pale, then it is time to cut her.
and that which is roundly assembled and is not far off; and it is bloody or frothy red or black, so that you avoid the incision of it. For there is great danger with the eye disease.
It is necessary, therefore, when you see it, according to the manner that I have said, of its blenching and its length, that you cause the patient to sit in front of the sun, and press his tongue against the instrument which we have mentioned above; then you place the onyx in its uvula, and draw it back, and cover it with the two instruments which I have said in the incision of the two mandibles.
And it is necessary that you do not cover more than the surplus which is beyond the natural term;
for if you cover more, it will be painful to the voice and to speaking;
and after the incision, use of that which we have said in the incision of the two mandibles, and heal it until it is well.
And if the patient has doubt about covering, then you must use fire cautery on the sensitive part.
And the way of fire cautery is sharp and bitter. And it is that the sick person puts his head in your lap, and then he presses the tongue to the instrument which we have said or fire cautery, and confuses with sharp quick water, so that it is not too thick or too clear. and in using the movement of this instrument, from which comes this form:
And put the head in a cap or hood where the medicine is placed, as if it were the handle of a spoon, and place the instrument on all the medicine on top of the head;
and let the patient lie on his side so that the saliva and mucus run from his mouth into the medicine, so that it does not go down his throat and hurt him;
then take your hand to all the medicine and press it on top of the head, the quantity of half an hour, until you see it clear and the medication is gone;
and if you see, take cotton and wrap it around any instrument, and wet the cotton in the medicine, and put the instrument on all of the cotton on the string above, until the cotton dries on the fabric.
and do this often, until the cauterization is perfect, then let it dry, and clean after three or five days.
And if you need to re-apply the medicine cauterization, if necessary, and after the cauterization wash out the cotton wrapped around it with water from a vessel, of cotton wetted in the medicine, and clean what is inside of the medicine;
and be dipped in cold water, and be cured with gargles until it is well.
This treatment is safer than the incision, only the cauterization.
if it is cured with fumigation in this way, take calamus and hyssop and oregano and rue and chamomile and aron and similar herbs, and put them all or any of them into a pot, and pour it in easily, and let it boil;
and may be well glued with strong soil, and enmi the pot has I instrument chisled according to this way: And is of silver or gold, and is one of the heads bottle in the mouth of the patient as long as the steam rises through the cannula until the urine is deprived;
after the beginning often, as long as the urine is dry, and keep that you do not make this at the beginning of the opening of the abscess, because many things have come; and not to make what ever that to the decline of the abscess is hot.
And if this instrument is not present, then take a cannula and put inside the head of a hook made of wax, so that the mouth of the patient does not get too hot; for the hook of wax does not let the steam be heavier in the mouth, and this is a good cure together save.
Many times there is an obstruction in the throat of bone or spine of fish, or nothing.
So if you can see it, you must draw out what you can see, and press the tongue to the sun with all the instrument, so that you can see the thing move;
and if what does not open and is put back in the throat, you must make the patient vomit so that the meat is cooked in the stomach; in case the thing opens up by vomiting;
or if the patient swallows a sponge, or a piece of navel, or a lettuce root, or a piece of dry bread crust; and he lets it hang on a string, and then swallows it; and when it comes to the right place, if it opens, and then draw hard;
and if it does not come from what we have said, then take this instrument of throwing according to this form:
And the instrument is curved at the top so that it can enter the throat more easily and raise the jaw; and be careful not to touch the epiglottis, lest it come out, nor poke the bone inside;
and make sure the patient does not cough up the instrument, so that it does not get stuck or stuck; if he swallows the instrument whole, or pulls it out smoothly all at once, until it is out.
And make the instrument curved at the tip so that it can enter the throat more easily, and raise the chief [larynx] higher; and be careful not to touch the epiglottis, or else the sound will be blocked, nor should you prod the bone within; and make sure that the patient swallows the instrument, for in doing so he will feel relief or pain; if the fluid is swallowed, or if it is drawn out of the instrument evenly, then let it go.
No medicine will heal him without bloodletting, as I said in the division, by the treatment of medicine; and when that does not help, then look in the mouth of the sick person with the sun, so that you press the tongue to the instrument which I have told you;
And if you see the blood, if it runs with a small hook, or with tiny claws that go under him.
And if he doesn't respond, take a dog's chain, and pour it into the throat of the patient, then pour or pour from the chain's iron, and do this often. And if the patient's blood is very hot every day.
and then take a full glass of cold water, and open the mouth, and fill it with water, and move his hand often; and if soon the blood feels the water, let him spit it out.
And if it does not feel cold as we have said, then fumigate the patient with ash, using the instrument I have spoken of in the smoking treatment.
do this many times, because it will soon taste bitter.
and the method of smoking if it is so that you press the mud or there are coal ashes in a place, and in that same pit there is a hole for the instrument to enter;
then pour the smoke treatment, and let the patient put the head of the cane in his mouth, and close his mouth, so that the smoke does not escape but goes straight to the blood;
and the blood will now stop, and if it does not stop, then begin the fumigation again and again;
and suffer the patient to have thirst, and drink no water;
and then the remedy will be good for him that he should pass through this government.
And the form of the instrument how it passes the blood, if it is so, when one can see it, seems like hooks bent to force them to enter the throat; and has the appearance of a careening beak, and it is sharp like limestone, so that whoever takes it cannot let go;
Mouths of appearances of an abscess are, according to what the memory comes here before one and another in this book, and are diverse in perforation and size;
and it is in two ways, of which one is in its own image, and from that which causes moisture.
The second way is for the joints where they are on the body.
For the abscess at the top is different from that at the root, and the abscess at the shoulder joint is different from those that come in joints, and each has its own judgment in the work.
And if to abscesses one must not pierce, as long as the bowels are still according to their fulfillment;
and if to such that one must pierce when they are curbed, and do not die according to their fulfillment, as is the case with abscesses that are deliquescent joints.
For when abscesses come out of the joints, and are left until they rot within, for fear that if the ligament and nerve of the joint are corrupted, then this is a cause of contraction in that member.
Or the abscess is from the principal member, and if you delay the perforation as long as it is still alive, it will harm the principal member;
or the foundation is deliquescent, if one pierces it so that it is still alive;
and it is not convenient that you pierce an abscess without digestion having been accomplished, so that the foundation, which is deliquescent, does not become completely corrupted, and be dilated within, and a fistula come about; and can't heal it for a long time.
and you must know the time for the perforation of the abscess which is dead according to the fulfilment, and that is when the pain is relieved, and the departure of fever, and the 감소 of pain and redness, and the movement and sharpening of the head of the abscess, and the other signs;
and you must make the perforation sit more comfortably in the place of the abscess, and where it opens;
and the perforation is long in the body, and the abscess is at the hands or feet, or in joints and sides and all over the body, and there is no pain. In these cases, according to which limb.
And when abscesses are in a raised state, if you allow the piercing to remain until it is completely cured, as we have said.
For if you pierce it before this, if your body was full of blood from it, and wet with pus; and because of this they harden the lips and him parboil.
And if any abscess that are pierced according to the breadth of the body, according to which the members have need.
And you must bring a little abscess, a little pit; and in great abscesses, great pits, and many splits according to the appearance of the size of the abscess;
and if at such abscesses it is necessary to pierce the skin, and cover; when they have become hard like leather, and are softened, if one does the same as one does to blisters:
and if at such ones that are split into three angles, and at such ones that one covers like the skin of the mirtal tree, like abscesses in the angles;
and if at such ones one makes a round incision, and other incisions and looks like it has been covered;
Those who have no head, like a superficial abscess, you must pierce it clearly;
and it is necessary when the abscess is large, and it has grown great boils, and you pierce it, if you do not extract all the boils at that time, but extract some of them. then stop the abscess just until the next day, then do not extract much of anything; make this several times from little to little, until all the boils are gone;
The patient is of weak virtue, or a woman, or small children, or old, aged people. Those who do not have a head, like an abscess on the skin, it is necessary that you pierce it clearly; and it is necessary when the abscess is large, and has a great bulge, and you pierce it, if you do not draw out all of the bulge at once, but only part of it; then stop the abscess until the next day, then draw out nothing more; do this many times from one heavy to the next, until the bulge is completely gone; however, it is a weak person, or a woman carrying, or small children, or old men decrepit.
Then use this remedy with great caution, and when you have pierced your abscess, if the wound heals, and watch to see if the wound from the abscess is small; and if it is a simple wound, then apply linen or old cotton; and if it is a large abscess, and there are many boils, then you must tie each one with a bandage so that they come together;
and if you have copped in the aposteme a part of leather, and you have sewed it inside, it is necessary that you fill it with old cotton or woolen rags dry from moisture, and tie it just until three days;
and then the bone, and the cure of ointment as long as it is healthy.
And if the pain comes to your head, then bring cold water and quickly, and wet the sheet, and put it on the place where it is hurting many times.
And if the pain of blood persists, instruct him in government and cure, and the powders that I have said to put on them in this book, and if he has fever or is wet, then you must put sheets and blankets soaked in wine and oil warm;
and if he is scorched, and his limbs are swollen, it is necessary that you cover him with sheets soaked in water and oil, or in cold wine and oil, until three days, as we have said;
and then clean out the abscess and drain it and heal it, as is right, until it is healed.
And this is what one should know universally in treating abscesses:
For I have told you how one must proceed before treating abscesses, and now listen to me about the paste.
Or treat the head of the shoulder so that small abscesses are created, and they are treated in such a way that they are like webs, as with the knee of a gown, and many have similar appearances.
There is grease and oil where there is moisture as well as feathers;
and if it is hard and bone-like, and there is no doubt that the artery does not oppose itself.
And the work of the waist so that you experience all the instrument called "intramessore", from which the form comes after, what it contains.
For if it contains moisture, if it flows from above the long way.
And when the moisture has dried up, if you leave the hair that contains the moisture in place, it will stick again once it has dried up;
and then dip cotton in Egyptian ointment, if there is any present; if there is none, in water and milk, and apply to the wound, and leave it until the next day; and this man who is delayed by night.
And thus start the cotton again, as before, on the second day, and the third, as long as you know well that it does not stay away from night;
then heal the wound with ointment to suit, as long as he is healthy.
And if the abscess holds a lot of pus, so that the scar remains long; and I put your scabs, and scorch all over, and put all your cure to draw the skin where it lies;
and if the artery does not go against you, do as I have said before.
And so you make the abscess if it is painful, and the barber's and doctor's tools as I have told you.
And cut on the painful abscess and the wet one, for it is lighter in blood loss. And if in any of these abscesses or head where there is no moisture, and those that I have described, where the head of an old woman;
and I found the abscess as a heavy stone, hard and pale, and could not break it; and if there is none, one would also have made a good wound like a stone.
In other abscesses that come out at the top, it is necessary that these who come out at the tips of the ears be completely removed so that the bowel can be pushed out.
and heal them as is due.
Many times have there been abscesses in the throat, and they drain, and cause pain, and do not go to any other place or heal, and are rotten, and one is infected with another.
And each scar is properly within its rib, like the root and the abscess at the top, as we have said. And the appearances of these scars are many.
And the appearances of these scars are many. There are some that contain moisture, and there are others that do not want to obey health.
in that which you see of good disposition to the touch, and is the same color as the bone, and does not move from any part, nor is it deep.
it is necessary that you cut it from above, and scrub each part, and the two lips of the face with one hand, if you need them, as we have said in the top abscesses.
and little by little, and be sure that you do not cover the nerve nor the vein, and do not cut it too deep, so that the hand does not escape, and do not look too far ahead, so that you do not cover what you should not.
If you cover the vein or artery and it does not let you work, then put vinegar on the wound, or some powders that stop the blood, and draw the wound out. and leave it until the abscess is calm, and the wound is softened, and then begin to rot.
And when the blood has stopped, if you return to your work, as long as you complete it;
then feel with your finger if there are any small bumps, if they are, cut them and clean them.
If there is great pain in the root of the abscess, it only comes when you cut the abscess in its root, but leave a strong double thread and let it hang, without causing any harm;
then employ the wound of fine cottoncloth soaked in Egyptian ointment, then heal it.
And if you catch the whole plague, it is necessary that you join together the two lips of the wound, and sewed them up, so that there is no delay from the abundance of the plague. it is necessary that you hear to cover the root of it, and draw it out with force, and sew it up as we have said.
it is necessary that you hear to cover the root of it, and draw it out with force, and sew it up as we have said. Those scrofula that have excess, pierce where it opens, so that it dies;
and pierce in the same way as said before, depending on it, then I apply ointment and similar things, so that it corrupts him who is delayed from corruption; and when the wound is well washed, then heal with ointment causing confusion, until he is healed.
The old said and spoke about the scalpel of the throat; but I never saw in our land that it was done, and this is the script of their words.
For those who have squint, it is necessary that the split of the throat which is called "epiglottis" be removed; and let him not do it himself, for all the veins and the poison of the disease are at those who have an abscess hot in the mouth or in the throat or in II adenoids.
When the patient is in the throat channel, it is necessary to cover the epiglottis to prevent the danger that comes from strangulation.
It is necessary then, when we want to split the epiglottis, that we do so with three circles or four small splits through, between the two circles or by the quantity of the split on the soft part, not in the cartilage;
and if they are suitable for the section of the epiglottis that there is no chisel, and the vessel is long from one.
And if the master is afraid, it is necessary that he extends the skin of the throat to its entire length, and then splits the meat as much as it comes to the wood; and avoid the vessels of blood, if you see nothing, and then split the soft part, as we have said;
and is demonstrated by the splitting of the fluid of the throat that jumps out through the place that has been broken, and by the loss of voice;
and leave the wound open for a while.
And when the hour has passed when we are in doubt about strangle, gather the two lips of the wound on both sides, and the entire cut goes under the cartilage;
then administer drugs that cause nausea, until it is healthy.
Albucasis says: 'Do not make this cut until the throat is completely closed up, and the patient is judged to be dead, and the fault leaves it.' Then cover the epiglottis so that the patient cannot breathe, and he breathes through the wound, and thus is saved from death;
and so the elder is commanded to leave the wound open for as long as the disease is gone, and it has passed in three days or four. And then he orders to sew up the wound and heal, until it has healed;
and I will tell you what I saw. I saw that a damsel took a knife, and put it in her throat, and went out into the cold.
and I was called by the healer, and I found it as dead.
I discovered the wound, and found the blood that had issued from it, and I saw well that it had not been cut open by a vein or an artery but was coming out through the throat, and the veins were going out through the wound.
I hurried, and sewed up the wound, and healed it until it was well;
and there remained with the damsel only that she was red in the face, and returned to her usual state;
for on this day I would that in the cutting of the epiglottis there be no fear.
The abscesses are called "glandular glands", and are large in size, of a yellow color, and very common in women;
and it is according to two manners: natural, and accidental;
where natural has no cause.
And the accidental one is according to two manners: one seems like fat to us, and another manner seems like an abscess that comes from our blood. and he has fear, and does not fit to act on fire furiously than in the little one who is small, and test and search all the inter-machine: If you try it too as I know, and can't do anything, if the cap, if he covers us, and treats all his coat, if there is any; and search well soon, and treat it as it should be, so that it is completely healed.
There are many ways of doing this, which I will describe all the similarities;
and it is necessary that I say all the difference that exists between us and the outcome.
I say that the outcome is painful and feverish, as long as the bulging is passed, and the blistering is complete; then the fever and the heat rest.
With good health there is neither heat nor fever nor pain, and it contains a fluid that is similar to the blood of the body according to its color, and it begins like a seed and becomes large.
and they are according to two appearances, either fat or moist, and many colors are as I said in the division.
When you come to the treatment of our nature, you must first test and inquire about all the instruments that are called "entromissoire", according to what their shape may be or the paste that follows it.
And the way to extract abscesses from the body is that you squeeze or moister place you find in the abscess, and turn your fingers little by little, until you feel the instrument has reached the bottom, then it should be according to the size of the abscess;
then take out the instrument, and take care not to miss anything.
If moisture runs quickly, that it be of the same color as I said for the other abscesses;
and if after the instrument comes out moist, know that it is fat, so that you hold it with a pin and lightly peel it from each side and pay attention to where it lies, so that you take it out healthy with the good health.
and if you cannot draw it out healthy, draw it out piece by piece so that nothing stays behind.
For if anything stays behind, it returns to us many times;
and if there is a little delay, and it does not trouble him, then employ some corrosive water powders to extract the wound, and put something soothing on the pustule, and treat it with other remedies until it is healed;
and if it hurts us much, then count the two lips of the wound, and treat what causes the pain.
and if the vein is under a stone or another obstacle, then hurry and employ the power of vitriol, and let it rest for two or three days, until the wound is pus-filled, and pour on the blood. then return to treat what has been delayed from the outside.
Behold the forms of the intruding instruments, and they are of three manners: large and long and small;
and there are three quarters that are called "albaret", and one that is called "breb", and they are of three manners: large, medium, and small, in order to close the abscesses of fistula;
and they are also like the needles used to pierce sorcerers, and they are made of yellow brass, or iron, or silver, and those that are bright yellow, and are more proven by black lead to close the abscesses of fistula;
and they are of three manners: large, medium, and small, according to the size of the aperture.
The forms of the hooks are of many appearances, as you will see here:
and if they have two curbs of three kinds as well;
and if they have three curbs and are also of three kinds;
and if they have two curbs, and one with only one curb, and are of three kinds;
And all of these are necessary in their place.
The head of these should be sharp, and some of them do not cut well but only from one side, so that we skin the nerves in order to hit the vein or the nerve;
And these introverters are put back in many places so that the patient does not lose them at the opening of the abscesses;
and they are of three kinds: great, small, and medium, as you see;
and not use one more than in a good place, if legs, arms, breasts, and hands, and similar things;
and never make another instrument small, resembling a scythe of beasts, according to this form, so that it does not hurt the flesh: and put it on no more than once to the place that heals with a comb of veins, and arteries, and never according to this great form:
and never do men's breasts swell when they become corrupted, as much as they seem to be a woman's breasts;
and do not remain ugly and swollen, and who want to cure them, if it is appropriate according to this form of this line . b . until g .: then scalth the fat, and apply medicine to the wound washing it with water, then sew together the two lips of the wound, and cure it as long as it is healthy;
and if the breast has run down, and is soft because of its size as it would be in a woman, then make two holes on top, by two similar splits; of so that one is held by the other at the end of one and the other, so that the greater line contains the smaller according to this form, from this line .b. up to line .g.; Then scald the skin that is between the two lips, and bone the fat, and add what we have said about sewing and powders, and whatever is necessary in the cure, until he is well;
and if he is not well, or the incision is not yet entirely made, so that the patient does not rest, or for the escape of blood, then you must fill the wound with cotton soaked in a corrosive ointment; and leave it until it has dried up the remaining skin and fat, then treat it until it is well.
which come from sore buttocks are managed like hard scrofula or if it has ribs, and if there is only one that contains moisture.
So those that contain moisture must be cut according to this form, from line. b. up to line. g.: And when all the bowels that are in the abscess are empty, then plug the wound with wet cotton and leave it until the next day, then remove all the cotton, and treat with ointment as soon as it is healthy.
And if the abscess is like scrofula, then cut it as we have said in the cutting of scrofula, and if the wound opens bowels, then apply fire cautery as we have said before.
When the artery is cut, and the skin that is above it is sewn together, then many abscesses come, and also come to the escaped vein and abscess;
and if they prick at their base, so that it is for the artery, if the abscesses are long all around. and when you feel it on both sides, if you feel extraction.
and when it is for the vein, if it is necessary to move apart gradually.
and this chapter teaches that it is foolish to cut the abscess, and least of all when it is connected to the jugular vein or to the neck and mouth of others, and it is very dangerous. Therefore, it is necessary to avoid the cure of iron, and that which is at the head also must be avoided, and in that which is inflamed with an artery, it is done from above the skin with a long knife.
then work on the size like a single piece of cloth, and separate the artery from the membranes very carefully until it is uncovered;
Then bottle up the blood, and let it pierce almost to the other coast, and hold back the artery with a double thread of thread in two lines according to what I have taught you in the extraction of the two arteries that are in the temples.
Then mark the line that is between the two knots of an introducer as far as the sun rises and sets, and let it come out, and release the abscess.
Then set in motion the cure that is due to water, until the line is broken. Then treat with an ointment that comes from this, until he is healed.
And if the abscess is near the vein, you should hold it in your hand what you can of the abscess and then bottle up the needle with moisture and let it pierce, and there are two threads, so that you pull it from the other side. and tie the aposteme, if I told you, or the string of one of the two parts to the shoulder blades;
and if you doubt that the string is not strong enough, if he returns another needle to all the thread from the first incision, and pulls out the strings in four lengths;
then cut the aposteme until the surplus comes out, then cut the excess at the knot and leave what is tied;
then put on it a wet cloth in wine and oil, then bring him cures of camphor and cloves until he is healthy.
So too do arteries and veins; they come from the nerves when they are hurt, or because of excessive work, and similar things.
And if there are more joints, and two at a time, and in all of them or some of them, where there is a knot, it seems the same color as the blood, and it has many symptoms without pain;
and when they are restrained, if the patient feels pain, and it is not completely cured, but let it continue;
and be quiet on all sides, and do not move forward or backward, nor above nor below, and the one who is in joints does not come to cover with iron: for fear that they might contract; and those who are at the head or in front, make the skin with a scalp-pin.
and those who are at the head or in front, make the skin with a scalp-pin. If the abscess is small, if it has a nail, and cut it at the root;
and if it is large, if the suspender has an oncine, and scratch it, then break the bone and patch the wound with sutures, and treat it until it is healed.
Now there comes a pain in the belly and not elsewhere, it is a disease that is called "fungus" by appearance, and its root is subtle and its head is big;
and I have both small and large ones.
and I saw a house that had two or three belly buttons that looked more like mushrooms than anything else, and there was no difference between them; they were white, and had little roots, and they were hollow, and ran together with moisture.
I measured them and found one to weigh 18 ounces, and the other 6 zozimes; in the incision of the wound I saw that the patient is moist, and the color of the arterioles is pale and moist with a fine root; if you put it on a large spatule, and in your presence is the fire cautery.
if you put it on a large spatule, and in your presence is the fire cautery. For when the cutter comes too often great removals of blood, and he goes out from you, so hurry up then cauterize;
and if you see the patient sweating and fearful of the incision of the iron, then take a well-made cloth, and bind the arterioles as we have said, and leave it for two days;
and then the restraint, and do not cease to extract the hair of the face until it copes with the arête, and chiece by him sense work;
and if the roots are thick, so that it hurts to cut them, but you can cut the half well, then cauterize it so that it does not come back;
then heal the wound, and keep you do not cut the thistle which is of faix color and poor sense and milk regart.
For this is an abscess infected, and I will come to the treatment of the ulcer hereafter.
when the heat If the appearance of the wound comes by cauterization of a sore or cut of medicine, and is on the belly and some of the bouez, so as it happened in other wounds, or of blood that cuts off a vein or an artery according to what is before, or of windiness;
and if it is by the cut of medicine and by the exit of the bouez, if the color of the abscess seems to the color of the body, and is a light thing without pain, and opening of various exits. And if it is by the issue of the intestine, then it is more varied, and when one presses it to both sides it turns back, and then comes back again; and perhaps it becomes tighter, and widens greatly at the entrance of the bath and by strong work.
And if it is due to moisture, it is a light thing, and open well when you press it to your hand, do not constrain.
and if it is due to blood, if it opens with these signs, the abscesses are big and hard, and it is fixed according to a quantity; and if it is due to wind, if it seems hot at the touch, and the opening is so that you see its appearance is due to blood from the artery, or vein, or wind.
and if it is due to wind, if it seems hot at the touch, and the opening is so that you see its appearance is due to blood from the artery, or vein, or wind. If you leave the cure. For in the work of this chapter, there is doubt and fear; if, as I said to you, the chapitre of the abscesses, for the artery and for the vein.
And if its appearance is due to the intestine or bad bowels, it is necessary that you instruct the patient that he cover himself, and be stretched out straight, then sign with your hand all around the navel; then you command him to walk softly between your hands, then enter the place that you have signed all around the navel, then stretch out half of the aposteme towards the top at all the great angle; and tie his neck with a strong rope or silk, firmly binding him.
Then, extending halfway across the ligature, place your index finger and gently lift up the intestine. if you find it tied to the ligature, loosen it, and push the intestine back towards the abdomen's edge.
and if you find the boil, take care not to touch the crust, and cut off any excess.
and if the artery is blocked or bleeding, take care not to cry out too loudly, then return to your work and take two needles, thread them with two strong threads, and push the needles through where you have made a cut that you have pierced.
then stretch the intestine in four places above the needles, and if you see any blood, remove the needles, and leave it there to dry up, and let it wither away on its own. you the salve when it is subtle and permeable, then heal him of what he needs, and cut off the abscess as we have said;
you the salve when it is subtle and permeable, then heal him of what he needs, and cut off the abscess as we have said; and extract the blood or moisture that you find, then heal the place of what he needs, and bind the place;
Dou Chancre. We have said in the division the appearances of chancre, and how it must be operated on by medicines, and how it must be cured with iron;
and let the old man say that when chancres are in a place where they can be raked out as chancres that are in mamelles, and in the cunt, and in similar places, and it must all be cut off when it is in an incipient state;
There was never a man who kept me from reaching my goal.
And the work, when it is in place or can be removed, as we have said, is that you do not purge the black bile at any time;
then make him well if he has manifest fullness, then afire the bad blood so as to do the work;
then pour your oils or gangrene, and shave all his hair, leaving nothing;
and let the blood flow freely, and press firmly on the place with your hand or any object, and the removal of blood from the artery or vein makes the cauterization necessary so that the wound does not heal; then treat with other treatments as long as he is healthy.
About dropsy. We have said in the division the appearances of droppy, and in what way the assembly of water is made, and the signs of each appearance, and the treatment that is done with medicines, and that which is cured with iron:
and one must not touch with iron in these two appearances: this is to know, tympanitis and hyposarcoma, because it is a deadly thing;
So when you treat this appearance of edema (yropisie), which is called "eclites", and the cure does not benefit, if the patient is weak or has another disease besides edema, such as a stomach upset and similar things; if one does not touch with iron, for there is doubt;
and if you see the patient of great vigor, and he has no other disease but edema alone, and he is not too old or too young, then one must do this: lift up the patient directly on your hands, and the assistants press the abdomen at the lower part of the back, then take the spine with thorns according to this form: And let there be trenching from both parts. be short, and let there not be so much space between it and the other flesh that it might come into the intestine when you put it in, and not get bruised.
then look to see if there is water coming out towards the intestines: if it comes out straight down from the armpit, you should cut through it two hands wide on both sides; and if there is water coming out due to liver disease, then your cut should be on the left side of the armpit, two hands wide;
and if it is due to pus, then on the right side, and it is not good that the patient lie on the cut so that the excess does not run into his weak place;
then pierce all the skin with the instrument, and squeeze it out, and hold your hand to all the hair between the skin and the fat as you would do when stretching it out to the quantity of an inch or in wrapping it around;
and pierce the lump until the pus comes out, and this is the place of the vein, then make it wide, and pour this instrument where this shape is: And it resembles an slender silver dog, and is of brass or lightweight iron, and has in the end a small hole: and where it comes out on one side, there is a hole; and two more on the other, and one on the other;
and the head is shaped like a pen, and this is the shape of the incision that the writers cut the pen with:
at the top of the head there is an opening, so that when the instrument comes to the water, it comes out through this hole on the instrument;
empty it halfway or one-third, because if you empty it more than that at this time, perhaps the patient will die from the loss of his spirit due to the weapon, or he will flail about, or come close to death;
but according to the quantity of its virtue, and according to what the dispositions of the virtue of the disease mean, and his hairs;
Then train the instrument and hold back the water, and it is held back now by the key that stops the hole that is above the surgical wound, of which I have spoken, so you pierce according to this way;
then restart the instrument another day, if you see the patient suffering, and train a small amount of water;
do not do it any day, and keep yourself from following up too soon while there is still a little bit of water.
and if you doubt about the patient, and you leave a little water, if the cure of the burial bed or the clay is hot, and by sweating or bathing and in the sun, and if it turns brown from drinking; and the treatment of drying medicines as long as he is healthy, and cauterizes on the stomach and on the liver and on the spleen after extraction of water, as I said before.
No child is born with an imperforate penis, or if it has one that is small, or if it is not in its correct position.
If it happens that he does not pierce the most subtle skin according to this form:
then if the patient has a small stone in the bladder, tie it and keep it there for three or four days until he urinate, then remove it when he urinates, and then reset;
and if by chance we do not understand at all, because the urine that comes out is not enough to leave the stone closed.
The piercing of which is painful, if it is medicine of the cloven tongue, if as we said, it expands itself.
Those who do not have the stone in its normal position are blue, because no one is born with a stone at the tip of the penis, so that he cannot urinate until he raises his penis towards the sky; and they cannot have children because the matter cannot reach the womb, and it is a bad disease.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient;
And the method of cauterization is that the patient lies down on his back; then put the head of the penis and the scrotum as with the size of a feather, so that the piercing stings in the middle, as it should;
of the penis sores And many times come cistern albaith in the penis, and is an appearance of a ugly horse;
and there are malicious and non-malicious ones;
if you pinch them with subtle forceps and cut and clean them all, then put cotton moistened with Egyptian ointment on them; then cure the ointment with diafinicon as long as it is healthy.
And if the penis is malignant, of a putrid color and stinking, then you should apply fire cautery to it.
When you have cut it, and the blade is at the root of the hair, and part of it inside the skin and part outside, then you must first remove the blade that is inside. and when it is closed, if the wound runs.
For when you close it together, if it is not firmly sealed at the root of the hair, then it will turn black and corrupt the hair and where it grows.
If all that is black and corrupted is removed, then put on the plaster of honey and flour made from pomegranate bark and seeds, and then cure it with other remedies until it is well.
And when blood comes out, then administer the lunar cautery according to this form:
The cauterizations assist in two configurations together: this means, that is to say, at the evacuation of blood, and at the corruption.
and if the hair at the root is corroded and pulled back, then you must put or lead a string of hemp to the root of the hair, and make the patient piss;
and when the hair is shaved off at the base of the penis which has not yet been circumcised, or where there is an abscess or an abcess, then it is necessary that you shave with a razor while the veins are still tied up and the foreskin completely freed from all sides.
and if it is a difficult matter to discuss, then it is necessary that you shave with a scythe at the base of the penis and the hair.
and then, carefully separate them from each other, and dip a thin linen cloth in cold water, so that it does not burn immediately.
Circumcision is not unbound if it is like the other wounds. However, when we perform this work of our own will and in particular for children, if it is necessary that we do the best work and the lightest work for their salvation.
I say that the ancient ones did not mention circumcision for their children, because they do not use it in their laws, and we have only learned this through experience.
For I have learned from the greatest masters and honorable men who practiced circumcision around the genitals, and in all novelties;
Since it is possible to cure with two leeches, and by chance if one of them bites the skin above and below, let him hold him back and delay him. Or he is recovered, and the pain is doubled, and the purification which comes from the penis is not yet assured at the tip of the member;
And the purification of the nail, by chance, has escaped him, and he corrects the work, and many times it happens that there is no need for purification and I have wanted; and I will tell you how to do it when you want to practice circumcision on yourself.
Of the washing that is done to all the body with force I have found the goodness of the experiment, for the forces are equally as much above as below.
For when you press your hand, if you cut evenly in one piece; but that the thread is well threaded around the skin;
and be the way of the first work so that you make the child think, if he hears, that you do not just tie the string around his penis so much, and then make him wait in all ways that you can;
then make him lie down between your hands straight, and rub the foreskin between your hands or cut your fingers so that the boy does not see them, nor any of the tools;
then put your hand on the penis and blow or massage, and turn it up as high as the head of the penis is; then clean it well of the dirt that has gathered there, then tie the foreskin with a double knot, then tie one end to the other;
then clean it well of the dirt that has gathered there, then tie the foreskin with a double knot, then tie one end to the other; and hold it as two threads at the root and the middle finger, and insert between the two ties, then loosen the knot carefully from above, and turn the head of the penis; and let the blood flow little by little, for it is the cause of death. and put powder on top of the powder I cover with a piece of wet dried-up rosin melted with rosewater, seasoned with good oil and fresh herbs, and leave it there until the next day, and the doctor treats it with other remedies until it is well.
The form of treatment for this is as follows:
the two shoulders should be relaxed and smooth, and the shoulders should be cut in the same way as always, evenly.
the mistake in the treatment is when the liquid escapes through the incision;
then you must stretch it with your finger so that the veins make an abscess;
and make it even, and if you cannot hold it with your finger, hold it with pliers, and then make it even.
And if they exceed three days, and that which is sore in the scrotum is swollen, if he leaves it so that the abscesses are calmed, and the scorching is light.
If you cover it as well as you can, and keep away from the part near the scrotum, it will not harm him.
So then the powder of things that cause a sore to heal, which we have spoken of as a treatment of powders, and if you cover it too much, and it goes up, it will not harm.
So then cure, as we have said, until it is healed.
retentlement of urine
The retention of urine is due to an operation on a stone, or frozen blood, or bowel, or similar things, which we have spoken of in the division;
and if the urine does not flow freely, and you see a retention because of a stone or a knothole in the bladder, so it is necessary that the patient be lying on his knees; and let them lie on their backs, and extend their bellies from the back side, and restrain the patient so that they remain as much as possible. and then constrict the colon of the bladder to the excretion of stone above, so that the urine is discharged and;
and if it does not come as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then you must bring in the instrument that is called a syringe, from which there is this form:
and be of fine lightweight silver, as the feathers of an owl; and be of the length of a palm and a half, and be flexible at the tip.
And the manner of the discharge of urine is that you take a double thread, and tie it to the tip with a piece of wool or cotton, and dip the tip into the syringe;
and cut off the superfluity of the lamp and pour it up to the head of the syringe, then oil the syringe with oil or butter and egg yolk, and make the patient sit on a seat, and inflate the bladder and foreskin with moist oil and olive oil and water;
then insert the syringe lightly into the foreskin up to the root of the foreskin, then turn the foreskin over towards the bladder;
then fill the syringe up to just before the bladder, and let the patient go until it comes to the hollow thing, and if it is not done according to this order then it will turn around and go back;
then draw the thread through all the wool, and the urine follows the wool, then remove it, and let the urine run;
and begin the syringing as long as the bladder is empty, and equalize the patient.
When blisters or sores come to the bladder, and it is swollen, and you see there distilling water and medicines, so do for all the instrument which is called "clepsydre", and that is like this:
It is closed, and if it has three openings: On one side, and on the other, as you see;
and the hair cut so that the medicine goes in such a way that it stops well the prick without addition, if one can draw out the moisture, and push when necessary;
and when you see to move your medicines into the bladder, put the head of the catheter in the moisture, and push while moving which is above;
you will draw out the moisture to the catheter, and then push hard the catheter above; if the moisture enters, it will come to the bladder now, so that the patient feels it;
and this is the form of the subtle enema with which one enemas the bladder:
And it is of silver or of archchant, and this head is higher;
and the chin or the jawline;
then take a lamb's bladder and put the moisture that you have distended the bladder, then place it between the two breasts with a good double thread, and heat the moisture over the fire;
then pour the distended bladder into the scrotum, then draw your hand over the bladder taking out all the moisture in turn, so that the patient feels that the moisture has been drawn into the bladder;
and if you do not have a bladder, take a piece of parchment, and make a circle on it, and pierce it roundly; then pour in a strong thread into these perforations, then join the circle together as you would join a seam, and put inside it what you want of oil and moisture and water, and tie it in the instrument;
and do so as you have done with the bladder, pressing with your hand until the moisture reaches the bladder.
of stone
We have already spoken about the division of stones and their extraction together with medicines;
and I have said about the difference between a stone in the kidney and all the signs, and that a stone must be operated on by cutting; and in the bladder and in the penis;
and I will tell you openly and briefly.
I say that the stone that is lodged in the bladder often occurs more frequently in children, and it is a sign that the fluid jumps from the bladder into the thin substance next to it like water in its thinness;
and I hold him back, and massage his penis, and I bend it many times, and then I rub it; and at the end of these movements, the basis is broken;
and is lighter the healing of children until they are four years old, and is bitter in elders, and is like the moaning of those who are between juvenile and elderly.
and is lighter the cure of those who have a large stone, than that of those who have a small one.
And when we come to the treatment, if it is necessary first to purify the patient with enemas, in order to remove all the matter that is in the intestines. For it never bothers to seek a stone.
Then take the patient by the feet, and move him up and down, so that the stone comes out to the perfection of the bladder, and do not cut it from the top;
then make him sit between your hands, and his legs are drawn up, so that the bladder hangs down;
then look into it and touch it;
if you feel the stone in space, then hurry to cut off the stone above the stone.
And if it does not chide when you touch all of it, then wet your index finger with oil from your left hand, if the disease is difficult, or your middle finger, if the disease is in its infancy. and put it on its foundation, and feel the stone, and when you feel it in your two hands, if the pain is at the neck of the bladder;
then press toward your two hands, and the bottle away from where you see it cut.
And command the minister to press the bladder in his hand, and he commands that he extends the testes in his right hand above, and with his left hand hold the skin that is soothed by the testes on the part where one cuts.
then pour the semen, for this is its form: And open between what is between the testes and the foundation, not in the middle but at the side of the left hip;
and be right on the stone, and your two hands be next to the foundation, and be the cut deep as the quantity of the stone allows, not too big;
by chance, the press if it must be who is or foundation, so that it jump out without work;
and knows that there is a piece of stone or angle, and margins: if it grinds to issue;
and if there is a piece of wood that seems like a nut, and round, whose issue is light.
a cell then where it has angles and margins, make the incision larger;
and if it does not grind, then you extract it on the claws that are like a file at the head, so that the stone does not escape; or you put on it an instrument of silver finely ground on the head;
and if you cannot fix it like this, then open it with a sharp edge, and if it bleeds, then extract it with vinegar;
and if there is more than one stone, then bottle the largest first at the neck of the bladder, then cut above, then push it out forcefully, and the smaller ones after if there are more.
If the stone is large, then it is necessary to make a larger wound. For two things come to the patient: where he dies, or his urine comes again quickly because the leg cannot hold it.
however, you must try to pull it out with pliers, or cut it off with knives, as long as you pull it out in pieces;
and when you have finished your work, if you apply the wound with oil and wine, or with oil and cold water and rosewater to calm the inflammation; then remove the patient's bladder, and do not separate the ligature until the third day.
And when you release it, so that it returns to its place well with oil and water, then cure it with unguent of honey and unguent of basil until it is healthy.
And if abscesses come into the wound and putrefaction, and freezing of blood in the bladder, and is retained by this that the urine goes up, which is congealed in some way so that it does not go down with the urine: Now therefore you must put on poultices in the wound, and extract this blood, because if it remains, it corrupts the bladder and makes it pus:
Then raise the wound with water and earth and straw, and help him in all ways that you can until he is healed;
And it is necessary that every day that you cure him, you bind his two legs and put the medicines on the place.
If the stone is small, and it is in the bladder, and it is pushed out, and the urine cannot come out: If the cure for what I have said above, that you cut it many times, is a reason for this cure to be excused from cutting: I have proved this myself.
Take iron and forge it according to this form, and let it be III angles nailed in one piece of wood:
and take a piece of leather and fasten it to the root of the penis so that it cannot move backwards towards the bladder;
then pour the liquor into the penis lightly until it reaches the stone; and return the awl to your hand in the stone little by little, so that you can pierce the stone from another side;
so that urine will soon flow out, then press your hand on him who is delayed from the stone that is inside the penis. If it has been broken and gone flying with the urine, and the patient has relieved himself, he is cured;
and if you cannot achieve this by any means so that it is damaged, then take a piece of leather and fasten it to the stone and another above it, then pull it out forcefully, and after removing the leather, clean the frozen blood that is in the wound; and the healer as long as he remains healthy.
from the woman's bone
There is a chance that it will occur in women, and if it does not happen once, there is a great harm to the healer, and is defended by three things:
the first is that per adventure the woman is virgin;
and the second is that one cannot find a woman well-informed who reveals herself to spooks, even if she is married.
And the third way is that per adventure one cannot find a woman well-informed in this craft of hands;
and the fourth way is that the woman's hand is more perfect than the man's hand, so that it covers it better and causes greater pain. And if necessity demands it, you should take a female healer who is well-informed, and not a male healer, for if you do not find one, there is no point in seeking one.
and the present a skilled dancer in the life of women, or a woman who knows part of the art, and commands that she do what you command of the extraction of stones; and watch very well whether the woman is a virgin:
and watch very well whether the woman is a virgin: then it is convenient to put his finger or foundation and seek the stone;
and if she pricks it, so that the finger is released from her grasp, and he recommends that she puts her finger or thumb in the malady, and wants and presses her left hand on the bladder in form.
If she pricks it, so that she moves it with great force from the entry of the bladder to the root of the thigh;
then cut into the stone in the root of the thigh against the middle part, where it is moved, and feel the stone in that part; and do not move his two above the stone or cut off, and let it size the first small;
and do not move his two above the stone or cut off, and let it size the first small; then bottle up pour on the waist, if you feel the stone so large the wound as the stone can come out again, and know that there are many ways of stones:
it is to say, small and large, sharp and rough, long and round, and which have rain.
If you know the appearances so as to know the outcome.
And if it does not go out, put on the vitriol burn, and keep it for an hour as long as the wound is not cured;
then return to your work, as long as the stone is out, and have tools that I have told you in the extraction of the stone from men to help you in your work;
and if it does not go out, and this is the artery that is cut off, put the powder on the spot and strain it from thick and thin, and do not recommence it, and leave the stone and do not extract it, except by accident the patient dies; then treat the wound.
And when the heat of the fire has subsided, and the blood has stopped flowing, if you return to your work, let the stone be far away.
water is nothing but a collection of white or clear blood, which causes the dislocation of the joints, which contains the egg.
and is called "syfac", and never properly in the yolk of the egg, if one believes that it is another egg. is the skin of the joint between the white or clear blood that we have mentioned;
and if it does not come to nothing. And the generation of this hernia is so feeble that it comes from the utters, and that material is spread out.
And never by impact on the joints, and this moisture has many colors: where it is a color that changes to yellow, or is without red, or black, or white water, and this happens more often.
and these are the signs of this collection, for if it is white or clear blood as we have said, then there is pain in the abscess, and a long poke as in an egg, and does not close the joints, because it has moisture all around it.
And if there is moisture in the own towel, then is the aposteme reason with a part of the egg, and because of this one thinks that it is another egg.
and if there is moisture between the leather of the testicles and the white silk, then does he feel bad;
then when you want to know the color of the moisture, try it on all the intimate parts as much as possible so that its shape is in front. According to what comes after the shell, judge of what is inside.
And when we heal him with iron, it is necessary that the patient be healed according to his power and the repletion of his body;
then let him lie on his back, on a high thing, and cover him with a few blankets;
then sit down on his left side, and command the minister to sit on his right, and extend the stick to one of the 12 ribs on the side of the testicles;
and take the spatula, and peel the skin of the scrotum among it long to the tip of the penis, and be your cut all straight by dividing the skin of the scrotum until the white Syphac, and the scar slightly according Tom Pooir.
then pierce the Syphac clear of water to the large opening, and remove all the water, and then put your claws, and let the Syphac upstream;
and do not touch the skin of the scrotum, but that the Syphac alone; and peel all or by pieces separately the skin of him subtilely, that if you do not peel it well bleeding, so will return the water;
and if the wind blows to your work, so you reset in its place when you have completed the work of the Syphac;
then join the two limbs at the knee joints with one seam, then treat it like other wounds until it is healed.
And if you find the hock corrupted by another disease, then it is necessary that you hang the feet that are suspended, in doubt of the decay of blood;
then cut off the leg at the suspension, and extract the hock, and treat it as we have said.
And if the hock is assembled in two parts together, know that they are two branches; then cut off the other part as you did the first one, making it even, then wash the blood, and put in the wound another moist thing made of oil rosin;
then cut off the other part as you did the first one, making it even, then wash the blood, and put in the wound another moist thing made of oil rosin; and put there another moist thing made of wine and oil, and put it on the two limbs, and put double drapings on top of them, and tie all the leg together in this form:
Then take two drapes and employ them of woolen cloth according to this image and let them be sewn together in the throat of the breeches, and that one of the shoulders preaches on the foundation until the back, and the other at the part of the grip.
and the other two shoulders on the two arms, and let all of it be assembled in the loop of the breeches;
and no longer is this medicine of the fire cautery in the place of a iron bar, and it is that you press the cautery of the skin of the neck, and be heated as we have said, so that the white medicine that contains the water is uncovered;
so take this cautery according to this form, and pierce it with those needles, and burn it with the subtle cautery of fire:
And coat it in all ways that you can, until you have scorched everything;
and let the fire not touch the egg.
and know that this work is safer. and keep the blood from flowing out, and be careful about the work of cutting.
and if anything makes you contrary, or an abscess or the flow of blood or anything else, then heal what makes you contrary according to this which is before you said.
And if the patient is fearful and does not wait for this work because of its horror, then make a perforation, as I have said to you, and it is that when you are sure by the signs which we have said that the water is hot, then place the patient on a raised seat; then pierce the abscess from top to bottom all the way through the broad part, and make the perforation long with the lance;
and make the piercing wide so that all the water runs out;
and then wrap cotton on the wound, and bind it, and let run the rest of the water, then cure as long as the wound is healed;
and if the towel does not let the water run out of the wound's mouth, then you must put in a tube or the instrument with which one draws off the water from the hydropses, so that it forms as before;
and open the wound wide, and know that the water returns, and is assembled after VI months or so turning inside out, and when it is assembled as before, and then the patient's days will pass;
Know that in the severing of this limb there are many dispositions, so that I think it is better to leave it;
and I will tell you about the work and the appearances of the abscess.
I therefore say that many abscesses come from the cors, and most importantly the injections. and this is because of moisture.
That is to say, by acrid and sour water that spreads into the injections, or by impact;
and the color of the abscess corresponds to the color of the cors. And does not indicate pain, and is an abscess of sadness;
and by chance there are some abscesses that are painful and piercing, and of a purple color, and never come from an artery, or swelling in the vein.
When it is from an artery, if you know by the position of the abscess that it is hot, then when you press it with your fingers; and only touch it slightly.
What is done by swelling in the vein is known by its expression when touching with the fingers, and one can make the size of this appearance, and of the other characters; and so you take care of the curings of the joints, then place the egg on top, and the trail further down from the white milk, and free the suspender from all sides of the egg.
If the egg is already soaked with these new oils, then it is necessary that you then draw out the egg and the coating.
and if it is white within, or in what is inside the containers, then you must free all of it, and the coating rolls around.
And if the birth of the horse is from behind, then you should cut it all, and remove the membrane, as we have said.
And when your work is completed, then employ the wound with wet wool in oil and wine, and then cure it with other remedies until it is healed.
This is an abscess surrounded by a wrapping that resembles a barnacle, with the softening of the joints, and the patient groans greatly when it moves.
and the treatment of this disease is very similar to that which we have described above, and we will tell you the way to do it according to what the old man did.
He should have you sit the patient on one side of the bed with his legs raised, then pour the potion of suspension between his thighs, all along the vessel that is near the penis, and spread it well on the skin.
Then cut the skin with a sharp instrument on both sides of the vessel, as much as it is exposed, and then peel off each piece, as we have said in the extraction of arteries that are in the temples.
Then take an needle where there is a double thread and tie it to the first place where the vein has been seen, and then quickly tie it to the other end; Then cut them in the middle, correctly according to the length of the body, and thus extract the corrupted moisture.
Then treat the wound as with others where a bow has been shot, so that no vessel churns and makes one of the testicles rot.
Car by God it comes not of evil, and so all vessels come forth, if is necessary to draw the semen from all vessels. So that the oven does not lose its freshness because of the incision of the vessels, and they dry up and cannot be helped.
The movements of this rat come about because of the incision that comes out or extends on the belly in the part of the anus, so that the intestines descend from that cut to one of the chambers;
And this cut is where the pain comes from or because of the extension of it, and these two ways come about because of moisture from these two causes:
Or because of impact, or leap, or braying, or lifting a burden, and by similar things;
And the signs when it is an extension of pain, if it comes slowly and slowly, for a long time, and does not come suddenly; and the aposteme is even until almost at the end, so that the medicine hastens the intestine.
And the signs are when it is a section of syphilis that sudden pain comes, and the apostemes are different appearances, dislodging the skin; and this is due to the exit of the intestine and the body away from syphilis.
And never do cut the circumcision with the intestine, and is held in-quest, and causes great pain to the patient, even when it is pressed.
For in these treatments of iron, for fear of which they must be avoided.
And the way of the application is that you command the patient to hold the intestine in his hand at the bottom in the wound, if it can be forced in; then put a cloth on top of his neck between your hands and gently press;
then pull the skin of the neck up, and cut all the long hair; then put inside the loin clothe from the waist according to what you need to open the wound, and be so that he can easily come out;
then peel off the medicine that is on the skin of the loin, until the white medicine is completely uncovered from all sides;
then put your index finger in the opening of the loin, in what is between the white medicine that is uncovered from all sides, and in what is second, and leave what is behind the loins, and between the second;
and so move to the right hand side of the bed in front of the legs, and are the white skin up at your left hand, and lift the arm completely towards the waist. and command the minister to extend the arm upwards, and carefully slide it behind the spine.
and feel with your two hands if there is any hard or tight thing wrapped around the intestines, and if you find nothing, pour in some wine.
then take a needle with a thick thread, and insert it into the back of the skin, which is after the sinew of the legs; then cut the threads that appear from the yarn, until there are four; then assemble them one on top of the other in a cross-like manner, and sew the skin, which we have said is after the sinew of the legs, with a strong thread of two parts; And wrap up the heads of the bones, and tie them together from two sides, so that no one of the servants who feed them can enter them, for it will not be possible to put in an abscess. and tie them very tightly according to the first length of two lines, and after these two lines leave a space that is three fingers wide between the sides; and after all the rest according to the roundness that the elf carries;
then cut off the part that is next to the leather of the legs, until it stands out, and bends it, as we have said above;
then bring wet wool in oil, and put it on the wounds, and put on the tie that we have said. And never is cauterized the white blood that we have said, after the incision, for doubt of decay of blood. For this often happens, and leaves the tie on him until he dies;
and if it delays in the shoulder, so arise from hot water, and put on what we have said, until it feels hot.
then heal the wound with another treatment, until it is completely healed.
of hernia carnous
In this recipe I have never seen anyone dare to try to make the cure with fire.
And the old people said that it is done in this way as the vine that ties the vine, so that you tie the branches, after the size of a little bit on the leg;
then take care of me, and heal the abscess of him who works, until the branches feel hot;
and the treatment as we have said, until it is completely healed.
No time comes when the wound ruptures in the flesh, as we have said, and opens up the veins;
and do not fall out any of the entrails, because it is a small thing, and repair every hour;
and for all that if he lingers too long in this place, he believes the wound or sewage, as far as the intestines are coming out;
and what happens because of the spreading of the sewage that is at the ankles, as we have said, because it is spread out, then it softens and swells the joints and opens them up;
and the treatment if it is by fire cautery, as we have previously said;
and no one is cured by iron in this way: and it is that the patient lies still on his back between your hands, then cover the site of the rupture with a large amount of three-parts;
and then extract the sewage that is attached to the skin that has been peeled, and then take the rag and put it on the site of the sewage;
and press it perfectly hard in the belly, then cut the two sites of the sewage on top of the rag, and cut each one;
Then pull out the head with force, and do not cover with any medicine or extend the knife or anything else, as I have told you in the treatment of the ramose entrails. Then cure with the cure for wounds.
Then cure with the cure for wounds. And when you cut the hair, if it is infected or healing the wound, until it is healed.
The ointment is constant and has no appearance in the rupture, and the cauterization is moist in this place, and closer to salvation.
of the softening of the leather of the crotch
Often the leather of the testicles is softened in some men, so that the spermatozoa inside are softened, and it can be seen;
And it is necessary, when you treat him, to make the man lie down, and to pull off the skin which is softened on top of the natural skin;
Then join the two lips with one stitch, and you will see, cut first the excess of the softened skin at three stitches or four firmly;
Then pull between the stitches, and treat it like other wounds, until it is healed, and let it ooze.
Dou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.
For if I were to say this, then it would be against our custom.
and it is not necessary for just two ways:
where one is that the mirror should answer when asked, and in a mirror's cure;
and the other, for if we have often had a need to chastise certain animals to help us, as with rams and sheep and hogs and others.
I say then that chastisement is done in two ways: where by attraction or by splitting apart.
In that which we do with attraction, let us sit the animal in hot water until its testicles are softened and while they are still soft; then grab them with your hand, until they have healed and you no longer feel them.
Of the lancing of wounds: You must take the best cow, and bring its hide to your left hand, then tie it up with the strap, and cut off each hoof when you have well skinned them.
and I leave no hole of syrup or sugar which is over the veal;
and this way of lancing is to be preferred over that which is done by attraction, for in the latter case there may be something about the hooves that causes the cow to crave luxuriance;
Then heal the wound as long as it is well.
Of the chastisement of size: It is fitting that you anoint the bestial, and press the skin of the hoglets to your left hand, then tie the suspender, and cover each hoglet with I know not how many; leave no small poultice of the si-fac and sub-tifat which is on the vasselins; and this mode of chastisement is mature that which is done by attraction, for thisu that to the attraction remains by adventure nothing of the hoglets, by coi the bestial desires luxure; then heal the wound as long as it is healthy.
Hermaphrodite is according to two manners as men: the one if it is that between the two hooves as it is made by nature of a woman, or it have hair, and sometimes the urine.
And the other way is in women, and has on the breast as a penis and two testicles.
And the healing of man and woman is that you cut off the hoofs together, and heal them as other wounds;
In the second way, men whose urine jumps out of their loins, unless they are cured.
The tail is tied to the natural part, as long as it is too ugly to see; And some women have also great wonder at it, and that is the cure.
It is necessary that you take the surplus of the tail to your hand or fingers, and make a small cut;
and do not cut too deep, that the blood does not flow much, then heal with another cure as long as it is healthy;
and at another tail that is born in the mouth of the mare, and use it, and perhaps it will jump out, and is according to the appearance of a cow, and for this they called it the old "cow disease". If you need to cut it, as we have said about the tongue, and treat it until it is healthy.
Erratic it is when the nature of the woman is not perceived, or the hernia is small; And is natural by birth, or happens through disease that came to it;
And is natural by birth, or happens through disease that came to it; Or is made by the art of the jester, or by the subtle or specific medicine, and is made perfect in the mare, or in the coast, or dissection, or what not;
and can be conceived, and birth, and by chance flowers to have;
and the knowledge of this is through the way of the dance.
For if the stoop is close and apparent, whether it is at your two sides or above.
If it is subtle medicine, and it is near to leaves, if you hurry, and around thus:
meet your two fingers together, and the woman be on her back, spreading her legs;
then are the two fingers formed, until the subtle medicine is running, and the support is removed;
then take wool, and wet it in oil, and put it on the place, and let the woman lie with each man every day, so that he cannot hold it together.
And if the remedy is harsh and thick, then it is necessary that you take a kind of spa water resembling a mint leaf.
If he is stuck in a car, if he is suspended by the neck and the cloak.
and put medicines that stop the blood, if necessary, blood of dragon, incense, together with a lot of incense;
then provide a long, wide piece of cloth, so that the wound cannot heal;
and let it hang for a long time, and bring a tent made of dry linen;
then heal with other treatments until he is well.
When the woman is pregnant, and you cover her according to this method, unless it is an abscess. For in the case of an abscess that is in the womb, one must not touch fire.
hemorrhoids Hemorrhoids are openings of veins that require no surgery, and when hemorrhoids are old they become throbbing;
and we have already said in the division the signs of disease, and the symptoms, and I will say here those that receive cure.
I say that hemorrhoids and the thump are perfect in the marriage, and they do not appear in feeling unless it is cured by fire.
Those who are at the mouth of the vagina can be felt, and those who can be cured are cured.
It is therefore necessary that you put the woman in a cold house, and tie her to the bed, and cover her with clothes, and powder her with medicines that stop the blood, if necessary, blood of dragon, incense, and similar things;
Then put his feet on the wall for an hour, then place them in cold water.
and if the wound comes, so that the fat is poured out, then place it in a decoction of sumac and pomegranate bark and gall and similar things, and then take barley flour, and mix it with honey and thus, and apply it to his back.
And if it stops, that's good. If this does not work, then place air cushions on his back and massage without hurting;
Then take another one, and squeeze it to extract the juice of plantain or of gorse with old wine, and apply it to the place.
And when the abscess has healed, then treat the wound until it is well;
and that which is called "spelt" is red, and is like to I sharp chief, so cover it as I have said in the recipe; and then treat him as long as he is healthy.
Various kinds of abscesses come in the married woman, such as plaguey and piercing abscess, herpes and estias and fistula and hemorrhoids and hot abscess, and many other diseases that I have mentioned in the division.
Therefore, it is necessary that in this treatise, the apothecary's cautery which comes to the femur, which is not a constant abscess but a burning one;
and if you know the work of fire, see if the abscesses are tender at the beginning of their appearance, and if they are hot and feverish, and if they turn red, then you can see them. Therefore, do not hurry to pierce it, but let him die as long as the pain is not relieved;
and then make the patient sit down on two small seats, so that he leans his back and joins his legs away from the leg;
and may their hips be spread out, and place their arms behind their knees, and tie them well with a good bond;
Then suck the bile down towards the left coast, and I will prepare the instrument with which one works the mouth of the womb, from which comes this form thereafter.
and it is necessary that when you see me prepare this instrument, that you put the point first in to test the depth of the womb so that what enters through the instrument comes out perfectly as it should and does not hurt the patient. and if the instrument is larger, cover the depth of the womb with cloth so that the instrument does not hurt it.
and it is necessary that he put the tip of the instrument on top and dip the instrument into water.
And when the abscess opens and you hold it with your hand, if it is necessary to cover the apex, the most painful part;
and when the bow is empty, if it is necessary that you put in the wound wet rags soaked in oil of roses, or dry green oil;
and put the poultice perfectly over the wound and peste on the wound and on the other hand clean rags wet with water or fried seeds;
then the healer after two days of poulticing coming to this, as long as it is healthy;
and never raise the poultice and the wound by the use of water and honey, and then by water or long roots of lys and arislage are cooked; then recover to poulticing.
And if the wound is healing in the scar, you must keep yourself from cooking with iron, but cure it as we have said in the division.
of birth The first thing is for the woman who gives birth to know the signs of nature, and if you see her press down, and she desires to smell the air:
Then let the fire cautery be applied. And now I will tell you that these children are according to their natural figures, and this one comes out with its head, and the second with it.
and when you see these signs, if you lightly press his belly, then that child will come soon;
for when it descends on its head, then the second with him, and thus cleanses the marriage of its excesses by good purification;
and this one that comes otherwise does not come naturally.
For it comes in no way on its feet, but comes on the chest or shoulder, and the hands, or comes on the belly, or sometimes, and is turned around by accident on the neck, and by other bad shapes;
so that you may dance wisely and cunningly in these things, and be warned of error and deception; and I will show you all the shapes how to help them.
If she falls forward by her own natural force, and the woman gives birth in pain, and her virtue is weak, so that it fails when she sits on a saddle or when women hold it.
and pour over her with oil or fennel seed that has been cooked, and then pour the balm between her two little spatulums whose form is described here: and split the second one, and cut off his fingernail until the moisture that causes it to crack comes out.
and press on the woman's belly until the fetus moves, and if it does not move, then it is necessary to apply musk oil made from fenugreek with sesame oil;
then make her press and shake off the condensing, and hold her mouth and nose for an hour: so that she may now deliver the child.
And if both hands are hot, then you must repeat the process of gently squeezing them a little and a little: and if they cannot enter, then put the woman on a chair and lift her feet up. then remove the chair from under the woman, and tie her down so she doesn't stand up;
and if his hands cannot enter, and the baby dies, then cut the hands off with the knife that is placed in front, and pull out the baby, and cut it evenly.
in the delivery of the child on its feet When the child comes on its feet, if you put a stick up; and then turn it back and forth until it is even;
and then stretch it out and bend it back and forth.
Until he jumps just as high as his knees, if you command him to jump, and make him shake with fear; If he jumps, may God help him.
And if it does not turn out as we have said, then let it be turned little by little, until it is back in its natural position. For now it is light.
And if he does not come as we have said, then take musk of alyssum, and oil of sament, and gum melted, and grind it all together in a mortar; and put on her nature within and without this ointment, then make her sit in warm water until she is soaked to the ribs;
and when she is wet all over, she is given a chain of myrrh, and it is put on her, and she is left for an hour; then make her sit on a seat, then make her shake and hold her mouth and nose, and press her belly lightly, for the child is coming now.
of the delivery of the child between his legs When the baby comes in this form, if I put my hand on his head little by little; then be bound around his neck, and hang his feet down, and lie down on a bed; and bend his hands little by little, and then press his hands on his belly, and pull out the bowels all at once, until she is emptied; and if it does not jump, then take its feet and move its body, then move its body above its belly, then put your hands on it. and strike the child little by little; and command the woman to lean back as the child comes out.
When the child is born with one hand extended, It is necessary to learn how to bring back the hand: if one cannot bring it back, then let the woman get up and go.
if she cannot walk, then let her lie down on the bed, and make her stretch her legs straight;
then arrange the muscles as I have described;
and if she does not give birth, then let her sit on a chair, and study to bring back the hand; and form the child according to its natural shape, and make it shake, and command the woman to lean back as the child comes out.
of the baby's delivery through its mother's groin, and it spread its hands, and its face turned towards her back It is necessary that the barber shave his hand, then turn it a little at a time, and wipe it lightly.
and when it is even, if he puts the musk that we have mentioned on top of it, and oil, then he orders her to move a little at a time;
and when you have done this, if you place it on a seat, and he orders her to lie down; and make her shake. of this same method for all the second part
of this same method for all the second part When he comes in this way for the whole second time, if you cover your nail with it until the moisture is empty;
and if he puts it on his face and neck, and covers it up so that it cannot be held back, then the barber dies;
then put the child inside, until you have put it in as it should be, and order the woman to lie down once:
of the twin's issue It is known that good things come often, and never more than three or four at a time; And this is not an unusual thing, and it rarely happens; Two are an unusual thing, and they never live, if only one were left;
Two are an unusual thing, and they never live, if only one were left; I know that, if they are multiplied, they are lost by the fire which devises them, which is tied to the lead;
And never are they born naturally as all of us, as we have said.
If they are born with pain, if the cure is as we have said, and let the wise doctor do it quickly and lightly; and then do it so that it may be saved. of many children
And never is it formed in the womb one or two or three or four or five or six or seven, or more than fifteen, and all are formed by the measurement of the wise glorious, and know the doctor everything, for by chance similar things might be there; Do as you see fit.
of the dead child
When you treat a woman who has given birth to a dead child or is pregnant and it does not come out, and you are forced to use your hands; if the woman is of sound health, and there is no accident that she might fear death from;
if the woman is pinned beneath her back and her hips are tilted downward, and her legs are raised up;
and the midwife ties the cords from both sides, so that she is tied to the bed, so as not to be treated for the delivery of the child;
Then rub the mouth of the woman with moist oil mixed with ale and fenugreek seed and flaxseed, then ointment her hands with this oil and these muskellion seeds;
Then pour into the woman's body lightly, and then see if the child is ready to be born, and take care that the baby is dressed properly so that it does not come out in pieces;
If he inserts the hairpins into his hair or into his neck or into his mouth or onto his cheek or onto his chin or near his sides, and the pins are inserted or pricked through the skin, then they must be cut off at the base and the blood should flow.
And he should hold the hairpin in his right hand and place the thumb of his left hand between the two fingers of his right hand, and grip it lightly with his entire hand, and insert the hairpin into any one of these places that we have described until he reaches the empty space.
Then take another hairpin and place it in such a way that the pricks are even;
And then stretch it evenly from one side to the other, so that it stands up, and fix the hairpins with their points in such a way that they cannot move, as follows:
And if some part of it remains, if he oil one of his two ends and bottles it up in that part, and draws the other part;
and if there is no delay at all, he places this ointment or more high and does it until it comes out completely.
And if one hand comes before the other and cannot be brought back due to the tightness, then you must wrap it in a sheet until it comes out completely; Then take it in the joint of the sole or at the neck, and in this way you must do with the other hand, and with the feet.
And if the child's shoulder is large and stuck in the exit, or has an acute joint assembled, then you must bottle the thorny sputum between your two joints, and cut off the joint and extract the thorn. where you have the instrument which is called "almahide", from which the form comes with the tools or paste which follows this one.
and so also it makes the natural man sick.
and then draw out the bones with nails, and the head of the shoulder is forced, so that it is cut, as much moisture comes out as possible.
and if it cannot come out, then chop it into pieces so that you can take it out.
and if it is swollen in the belly or burst the ribs, so that it is necessary for you to pierce it as much as the moisture runs.
And if he falls on his feet, then is the light आकर्षण, and the treatment is at the mouth of the wound.
And if it is stuck in the belly or in the foot, so that you can take it out with the cloth wrapped around your hand. and cut open the belly or the foot, as much moisture as comes out.
and if the other limb is ossified and the shoulder remains in place, then pull the hand completely out of the socket and draw it up to the mouth of the socket. then pour some wine or water onto one or two, and draw it forward.
and if the mouth of the socket is constricted by an abscess that has come up, and it cannot work, then you must use moist and greasy substances; and prepare poultices, and cut them into sharp, moistening, and soothing materials.
And if the hernia is on his rib cage, and you can make it flat, then prepare what we have said for the live child;
and if you do not have the ability, then draw it forward piece by piece and leave nothing of the second.
And when you have done this, prepare what we have said for short, sharp wounds that come in through the socket;
and if the blood flow comes from the wound, then it is put in water restraining, and other treatments are given.
And I saw a woman in whose womb an infant had been killed, then consult another on that one, and kill the others. After a long time, the twenty feet came out of the boat, and they began to grow large.
I was called to treat it, and I thought for a long time, and I could not close the wound.
I put on a strong plaster, and after a few days more. I marveled much, for this belly has no bones.
I thought that it was the bones of a dead child.
I want to stop the bleeding, and with my hands as soon as the woman was in a better state; and waited for the woman long time then, and it was fixed a little bow from its place;
and I have not remembered this paste before that for one who, when the master tries an strange thing, he knows how to put help.
Here comes the form of the pressure, where we place the books;
and on two sides are two shoulders. Nevertheless, the horns are thinner than the restringent, and it is made of ebony or boxwood;
and the mouth of the tube should be as wide as a palm, and the margin of the tree should be, and one palm and a half long; and the two limbs are fixed by this means, which are bent in one and in the other, half a palm long or a little more;
and these two joins are inserted into the mouth of the jaw to open when the two horns are turned.
Another form, its appearance being more subtle and lighter, is made of oak or boxwood, according to the appearance of the nails; and has two joins, as you see, a palm long and two fingers wide;
and when you see the jaw opened by all the instrument, so place the woman on the bed, her feet hanging and her legs open, then join the two joins together in the jaw, and hold the head of the instrument between her knees; then join your hand to all the instrument, as you did with the nails equally, according to the quantity that you saw the mouth of the jaw open, until the ball moves in place;
The instruments are all mounted upside down, and multiplied for their appearances. And when you have set up the mirrors, so much faster is the operation, and higher are the men for their number.
If I do not despair of the instrument, you have not prepared it well, for its necessity is not excusable.
When the second is ready for birth, it is necessary that you instruct the woman to keep her hair in place, and then make her sneeze, and hold your hands away from her mouth and nose; And if she does not, well is it.
If she does not, I can take a piece of wood or a lid and put herbs that can open the mouth of the woman, like thyme, Rue, Anise, Chamomile, Cassia, and Cento; all these herbs, or none of them, are boiled or poured in water over the fire;
then put a lid or a pot on it, and another one in her mouth, and make her swallow as the vapors come inside her;
Then make it shake, as we have said. If a person has had surgery.
If it remains after this treatment and is not well, order the patient to soak his left hand in oil of sesame or in musk of ale, and then put it back in its place, and then wants the second. and when he has found it, if he pulls it and stretches it little by little correctly, so that the bones do not ache at extraction;
but then move it lightly from side to side, and then stretch it; then come and dislodge it.
And if the patient's mouth is closed due to extraction, we have said the treatment of shaking and fumigation with herbs;
and if it does not improve from all that we have said, then be careful not to fool around when you stretch it;
but it is necessary that he who is at the mouth of the mare, you bind him to the loins of the woman, and then cauterize with ointment tetrafarmaçon; if she will become pregnant and continue, and it will come strongly;
but then, when it comes to a bad smell in the stomach and head of the patient, and blisters the sick person. So then are fitting fوميجations suitable for this:
no one of the elders has tried smoke with watercress and dried figs.
The form of the instrument to which you will add the smoke of the flowers and the second one if this is it:
And is it like to a dog, and put the head subtly in nature, and the shoulders wide over the fire;
and let the smoke be on the coals, and the tan as long as it is spent, and restart another.
Many children are born who have not yet had the fundament pierced, but they are softened by a subtle and safe poultice: If it is necessary for him to touch the medicine to his palm, and he does not touch it with his index finger, and he holds back the string that binds it so it doesn't touch;
then dip in another moist liquid, made of wine and oil, and then the cure of ointment until he is well.
And if you doubt that it will not recover, put a splint on the leg, and let it hang by the hand, and be careful when it walks upstairs.
And never does the cautery come from sudden inflammation of a wound or abscess; If it is necessary to cover the sudden inflammation: then treat, as we have said, with the poultice of vinegar.
Fistula that comes from the fundament is nodation, and it hurts more than those that come from the fundament defuer, or in the space between the two parts, if to one fistula or more;
and when that nodation is old, if it is opened, and then wet with a warm white or yellow poultice, and never are these fistula persistent;
and are caused by that which he has or wind or fever when the sick makes an effusion, and by chance in jumping one down.
And if there is a fistula that pierces just up to the bladder, and just up to half of the penis; and arrive just up to the junction of the thigh, and just up to the notch at the top of the chest.
And thus it is known if the fistula pierces down to the roots, and not if it pierces down: and is when you blow on your little finger or root, and blow a fine needle of gold or iron into the fistula when there is no curvature.
And if it has a curve, and you blow a little piece of thread or hair from a horse as far as your finger can feel it:
and if you don't feel it, and there is neither an effusion nor a fever nor wind; as we have said: that it does not pierce if you hurry to heal
And when the fistula reaches just to the bladder or just to the urinary conduit, if then the urine jumps out, and cannot be held back by medicines.
If it is pierced just up to the join of the thigh, if so be coming up just to the edge; if there is no twist and the pain between the bones, if so be he has already bowing back, and does not want for medicine or suddenly by touch;
and in these persistent sores there is no cure except work, and the vain vanity of foolish people who mix themselves up with them.
In that which is not persistent and not old, there is hope for health by fire, if so be as I have experienced, and it is that the patient lies between your hands on his back;
and he lets his legs go up to his thighs, and his thighs bend towards his belly; then pour out a little water, or a little mud if there is twist, until you know where the pain comes from.
If the patient feels pain in the fundament, then it is necessary that you insert your index finger there, and you will feel that the tendon is pinched.
and see whether between your thumb and the wrist or between your index finger and the wrist there is pain, so you know that it is persistent. if it does not bother you, then it cannot be healed.
By stretching it, one can perhaps heal some of them well, but this is little done;
and the help that can be given is that if one heats the subtle cauldron according to the width of the fistula, as it has been said before; and pour into it hot along the fistula, until it comes out from the fundament; and make this two or three times, until you know that the scar tissue has been burned, which resembles a bird's feather;
and then the doctor of tent-cloth immerses, until it has dried, and then the doctor of ointment rubs and dries.
If he is healthy, then that is good.
For if not, there is no cure for him;
and if he tenters between them and does not pierce until the back which is at the base, and between the two tents there is an thick covering of tar or syrup, and you see the fistula to that who comes out from under the covering with a cure; if the patch of the beginning of the fistula, and bottles immediately before the tent, and then the cure after, until it comes to the head of the tent; and the tent will be delivered, and he will be cured;
then the tar-cloth which is made like a feather seems, and there remains nothing of it.
And if the blood does not come out, and you cut between yourself and the work, then cauterize with fire or with bitter medicine.
For the fire cure brings together two things: This is to know, the burning of these saddles, and the cooling of blood and the drying of moisture.
then the cure of wet tents dries or in a house cooked, until it gets hot, and those who have been burned are put into these saddles in the fire.
then cure the wound of burning tar melting hard wood, and are the dry medicines.
For when it has been reset, if it has healed properly and does not come out again.
And if a fistula comes up to the very foundation of the body and is separated from the chest, then it should be cut off at the root, and such things should be dug out.
If you feel the tent, and within it is the cloth or the tar or the saddles, or it is ready to pierce, if there is not only a way of hope and faith, by the administration of one of the three ways:
or you cauterize it as we have said, or you chop it just to the bone, or if you can put wet tents and cure it as first.
and do not chop too much in perfection that you cover the foundation which holds the ground, and come the excrements by the voluntary sense; and the doctor, as we have said;
and the doctor, as we have said; If he should recover, then take off that covering and clean it thoroughly from the base, or with a cloth or some other instrument; and burn up that wood which is in the wound, as well as you can; and study to restore the wound and keep the fistula open at the base:
and study to restore the wound and keep the fistula open at the base: for it is lighter for the patient.
And never let the fistulas be made in this way: and when you pierce a tent into the fistula, and it is or is attached to the base of the skin above, then take a tent pierced at the top in this form: And I pour in water into it in two, and plug the tent into all the thread in the fistula as long as it is at the top.
If it is piercing into the margin of the base from within, then pull out the thread of that pierced one, so that you pierce your finger or hand at the base:
and train the head of wool, and join together the two shoulders, and hold one to the other, and leave it for a day or two.
and do not restrain it once, until the wool has covered these joints that are between two, and have chafed;
then heal the wound as long as it is souded and healed.
If the fistula does not pierce, if you make it pierce in all the ways that you can, if he is not too deeply imbedded. For it does not fit to make a cover with a perfect seam, and then heal, as we have said, until it is healthy.
The form of the spine with thorns that one makes a fistula if it is moistened with one, part and cut. and on the other hand not, so that we do not cover what we should not cover, as you see here:
The amputations are according to two manners: where they are inside the foundation, as a grain of resin, and have small and large ones, and cut short there, one or more, and are removed from the foundation and from the head of the foundation;
but those that are far away, if there is a little moisture, and again soon or a little yellow water or a little blood, and have the color of the flesh;
and the treatment of those who have them deep in the foundation, so that you command the patient that he should sweat himself in the chambers as long as the foundations come out, and the children are born; if you hurry and cut it like claws, or if you hold it with your nail, then chop it at its roots;
and the ligature cannot keep them in place because of their moisture, take them with a towel, or cotton, or a piece of calico; and extract them with your two hands, then chop them and powder them with any hot powders that are available as a cautery; or you cauterize them as described in the chapter on cauterizing paste, for other cures until they are healed;
and if its foundation cannot be removed, then cauterize the patient with a hot blade and harshness so that it can wash what is in the foundation, so that it can come out openly; And if the patient is bleeding, and his vein is near the surface, then the cure is light;
And if the patient is bleeding, and his vein is near the surface, then the cure is light; And you shall hold them with your fingernail or tweezers, and cut them off, then cure them as we have said, until they are healed, and do not make an incision with iron. If it is necessary to bring the wound together in this way:
If it is necessary to bring the wound together in this way: Take a twisted thread and put it on a needle, then pass the thread over the top of the needle and pierce it from the other side, then return the two ends of the thread through the eye of the needle, and so it is wide;
and draw out the thread forming it, then tie the thread, and draw out the needle, and do so with all the others, and leave it there for to take away the excess blood;
then put on the foundation with a wet cloth or oil rosin, and put on the foundation, and instruct the patient that he rest;
and then leave it until it bleeds, and when they stop bleeding, if they are treated with ointment and other treatments until they are healed;
to dry at the end or foundation Many times there is drying out in the intestines, and by necessity of nature, and when the disease is old and medicine is no good. If it is necessary that you hold the edge of a scalpel or your fingernail above it, which does not allow it to dry out; and then treat it until it is hard as it should be;
and if it cannot harden, if you begin to shave it more forcefully than before, until it bleeds again, and is scorched; and treat him until he is well.
Do not sweat. Flesh is a small thing that grows over the body, and it covers everything perfectly.
and there is no time when the wound does not ache, and one can feel it everywhere as if one were dead, and it goes all over the body, and more so in the hands than anywhere else.
And the healer should take a feather from an goose, or a strong vulture's feather, and put that feather on the wound, until the purple circle surrounds the entire wound; then turn your hand around all of the feather as you hold it all around the wound, and make it perfect, and clean the wound from its roots.
And if you see, so make this of a dog's head or iron according to this form, and be subtle and run on top: do not pierce it, so that it does not fall apart, and it must be pressed.
And if you see, cauterize the wound, as it is in front of or with fire of cauterization.
No silver clistere, or archaut, or melted arain, or metal;
and no small or large instruments are made from them according to the disease that they are used for. This is used therefore in the cure of children and who are weak and painful, are small.
This is used therefore in the cure of children and who are weak and painful, are small. The form of the cautery small and great is above wide, or the belly is tied according to this way:
and I have seen a swelling or the belly is tied up, as you see it, and the navel is pierced inside;
and one of the ribs has a hole, and the other;
and the belly or a cow's bladder or parchment is put into one, and all small holes are pierced with a thin thread between each hole, then a strong knot is tied around the belly like a sheepskin, then it is sewn together; and when the medicine is inside, if the instrument lies in front of a strong thread, then cauterize;
and this is the shape of a circle:
And let the medicine not be too hot or too cold, and anoint the head with oil or ambergris or some other thing, then pour it lightly; then the ministers hold it with both hands until it is completely dry, then remove the cloth, and place the patient's legs against the wall, and let the medicine flow out, as much as it can; and if he sleeps a whole night, that is greater aid.
And if you cauterize him with fire because of a disorder of the belly, and the medicine hastens to come out, then wait until he is well again.
And if the hemorrhoids are in the fundament or abscess, then let the cloth also be very thin like for a child;
and this is the shape of the thin cloth over the skin so that it is held back:
We have already said in the division the treatment of wounds;
or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicament, selonc l'acomplement.
I say that wounds are various according to what they are, and according to the places where they are made, and according to how they are made.
or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicament, selonc l'acomplissement. Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses;
or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicament, selonc l'acompliment. Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses; ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres;
or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicament, selonc l'acompliment. Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses; ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblan
I say that when there is a simple wound where the bone is not broken, but take care for it may be from a stone or similar thing, and the skin is all torn and the wound is large, and you doubt about the temp of an abscess. if the pain comes to the head so quickly after the wound, and is opposite to where the wound was made;
and denies himself wine and meat that is fattening.
And if he does not improve, if his flesh is growing less, and he does not drink wine or eat cheese;
and put a hot cloth on the wound, if an abscess forms, wet it only with oil and then wrap it up, or with wine that is stinging.
and if there is no temp in it, if it lies still on the wound, not moved by air or powder, which I will speak of a little further on;
and if he has been burned, then put it on some ointments until he is well.
And if the wound is large, as from a sword or similar weapon, and the lips cannot be joined by stretching, but must be joined with sutures, just as I say about abdominal wounds, from the stitch.
If the wound is open and raw, and bleeding, and only holds but to a pok, then bind it up. Then treat the wound with medicine, and return to using hard food instead of soft leather, and instruct the patient to eat hearty meats, such as roasted meat and eggs, as well as poultry and other similar foods.
And if you find leather putrefaction, and it does not touch the bone, then bind it firmly, and pour on it a strong solution, and then treat it;
and if he has an artery in the wound or vein, which cannot be stopped with medicine, then seek the artery, and if you find it displaced, then mend it with a thread; and if that does not help, then apply fire to cauterize.
And if these wounds are small and simple, then the cure is light. and that you put this powder in so that the fire will move it.
And the manner of the powder is thus: take incense a part; Dragon's blood two parts; burn the incense part, dragon's blood three parts, and the powder, and apply it to the wound, and tie it up tightly, until it heals well and joins together all its blood;
and then he bandages it well, and leaves it undissolved, if it does not swell; for the medicine should not be applied until it is healed.
And never does one use only live charm when incense or dragon's blood has moved the wound; but that fire has moved the wound.
And if the fire has moved the wound, even slightly, then there is no need to apply this powder;
but put upon some garlic that has been infused, or grain of wheat made with water and honey, until it heals. And then the doctor prescribes other treatments as long as he is healthy.
And if the break in the bone comes with the wound, and it is small, then extract it with careful pincers;
and I will tell you later about the breaks in the head.
of the wound at the neck
If the wound is at the throat and it is simple, there is no difference between it and that of the head, but the artery at the throat is severed.
If it is a newborn, if there is no other device than to let the cure take place, and do not put anything restraining, because it harms the newborns and makes them retreat; and do not put anything on the wound, because the substance of the newborns is cold, and their growth continues with the brain, which is the highest limb;
but let the medicine be hot, as warm water, and mixed with rosewater oil, and let it also be washed with fresh water, and other stones of the mines according to this way, and moistened with moisternails;
And if the wound is large, then bind it with bends, and then treat until it is healed.
And if the wounds are deep and she is full of bowels, then pierce her or lower down.
And if the artery is cut, and bleeding comes from it, so she loses consciousness, and her pulse stops, and she is cauterized, then the profession of surgery must be done;
And if the larynx is cut, or the windpipe, and it is blocked up so that the meat goes down, then cut the windpipe at the base of the larynx, and do not touch the larynx but reset it according to its natural shape; and then let it rest for some days, and then treat it with garlic until it is cured;
And if the wound has impressed the bone, then cut it. and if there are pieces of bone, then cut them all off so that you cannot have it, and leave the wound to rot and putrid, and let the pus come out;
and if the wound is fresh, sprinkle on the powder that I have said. And if there are bones in the wound and it has a fistula, then treat it as I said in my chapter on the ointment.
If it is a cut from a lance or a knife, and the wound is deep, then look up at the patient's face: then know that the wound is mortal;
and if it is not deep, and the wound is fresh to its very heart, then do not put on the powder yet, nor bind it up so that it does not heal completely, and return to the body, and let the patient rest; but I will put on a healing ointment, and bind it up twice a day;
and if you do not have ointment, put raw wool in the wound to absorb the moisture, and let the patient sleep on the wound for three days, or four, or more often; If I do not come to spasm, or a bad tremor from the heart or any strange extraction of bone; And when you see these good conditions, know that the wound is saved. Heal the wounds with ointment and other remedies as long as he is healthy;
And if it cannot be healed, and operates, then know that there is a fistula;
if the healing is as it should be. And if the wound is an incision with a knife or a spear, and it is simple, or deeper or on the back, then know the cure of this one who is ahead; if it is large, from sewing;
and if it is small, from powder, and if it has entered the bone, and has broken it into pieces, then examine the wound, and the difficult cuts if they are dislocated; and if they are not removed, then let the wound fester, and let the extractions be equal.
and for other wounds or other members, the judgment is as we have said.
Dou derrompement du ventre
The rupture of the abdomen is great and painful and small;
from a large wound, sometimes the intestines break out or separate from one another, so that the entrails are broken up;
and the suture is more difficult, and there is no reason to put any less effort into a small wound than a large one, for if we do not sew them together inch by inch, the intestines will separate.
so that the intestines swell up so that they feel cold, then put them back in place again, and for a small wound, because we leave it longer than the other wounds,
and know that the rupture of the abdomen has four ways to happen:
The two common stitches are in the stitch of the womb, and the stitch of the other wounds of the chest and two other proper stitches are common to other wounds.
and each of them is more appropriate with the stitch of the womb, and I will say one by one and I will declare.
I say that when the wound is small, and there is nothing of the intestine out, and there is no need to mend it, this is done in one of two ways: or for the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestine is swollen by the cold.
And when it is cold, heat it in one of these two ways: moisten a sponge or II dry cloth in lukewarm water only, or cook it in lukewarm water and fenugreek and cumin and spices, and rinse the intestine until the swelling is removed;
and never does this wine causing constriction, and it is bitter to the soul for expelling.
And when you see the swelling subside, if you moisten the intestine with water or alcohol and cook the herbs, because by this is restricted the entrance to a small thing;
and if it cannot enter, then make a little hole in the wound with the instrument with which one cuts the hemorrhoids;
and the first treatment is to cut off what needs to be cut off, and we do not want to cut it unless there is a great need;
is the instrument for splitting it:
if it cuts from within towards the core and not away, and thus consider this form: And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestines are protruding, if you can put it back in its natural place in its own proper place, for that is what needs to be done.
When the wound is wide and in the lower part of the abdomen, it is convenient that you make the patient lie on her back, and raise her legs higher than her head; and if it is in the lower part of the abdomen, then put the head and the buttock higher than the lower parts, and likewise the rupture of the abdomen is in one of the two parts so that you understand that the lower part should be higher than the other;
and then it is necessary to treat what I say in great and painful wounds.
In small wounds, however, you should prepare, then put your fingers between your hands and minister with them that which covers the whole rupture in your hand, and join the lips together;
and this is the common way of sutures, and it is that you should press a needle or more, according to the quantity of the width of the wound, then leave from the head of the wound a space of one thread, and put in a needle there with a strong good thread; and pierce the two heads of the skin with the two heads of the needle, which is inside the skin, as much as you make it pierce from that part, and join together the two heads of the needle with the three together;
Then the strain of a double thread enters the needle from both sides, then assembles the two shoulders of the wound in front, and then leaves a space of two, and puts another needle.
then lay the thread down as you did with the first needle, and do not cease to do so according to what you have done with the needles, until all the wound is closed;
and let the needles be small and large, because small needles cover all the wound, and too large ones cannot enter well: so that they may be small;
and do not push the needles too far from the edge of the wound and the hide, so that they do not cover and open the wound before the suturing;
and then cover the shoulders of the needles so that they do not wound the patient when he sleeps, and put blankets or sheets over the shoulders of the needles to keep them in place, and leave them until the wound is sewn up;
and this method of sewing with needles is more appropriate for small wounds, because it requires only one needle or two.
The second stitch is common, and it is that you join the two pieces of skin together with a strong thread;
and when you have pierced these three together, then remove the needle from the part where you began, in the same way that one sews clothes;
and place a space of about half an inch between each stitch;
This stitch is suitable for a man who had a cut or a stab, which was cut with a knife, and the wound was more than a palm wide, and it contained two palms' worth of bowels, and the wound ran into the belly.
I took him into my care when it had been ## hours since the injury, and the wound was well-healed after fifteen days, so I treated it, and he recovered.
And the miracle was that he died, and this was a wonder;
and do not heal it with ointment, for I am in a place where there is none to be found, nor any medicine. and do not put on any cotton wool again that day, and wash it with honey water as long as it was healed.
Or I will tell you the two proper ways to sew.
take the needle, and thread it from the outside part all the way inside;
when it has pierced the right side in the right way, so that the thread comes out on the opposite side from where you started sewing, threading the needle as you go, and piercing from the inside part all the way to the outside;
and the meaning of this stitch is that you also sew as the furrier does, and leave the thread on one side, and take it up on the other, until the stitching is finished.
The second method of suturing, which is properly performed by Galen, is if it is so that there is no knot, the two parts are joined together naturally, and one of the heads is applied to the other head in this way:
insert an awl or needle near the center, and pierce it only slightly, leaving the two heads of the wound intact; then turn the needle, and pierce it from the outer side only to the inner part, leaving the two heads of the wound intact; then
then pierce one and then the other from the outer side only to the inner part, in two other places that are on the opposite sides of the wound;
And this is the method of suturing with blood, and it is the most common one.
Galen says this word, and no one testifies that it should be done in such a way, that the thread has to be passed through two needles, or through each of them;
and one needle from one side, and the other from the other, in the way of those who sew with needles;
and know that when the rupture is in the middle of the belly, then the stitch is stronger than the others from the belly.
The judgments for the wound are such as they are for other wounds:
and that when you find the fresh wound with all its blood, so that the fire has moved it, then put back the intestine and the stitch;
then put on the powder with a spreading tool, and if the fire has moved it, then put on any ointment that is present, until the wound closes; and clean the thread, and make the sutures tight, and apply the salve and the spice; then treat the wound as for others, until it is healthy;
And if you have no medicine, put on cotton wool, so that it begins to come off, and move it two times a day until it is healed.
For you do not need any other medicine in many cases when the wounds are simple;
and if you doubt that the wound will not become commingled with the principal members, then it is fitting that you moisten another light member with oil of thyme or rose oil, and put it between the arms, and cut off the joints;
and if it feels pain or inflammation in the balls, and many times happens, if the cataracts of black wine are washed away, and most often the inflammation comes up to the intestine;
and pierce it inside, and know that when it is the large intestine, it is easier to heal than the small one.
Since you have no need of other medicine in the various preparations where the wounds are simple; and if you doubt that the wound will connect with the main members, then it is convenient that you wet another light one in oil of tempere or hot rose oil, and put it around the ankles, and clean out the blisters; and if it feels pain or corruption in the balls, and often happens, if the clisterize of black wine soothes, and more often the corruption comes up to the intestines; and pierce them inside, and know that when this large intestine is, it is lighter to heal than the small one.
And if the scar tissue jumps out of the wound, also put it back as with the intestines, while it is fresh.
and if it is old and has become dry or black, then you must cut the black spot, because there are veins and arteries;
then cut what is between the shoulder and the part of the wound to the side in order to ease the extraction when the scar tissue falls, and the wound closes.
Of the rupture of the blister
When the intestine is torn and the wound is small, then it can be restored in some cases, as I have seen that an honest man was pierced or stabbed by a lance;
and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and it became infected and turned into a fistula, and there was discharge and wind;
I shall employ whatever means I can to heal him, and I shall not cease from applying a course of treatment until he is well, and I shall bind up his wounds.
And when I saw that the wound had healed, I doubted that the patient had ill in his belly; and there was no evil, but he delayed in better conditions, eating and drinking;
and they said no experiments that when he has a small wound in the intestine, he must be tied in some way: take two big testicles, then assemble the lips of the wound, and when the testicles have opened the mouth, put it on the two lips, so that it draws its mouth out;
and then he covers the head, and that remains in place so that it cannot be separated, and then he puts another testicle after in the same way as before, until the wound is entirely covered; And bind up the wound.
If it burns in the intestine, and does no harm to the patient, and can be tied with a fine thread cut from the intestine of an animal in this way:
Take the end of this intestine thread that is separated from the rest, and then tie it onto an end of a fine twisted linen thread; then wrap the thread around the intestine, and cut it into sections, and then remove it from the incision.
and this way of sewing with needles is only useful if done according to the way of faith and hope;
And if the wound is big and wide, mostly when it is in one of the small intestine grooves, there is no medicine that can help, except with carefulness.
of the fistula, whether it is are that all wounds or abscesses, when they heal, are called 'fistula' in general, and most when they have gone through the body and come out at the other end.
And a fistula is according to the true nature of a hard and white nodule, where there is no pain, and it is also smooth like the feathers of an owl;
and once in a clear bow, and another time thick; and once pock, and another time enough;
and I have spoken in the division of wounds, that every wound that is not healed, and it does not hurt, it is only by one of VIII causes: that is to say, by small amount of blood or pus; or because of evil; or because it is hard within and on the lips, so that it does not give birth to filth; or there is too much bow; or the bones are rotten, and the matter is of bad quality; or the medicine is not good for the cure; or because the corruption is in the way of poison; or because the property in the region is late in digestion, and late in health, and runs away by nature; where there are veins where there are bones:
and I have already explained all these reasons, and the signs, and the cures of medicines in the division.
It is necessary that I make you aware of the treatment of fistulas, which is done by manual labor.
Know that fistula can occur in all limbs of the body; For there are fistulas that come from great veins, and arteries, and nerves, or the syphillus, or the intestine, or the bladder, or any of the ribs, or the spine of the back, or any joint of the hands or feet; and if there is only one that comes to the principal member, and similar ones.
And all fistulas that are in this way are of great difficulty, and there is only work, and ignorance;
and if there is no fistula that does not come to the level that I have said, and you have pledged to cure it, and you see it clearly, then take a piece of brass or iron, if the fistula is straight, touch it;
and if it is torn, so that the search for a thin tent of throw, because the throw folds itself inside the tangling.
and if the fistula is broken in two places and you cannot well search for it by tents, if it clisters through one of the breaks, because the moisture goes so quickly from one break to another, and cleanses it.
then search for it by your power, that you know if there are bones or nerves, and cut them through completely, and ask the patient very well whether he feels pain when you press with your hand, and the place where he feels it.
and when you know very well the place where it is, and whether it is far from a joint or a nerve or an artery or a vein or any of the places that I have told you about, if it is in accordance with what I have told you, and take out the false joint and the corroded bones that are within;
and then the cure as long as she is healed, and the fistula is very deep in a straight place, so that you cut it perfectly, as much as you can, then I put wet tents in medicine water, and bottle them up to the head of the fistula, as long as the medicine corrupts the excess that is delayed at the bottom;
and then I put honeycombs in a fine cheese cloth, as long as it is healed;
and if it is not healed by this, then the cautery as we have said, and if the bone is corrupted by the fistula, then cut it off.
For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
and if the bone is uncovered, and there is corruption and blackening, then cut it as long as the corruption is all bone, then cure with honeycombs of fine cheesecloth as long as it is healed;
and if he is not cured, and bend back as before, knowing that you have not gone far from the source:
if it unveils and searches until you are at the base, and removes all the corruption, then restore the position;
and if he is thus cured, it is good. If not, know that the corruption is too deep that you cannot come to it; if there is another means than to ease it by nature;
and if there is one small bone corrupted, and you can pull it with pliers, if you extract it with the suitable instrument for this, and if there are many bones, pull them all out, leaving none;
and if moisture causes you to make a mistake and fear, and it becomes dry and solid, and deliver the bones;
And if you cannot remove them in an hour, then put on the wound something that prevents putrefaction, and let it be until the flesh has putrefied around the bones, and then the bones will come out more easily.
and if it is a large bone, such as of a leg or thigh, if you wait until the putrefaction is all over the bone, then mend the wound;
and if there is much decay of it and comes to little more than the root of the bone; if it is convenient to cover all of it up to the point where there is decay, and then mend it until it is set;
And I will tell you of a fistula that happened to a man in his leg, so that you take example and help in your work.
He was a young man of about thirty years, who had pain in his leg from a cause that entered the body, so that the matter came out to the leg, and there was a large abscess, and he had no clear cause to open it;
but the mirror by their madness turned up so high that it touched the abscesses, and consumed a great deal of matter, and became a fistula, and went out a great deal of pus and moisture from the heart.
and many people were cured with it in two years, and I had no skill in the art of medicine until I was called to cure them, and I saw their leg and the medicines they used to cure themselves, and those who were cured by the pus that came out of their body. and his heart became red in youth, and had a yellow color.
I pitched a tent in one of those clefts, and then I searched all the clefts, and I found that one came against the other on all sides of the leg.
So I hastened and went into one of the pustules as far as I could see a piece of bone, and I found it corroded and eaten away, and the corruption went all the way down to the bone.
I knew what had come out of the bone, and I took care that there should be no other corruption there, except for what I had taken out.
and I began to restore the wound with medicine by long tenors, and could not bind it;
and then I began again, and uncovered the bone as before, and found the continuing corruption in the bone, and dried it, and then I put the bone back together, and leaned to bind the place; but I could not but that I copai an palm of the bone, and lead it away from all the molecule, then I restored it with medicine; and he was healed and bound very well, and I did not need to reopen the wound except for the weakness of the patient, who could not bear it, and for the fear of death that I had for him. Car por l'evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement, et nasquit en leu de l'os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n'ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l'aleir ne a venir.
And if the bone is broken in any place of the chest, then it should be treated in this way: take a bandage, and stretch it out at the top of the bone that is opened, and command no one and join another chain of a larger length to the first one, and place it over the shoulder that is forward of the bone, and position the head, such that you drag the corrupt chain off the bone, and remove the head from above the spot where you see silk, so that the silk does not scratch the head.
and hold a stick or a wedge out of place to support the bone so as not to move the head.
and it is necessary to make silk visible and feelable as often as possible; and again and again.
If the bone is corrupted and does not open up, and corruption is in the middle or in part of it, then remove all of the head.
then hold out a stick out of place, and make silk run from one part to the other of the corruption, and let the silk come from the long end of the corruption, as we have said;
and if corruption is in the joint, then destroy the corrupted joint, and from the other side, keep the bone intact;
and if corruption is in the continuation of the two joints, then there is no other pain than that of the joint;
and if corruption is where the hand or foot is pricked, this is very strong, but you must still inquire about that corruption, how it hurts you; and wash it in all ways that you can, but the vein or nerve do not make you opposite;
and know that the chisel and the nails to repair these bones are many, according to the position of the bones and the appearance of the teeth, and their size and fineness, and their hardness; and for each work there is a special tool;
and knows that the work will show you the instrument which you will need, according to the knowledge of this art, and the testimony of the manner of the diseases; if he imagines the instrument which you have a trade according to what is appropriate.
The head might be dislocated due to an abundance or deficiency of moisture, or due to heat or cold.
and when you have medicine that corrosion by the cure of medicines, and it does not benefit, if you cover that member up to the place where the corrosion comes, so that the patient escapes from death due to the malice, which is greater, of the failure of the member;
and the signs are that the members become black, and that it seems to be burned by fire, and after this blackness, the corrosion of the member goes from member to member, and takes hold everywhere;
If you strike with copper, and if it is due to the piercing of certain venomous beasts, such as sea scorpions and adders and others, then the corrosion is at the head of the two parts, if the copper, and does not give them space to come until the hand.
And if it comes only to the hand, if the copper has reached the joint, so that the corrosion does not come only to the arm;
and if it comes to the arm, if the copper has reached the neck;
and if it passes the neck, then it is death, and you will only achieve one thing by measuring its strength.
And so do not let the corrosion come to your feet: and if it comes at the first joint, if the copper then goes beyond the other joint;
and if it comes to your feet, if the copper reaches all your feet; and if it rises up in the leg, so hit the knee joint.
and if it comes up over the hip, so there is no other remedy except to make the patient die.
and the way to wrap or sew the limb is that you tie it down and stretch it out, and extend one minister one of the limbs downstream, and another minister the other limb upstream, and you sever the bag which is between the two limbs at a wide gap, as far as the bone is uncovered;
then wrap or sew it, and put a linen cloth on each side so that the silk does not touch the sound leg, and come to the patient with another wound and abscess.
And if the blood rushes out when you work, then quickly cauterize the leg with some restraining powders;
and return to your medicine until it is completed, then bind the injured member with a convenient bandage, and treat it until it is healed;
and I will tell you what happened to him at home on a certain day:
he had a blackness that seemed like fireburn, and this corrosion came first to the bottom of his foot, so much that it discolored all the foot;
and when the honourable man saw the corrosion, he covered the whole foot with it, and was healed;
and long after that the corrosion came again to his hand, and came to me, and I put on it things that rub, after washing the skin, and I could not stop the corrosion;
and he commanded me to cover his hand, and I refused, for I had hope of regaining the substance; and I doubted also that if he were to cut his hand, he would not die, for the virtue of the man was feeble;
and he despaired all, and returned to his country, and he sewed his hand up with copper, and he was cured;
and I have told you this only so that if you should ever need to do something else, you will know how to do it.
No time comes when the abscess is in its place, and it remains so long that it causes great gathering of pus; and then it ruptures and perforates, and goes out through the belly, and remains stuck there, just as our serfs do; and the skin that is on top is as thin as silk curtains, and it does not corrode down to the bone, nor to the nerve, and such a disease is called "clean", and is not called " fistula ";
but if it is so long that it reaches the bone completely, then it is called a "fistula".
and the cure should be that you cut all around the skin, and most importantly when it is thin, just as we do with cloth. and it should not be burned for its corruption.
And if you have cut the skin so that it bleeds, and the corruption is not complete, and the skin is thin like a sheet of cloth, then treat it with a hot water bath.
observe if the breasts are large, and the breast that is affected has a foul odor, then treat it with Egyptian medicine that is made like this: take the following: oil and lead oxide, mix them equally, and cook them in a pot over the fire until the medicine becomes red and as thick as honey.
and then take this according to your need, and make it in water and honey, and harden the inside, and extract the hole; and leave the medicine in for two hours, then extract it by squeezing;
do this mutch times, till the sinews be broken, and the bone come out;
and no time is hardened with water of ashes, when this medicine is present, and it is that you squeeze ashes from a vine's bark, and pour water on top, then let it flow, and harden, until you know the sinews are well broken;
and if the patient cannot bear it, neither can the Egyptian medicine nor the water of ashes, then harden it with a little bit of ground limestone; or you harden it with honey and wine, that the honey's property of breaking and washing is present, and the wine makes the inside sour;
and when you have done this, and you have engaged that the breasts are well changed, if the plaster of those who make them be mixed with oil and wine, and made like this:
or you clisterize it with some medicines and ointments, of which I have spoken in the treatment of ointments;
and if the chest is small, and the clister's hole does not enter, if it is widened with a little iron, and put in a tent of Egyptian ointment or basilicon ointment, as much as it is widened;
and if the wound is too wide, so that the clister does not enter it by leaving a little space on either side, and if the hole where it enters is above or below the breast, so that the copers touch it;
and if you cannot cover the bottom string as you see, so arrange in such a way that the bow runs to the lowest level where it is, for when the bow is drawn to its full length, if it does not leave a gap; and if you cannot cover the bottom string as you see, so arrange in such a way: that the bow runs lightly downward, and does not leave anything of the bow;
that the bow runs lightly downward, and does not leave anything of the bow; and take consolidation medicines to put on the wound, and are on a linen cloth that covers all the wound; then cover as tightly as possible the hole on the side opposite the largest opening, since sewing together the linen cloth according to the amount of the hole, and place it on the hole on the wound in order to tighten the bow, and do not lift the large cloth before several days;
and those who are on the chest of the breastbone, often for cutting the bowels, and for what runs from the bowels, whether it is poison or pus or enough or not digested or indigestive;
and take care if the patient feels pain or not, and whether there is an abscess or not, and how much of the medicine has spread out and you see the nature that rises on the chest of the breastbone, know that the breasts are already irritated, and bring the medicine;
and then unbind it in the morning or on the third day, and when you undo the wound, if you change another cloth, and renew the poultice.
And if subtle poisons run long after the spring, so that you are not desperate for health because healing is close.
For there are people who delay healing their wounds and those who do the opposite;
and the bowels that are not digested rise from the chest after many days, knowing that the breasts are not irritated;
and if it is delayed to hear from another, and is to be postponed, then such medicines are mixed wet in substance and dried in virtue, as the ointment finishes, for there is a great part of vinegar, and this is the hind medicine;
take the dry medicine, and make it with oil of roses, and aromatize it with equal equal wine in substance;
then the confit and use it;
and that medicine makes honey cooked enriched, when the dry ointments are not present, or you take mirr and alloea and incense, and grind it, and powder it on honey as soon as it comes out of the fire;
and then put it in a glue drape, and apply it to the breast, and never administer it without an oil base, and roots of the celestial plant, which is also like flour of times and hundred; and in the use of simple substances or compounds: break them up, and reduce them to a fine powder, and put on honey as I have said, and use it.
and if the cure is prolonged, and this cure does not help, then know that corruption is complete, and it causes pain in the bone, or in the limbs, or in members; if the cure of the cure of the fistula, as we have said above.
Panaritides is an abscess that may arise in the nail of the hand or foot, or perhaps in another two;
and when it has become infected and one does not pay attention, then it comes to an abscess, and causes great pain and heat as far as the root of the nail, and perhaps even the whole thing;
and the corruption extends to the bone, as much as it comes with a painful stink, and the two legs are wide apart, and the color is yellow;
When you treat it as we have said in the division, and the cure does not benefit, then you must cut off all the excess that has accumulated under the nail, and then cauterize the wound afterwards. The fire cautery is a great help if the bone is sound, and the fingernail is healthy;
and if the fingernail presses down on the wound, and begins to prick, and bleeds, then you must take off the fingernail that pricks the wound, and cut it short, and carefully and lightly cut the nail edge, and put burning and corrosive medicines on it to stop all; then heal with ointments as long as it is healthy.
And if the corruption is in the bone, then cut it and try hard, for as long as the bone is corrupted, it cannot heal;
and if you see the joint corrode, then cut it and try as hard as said above, then heal as long as it is healthy;
and if it is broken, and bruised, and smells of pain, then first you must heal it;
and then cut the nail of the spur with a chisel from side to side above, and be careful that the chisel does not go all the way down to the claw, because if the patient feels too much pain;
and if so, put something on that soothes.
Le doigt qui pousse dans la main de certains hommes est complètement charnu, et par aventure il y a un os, et jamais une ongle, et aucun d'eux ne nait à la racine de la jointure, ou la naissance est chez certains hommes.
whoever is born in the middle of two bones does not move, and whoever is born at the joint between two bones may move.
the nail of him who is chubby is so light, in a certain way: cut it in its root with a wide chisel.
whoever is born at the root of the joint is difficult to treat: if you keep it covered.
In those who are born between two joints, you must first chop the flesh completely around the bone; then cut the bone with a suitable knife; and finally treat it until it is healed.
The joints that come together by nature, by the joining of a wound, or by the burn of fire, or by similar things.
if you cover that which should be joined naturally, so that the shoulder is reset according to its natural shape; and put between two tarpaulins or drapelets moistened with oil so that they do not stick together; ou tu met entre dous pièces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leis soit soudés, si com il convient.
If it comes out of one of its two sides with the palm, if you hold it as it should be.
O you place between two thin pieces of felt, as long as the leeches are stuck together, just as it should be. There are large envelopes filled with melancholy excesses that come from many parts of the body;
And more comes in legs of those who walk on foot and work and carry, than to others.
Therefore, you should not administer any more purging remedy, but rather treat it with basilicum.
The cure for this is according to two ways: one is that one copes them, and draws out the black blood; and the other way is that you open the vein and draw it all out.
The size is according to this manner: arise the first leg with very hot water, until the large sore is thin, and then draw out the leg of the sick from above the thigh down to the joint of the foot;
Then cut the vein in one place, or in two places, or in three places of a large size, then slice and draw out the black blood strongly with your hand from one end to the other as much as the virtue of the disease can bear;
and then bind it, and command that he be dyed with black tar;
and restart the evacuation and bleeding when the veins are empty, and pour on the patient.
The treatment for this is done in this way: He should wash the patient's leg if there is hair on it, then dip or bathe it, and heat his leg with cold water until it becomes red, and the veins swell up;
If you do not have a bath, if you heat it on the fire, and then cut the vein at the top of the shin at the knee joint, or in the part below the ankle;
and soak the skin with honey, and burn the vein from each side until it feels like you are touching it.
and when it turns red and black, and when it enters or leaves the skin so seems to us as a white rope;
then pour out the blood until it is removed from the skin, and then tighten it with a light pinch, then cut it into two pieces.
then burn the skin on the vein until it feels like you are touching it, then loosen it with your finger, as you have done, and tighten it with another pin.
then cut another piece, or several, if you need them, then loosen it and cut it to the second size.
then extract it from size to size until it is all out, then cut it off.
and if you cannot pull and lift it up, then bind a needle to the whole thread very firmly, and tie it and pull it, and turn your hand from one side to the other, until it comes out; and be careful that it does not break, for if it breaks, neither can you pull nor lift it up, and it causes harm to the patient;
and when you have finished treating it, put wet wool covered with wine and oil on top of the wound; and treat it until it is healthy again.
And if the eye is twisted and wrapped up together, and it is not straight, as we have said, then you must cut it crookedly, but do not cover it up; and pull it as we have said above.
The shape of the iron where the eye breaks out is curved, and do not cut, so that it does not break the vein;
and is a heavy corbel, because if it were thin, it would tear the vein, but if it were thick as we have said, and here is its shape:
This vein is found in the legs, in warm places where there are no herbs or trees, and on land where there is no moisture.
And perhaps it grows elsewhere than in the legs, and such a thing happens that the skin breaks out in a rash, as if it comes from within the body, creeping and winding its way between the skin and the bone.
And if the signs of the beginning of this disease are that it comes to the leg a very great inflammation, then the places change, and the vein begins to come out, also as a root from a plant.
When the head is opened, if you wrap a piece of gauze around it from one and a half to two inches, and then bandage it to the leg, and every time there is no more of it, so wrap the gauze and bandage.
And if it is too far away, so take a part of it, wrap it up again, and do not cover the rest as far as it comes out. for if you do this, get back into the cart, and cause infection and pus where it is, and bad illness.
because of which thing it is necessary that it be treated little by little up to the throat, and nothing remains there or corrode.
and never once has this hand been treated when it was as long as X, or longer than X, and one hundred and ten years old at most, and when you cut it, if you bottle or pierce it, and pierce it up to the bone, so that everything goes out.
and let the matter that is inside become empty, and introduce at its place medicines causing pus no day, then heal it as you do with abscesses.
and never once has this hand rained, and least of all when it opens at the ankle joint or the foot, and it rains much from it, and it jumps out.
Cure the dislocations as we have said before.
vers that hatch between leather and cart This disease is called in our country "beef disease", because it often affects the bulls, and is a small worm that emerges between the skin and the shell, going up and down all over the body, making holes where it goes, and jumping out again;
and is infected with pus-like humors, such as come from worms, beetles, maggots and parasites;
and there is doubt about its malignity, because when it goes through the body and rises to the head, and comes to the eye, it may turn back and destroy the eye; and this happens many times.
When you see him cure and draw out, you can do nothing except when he goes:
then it is necessary that you lay him on a firm tie tightly, then turn him over and draw him out hard, and turn his body inside out, and you will not find him, so burn him with fire all over, until he dies;
and the greater harm it does, if it turns the oil, as we have said;
If you see the head of the shoulder near the oil, then hold back the dislocation with your hand, and push down hard;
and the patient should use medicines that dissolve the bad humors, and wash with meat juice that is rotten;
of the pain that comes from windiness This disease is called "vakirir" in our land, and it is a painful disease that affects some limbs and spreads from limb to limb;
and I saw what I told you. I was called to a sick woman, and I uncovered her arm, and saw a small swelling in the vein of the arm;
and I poked it again, and saw it go up as high as a worm does to the shoulder, quicker than anything else, like silver in motion when it moves from one place to another;
The pain left that place, and then it came into the shoulder, and soon after it spread throughout the whole body, until it reached the other arm.
Then he told me that it twisted again around the body, as I saw it.
I marveled how much this woman was moving her member from one to the other, for I had never seen such a thing with this disease. Nevertheless, I had often heard that such pain can move from one part to another, but as I saw it in the woman's case;
And I thought that perhaps because her chest was tight and the veins were visible, and perhaps because of the constricted windpipe;
And I didn't see any reason for this in those who are healthy, whose chests are moist and whose veins are relaxed.
When you treat this disease and the patient feels that pain, if it comes again as we have said, let him lie down and keep him there until the constriction in the windpipe eases; and cauterize the place;
if you don't see the hair, if the doctor who removes the wind with pills of rotten fruit, and pills of nettles, and similar things.
The arrows are diverse, according to their appearance and according to the places where they strike.
The diversity is that it is those who have large tips, small, hair, and soldered; and of those who have two angles, and of those who have tongues, and of those where there are pieces;
and that which does not move in any member so moves according to two ways: or in a principal member it chieres as the brain, heart, liver, stomach, reins, intestines, bladder, and similar limbs. When it therefore chieres in any place of these limbs, and the sign of death, which I will tell you hereafter, then you know it: so that you wash yourself from the extraction of this arrow, for death comes after many preparations; and when this bad sign is not apparent to you, and the arrow has not been fully extracted, if you pull it, and treat the wound.
And the sign of the skull when the arrow breaks and pierces the bone, and the wound is near the skull, is when there is a splitting and crushing and twisting and pain in the joints, and inflammation and swelling and pain in the tongue, and muscle spasms and confusion of thought, and vomiting of food; and perhaps it is not from the nose, or ears; and perhaps it is not from the throat or voice; and in salt water there seems to be pus and it smells like burnt meat;
and if this sign appears to you, then hold back from the treatment, and extract the arrow if it is inside.
The sign of the arrow when it scratches or pricks is that it is near the left breast, and also smells as if it were stuck in something hard, not hollow. and for fear it moves too, like a chicken, and with short breath and coldness comes and faints. For then you must know that death approaches.
The sign of the arrow when it strikes is that it does not ooze pus from the wound, and the throat swells, and the patient's color changes, and he gasps for breath and shivers with cold. So you should know that death looms.
And if the arrow pierces through the skin and the bone, it is painful to touch the spot; and causes great pain and sorrowful sighs; and moves all the limbs of the shoulders.
And if the arrow enters the stomach, for fear that some of the meat is not digested.
And if the arrow enters the abdomen and does not exit through the intestine, then there is no hope for recovery or extraction of the arrow.
And if the arrow pierces the bladder, and the urine flows out in spurts, causing the patient to urinate and feel great pain; For that the wound is fatal.
The other member - the face and throat and shoulder and arm and spine and leg and foot, and similar limbs - are saved according to many dispositions. When the arrow is in a nerve or artery, and does not cause venom, tell me how you would do otherwise.
It happened to a man who had an arrow pierce his throat and tear at the root of his neck; I tried it, and took off the fat of the ear with a sharp blade, and was healed without feeling any pain.
And throw an arrow that it falls in the grease of oil from paper dried, and the arrow was re-laid, and could not but the tip towards the fur, and it was the arrow great by an arch-turquoise, all I made to hear without ears.
And the game was sane, and came no bad accident.
And threw an arrow into the throat of a Christian, and it was the arrow Arabic to ears:
I loved the beards, and subtle as I threw it, and was sane the Christians.
And throw an arrow at the heart, that it was the chewed or stomach, and thought he died;
and then that it passed XXX days, if did not change his condition; I cut on the arrow, and engaged it, and threw it hard, and came no bad accident.
And if you wish for a man who has an arrow in his chest or back, and the wound is seared above it;
and delay the arrow within him, and do not hinder his natural dispositions, nor find harm in any of his natural works.
And I have another man, to whom an arrow has fallen into his face, and the wound is seared; and so he delays not to suffer great pain;
and other similar things.
And there was a man of the king's prince, whose arrow had gone astray and struck him in the neck, and he was slightly 기울 to the left side; and the arrow was all turned around.
I was called to treat after that which had been hit three days. I found the wound very tight.
I wanted to give it all my care, and I did not feel it; and he felt a piercing pain and pain in his left ear.
I thought it was from the point of the arrow I put on the plaster with the medicinal herb, so that the legs do not swell; and I saw the leg of the arrow.
and I saw the leg of the arrow. I put the plaster on both legs, and quickly healed the wound, and delayed it for a long time, so that the patient felt the arrow in his neck;
and he took it off. I put the corrosive medicinal paste on the wound, and tried it, and felt the tip of the arrow getting warmer at the joint;
then I adjusted the opening of the wound with the corrosive medicinal paste, until the head of the arrow was clearly visible;
and the wounds heal well within three months, and then he opened the wound where I had tied the thorns, and stretched it from one side to the other, and could not draw out.
Then I ceased not to study and invent methods of instruments until I had obtained good hooks; according to what their form will be at the end of this chapter, I fixed them on, and repaired the wound.
And the doctor judged that the cartilage in the nose cannot be restored. I repaired it then, and sewed up the wound, and the patient was completely healed.
Or I have not told you the quality of extracting some arrows, so that you put your treatment on what I did not say, for the book cannot take everything into account;
but the master physicians compare very little to what is present and failing, truly nine operations and nine instruments, at the dismemberment of strange things that come in this art.
I say that arrows are of members where they are stuck except for two ways. or by the place where they enter, or by another part;
and that which is shot out by an arrow, is a transfixed arrow in its flesh, and never remains in one place now.
And if it does not go out now, if you leave the flesh rotten within, and the hole is healed;
and also if it is stuck in the bone, and cannot go out, if you leave it like that for some days, and move every day;
and then it goes out, and if it does not go out, if you pierce within all the way up to a small hole, as long as the flesh within is stretched out, and then you let it go;
And if the arrow is stuck in the center, if it cannot be seen, seek it with all your strength; and if you feel it, if you extract it with an appropriate instrument;
and if you cannot extract it by the wound, and by the depth of the arrow, and there is no bone, nerve or vein, then cut off as much of the wound as possible;
and extract the arrow if you can, and if it has ears to hold it in place, remove the bar that is stuck on both sides as far as you can, and then break or bend the ears of the arrow, as much as you can pull it out;
and carefully although you do not break the arrow, that you draw it out more painfully.
And if you cannot hold it once, then let it go until it is no longer painful, for extraction will be easier. And if the healing does not go well, bring what we have said in this chapter regarding the treatment with its paint;
and guard against cutting the nerve and the vein, and do not draw out the arrow with danger, soon or slowly, firmly or loudly;
and put the patient in the position he was in when the arrow entered, for that is the greatest help, and if you cannot do that, then follow the signs that the wound shows you.
The arrow that comes from another way, where it does not open anything, or if the skin is swollen in a certain place, whether we see it or not:
cut off then, as long as the pliers can take them, and then extract it: If you jump now.
And if it is held in the bone, turn your hand round, as far as it enters into the bone and broadens the bone, then remove it.
And if she can't get out, keep her there for a while longer, and then start the extraction process again until she finally comes out.
and if he is stuck in the arrow, push him hard.
and if he is stuck, you need to push him hard. If you push him with an instrument, so that the point of the arrow enters into the hole of the instrument;
and then push away, and if the arrow is stuck, you push the instrument with a sharp point to ease the extraction.
And if the arrow has touched something, it is necessary that you cut away all of the flesh around where the poison is; if you can do so, then treat the wound as it should be treated.
and if the arrow is stuck in the neck or the stomach or the bladder or the ribs, and it is coming out, you can cover it up. If you cover it up;
and don't forget to cover the vein and the nerve, and then extract it, and then sew up the wound. This is work for a doctor. and treatment until they are well.
The form of the clamps used to treat arrows are similar to an owl's beak, and here is the form:
And there are many ways: great, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the arrow.
The form of the piercing knife used is similar to an owl's feather, to pierce the tip of the arrow, as here is the form:
For veins that are healed are XXXI, where there is a head of XVI, that is to say: Two batons which are after the ears, which are called "dous herbech". and the two arteries which are in the two temples appearing; and two veins that are in two nostrils of two hairs, which are called "aspires"; and the vein that is under the brow; and the vein that is at the head of the nose; and the two arteries which are at the neck; and the two veins that are on the lips above the mouth, and they are called "augeherich"; and two veins that are dislocated from the tongue.
the veins that are commonly spoken of are five in each arm:
one is the cerebral vein, and it runs down on the left side, and it is called by lay people "vein of the head"; and the middle one is called "fast", and it is composed of the cerebral and basilic veins, and it is called by lay people "vein of the wrist"; and the basilic vein lies on the right side, and it is called by lay people  "vein of the abdomen", and it is under the fascicle, and this is the one that is spoken of, which opens clearly over the breastbone.
And the jugular vein is the vein that lies between the thumb and the index finger, and if it has two branches;
and in the leg and where the foot is there are three veins: one if it is dislocated at the top of the left side pocket on the coast of the rib cage, and the second one which is at the ankle of the right leg. and the vein that is called «nesse», which is in the ankle of the other side;
and in the other leg are three veins dislocated from those.
the vein that is called «sainte», which is after the ears if it helps the old catarrh, and has a headache;
and the quality of the saint, as I told you, is that you remove the head of the patient, and rub the place where the veins are with a sharp cloth; then pull the patient's neck with a twist, until the two veins appear behind the ears depending on the head: keep them then in your two hands, and where you feel the pulse of one side dislocated, if it is a sign of pain;
and take the needle, and pierce through the vein up to the bone, and then lift your hand back all the way up, and cut and strip the flesh and the vein well, you must travel through it all, and let blood as much as you see;
then extract and bind, until it is healthy;
and I have already said the incision and cauterization in the first book.
The two arteries that are in the two temples, so it is the age of the elderly, and the sight is dimmed, and the eyes are used to tears;
and the quality of the seer is so as I say: and it is that the patient extracts his neck, until the two veins open; and feel the pulse of your two fingers, and then sign with a knife;
Then place the blade against the vein at the top of your index finger, and point it downward, and place the blade against the vein, and cut, just as you did in the other two veins, and pour blood according to your need;
Then remove the bandage from the patient, and put your thumb on the vein for an hour, then put cotton on it; and then form the shape, and leave it until it is healed;
And we have spoken of their treatment and extraction, or beginning of the book.
The bloodletting from the forehead is as effective as that from the temple for the treatment of old diseases of the face and headaches, and for migraine;
and the quality is such that the patient twists his neck so that the vein appears; Then take the instrument called a "seeder", whose form is as follows:
And place the point on the vein, and press with your hand or something else, and let the blood flow according to the quantity that you see. Then loosen the neck of the patient, and tie the vein tightly until it is healed, and do not use a large flame.
However, it is not necessary for the flame to be too hot; and heal across, because the bone is close together, and the flame may break if it is too narrow.
The two veins that are in the two laminae should be cauterized with oil, and with the tan, and with the redness, and with the blight in the oil, and with the diseases of the face;
and the quality of their healing is that the patient's neck is drawn out by twisting it with a cord, as has been said;
and then the medicine, and let the mediciner go through, a little of the long flame a little wide, because there is no fire. And if the flame is thin, perhaps it will break;
Then make the blood run, as much as you need to, and then put it on cotton, and put it well on.
The medicine of the vein of birth if it is good for acute fever and sudden sickness, and for face diseases, as headaches and pain that comes to the face, and indeed when it is old;
and the quality of the medicine is that the patient strangles his neck, then bring the fire's thin flame to the space between the two nostrils, because the vein does not open well on its own, and the blood will begin to run now;
and don't burn too much, and make the blood run according to your need, then let it sit for a night, because it is soon restored.
is the treatment of two kinds of fever, and also with the use of cautery, and many diseases, and pemphigus, and corrosives, and herpes, and are considered.
is the quality of the medicine that is that the patient extracts his neck from one side to the other, as we have said;
and the master standing over the patient's chest, and the patient cutting a long vein, then treating it with blood in moderation, or as much as necessary;
then make another in the other vein, then tie up the arteries, and extract them slightly, so that the patient does not strangle; and leave it until morning so that the wound is healed.
of the health of the animals Of the health of the lips, that they may not hurt themselves when eating in the mouth, and do not corrode the gums, nor tear the lips, nor cause pain or disease in them.
And the quality of the cure is to make the patient sit in front of you, and to tie his neck as I said; then turn the lip, and look at the two veins, one on the right side of the lip and the other on the left, and recognize them by the fact that they are small black veins:
then tie them both, and if you don't recognize them and are in doubt, tie the larger one of each pair, and do the same for the two veins that are above and below, because it is a similar method.
of the health of the tongue the cure for the veins that are above the tongue after the cure of the cerebral vein, and it is at the extraction of the throat, and diseases of the eye, and diseases of the mouth;
and the quality of the healer is that the patient dies between your hands in front of the sun, and he lowers his tongue, and looks down on everyone a black vein.
then heal them both, and do not be too confident, for arteries are fragile.
The veins of the leg, which are commonly treated, are healed according to two methods:
or burn them all with a strong fire, or apply a subtle olive oil as thin veins are called "aneasil". and they are wide and subtle according to the width and thickness of the veins. The shape of the sharp, thick blade is called a 'flame', and it is wide as you see it.
And one should be skilled in opening flat-headed veins that contain thick blood and trouble; This is the form of the olive oil fire:
and it is more subtle pointed, and is to save the veins that are subtle, where there is subtle blood citron.
The healer of the base, which is one of these veins, helps with illnesses that affect the throat, neck, chest, and abdomen;
and it is necessary for the surgeon that he heal the wound, and that he wash with water that is hot. If he stops the artery, and the blood comes running out, if it is necessary to stop the bleeding, as I have said; and must not be pricked with fire but cut off like a nail;
And if the nail does not open clearly, you must extract it, and change it for another one; or you do not want any rain of it, or you heal in its place the vein at the base of the arm: it opens clearly; and cut off with fire like we have said.
And if you can see the place of the wound, then it is necessary that you extract the arm, and touch the place as much as you can feel the pulse; and then sign the neck of the chest, and then tie his arms, and cut the vein from the flame with a sharp knife. and be careful not to hurt yourself in the artery when you see the neck dislocated, because it is the artery: so avoid it.
And if you see coming out on top as urine from a child, and the blood is red and thin, know that it is the artery: so hurry up, and put your finger on top of it for a long time, then open your finger so that the blood does not flow, because it often happens: tie his arms, and leave them like that, and do not move the patient.
and be afraid, and do not move him until he is well.
And if the blood does not stop flowing and he bleeds, cut the artery, because the head of the shoulder is pulled back: and they stop breathing.
And take a piece of fir tree, and burn it, and take one half and put it on well until the other day.
if they stop breathing, it is good; if not, if the doctor, as we have said, with powders that stop breathing;
and the stopping of breath is not done in many places for the small size of the wound, and the power of the vein of the arm.
The vein that comes out in the middle should be treated so that it stops bleeding from the top of the head and from the base of the neck, for it is composed of basilic and cerebral veins, as we have said;
and the doctor should be warred against the vein that comes out at the back of the neck, and if he cuts too much in perfection, the blood will flow from the nerve, and it will swell up and the patient's health will be broken, and perhaps will not heal;
and this nerve opens many times, and if it does not open in any men for its subtility, then you must cut off the limb with the saw. and avoid the nerve at your power.
And if there is a vein between the two necks, then cut it short.
The removal of the cephalic nerve if it helps, that it does not move with the head, and aid the eyes;
and it is necessary to cut with fire at the olive or at the water fire, for this is the most saved of all veins, because it does not have a nerve nor an artery. However, you must choose the lighter way, and do not grieve anything if it fails the first time, and you start again; and perhaps the leg does not hurt in any men the first time, but it does not grieve anything.
The quality of the bloodletting is according to your thought.
The first thing you must know about removal, if it is not done except to preserve health and avoid future diseases;
and let the soldier be made in one of the three veins that are or cut. this is to say, cephalic, fast and basal; and the soldier must be made in the beginning of fasting, and in autumn and winter after eating, when the sign of fullness appears;
and the soldier must be made on the first day or the third, after two hours or three days.
The soldier who is administered with medicines has no determined urination, but that when the need arises, whether it is day or night, at all hours and in all seasons;
and does not fit to make the children until they are twelve years old, and a woman except for four months after giving birth until she is seven months pregnant. The patient who is free from disease does not have a determined time limit, but when it comes to eating or drinking, it is in all hours and at all times; and one should not heal children until they are 12-13 years old, nor women who have been pregnant for less than four months until they are seven months pregnant. One should not heal the elderly who have passed 60 years of age.
And when some must be made, in whatever way, it is necessary that he empty the bowels of a light enema, if there is retenes moisture, so that the veins do not attract the excess of noxious matter harmful to the main members;
ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques;
ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k'il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques; et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d'abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l'arme ou dou cors;
then subtly the humors, for him shall be fat, through meat and drink and medicine, if you have such power;
then enter or bathe, for nothing will benefit him, to subtilize his blood, and heal him of the vein at the pit of the stomach from within the third, as we have said;
and keep yourself from work, from hunger, from lust, and from similar things;
and be quiet and still, and let the surgeon be higher than you who heals, and rub his arms twice or three times, then pull the ligature gently, for when it is too tight or short, it cannot run;
and then rub the cut with hands, until the veins swell and can be felt;
then moisten the surgeon's flame with a spot of old oil, and then put his left hand on that vein to stop the bleeding, so that the vein does not break and bleed;
For there are veins that flee from the surgeon like strings, and some that are prone to bleeding, so that when one puts the flame on them, if one takes it away, the vein does not open, and thus one is of those; and if he opens a vein, if the wound is too narrow, for in these things it is necessary that the patient be warned.
And if he opens the vein for the first time, it is good; if not, then start again a little bit further on that line or above hospital, if the leach is not inflamed.
And if the leech is inflamed and the patient hopes, let him be left for a day or two, and do not bandage his arm: so that there will come abscesses;
do not enter or bathe again, and then start the treatment again if he wants:
and if the dislocation is small, or the joint is slightly subluxated and you doubt that it will move as much as you see, then firmly in the same joint to all the flame right:
and work a little surgery, so that the veins are swollen. for this often happens when the wound is small.
If you see the vein swollen, do not stop the bleeding, and put a little oil on it, because it cools the body of blood, and it is soft in this place where the oil is;
and thus administer the oil to each vein that you are suturing in order to stop the flow of blood;
and this also makes the wound and the incision look better and smaller when it is put on it; so that the hole is small and does not spread if it is too large.
And if there is an abscess that comes out often, especially when the opening of the vein is small, do not hurry and put wet sponge on it with a little heat and hold it in place for an hour;
and it is necessary that you do this after the issue of blood from the vein, and if it stays in place for a few days without any black or green, then it does not harm me; and if you see, put on nothing but aloe or myrrh, juice of calamus, marjoram, or similar.
And often an abscess and appearance to the disease of the temple:
So then put your hand on it, and if you feel that the place is soft by the pressure of your hand, then this is the appearance of evil. So avoid putting on anything we have said, because perhaps at the root of the artery;
but the plaster dry to harden the place, then treat it with other treatments until it is healthy.
And each person should be treated according to the quantity of his virtue and the color of his blood.
For if the root is black, let it go out as long as it is red; and if you see a lump, let it grow until it is small. and if it is too hot, let it cool down.
And for those who are ill and need bloodletting, let them make the wound larger and wider the flames;
And for those who are weak, do the opposite, and let them bleed little and often, and they should bleed across rather than into; do not bleed them in a piercing manner.
This method of bleeding is safe from the destruction of blood and the stretching of nerves, and it is better than long or broad bleeding.
And for those whose hearts need to be bled, give them wet juice from pomegranate seeds; if it is hot, three or four times; and if it is of cold complexion, before the bleeding give wet juice made from muscatel grapes, or honey-scented syrup with spices, such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and cumin, and fragrant syrup.
And if it is the case that one has had a bout of diarrhea after eating bread made with three or four times the normal amount of grape juice, then it is right to drink beer and subtle, fragrant syrup, and use other things that we have mentioned in the division or chapter on syncope for the evacuation of the vein.
And if one farts with the arms raised up and then begins to vomit at another time, when he is weakened by great vomiting, that he heal little by little, according to the quantity of his continuing virtue.
And who wants to vent his arms after the first wound, and he has a strong cord, so that he heals seven hours after the first wound, or after the ninth hour.
And who wants to be wounded elsewhere, should be healed in two days or three.
For he has a fever that is hot inside the body, and brings forth heat. If it is necessary to draw out a great quantity, and widen the hole as much as possible; Then you shall treat all the conditions of sickness, and place your hand on his pulse as he recovers, that death does not come to him in place of recovery, and that this happens many times, when the recovered person is neglected;
And it is not necessary when you see the shoulder dislocated that you make him sneeze a second time, and the hole is closed, that you press firm upon it; not if he is curved, that he extends his arm carefully, for that would be ill;
but let him alone until he recovers a second time; or you place the tip of the flame upon it so that the blood that is frozen at the dislocation of the vein comes out, and put there a little string soaked in water, and press lightly upon it.
And if the vein has burst, let it go and do not tighten it, as long as the abscess is calm.
And if necessity requires to drain the blood a second time, if it is in the same place, or in another vein, or in the other arm.
The vein that runs through the arm is attached to the vein from which blood comes out.
And the way of treatment is that the patient dips his hand in hot water until the pulse is red.
Then cut with care so that the vein shows clearly, then treat now from above, not from the sides nor from the back;
And make the hole wide, and treat well near the joint of the hand, and it cannot be taken out, then put the hand in hot water, and let the blood run in the water until you have enough;
And if it has been cut, do not dip the hand in hot water again, for we dip it more when it is healing than when it is cut;
And the treatment of this vein is safer than any other vein, as there are no arteries or nerves involved.
The treatment for all liver diseases with the right hand is as follows:
Estrain the hand, and dip it in hot water, until the vein is gone, if one can see it. and split it from side to side, and cut it all around, if it doesn't hurt anything;
and don't cut it too much in detail, for the nerve is all exposed and then put the hand back in hot water, if it gets stuck in the wound, and cannot be taken out.
And when you have treated the blood as much as necessary, put oil and wax on it to make it strong; and do the same for each arm.
The salve for the left hand is good for the disease of the heart, and do the same as I told you before for the right hand.
The salve for the foot is good for all kinds of diseases that come from the body, such as diseases of the bride, and restraining of flowers, and old diseases of the feet and legs, and similar diseases.
And the quality of the wound is that the patient dips some foot in hot water, and rubs on the vein until it stops, and puts on the joint at the foot; and the vein if it is at the ankle, and then go up to the foot with many drops;
治 the joint or more wide rain, or at the ankle, so you don't get hurt.
And if you treat it on the foot, beware of the toes that are dry, and treat it also across as in sowing.
and let the fire go out.
And if he cannot get it out, put the foot in water, and leave the vein well open.
And if you treat it for the first time, if you begin again on top of it a little bit after, because the leg is cold;
do not doubt about the nerve, as we have said, and thus do the same for the other foot evenly.
The blood vessels are at the ankles, and the pain in the knee joint is due to the blood leaving the leg when it is cut off.
And the quality of the treatment is that the patient enters or bathes, and removes from the ankle IV nails by twisting, because otherwise it does not open the vein;
and if it opens, then treat it in all ways that you can, and crossing over; and wait until you have sown it, because the leg is warm, and it has been well respired by many men.
and wait until you have sown it, because the leg is warm, and it has been well respired by many men. And if you do not treat it, let there be no rain from him who opens or closes the foot, and towards the small toe, and guard against the heels.
and make so much blood flow that you see it, and then loosen the ligature, and put on cotton and tighten it; and now it is healed.
Vacuums are made of horns, or of horn, or of glass;
and the vacuum is made according to two ways: either by wounding and sucking up blood, or without wounding.
And this suction that is without wounding is according to two ways: either it is all fire, or it is without fire;
and the suction that is made by wounding and sucking up blood is made in 12 parts of the body, so that one is all in the head; and the other is the neck. and the other two are on either side of the collar; and the ventouse (a suction device) from the chin; and the ventose from the shoulders; and the ventose on the arms; and the suction devices on the two arms; and the suction devices on the two legs; and the suction devices on the two ankles;
and the suction treatment does not cause blood loss, unless it is a small vein that is spread out over the body, and for this reason it cannot be used; if it were done in the same way as a vein is treated in surgery. ne can be used either at full speed or at a slow pace, nor in any disease that comes from overconsumption, until the whole body is free of water.
And if, because of necessity or habit, we must use suction, let us do so every hour in the first half of the month, and then at the end, and also every 10 days, gradually increasing it;
For there are some who, when they have work to do with wind, become very heavy.
and if there are those who, through the hot wind, get redness and pain in their face, and in their head, and darkness in their eyes;
and those who, after blowing, have a drop of blood in their mouth, and their tongue has fled, and are thirsty for blood; and if there are those who dream, and see vision, and hear, and die, and similar things.
And when we saw these signs, and in particular when it is the middle of the month, we order them to belch after three hours from day.
The danger of the wind to the head ... which comes with the eyes and does not come until all the blood has been evacuated from the body;
and this wind-blowing is in the place of the headache of the head, and does not come until those who are of a cold constitution use it, or who have had a fever, for that does them much harm;
and so it is not fitting that I should keep you awake when you are using it, or those who have a chief cold disease.
And those who are recovering from it often become confused, and for this reason the suction cup should be placed a little further downstream due to the doubt of confusion.
The wind and heat are in the place of the neck and base of the skull, and for this reason they cause extraction of the tooth, and cutting of the canal of the gums, and itching, and filling.
and so it is necessary to press it in, for if it holds too tightly, then it will cause pain or injury to the stomach and body.
The wind and heat are in the neck region, causing pain in the head, blindness and dizziness, and strangulation, and pain at the roots of the teeth, and are in the place of the base of the skull.
And it is fitting that you command the doctor to press his hand upon it, so that he does not cut the artery, and does not cause movement of blood.
The windings of the throat are affected by disease of the mouth, and corrosion of the gums, and similar diseases that are in the mouth; and is in the area of the two lips.
The wind-puctions of the shoulders cause a disease that comes from heat and swelling.
The windings of the arms are affected as much as three veins of the arms, because they attract blood from these large veins;
and instruct the patient that he not cut too deeply, for his vessels are naked of cover, and know how to cut the nerves and arteries.
The windpipe that is on the chest is affected by diseases from the fundament, and similar diseases, and it is necessary that the windpipe be large, and of air, that it has the function of good breathing; and if it is thin, then it would break; and causes large wounds.
The legs' windpipes open widely, because they attract blood from all the body, and are the cause of ancient pains in the kidneys, and of the womb, and of the bladder, and cause the flowers to return;
and are in the second place of the feet, and of the toes, and yet they weaken the heart after a long time, and bring about many conditions.
The manner of putting on the suction cup is that you put it first in place, and suck it quickly, and put it there firmly, and move it evenly, and do not stop doing this until you see the color of the heart red and inflamed, and notice the pain of the wound;
then take off the suction cups, and take care in the disposition of the hearts, for there are some who have bitter character, and clear ones: if it is necessary to wound even once, and to make deep wounds, and a little bit deeper: and suck lightly.
And if the man is fat, then it is necessary to wound him twice: the first time for subtlety the way of blood big.
And if it is very thick, then you must wound a third time;
and when we want to draw blood little by little, then we only have to press firmly once. And if we want to draw blood, then we must begin again often;
and if the blood is thick, then we must press firmly and fully, and the end should be that the piercing is sudden, and for those who have hard and dry skin, you should wet the leather with oil that opens and dissolves: if it is in a place of salt, of olive oil, or of sweet almond oil, or of cucumber seed oil:
and if it is in the eye, with oil of watercress, or of lily, or of chamomile, or other.
And if the overflow is thick and cold, then take oil of almonds, or of balm, or oil of anise, and the like.
And if the patient's skin is very dry and scaly, then one should not use oil, but it must be washed after the wound has healed with rosewater, or cold water, or water from mulberries, or water from cucumbers, or water from porcelain, or something similar.
And for those who have too much moisture, if it comes out like this, or with water from myrtle, and sumac, and similar things.
And those who have great excesses stand up with wine of oak, or water of thistle, or a decoction of fennel or chamomile, or others similar.
and they should not be washed with a vacuum before the bath or in the bath, but an hour or two after the bath;
and they should not sleep after vacuuming, and it is necessary that he warm himself up when he needs to be vacuumed and when he has been vacuumed;
And guard those who are being treated for colitis, and their bowels are too strong and inflamed; if he needs to drink cold things, such as pomegranate, endive, and lettuce leaves in vinegar, and similar things; and sweeten them with honey, and cheese, and meat that is moist.
and sweeten them with honey, and cheese, and meat that is moist. And those with a pale complexion, if they drink syrup of honey, and fragrant wine that is between old and new, and sweeten them with honey, and with honey and small birds and pigeons;
and on days when he feels better, he must drink more than eat.
and it is good to give some people twice or three times the usual amount of ale or musk before or after the wind-up, to strengthen the main limbs; and be careful with the wine, but it is good that those who are warm drink it.
The wind-up that does not hurt are those put on the liver, and the neck, and podagre, and the belly, and the bum, and the knees, and the ankles, for this limb does not suffer to be hurt on the outside, and we put it on the breasts when it is not well;
to remove the viscous substance that is in the limb, as we put wind-ups on the belly and the bum to strengthen the member;
and remove the pain, when there is an operation or a stone, if it is removed by its attracting virtue from the operation, or removes the stone from its place;
and so let him do as follows when he puts it on the liver and on the mouse if there is wind held back, and these windpumps are empty with just enough air to blow. and never are they put together fire, and no times the water of the river is not emptied, if as in the disease of pleurisy, and in such a way that the windpump is filled with hot water or water in which he has boiled herbs suitable for this.
The shape of the suction cup is administered to fire as such:
And it has II fingers wide and half a palm in length, and is placed around the middle with a small opening, just as to fit an needle, and is made of brass, so that it does not burn the patient when put on the limb;
and in the middle has a bar of brass or iron, so that a clump is taken up, and are great and small according to the diseases and age of those who take them;
For children's suckers are different from old ones, and leaner than fat.
And one should place this sucker on the limb:
Take the wax candle or thread and put it through the hole in the center of the suction cup so that the clarity is at the bottom of the suction cup so that it does not burn the patient.
and then put it on the limb, and these two should be at the bottom that we have said, so that when you break it, if there is steam, and then remove the suction cup.
and take the thread as before, and restart it often, if you need to.
In the suction cup that is amended in disease of pleurisy, to all water, has no hole or break, and is amended only when it is plain of water, and is put on the limb as little as possible.
and this is the form:
are not increased in size except for limbs that cannot be fitted with suction cups due to their smallness, such as lips and gums, and similar things; and in the naked legs of a horse, such as two or three-year-olds, and others similar;
and the quality of the use is that when you find swells that are in clear, flowing water free from pollution, then take them;
and place them in clear, flowing water until they are well-fed and have nothing in their bellies; and then is cleansed from the wound and the suction cup, and then rub the limb until it is red, and place the swells on them;
and when they have healed and are cheerful, and if it can take a suction cup, it is placed on it, for that is worth more afterward.
If not, raise up the bed, then water, very well, and then press.
and if the bed is too high after the heart of the body, then dip the sheet in cold water and put it on, until the heart is dry.
and if there are many hearts, then put on vitriolic powder or gall, and similar things, until they are dry.
or you may put half of peeled peas on the bed, and let them burn there at the heat, now they will be dried.
and if you need more, then take another heart.
And if the hearts do not take shape, then rub the bed with cold blood, or you may put an needle there until the heart burns, and then put them on, and sometimes when they feel the blood, they will burn.
and when you see them chattering, if powder on a little aloe and seared, or ash, if they chatter now.
Here is the translation of the text line by line: The chapters on this chapter are many times necessary in the art of medicine, and is a remedy for fractures and dislocations.
Know this, o ignorant one, that the wise man will pour this paste on himself, which no ancient book or letter has ever mentioned.
and for this reason the science is strange to us in our land, for I never found any good of it;
and know nothing about it, except for the science of the ancient books, which I have studied so much and treated the science, and by experience, and by habit, and by my life;
and I have described to you in this paste what is contained therein, and have abbreviated it at the end, and have clearly set forth the forms of the instruments that are prepared, as I did in these two chapters above.
It is therefore necessary that we say in this book the sums of words and the chapters where the sage places his understanding, and delays on truth, so that those who are proved may know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
I say that when fracture or dislocation or twists or strain comes to anyone, it is necessary that you hasten to save the sick person on one side and the other, if nothing else stops you, so as not to weaken the corset, or entangle it, or grow old; or its tension is too loose or too tight.
and do not drink too much wine, nor drink any greasy foods, and do not fill yourself too much with meat that fills the veins with blood, until you are sure of the warmth of the abscess, or of the spreading of the substance in the limb.
if the sick person returns to his normal state of health under your care;
And when the broken bones begin to heal, it is necessary that the patient be fed with meat that is very fat, or with viscous food, such as cooked wheat in water, and rice, and beans, and pies, and porridge made from veal, and eggs, and fresh fish, and strong wine, and similar foods. For a slow healing will be delayed and slower the break will heal.
And know that the bones of old and decrepit people cannot be healed or made strong again by their own nature because of the loss of members, nor those which are too tender, as the bones of small children.
but doesn't heal, go up on the broken bone and thick tendons that hurt and join the limb together again, as it was before; and doesn't do his job at all, and for this reason he needs to grow large amounts of meat, as we have said.
And know that breakers are various in many ways.
For the break in the head is different from the break in the foot or leg, and I will tell you in this chapter all the ways of breaking. For there is a break that goes to the root, and another in grinding, as when one trims the tip of a feather to write with it.
For there is a break that goes to the root, and another in grinding, as when one trims the tip of a feather to write with it. And if a break is with a wound, and a break is all a little crack.
And each type has its own tool for repair, and its own special method, according to what comes to mind in his memory;
and the broken bone is known by how twisted it is, and opens well from the outside, and is pressed together by the hand;
and when there is no twisting or misalignment, and the patient does not feel much pain, there is no break;
but it can also have twisting, or a crack, or a small break. If it is not necessary for you to move it with your hand, but put on the medicines that come after this, and then now restrain it gently.
And know that the break that has happened in the middle of the joint, and are the two parts separated, it is now necessary to make them even, so that the scar comes out straight;
And if the abscesses are hot, if he does not leave it for a day, as long as the abscesses are quiet.
then put it on the fire as soon as possible and cut it with a sharp knife, and know that the restoration of it is easier than the restoration of that which has pieces.
Then tighten it, as it will come loose again later.
And if in the bone there are broken pieces, if it is joined by two parts, whether it is hand or foot, or a small member, or a string, or a cord and your hand;
and put the member back in its natural position, so that when the broken parts of the member are healed, you remove all the additions by fire as soon as possible, and be careful not to cause any additional pain or injury to the patient with your work.
and set well the two bones together according to their best shapes.
and feel with your hand whether it seems to you that it is not well
if it feels good, and do not pull too much, nor press so hard as those who work with an abscess make the member hot and contractile, as we have often wanted.
and when the member is in order, teach the patient to keep it still, neither watching nor sleeping, nor turning over, nor in any other way; and guard well that the member be so secure that it feels no pain. For when there is no pain, if it is not in order, and you should put it in such a position that it feels no pain;
and guard well that the member be so secure that it feels no pain. For when there is no pain, if it is not in order, and you should put it in such a position that it feels no pain; and keep in mind that it be placed correctly, so that twists do not come when it is reset;
and the quality of the broken member is according to what I tell you.
You know that broken members are different in smallness and greatness and in shape.
Because there are small limbs, like arms and legs and similar things: so that one covers them with soft and thin linen cloth; and those who are fat, like thigh and leg:
so that one covers them with a wide and hard linen cloth, because the wide linens embrace the entire large member and hold it evenly so that there is no gap:
and then tie it lightly, three or four times according to the member, and tighten the linen around the hand, then go up over the break and tighten it less, so that the break then comes away a little:
and soften the linen a little at a time until you press a lot of the skin, then take another linen and tie it very tightly over the broken place;
And then return to the part of the shoulder from the break, and hold it gently, not too strong or too lightly, as we have said in the first hour above.
Then place between the ligatures of linen or drapery, until it is completely even, and then tie it all together with a bendage, and then place your well-made splints on top, if there is no abscess or swelling.
If there is an abscess or swelling, place something soothing on the abscess to soothe it and let the swelling go down, and leave it like that for a few days;
Then set it upon your splints, and be they of half a pole-length of rope, or of a beam from which chisels are made, or of palm branches, and be they according to this figure:
However, it is necessary that the splint that one sets upon the break be a little thicker and wider than the others;
and so long as the member is small or large. then hold it by the joints also as you did with the first line, then tie it together in advance, like in the first line on the breaking. then the tighter the better; and then a little looser;
and the thread should be fine, not too thick nor too thin, and made of linen;
for if the thread is too thick, like I have seen in the work of some foolish people who make their ligatures with linen twine, and that is a great mistake, because the ligature cannot be even if it is too thin, and there should be less than two inches of space between each joint.
And if the patient is stabbed by the chisels of the stiles after the extraction in their healthy places, then set them with a linen patch or another clean cloth so that they do not bleed.
When the wound is with the bruise, and the suture is broken, I will describe the treatment hereafter.
And know that it is not convenient to extract all the members of the broken limb on the first day. For when the members are large, it is not good to put in joint before five or seven days, or more according to your judgment of the abscess heating up suddenly;
and show us the way of the ancient plasterers to restore fractures, dislocations, and torments:
and this is what you take from the flour that clings to the walls of the mill, and mix it with plenty of egg, and put this mixture, neither too thin nor too thick, and use it, and this is the common way of the plasterer restoring fractures in many ways, especially for women and small children, because there is no too short or too long.
Another way of plastering to restore fracture, dislocation, and twisting: Take Z abarices, and Ladaniya, and Enule, and Asafetida, and Indian gum, and Moghrat, in X z; Mirra and Aloes, in V z; Aloes, in VIII z; and reduce it to powder, and mix it with plenty of egg; If the man's complexion is hot, then use this plaster, for it is of good composition and quickly heals broken bones, benefiting many men.
Another method of using plaster that benefits twisting: Take mold and beeswax, half-and-half; Sandalwood and holly leaves, eight parts; Resin, six parts; Grind well, and mix with strong wine or water, and administer it.
Another way to make plaster for joints and bones that have come out of place, so as to soothe the pain immediately, and to fix the size of the break: Take another new thing, and moisten it well with warm oil, and place it on the joint.
Do not return to bed until they have healed completely; it is good for soothing an abscess, and properly relieving pain.
Another way to make plaster that restores broken bones: Take dried fig leaves, and earth-pavement leaves, grind them together, and make an ointment.
Another way to make an ointment for healing bone breaks and alleviating pain left over from abscesses. Take the roots of marsh mallows, chamomile, violets, flour of vesce, of each one a part;
and grind them, and mix it with wine, and warm the members, and mix it with water of coriander or water, and use it.
Another way to make an ointment that is stronger than the first one, which is used when the pain from the abscess lasts for a long time and needs to be healed quickly. Take the roots of marsh mallows, and flax seed, and hollyhock, and milkwort, and dogbane, and violet flowers and chamomile, of each one a part; and grind them, and mix it with salt water, or sweet water, or wine, according to the heat of the member, and its rest.
In his book, Ypocras says that one should not put anything on a broken member before the scar tissue is formed, except for a wax and oil cerote, and nothing else, and he says that it should be neither too soft nor too hard.
And it seems to me that one should put on the broken member, to restore it, dry things that are a little warm, such as mirr, and aloe, and incense, and similar things, as we have said.
Another way of making an ointment that is useful for injuries and pain: Take moss and hair of the beard, or feathers of an owl, and marsh mallows, and mix them together evenly, grind them, and make an ointment and spread it on his chest.
And then let it rest for a little while, and take care that the patient feels no pain, nor does his bone move from its place; if you do not rest by hand for days. And if pain or itching comes to the place, or if it swells, do not delay, and dislodge it, and apply the plaster now;
and take a light cloth, and a sponge of sea water, and dip it in water, and raise the place, until the itching ceases, and the pain is relieved; then let the member rest for an hour, then put on another dry cloth, wet with spring water or rose oil, and tie it to a nut, until you are sure that the abscess is warm;
and let rest the inflammation of the member, and be relieved of the pain, then begin again gently, and a little plaster, and do not pull it so hard as before; and carefully as long as it is sound.
And if you see that the abscess is warm and red and painful and swollen all over, and you need to apply ointment and bandages, then if it starts again, as you did at first.
If the limb does not respond to any of the above treatments, only then should it be dislocated after three, four, five, or seven days; and never leave it for more than 20 days, according to what we have seen, until the break becomes visible and the joint comes closer to the shoulder;
then pull harder on the second, and fatten his flesh as I have said before;
and if you see that it is not necessary to reset the shoulder, know that it will not come back on its own; then dip the shoulder in hot water each time you dislocate it, every third day, and leave it soaked for a short while;
by this treatment the rebound should be prevented from happening again to the limb, and carefully restore any deformity that has occurred;
it is bad, and if it is over-anxious, and I see no other thing but to allow it to relax and do it right.
There are many ways of breaking, and various shapes, and the causes are different;
For there are fractures that are made by the impact of a spear, and the collarbone is broken all the way down to the shoulder which is dislocated, like a hat or it was before; and for this reason this manner of breaking is called "fracture".
Or the spear pierces the bone from above and is called in this way "absolute fracture";
And it is the wound of these two great or small fractures.
And if there is a percussion within, or a split or a collar of stone, or a fall on stone, or similar things.
And if there is a piercing breaking, which approaches to the tendon that is out of the socket, or which is upon the bone, and this wound is great or little.
And if a wound that is healed in the bone is as fine as a hair, and is called in this way "capillary fracture";
and if the wound is caused by a stone, or by falling, or by some other thing, and a piece of bone enters it, and the bones are bent so as to form a knot, like the smith when he works on the kettles; if between the stone inside.
And this happens to those who have their chins wet with a wound, so that the bone is bent like a child's chin;
and in all these ways of breaking that small pieces are made which are like dice; I will speak to him in his own language.
And let us know all the ways to break it by pulling on them, and by the investigation, and by the rotten cart which is above.
The hair appearance is caused by the fact that when we uncover the bone, and we rub it from above, if we open the black break.
In the cure for a fracture, take care of the accidents of the patient, and if you see no bad accident, such as vomiting, loss of feeling, stiffness, palms, fever, hair becoming long and red, and other similar signs in various dispositions, so cannot be cured by doubt.
And if you do not see a possible accident, and you expect salvation, begin the cure.
And when the break comes first to you, and it is in winter, so it is necessary to remove the bone before the fourth day at most.
And if it is in summer, so you hurry to remove the bone before the seventh day, so that the bone's thread does not corrode, and the accident that we have mentioned comes.
And if the bone of the fracture comes up to the hair that covers the skull, then you should split the part that is split thus:
and that you should press the chin of the sick person so as not to move it, and uncover the bone in all ways that you can, and on top of the wound more than a hand's width, since the blood comes out at the place where the skin is separated from the bone, or an abscess; help him with what is needed, and fill the space with wet towels dipped in oil and rosin; and let the wound rest until the abscess has subsided, and be sure to prevent blood loss. then begin to cut into the bone, and it is done according to two ways of working:
one way is that you chop with a narrow blade in front, and this is the shape:
And then another way is more grant than the first.
the second way is that you have a number of different blades, some narrow and others wide, some pointed, and all made of iron:
and in working lightly, so that you do not bruise the head.
And if the bone is tough and hard, it is necessary that you pierce into it, so that you introduce the blades with care, not making them completely round so as not to pierce through the bone itself, and there should be a notch or a circle on top of the blade, so that it does not go through the bone;
and there may be many consequences, so that each comes to its place in the center of the bone, so that you have time for all tests.
and this is the form of the three ways to slow down:
The quality for piercing inside the bone is that you place the retainer on the bone, and turn it back two times as long as you feel the bone is pierced;
Then remove the retainer to another part a little way away, and do it all around, then cut out the space of the bone that is between the perforations, and do it more finely than you can, and lightly, as we have said, until you take the bone in your hand, or any of the tools you have, such as pliers, pincers;
and make sure you do not touch the brain or the spinal cord.
And when you have the bone pierced and treated, if it seems to you that you should rest the edge of the bone, which is delayed from the bone by all other instruments resembling an incisor, but it is necessary that it be more tender and thinner than the other incisors;
and if it does not lag behind any small bones or scales, if the bone is lightly cut with tools; then heal the wound with tent and oil that we have said.
And the other way to work if it is that which Galen says, which is more dangerous; and the loa very strong, and this is his word. It is necessary first that you discover a part of the bone, where the break opens, so that when you have discovered that part, you put on the end of this lens-shaped incision, from which it takes its form:
And do not cut from one side, and this side is wet in two sides, so that the cutting is towards the bone;
then forge with a small mallet above, so that you lightly chip the bone all around, and take good care of the chisel that is discolored;
If it is a fracture to the bone, then let it be light, for the bone that is well-healed does not cause pain and fear.
And if the bone does not break through the skin, and the bone is cut so little from above, and there are small pieces, then cover them with a thin rasper, of which you must have various quantities, to apply in each place the most suitable, according to the work and the shape of the break.
If you have several thin rasers, and then more fine ones, and do not stop doing this as long as it is well done.
In each of the other hair losses and subtle cuts, you must bring together the cause according to its position;
This is not easily answered by anyone who has put his study into this art.
And if the syphilus is discovered, then let you take a linen bandage, according to the quantity of the wound, and oil in it and put it on the wound; then take another bandage doubled II or III times, and oil in it and wine, and put it on the first bandage; then let you bind it up tightly with a band; and do it as lightly as you can so that you do not aggravate the syphilus, then bind it with one more linen bandage, and do not strip it off before it has healed the wound completely;
and leave it so for a day or two, until the abscesses have become calm, then remove it, and administer medicines as roots of licorice, and flour of almonds, and incense powder, and aromatic wine, and similar things;
and from these things make a powder, and put it on the wound, and administer it again with powerful medicines without stinging;
and guard that the wound is clean, so you do not leave it oozing, nor do you let any bowels assemble on the cloth of the skull, for if they corrode and penetrate, they cause great harm to the patient;
for when one applies a mordantic substance, it may burn from above. Watch out therefore, so that no bad accident happens to the patient, as we have said, if it is doubtful without doubt.
And if black comes out only because of the medicine that has been put on, which has power, then you should squeeze a part of honey, and three parts of rose oil and one drachm of resin, and mix it with oil; and put it on the medicine and then the cure with the manner of cures that he knows, until it is healthy.
Know that neither time are broken the two parts of the neck above, or one by itself, because they are bones;
and this shoulder is cartilaginous and does not break unless it is bent or twisted, and then it heals.
And if one of the two parts is broken, it is necessary that you plug your little finger or the tip of the neck, and make it even within your index finger, and at the back by defect, until the neck revives according to its natural shape; and do it lightly, and be careful that the patient does not feel pain because of your work.
And if his break is in the upper part of the neck and cannot return to its place, know that you put it equal to the head of a stick a little thick.
And if the broken part is of two sides, do it otherwise, and make haste to restore the first day, if you can;
If not, after the seventh or ninth, when the abscesses have subsided, then bind the head with linen bandages, if the fracture is in one part.
Or you bind one to another, if the fracture is there; and may the bandages be so thick that they fill the apertures of the neck.
And say that one must dampen the strips to make them soft, and change them every day. It seems to me that this is not good, but it will be if they are wet with the ash of oak and the powder of mulberry. Then remove the bandages when the bone is hard and the joints toughened.
And never bind the neck with goose feathers in place of bandages, and if a wound needs wrapping several times, and the fracture is mended, and blow on the patient. Or make the knot well so that you can see.
And if an abscess forms while you are operating, put cotton soaked in oil or a poultice of blood-root, or a small patch of dyak.
And if the abscesses don't come out, then wet plaster with flour from wheat and incense powder, mixed with sheep's dung, and put on light coats, and tie no loops.
And if the fracture of the bones is small, and they are broken into small pieces, then extract them with suitable instruments for this, then cut off the piece, and treat the injured parts with suitable plasters and oils.
And if there is no pain inside the bones, then treat the outside, and put on plaster until it heals.
When the jaw is broken and there is no wound, and the break is not too large, and it is not broken into two pieces, but rather bent inside, then one must take care lightly.
It is necessary, when the fracture is on the right side, that you pierce your little finger with a needle on the patient's left side. And if the fracture is on the left mandible, then pierce your little finger on the right side with a needle, and pierce the fracture lightly, and do it with the other hand on the opposite side, and make it even.
And if the break of the jaw is in two parts, then you should bring them together with two extensions, until they are equal.
And if the movement of the deeps comes, or a rupture, if it is drawn from a thread of gold or silver or silk, then put on the broken jaw with cerot, and put on a double drape. and put on the drape a great well-made stele, or a piece of leather even, long and wide according to the jaw, and tie it to the musket you can, and command the patient to rest, and eat light meats.
And if you see that the figure has changed, if you release it on the third day, and then reset to its place what has changed. and put plaster on it, of the powder from the mill with much ash or flour of straw, after that you have removed the cerot;
and put on the other plaster a light thing, and if the plaster hardens, and the patient's condition does not change, leave it as long as he is healthy; Many times are saned in three weeks.
And if you see that the figure [of the wound] changes, if you desalinate at the third day, and then put back to place what has changed; and apply plaster, of the powder of the mill with much salt or flour of sisament, after you have taken out the cerote; and put on the other light plaster, and if the plaster applies itself, and the disposition of the ill one does not change, leave it as long as it is healthy; many times is healthy in III weeks.
And if there is a break and a wound together, do not repair it with a bone piece; if subtile of the oster as instruments convenient to this.
And if the wound is tight, expand it with fire according to necessity.
And when you have all the pieces of bone together, and there is no delay, if the wound is wide, put on it plasters suitable for this, to prevent infection, until it is healed.
The force him to break many times before, around the shoulder, and the break is so according to three manners:
where it is broken and torn in two, and there are pieces, and it is the lightest to restore;
where there is a break with a wound.
And the overtures are so when the break is without a wound, that you have two ministers, so that one twists the shoulder that does not break with force; and the other extends the neck toward the part;
then set equal the break on both sides, so that the form is as it should be, and there is no appearance or twist.
And if you are skilled at making it larger, then put a round staff of linen or cloth on the shoulder of the patient, and make it as big as you need. and keep the force on, and hold the staff at your side, so that you make the break even, as it should be.
And if you cannot pull the head of the spear out to the end, so that it comes completely off, it is appropriate for the patient to lie down on his back, and put the shoulder with the help of a minister, and hold the shoulder away, until the bone of the spear is raised.
And then place the break at your sides, and if you find any debris, then cut on top of it;
and work the pieces lightly, and if the bone cannot be joined by any means, then take a patch to one of the incisions you have made; but put aside this forcep instrument, for surgery.
and it should be like a spoon, and not too narrow, and as wide as is necessary according to the size of the bone and the ability of the work;
and there are two heads, so that you see them, and one is wide, and the other is narrow, just like the split in the wound you made when you broke the bone.
and when you have heated the abscess to the point where it splits open, and the split is small, or if you doubt about heating the abscess, then wrap it in a cloth or tent according to its quantity.
And if hot abscesses come, if you moisten it with oil, honey, and wine, and put it on.
The extraction of the bone, when there are wounds and no bruising, is that you put on the bone the powder from the millstone and saffron, and apply light staples, and insert a spike where you need it; then take a very long bandage about a palm wide, then put two cloth strips over the staples, and cover with powder. then take a thin stick about three fingers wide and long, and wrap it around the bandage, so that the top of the bandage is hidden. and put the stick on the breach, and return the bandage to the neck, and loosen the healthy shoulder, and tighten the sick shoulder. and take away from each part, and when you see that the time is right for the stick to hold the breach properly, and see clearly that the stick does not move over the broken bone, let it remain each day, and when the bandage loosens, if it needs to be tightened;
and have the sick one lie on his back, and put him down when he sleeps in a small position, to raise the shoulder; if the breach becomes stiffer by the alignment of the shoulder, or if you put the arm around the neck, and do not take it off unless there is a sudden accident, until 20 days have passed;
then begin to apply the plaster again if you see that it is necessary, and tighten and leave it like this until it has healed;
and she was restored in 28 days, and less for some men.
of the dislocation of the shoulder
Now it comes that the shoulder is broken or out of place, and does not move only by touch;
if the apparatus is arranged according to the figure of the fracture, and you reset it according to its natural form, in all ways that you can;
then put on the powder of the mill with plenty of flour, and light touches, and put on a double sheet; then put on a wide and thin steel, a little wider than the shoulder, and despatch the steel at all places of the shoulder, so to employ the linen stitches, so that the steel is even;
and then bind it with a strong bandage all around, so that the steel does not move from its place, and inspects it every day;
and whenever he becomes loose again, if it is held in place, and makes the bone equal if it has moved from its place, and lies the patient on his back;
and the shoulder is reset after XX days or XXV days.
And when the number of days is completed, if it becomes loose again, and be careful, for it is not bone that moves easily.
If there is a piece of the bone forward, and don't remove it, if it heats, and the bone, and do as we said in the dislocation of the shoulder to soothe abscess heat.
of the break of the foot
The arms are never broken in midair, but this happens sometimes. But they are often broken at the end.
And when they are broken in the middle, if they decline to the side, and the patient feels great pain, and there is a lack of support, and at times, and by chance he vomits blood, and opens the veins in the broken bone, and it smells bad.
And the reset should be such that the patient lies down on his back, and puts I cushion between the shoulders, then presses the shoulders together, and gathers the ribs with your hands, and carefully makes it equal in all ways as much as you can, until the bone figure is like it should be;
and put on plasters and stoppings thereon the thin stone of salt, or other light wood, and wrap it in a cloth, and tie it to the broken bone, so that it does not move; and return the thread roundly to the back, and fastens it tightly, and loosens it hour by hour, and if it relaxes, so that it is held fast;
and if it is necessary to loosen it, because of rust or because of itching that comes to the joint, or pain or abscess, if you hurry and loosen it, and remove the plaster, and treat him in a way that suits his cure;
then remove the plaster, and hold it tight until he is well.
of the rupture of the ribs
Know that the broken ribs come from the back only a little way down, and at the top towards the inside, and do not bend much because they are thin; and the smell is good to the inquiry as are due.
And restore them so that you make the rupture even, as it should be. And then put on plaster, and a splint from a stick if you need one.
If the ribs break and fall inward, the patient feels great pain and a sharp pain as if he were crying, because the bone rubs against the membrane. and it is sore pinched and twisted, and it has great pains in the back, and this causes great harm to health, and the old have great trouble.
And if any of these serve that it is necessary to administer meat that swells the belly, in order to push the rupture away.
We must not do this, for if hot poultices are not brought, they will not come. And if they have come, and the wound is healed.
And no one of us says that we put suction cups on top, to suck out liquid, and this seems reasonable to me. However, I have the doubt that the suction cup does not attract the excesses to the place for the arrangement of weakness.
And they say that one should not cover the spot with another moist thing in oil, and put tents between the ribs to make the wound even, then it is cured with the cure for ulcers, meat, and medicine.
And if the patient feels great pain that he cannot bear because the bone rubs against the membrane, there is doubt about the patient, then it is good to split along the line of the ribs that are broken, and it is good to put a tool to prevent the wound from healing.
and then one should cut the bone, and draw it gently, and then sew the two lips of the wound, if it is large, and treat it with poultices until it is well.
And if abscesses develop, then put them on cloths soaked in oil, and put them on the wound;
and heal while waiting for the head of the abscess to come out, and wash it well on the coast where it is, until it is well.
and also at the spine of the back.
And when this has happened to anyone, and you do not know if he will be well or not, then take care that his hands are soft and swollen and dead, and cannot move them or stretch them out; and when you prick them with a pin, if he does not feel it.
Know that it is fatal in many cases, and if he does not feel them when they are pricked and does not move them, know that the joint of the bone has been saved, and the disease has been cured, if one puts on a cure.
And if similar things come to the spine of the back, and you do not know whether it is well or not, if one's bones are softened, and one's accident is in one's hands, and on one's back windiness and excretion without will;
and when one makes her lie on her back, there is involuntary expulsion. And when it has been treated by being placed on its back and it cannot move, then it cannot. Know that it is deadly: If he does not work hard at his cure.
And if this accident did not come to him, then this is the lightest thing.
And the cure is such that if there is an abscess, you rub it with oil or sheep's fat, until it is calm;
then put on one of the plasters, drying it and binding it, and command the patient to rest; and do not sleep on that part where he feels pain until he is well.\
And if any bone becomes loose, then cover it with oil; and set the bone, then sew together the two lips of the wound, if it is large, with a sutură, until it is well;
and if the bone of the skull is broken, which is called "the skull-key", then you hold your pouch in your left hand and place it evenly with your right hand, then apply the plaster and tie it up, if you need to do so;
then tighten it, and if there is a dislocated bone, then mend it, and the bone, and treat the wound until it is healed.
For the fracture of the leg bone
But if the bone of the thigh is broken, and if there were to be, then there would only be a little damage to the skull. And put it long and flat in the bed, so that the pain and swelling come to the patient, and not elsewhere, and break what is broken.
And the restoration should be that you hold your hand over it, as long as you are above the broken part; and knows what is the break and form of him;
and if the break is at the top, so make it equal to that break, as long as it is in natural form.
And if the fracture is long, or it declines inward, then make the patient stand on his stomach as long as the rehabilitation of that fracture is arranged for him. And when you have made it equal, then place it on the plaster, and then place a beam of wood or a post on top of it, and stretch the break, so that it does not move;
and employ the use of splints on the sides, as long as the length is equal. And command the patient to sleep on his side or back.
And if the abscess comes up, do not scratch it, as long as the abscess is calm, and then place on it what we have said before; and then return to the restoration, and hold it as is right, if there is no bad accident;
of the dislocation of the shoulder
The auxillary joint is that which is between the collar and the top of the shoulder, and if it is broken, then it must be restored according to one of the two ways:
If one is that you take a strong pulse, according to this form:
And let the two shoulders be tied together and raised up, and cut the patient on one side;
Then let them put some arms above the patient, so that it comes to rest, and have a cart of wood then put on top of any heavy thing or the ministers extend downward;
Then let the surgeon cut it evenly with his hands together, as long as the knife returns in the right way.
And another way is that one should let the patient rest on his back, and tie his hands to his neck, then order two ministers that one of them tie who is lying on the side with his hands, and the others pull him by all his body, and extend each to their part.
And if you see that the extraction is too much, then tie the patient by all his body, and extend each minister to their part.
And if the surgeon is near the top of the shoulder, then it is necessary that you put the strong pulse behind the shoulder, and the other towards the neck, away from the knife.
And if the surgeon is near the neck, then it is necessary to put the light pulse lightly, without effort, as long as the knife is even on both sides, and on the neck;
and then make the break even, as it should be, and hold fast, if an abscess comes up.
And if an abscess comes up, if one does not hold it back for seven days, and puts on a damp cloth and rose oil, until the abscess is relieved;
then hold it back, and the way to hold it back is that you put the plaster on the break, then join the arm to the aid, and put your hand on the shoulder or on the breast;
and put the cloth on, and hold back on the aid, and on the arm so that the arm is in a good position, if nothing is causing it to move, or if the bone has not been broken.
And if you doubt that the bone does not move, then use aids, and put on the break a bigger and stronger aid than the others, and have between each aid two spaces, and let each aid be so big that it goes over the break by three inches on each side;
Then drag on the stakes, as I said at the beginning of the chapter on the paste on the breach, stronger and less by moving away.
And if you see the setting of the stakes and the dragging, as we have said, in the ooze that you restore the broken member, and you doubt the abscess is hot, let it be tied up for seven days, as we have said.
Then watch for three days to see if the itch does not flare up again and does not come back to the member, or the painful sensation does not come back because it is too tight. And if you dub the apotheosis, as we have said.
And if such an accident does not come, do not untie it before three or more days, and let the patient sleep on his back and keep his hands on his stomach.
and put a layer of clean, even wool on the shoulder, and watch every hour of the day or night to see if the shape of the broken member does not change, or if the bonds are not loosened.
If it is to be given by virtue of medicine, and give the meat that we have put before in such a way that the meat is at the first subtle. and when it begins to take effect, if it is thick.
And it is customary that the shoulder and leg should be recovered in 40 days from all; and then you must remove and administer bath and medicines of ointments to the shoulder to heal it.
And if the stiffness is bad and blocked, it should not be separated after one or two months.
of the break of the arm
The arm is composed of II bones, which are called "fosciles", one of which is small, and it is this which gives the hand its shape;
and the other is large, and it is this which is dislocated, towards the small one;
maybe breaking only the big "foscile", or maybe both together.
When the small "foscile" is broken, the restoration is easy and the recovery is rapid;
and when the large ones are broken, if the healing is ill, and more painful than when they are broken all together.
If this small piece of wood has been broken by a slight blow, then it is necessary to extend it slightly and make it even.
And if the large one is deformed, then it must be extracted with greater force;
and extend it on one cussin, and make the pouchet of the hand higher than the other two, and the smaller ones lower than the others, and let the patient lie across it, and the cussin in front of him higher, so that the patient suffers no effort;
then extend the ministers of his arms to the part that is wounded to his hand, or to the chains, and other ministers to the other above it.
Then make it even, according to its best form.
If the wood has broken into pieces, then place each piece in its proper place; and if one of them has become loose and does not fit, and you cannot restore it to its place, then fix it with iron and bone, as we have said above.
And if with the breaking there is a wound, then I have spoken of this to the singular chapter; then take the cure.
And if in the beginning of the restoration abscesses form, then bind them with a cloth made of rosin oil and white wax, so that they are neither too hard nor too soft; and dip it gently from above, until the abscesses are calmed.
and then coat the bone, and I put the ointment of the powder from the mill with a lot of wax, then put the splints on, and let the splint of the break be a little tighter, and a little wider than the others;
and know that it should have six splints or more in various positions: either that the break is in one bone, or in two;
and hold it up higher than the other part, and always further away, as I said at the beginning about the ointment; and let the liniments that are on the break be soft and moist, and not hard or rough;
and let the liniments that are on the break be soft and moist, and not hard or rough; and let the thread, which is being held up, be linen, neither too thick nor too thin, as we have said.
And wait for the member and the lien after a few days. And if some bad accident comes to the member, such as itch that comes to the member, it is right that you wet the member with hot water, until the itch is calm.
and let the member not be too tight to rest.
And then begin again to draw out, and if the lien is softened and the bone exposed, and similar things, then address it.
And if it is necessary that the member not be moved again for a long time, because it is too stiff, then you must soften it slightly and leave it thus for some days, so that the movement begins again, and then draw it out.
And if none of these things that we have said comes to the patient, let it not be dislocated until XX days.
Or, with the head turned, then bind his hands to his neck, and let his necks be even, and guard against movement and turning over, and sleep on his back;
and know that this breaker is healed in 30 days or in 35, and perhaps in 20 days, according to the compositions and complexes of the virtues.
of the break in the hand
are few fractures on the back of the hand, and there comes but little rain many times.
And when the plant of the hand is broken or bent, it is right that the patient cut it, and make it even straight in front of him;
then place his hand on the extended loom, and extend the broken bones, and make them even mirror-like, until they are well joined;
and with the plaster and the staples, if abscesses do not come then I put a stake according to the quantity of the place; and be wrapped in I wrap it in linen.
And if the spear is at the back between the navel of the plant, then I make a stake of drapels, and instruct the patient to strangle it to his bruised plant; and then the stake of a long drapel, and be the stake of curd also as great as the plant of the hand, and strangles it, so that it comes.
And if it breaks on the outside, then it is fitting that you put a stake above, and another one in the plant, so that the hands are open and straight, then tie it completely around the hand, and stop the blood flow between the two.
And if the spear comes to any of us two, if it is poked, then he sets it even, so that it comes; and strangles it with the plant, and you see if I put a straight small stake to lift the bruised one, and does not move;
and if it is broken in two, as in the index or one of the others, if it is made equal, and laid with its healthy partner which follows. or you tie them all together, that they may move freely, or you set one on a stake, as if it were a pestle;
and take care in the restoration and arrangement of an abscess, and protect him who comes to it, as I have said.
The flesh of the loins is often broken, and one can see well when it returns before and after.
and the restoration should be such that you tie them together above the break, and below too. And the patient lies on his face, then each minister extends his link equally to his sides;
and that is when the break is in the middle of the bone.
And if the fracture is near the root of the breast, then one of the bonds extends beyond the knuckle, and the other bond below the fracture.
And so if it's close to the knee, then let the leg be removed from the knee, and let the knee be bent down.
Then take the bone with its two hands so that it is according to its natural shape, and then put on the plaster and the bandage, so that it does not move.
And if there is an abscess, if he leaves it calm then return to your work and your treatment. The rest is done in this way.
It is necessary that you wrap it in a strong cloth or a wooden board twice or three times, and hold back the excess, then bring the leg so that the heels come to the root of the ankle, and tie a long thread between the thigh and the leg, away from the knee joint, and bring the end of the thread up;
then turn to the leg and to the thigh the bandage, then put on the splint bones, and put a splint on the bone of the leg;
then employ the fire cautery between the leg and the thigh of linen bandages in order to make even the stretching, then begin to bind in a three- or fourfold knot on the splint; and as you go up on the splint, and less the stretching;
then enter the two wires that you have threaded between the leg and the thigh, and in their place three splints, then return to the distention at the head of the wire, as long as you can remove the foot;
and hold it steady so that it does not move from its place, then let it be like that, and if it does not come back with an abscess or swelling or any other sign. And if it happens, if it slips, and turns this way or that, as we have said many times;
and if there are any pieces of bone that grip, if necessary, let them be. and if it cannot, if necessary, split the joint, and draw forcefully; and treat it as we have said, until it is healthy again.
And never break the chest in this case, if one sets a splint, as with the shoulder and arm;
However, when restoring it in this way, do not let the patient move.
And know that the collarbone is restored in a day or two or more, depending on the diversity of complexions.
There is little breaking in the knee, but it swells many times.
And if it breaks, let there be only a split or a crack, and not all at once, and not too deep; and if it does not hurt, then let it be fixed in this way, so that it no longer hurts.
And the restoration is done by setting equal what is long on one side and short on the other, until it is joined together, if possible, without moving;
then set the plaster, and put a round splint on it, if you need one, and hold it as necessary, then restore all the provisions that we have said for other breaks, such as hot and cold applications, and similar things; If each person has an accident like this, then he must remain healthy.
regarding the break of the leg
I understand that in the leg there are two bones, one of which is called "mustelz" and the other "foscile".
And if both bones are broken like this in the arm, and for this reason the restoration is like that of the arm which is even, and the work is all done; And if the two bones are broken together, then the leg turns all around.
And if the thin bone is broken, then turn back.
And if the large bone is broken, then great pain is felt, and it can be seen clearly. Then it straightens out.
Then extend it, and make it even, and bind the joints evenly;
However, if the breaking is ugly, and there are many pieces, then the extension must be smaller and lighter; and adjust accordingly to its virtue.
and when you have finished your work, if the person has hair that touches the leg on both sides and is long from the ankle to the knee,
then wrap two bends around the leg above and below, and place it in the middle, and at this length do not let the leg fall to the right or to the left, and so is good;
and no one should administer any oil along the length of the leg, and if necessary, and put the leg in such a way that it does not move, and properly do this to the fracture or wound;
and move each leg every day, to see if there is an abscess or another accident; if the treatment until it is healthy.
of the break of the bones of the foot
At the ankle there is no break, but at the foot there is a break in two cases and only one time; it has happened to me in more than one condition.
And if there is a fracture of the foot and you see the bones coming together, put the sick person on the ground as if they wanted to walk, and then now put your foot on their own, where the bones are raised, and press them until they go back into their place;
And then put the plaster and press it on, and place a small table at the feet with II flat shoulders, and then fasten it to the ground in front of you, and then you have wrapped the drapes around, and other things that you need.
And when three days or four are passed, then unclasp him, because you will find the bones even if they are broken or out of place.
And if there are any two broken, restore them, and as we have said to the two by hand; then put on the two broken a plate according to the length of the two, and let it be a little wider, then place at the feet the small table that I said, and fasten it to the ground in front of you;
and if there are two or three more broken, put on each a plate according to its quantity, wrapped in a linen drape, and fasten the small table at the feet; and let it be placed on top of the small table with the stomach of the foot so that it is well covered.
And you must not forget the other things I have said about other breakers, when we have said it. and heal each injury so as it should be healed.
of the break of the bone with a blunt knuckle
When the woman's bones are broken, if she is seated enlarged, then she leans to the back part, and is held by behind.
then fill the hole of nature with cotton disease, and put also big as I sit;
then stand the woman up, and slowly bend her back and again jump the cotton, until it comes to the entry of nature, and the bones come back with slow sitting;
and when she wants to urinate, if she jumps the cotton, and when she has urinated, it is put back, and thus do seven days or more; so will be restored the break, and if you see, take a bladder of biber, and tie a cord to the navel, and pour all the bladder into nature; Then blow up the bladder until it is inside. the break will heal itself;
then fill it with cotton and leave it for a few days until he is well.
And when the bones of the hand or foot of the man or woman are broken, if he sets it as we have said regarding the hip bone.
and these wounds are not hidden from him who puts his mind to it and takes care of it, and listen to my book.
For the break signifies more than a few things in the right way of restoration: let them eat then.
In the groin, when it is broken, take a neck of goose and pour the urine into the groin; then wrap it in linen bandages, and leave it for three days or so, and he will be well without surgery.
with break with wound
It is appropriate for the one who has broken with a wound, even if it is great, as with the hip bone or shoulder blade or similar, that he be healed now, so that the healers that we have described testify to this.
And if the wound heals well, if the vitriol scar remains, then you should continue to restore the rupture in that very same hour, or else the blisters will come on that day.
And if the blisters come on, and you postpone the restoration until the next day, as long as the blisters are calm, and do not touch them either on the third or fourth day, for you will bring about a bad accident.
And if the broken bone is protruding through the skin, it is necessary that you bring the bone to a standstill lightly with your hands, with a small extension.
And if the extensions have not appeared to you so that your hands are made equal, if it is with this instrument which is of iron, which has seven or eight inches long, and the width is according to the quantity of the wound; and for this it is necessary that he should put III or IVI, according to what is necessary in each treatment of fracture;
and be round and a little thick, so that it does not press on the member when opening it, and be sharp at the end, and thick in the middle ahead: thus:
is called "planche", because it is necessary that the bent head be placed on the top of the prominent bone; and be straightened once, as often as possible, and be equal one against the other. And if the fracture is subtle and the tool cannot take the bone well, it is necessary that you cope with the head of the bone as long as the instrument has the ability to do so.
And if you cannot bring the bone back, as we have said, with an appropriate instrument, either an incision or a saw, to your power;
And look at this man who is delayed in the bone of the neck and small fractures.
And when the bone is brought back and the patient feels great pain afterwards, know that it is not in its natural position.
If he remains in his place, then wet the cloth with wine-colored tar, and thoroughly smear it on him; and do not put tar or anything else on the wound where there is oil, that he does not cause sores and corruption;
And then apply poultices when you have reduced the bone, and leave the wound uncovered, and wrap the covering around it well, according to the quantity of the wound, and be careful that the wound is not drawn up with the fracture;
and many times have they done this foolish thing, and have brought upon the patient death or corrupting nothing; And may be the dislocations are softer and more delicate than other fractures.
And if the wound is bad or large, and you doubt that a bad accident will not come, as we have said, and you feel pain in the place, then it does not fit to put a splint on. but wrap in linen, instead of splints, hard drapes, and bind it fast.
And when you see after one or two days to have been infected the wound, if he is there that you put on top of all water, and I put poultices healing wounds, so as poultice tetrafarmacion and similar.
And it is necessary that you dislocate the limb twice a day, in the morning and in the evening, until it is healed and sound.
And it is necessary that the limbs are moved so that the wound runs down lightly.
And if every day passes, and it cannot be joined but runs together again, knowing that there are small pieces of bone; because it is necessary that you wash the wound with water, and all these troublesome pieces that bring about pain.
And if a fistula comes to light, or any other kind of corruption, it is necessary that you cure it, according to what he says in his chapter above.
And when the bone is broken, and opened upon the limb, as the neck-bone or the shoulder-bone, and other great limbs, do not pull it out, for often death comes from this, but let it putrefy.
in case it should break again after 20 or 30 days, then cure the wound, if you can;
and if you cannot, then leave it.
We often come after the health of the broken one, even when it is near a joint, and an ugly sight is the figure of the limb; and for a chance cannot do their natural work of the limbs.
Take care then, so that we are not fresh: if the ministering of medicines is in a sticky state, as in aloe, incense, myrrh, and sarcocollus, acacia, and other things like that, so that you do not press any of these things, or all together, and confound them with wine stuck with resin or with a lot of ash or with oil; and put them on the neck in layers, and bind them well, and do not release them by hand every day;
and put them on the neck in layers, and bind them well, and do not release them by hand every day; and then dislocates it, and begins another one, until the nodulations are broken;
or you strain on a well-made piece of cloth; for the property of the cloth is that it breaks all the nodules off the limbs;
and if his swelling is hardened as stone, he is fit for the oven, so that when cooked, it shows the excess flesh clearly. Or you take him to no razor, as long as he is oiled, and cure him as long as he is well.
the member which is weak after the garrison
When the break in the bone has healed, and the limbs remain weak and fragile, this may happen for many reasons: for one is because it was tied too tight, and was not tied as it should have been; or for one there are too many ligaments, and cannot bring the member into its natural position; or for many armpits; or for great movements, not in his hour; or for one has little blood in his body, and are weak.
And the cure is such that you make the patient eat, and make the body soft, until the sin is multiplied in him. and the minister give bath, and do joy and let sleep;
then put wax on the member, so that the wax attracts his great swelling, and dip it often in hot water, until the swelling runs to the member; and return to its natural shape.
two injured limbs after surgery When the member is twisted after restoration, and the bone is broken open, and the form of the member is ugly, yet it does not lose its natural work:
so do not believe the foolish who serve this one must break the member all over again, and many foolish people have done this in our land;
and these works are to blame, and they bring great evils, and perhaps death;
all ways, let the nodules and the torture be fresh, so that they are raised from hot water, or that herbs are cooked that soften them, as foil of swan, and roots, and melilot, and similar things;
and the fabric made soft with a softening agent, as well done squirt, and you take the muskeg of swan, and confit it with fat or oil of lamb's ear, and make an ointment;
or you take figs, and grind them with hay of coles, and similar medicines that soften the sudden pain.
And never is the osteum rubbed constantly and lengthily with moist hands. So that each limb is moved every hour.
And if the torture is old and hard, as stone, and it needs to be split with iron, then cover it up to the bone, with a sharp knife, lightly; and put on the poultice and study in the cure.
Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
When dislocation comes to anyone, if it is now brought back gently.
For if delayed, if the veins swell, and perhaps if he is reset to his place at the site of injury.
For by chance do not move him when he is swollen. many times cause pain and other pains;
however, when this happens, if the patient is made well, then leave him, until the abscess has been calmed.
then raise the member with hot water and oil, then gently reset it, and heal each member as the wound heals in its place.
And I have ordered the potions for the dislocations of the shoulders just up to the height of the piez.
It should be known that the mandibles are dislocated from both sides, and the dislocation of both is according to two ways: either they are a little out of place, and slightly soft. Or either they are completely dislocated, hanging towards the floor, and the saliva of his mouth so that he cannot hold it back, nor can he close his mouth, and envelops his tongue with speech.
When the dislocation is small, return by means of these four dispositions.
And if it is whole and complete, then you must bring it to the hospital quickly and do not delay.
And in this way that the ministers tie the head of the sick person, and pour mirres some pottage of one of his hands at the root of the dislocation of the jaw within the mouth, there are two parts of dislocation; and the other two hands be away, to put even;
And command to the sick person that he softens his jaws and moves them from all parts. And let the wound heal evenly, until it returns to its place.
And if it is brought back, most especially if they are both jaws together, then raise them with warm water and oil, until they are reset lightly;
do not delay in bringing it back, as we have said.
And when they are reset even and the mouth of the sick person is closed well with a softener, then put upon it drapings wet with an oil made of rosin and wax, and let it rest lightly;
and let the patient lie on his back, and his shoulders be between two pillows, so that he does not move to the left or right, or try to turn over, but eat light food until the pains are gone and the jaw has recovered.
and then after he has eaten lightly, and does not work to open his mouth for eating or drinking until the jaw is well healed and recovered.
And if the two jaws cannot be put back in place within an hour and do not return to their places, then fever and abnormal sweating will come, and by chance there will be a solution of the stomach, and by chance vomiting of clear bile.
And when you see this, know that it is a sign of improvement; and often dies those to whom it is given, in nine days.
does not release from the coast within the extension of the thread inside it, and is dislocated only once at the back, and one feels it well.
And the recovery is that the patient lies on his back and extends his arms. and then press the dislocated joint with your palm, and it will return;
then put the splint and bandage on and hold it in place;
and the head that is over the neck cannot be dislocated; if it is not moved again, and if it is never dislocated, so he returns to his place, as we have said;
then put a splint and bandage on it, and hold it in place, and instruct the patient to rest as long as he is well;
and in the same way you should reset the shoulder when it is out of place.
of the dislocation of the shoulder
Know that the shoulder can only be dislocated in three ways:
that one is when it is dislocated at the part of the shoulder joint; and the second is at the part of the breastbone; and by chance it is dislocated at the top part, and this happens sometimes;
and never dislocate behind for the shoulder, and never dislocate inside for the neck;
and many times dislocates toward the shoulder, more so at those who have little hair, for to them this salt shall be taken away without surgery.
For those who have enough hair, they will get better without surgery, and return to being healthy.
And perhaps it happens to some men that they beat or break, and the shoulder is heated by a hot abscess, and they think that it has been dislocated.
So then you must test it out, as long as you are certain of it. and then begin the treatment.
And this is how dislocations happen when they go down toward the shoulder, and there is a difference between the sick shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find various manifest differences. and at the head of the shoulder there is a pit, and dislocate the shoulder on the table where the head of the shoulder is, just like it were an egg. and the patient cannot bring his hand to his neck, nor move at all;
and if it is dislocated from above, then is it not hidden, for you see it clearly in the towel.
and this method of dislocation is not to be used when it is new, or when the patient is ill.
And the way is that the minister should lift the hand of the sick person upward, then put the splint on the joint, and raise it up by force. and the minister should lift the hand, and extend it upward, then put it on. then come to the hospital.
And if not as we have said above with hand movements, then it is convenient for the sick person to be bathed in hot water. and provide a softening and soothing treatment, as an infusion of althaea and fenugreek and melilote in water, and be administered.
Then let the patient lie on their back, and place the shoulder's axil on a stool of another equal, not too soft nor too hard, then put the mirrour of the foot on the stool, and gently lift up the shoulder with care, and pull the hand of the sick.
and others ministers dryve the head of the sick man, so that he does not move down; the shoulder comes back right away, and you will see if it comes back in this way:
and that you make be present a man who is greater than the sick one; and be two sides of the chest, and set the axil of the sick man, and lift up the axil upwards so that the sick man hangs by his arms; and others ministers pull the hand of the sick man down towards his belly. And if the patient is too light, then with him put something heavy, so that the dislocation comes back now.
And they also answer in another way:
and it is placed a long rod in the ground, so that the shoulder is also caused as if by a pistol, and it is not too large nor too small; then let the patient be placed, but that there are drapels of sweat on it, and the patient is standing on the long wood;
then his hand is extended from one side to the other, forming a loop, and the joint will return to its place peacefully;
and if it does not return for all these things that we have said, then this remedy is done: take a long wood of two arms of great length and four fingers wide, which has the head placed so that it can enter perfectly into the shoulder joint, according to this form:
then place it on the wood with the drapels of sweat, so that the wood does not hurt the patient, and then put it into the shoulder joint of the patient;
and extend your arms above the wood of a long stick, and place the shoulder on the wood, and the arm at the top of the hand, then put the arm on an escutcheon of a shield of width, and let the hands be extended downward, and let the body hang from the other side: the joint is now ready.
Then when it is in place, in whatever way it may be, you must put an even woolen needle, then set the plaster ready with powder from the mill, with incense and amber, on the whole shoulder and innards, then draw it away forward, and tie it to the plaster, and embrace the hand at its neck, and let your hands remain in this way.
And it is necessary that he suck a little, so that the members are comfortable, because he will heal more quickly;
and then suck a little more after 5 or 7 days, and move it; and if it is stiff and not softened, then it is healed.
And if the joint has come out of its place due to moisture that has come or due to some other cause, you must apply cauterization three times, as it is done with the paste of cauterization.
And if you do all this, and it relaxes after 7 days, and the joint does not hold, and cannot raise your arms upstream, then know that the nerve at the top of the shoulder is cut or extended or softened; and know that the joints never fit back in their place.
When dislocation is due to a fall or push, and stretching of the hands, and another place is administered;
and treat until they are healed.
And if after healing comes to the limb greasiness, and slowly moving, then the patient often bathes, until that greasiness is gone, and returns to its first nature.
of the dislocation of the head
Know that the joints of the neck are dislocated and return to their place.
and is dislocated from all sides, especially in front and behind, and the dislocation cannot be restored, for we can see it and feel it clearly; and is dislocated according to each figure. And when you join the dislocated shoulder with good health, if you can see it openly. For the joint is deformed, and cannot bend the arm, nor touch its shoulder at all.
And you must reset it in such a way that the bones come together as they should, for if the bones do not come together, there would be great pain in resetting them.
and may not be reset from all sides, especially at the back; Si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li Mors.
This is worse than other dislocations, and it causes greater pain, and sometimes death. And if it can be done, so that it can be brought back, you should hold its hand with both of yours; and its arms spread out, and the hands with their thumbs in line with the neck at the back and at the front, and push the joint into place together with the palm roots, until it recovers its position;
And if the dislocations are in front, so that when it doubles its hand to its other hand, and raises its wrist, it returns to its place.
If it does not return to its position, give it a strong extension;
and two minister extend the arm, and two turn it, so that it does not move at the extension;
Then turn the arm of each side, then you have wrapped a long and wide cloth around it;
and when he touches the joint to his hand, if it does not come from any oil to soften the joint, then draw the joint together so that it regains its shape.
and when it is in place, if put on plaster dry with ash of owl, and strain it together, and bend the arm at the shoulder of the sick person, and leave it for some days, then loose it.
And if the joint is firm in its place, if loosen the ligature, and leave it;
and if you see that the joint does not fit well, if start again the plaster and the ligature, and leave it for a few days, until it is firmly in place; then loose it.
And if he feels pain after the resetting of the joint, and it moves, if bathe and rub it well, and press until it is eased; put on top of the joint a piece of thick lamb skin, then leave it for a day and a night, then the bone, and make it enter the bath; and when it sweats, rub the joint gently, then put the skin back on, and then bring it into the bath again; then do this two or three times until it is healthy;
and if you see pus, put on top of the wound a warm, butter-soaked cloth, and squeeze it out;
then return to its position.
the dislocation of the hand
The dislocated joint of the hand returns more easily than the joints of the other members do. However, it is necessary to put it back in place as soon as possible while it is still dislocated, so that the bones do not swell or an abscess forms.
And let them stretch out the hand of the disease on a table, and extend the fingers, and make it even, so that it put its palm on the appearance of the joint, and hold it until it recovers.
Anyway, you must look to see if it is in the right place. Then put the diseased back of the hand on a table for extension and retraction. If the dislocation is at the back of the hand, then put the patient's hand flat on the table and bring it to rest: then look to see if it is well in place;
If it returns now, it is good. If not, if the extraction of painful abscesses causes them to break open, and he leaves it like that without recapping.
And if he cannot bear it, and you cannot put it back in place after a few days, then the joint will be twisted.
and do not ask the patient to do anything but let his hands remain moist until they can extract anything completely. Then you know that the nerve is cut, or an artery.
if there is no other remedy than to extract by cautery the case, and perhaps nothing else.
When the hand is in place, put on the poultice that we have said, then extract it and leave it for V days, then take it off and leave it like this.
If he cannot move it well, and there is no crack, if the wet warm water, and rub until he is cured.
of the dislocation of the two bones of the hand
Never are dislocated the joints of the hand to each side, never at the back of the palm or the belly;
Then hold the two together and draw them back into place as much as possible, then support the head of the bone with your hand, and move it towards the joint where it is dislocated;
and leave it there for a day, then make it even again that day;
and do not move it if you have done so, and dislodge it from day to day, and make it move, and then relace it in place;
and do so often, until it is loose, and in the same way if it is dislocated at the base of the hand, and do so as you have done above, until it is well;
and also do this, when it is dislocated from another side.
the dislocation of the spine of the neck
When the spine or neck is dislocated, or there are several dislocations, there will be no cure, for it quickly kills the patient.
And the signs are that the excretions come forth without will, cannot be held, and often soften any member, or both legs or both arms or one.
And often the spine moves to four parts;
that which mutates in the rear is called "gilbositez".
the cure is that you treat it if the gilibosite has come from childhood: if there is no cure or recovery from all of it.
And that which comes from falling or blows or similar things, the ancient ways of curing with great words do not bring any great benefit;
but I have simplified it according to my intention, and have formed instruments in various ways.
I say that in the gilibosite that comes from the back before the chest, there is neither beginning nor cure;
and I say that what comes straight in two sides, and cannot be cured except properly what comes at the back, as I say;
is that the patient is lying down with his face flat and has no pressure on him so he does not get hurt;
then put a piece of wood under his head forming an arch, and another one at the feet, and tie with a cord the legs of the patient behind him, and another one at the ankles, and at the knees;
and the two ministers know the cords, one at the head and the other at the feet, between the two beams;
and they are well closed, the beam as we have said, and the mirrour sets its palms on the spine forming, until it comes back;
And if it does not come back by this cure, then take a round table of three arms long, and tilt it away from the wall, and let the patient be on one side, and pour the water of the table away from the wall, and then put the middle of the table on the spine; and place its legs on top of the other head of the table, and press firmly, until it regains its position.
And if you see, do so with the palm that turns towards the hand. And that you place two torches at the head of the patient with one arm, and between them, and a palm's width apart, longwise;
and have in each torch a hole, or the torche runneth, and let the torches be firmly set in the ground, so that they do not move;
and between each pair of torches have a single torch, so that the line turns, and have two small torches, a palm's width longwise, to turn the line;
and then lie the line that is among the torches towards the palm of the hand at the head, and the other line towards the legs at the other torch, and each servant turns its torch along the whole line, and the master sets the line evenly as we have said.
And when it is even, then put on desiccating plaster with much chalk, and then the poultices, and then the tablet of III feet long, which, as we have said, must be red to the place of gloom and the part of the spine sound, and bind with a thread, so that the patient uses subtle fasting until he is well;
And if there is no improvement at the end of this time, then administer softening and soothing medicines with the tablet we have described above; and never give a piece of lead, and never does the appearance come in the lower spine at the back, and be careful that it is dislocations; is the bone that opens, for one must not have any presumptions: may bring about death.
Saiches that as the joints of the hip and as the joints of the shoulder come only from dislocations alone, not coming at all as with the other joints.
and the hip joint is dislocated according to four parties: behind and in front;
and behind them there is a little more, and in front and behind them.
And the knowledge of his dislocations inside is that when one joins the leg with the sick, it is longer and more open than the healthy, and the patient's knees cannot double their knees at all. and the time which is necessary for the wound to heal after an abscess has been cut, so that the head of the thigh comes out.
And the sign of him to whom it comes at death, if this accident is opposite to these before.
And the signs of who has it in front, are that he has his leg well according to the fulfillment; all ways, do not double the knee joint pain, and if you make it run, it can not before, and holds back his urine, and swell the ankle, and when he goes, so he passes over the heel.
And the sign of him to whom it comes behind, if he cannot spread his knee, nor double it, and this leg is more twisted than the other, and the ankle is softened, and the head of the thigh is in its place between the ribs.
The patients who have this kind of dislocation should be cared for if the dislocation is old and it takes time to heal according to its condition, otherwise there is no cure; and it is not necessary that he has presumptuousness.
And in those who have a fresh dislocation, and there are four ways of dislocation, you must hurry to restore the joint, and put it back in place and move it to the right and left, and twist it from side to side; So that it does not come back, and there is no need for any other cure.
And if it does not come back in this way, you must have a strong assistant, and hold the leg very firmly with two hands, or tie it to the knee with a piece of cloth; and others extend their hand above in such a way that they pour water on their palms, and then tie it with a string from the knuckle; and others tie the head of the limb;
and extend forwards and backwards all at once, so that the patient is raised from the ground all at once, and remains stationary.
This method of extension is common in four appearances, and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, it is good.
If not, then one should treat its appearance.
When the dislocations are in the parry, then one should raise the patient on his side, then tie the string to the root of the elbow, and the limb that is out of place, then extend the string upwards towards the elbow, and downwards towards the forceps;
and others extend their arms, and embrace the large ring of the elbow that is ill, and extend it away from the body form; If they return to their place now;
and this method of dislocation is lighter than the others.
And if you cannot fix it in this way as we have said, then you must tie the two feet of the patient together with a strong rope from the sole of one foot to the sole of the other, and from the thigh of the leg that is extended to that of the other, and keep the patient's legs extended more than the other;
then hang them by the neck from a beam, and have one arm outstretched on the ground;
and command one minister to embrace the head of the shoulder, and have other ministers hanging with the patient who embraces the shoulder so that the dislocation returns to its place quite quickly.
And when the dislocation has gone out, so lie the patient down, as we have said in the case of one with gibbus, and remove the rope from the leg that is wrong properly, and also from the stone;
Then take two tongs, one at the head and another at the base, then insert a tong between the toes at the patient's foot and pull it towards the shape; and place wet towels inside, so that it does not hurt the patient, then extend each minister towards him, and have him put his hand in a position to reset the dislocation.
If it returns, it is good.
If not, put him on a table, and press him as we have said in gibbosity, and make the patient lie on his sound side.
And when the dislocations are forward, so it is necessary to extend the injured leg far away, and according to what I have said; and place him on his back on the injured side, then press with the other hand, and extend it towards the groin;
And if the dislocations are on the side, it is not necessary to extend the injured person below, nor to raise them onto the ground, rather they should be laid out on their sides as we have said for sleeping on the two hips; and let it lie on its face, and extend the leg as we have said before, and you must all press upon the joint at the table; and will be fixed when the patient extends his legs, and they will be even; then set the bones, and put on the plaster, and extract it from a bandage so that the shin does not move; and rest for three or four days, then remove it, and put on the plaster;
and if you see that they are even, extract it as before, and leave it for three days;
then remove it, and let him go blithely, until the limbs are comfortable.
of the dislocation of the knee joint
The dislocated limb is to be reset according to three methods: that is to say, inside and outside, and behind;
and do not delay.
and do not lag behind. If the leg does not bend at the knee, know that it is dislocated;
and the rehabilitation of all is that you make the patient sit upright, and extend his leg if he can, and place your back on his face, and place his foot on your feet;
then take his knee with your palms, and pull apart your toes, then bend the two sides of the knee in turn; and other ministers extend his foot until the genitals return to their place, and the sign is that he bends his leg at the knee easily;
and put the plaster on, and make the leg bend at the knee, and keep them together firmly for three or four days, then release it;
and do not work on the sick to move until the members are comfortable.
And if the limbs are not in place, then give a strong extension, as we have said in the treatment of the hip, until they are healthy.
of the dislocation at the heel
The heels are never dislocated and never fully displaced, both inside and out.
And the signs are that the ankle is dislocated, and test before the part where it is dislocated:
They should be brought if they are light, and must be extended lightly to their hands when they are first touched.
And when it is dislocated from the top, you must make the patient sit up straight and support him with his ministers away from the leg, above the ankle joint;
then teach the foot to you at your right hand, and then at your left twice, and then extend it upwards, and blow strongly on the foot upwards;
and do this twice, as we have said, blowing and teaching the foot;
if it returns, it is good;
if not, if the effort begins again, because it returns;
and if it cannot return like this, then make the sick person sit on his back on the ground, and put something firmly in the ground between his buttocks, and tie the sheets around it so that it does not hurt the sick person.
then place the minister's thigh, and another minister extends the leg to its hands or ties it, so that he lies on the collar of the stone; then extend each minister evenly, and the rope is close between the sick person's buttocks to hold the sick person in place when they are extended;
then place the minister' even on the dislocation at his hands, and another minister ties the healthy leg to the side, and the dislocation will come back slowly.
And when it is done, then put the plaster on and press it down, and strain it firmly, and tie the foot to the leg, and guard the nerves that are behind the ankle, so that the ties are not too tight;
and leave it for 2 or 3 days, and if he holds on to it, let him stretch it.
then let it rest for three days or four, and don't go out for four days; and if he goes before that term is up, it is not yet certain that he will still be dislocated.
And if abscesses come to the foot, so that you calm them down, as we have said elsewhere, until they are well.
the two When the two are dislocated, so it is best to gently extend them without work, and this is a light thing.
And if the dislocation is in any of the joints of the back or foot, then you must make the patient sit with his back or leg straight up on a bed or bench, and put your foot on what opens up those joints, and press down on your foot gently, until he regains feeling;
and when it is even, and he does not move anything, then set the heel of his foot on a table at two joints, then stretch it gently, and leave it for three days, then let him rest; and let him rest, until he is well.
of wound and dislocation together
When the wound comes with a dislocation and it is restored, many times the patient has died:
if you are not presumptuous in the cure, if you are not skilled in the art and have not used it for a long time, and if you are not compassionate and merciful and slow to anger, do not be bold:
and use at the beginning of things calming aposteme with hot, and leave the patient in God's hands, unless you see hope of health: and when you see hope, if you set the member back in place now, so that the hot apses come;
and when the member is in place, if you administer calming apses, and cure the wound, as it should be, with drying ointments;
and with dislocation there is fracture, and small bones are dislocated, if the bone, and do what we have said in simple diseases;
and keep away from a place of fear, according to what I have said, because it will cost you your soul according to your creator, and for the sake of arming yourself and your body.
