Ayssi comensan las paraulas de Albucasim .	Thus begin the words of Albucasis.
O, filhs, pus yeu he a vos complit aquest libre, le qual es le derier de la sciencia de medicina, per le compliment de lu so consequit la fi en lu, e per las exposicios de lu, e per las declaracios de lu, es a mi vist que yeu complesca aquel a vos am aquest tractat, le qual es partida de la operacio am ma, so es cyrurgia.	O, my children, now I complete this book for you, which is the last of the science of medicine; and by its completion at the end, and by its explanations, and by its clarifications, it seems to me that I make clear to you whom I love this treatise, which is part of the operation as I practice it, namely surgery.
Quar la operacio am ma es prostrada en nostre regio e en nostre temps de tot privada, entro que fort leu peric la sciencia de lu, e le vistigi de lu es ostat; e no romasero de lu sino alcunas petitas descripcios en les libres dels Antics, les quals mudero las mas e endevenc ad aquels error e heyssitacio entro que son clausas las entencios de lu e es elonguada la forsa de lu e l’art.	For the operation as I practice it is almost entirely lacking in our region and in our time; moreover, the science of it has become scarce, and its practice has ceased. Except for some small descriptions in the books of the Ancients, which have altered much and led to those errors and hesitation where the intentions of it are misunderstood and the force of it weakened and the art lost.
E es vist a mi que yeu vivifique aquela am ordenacio de aquest tractat en aquela segon la via de exposicio e de declaracio e de abreviacio; e per que vengua am las formas dels ferramentz de cautheri e dels autres instrumentz de la obra cum sia per addicio de la declaracio, e per preparacio de lu, la qual causa es necessaria.	And it seems to me that I should enliven this with an orderly arrangement of this treatise according to the way of explanation and clarification and abbreviation; and so that it comes with the forms of cautery tools and other instruments of the work as is through addition of clarification, and preparation for it, which cause is necessary.
Mays la causa per la qual no es atrobat bo artifex am la sieua ma en aquest nostre temps, es quar la art de medicina es longua, e que cove le sieu actor denant aquo esser excercitat en la sciencia de anotomia la qual recontec Gualia entro que sapia les juvament dels membres e las formas de aquels, e la conjunctio e la separacio de lor; e haia la conoyssensa dels osses, dels nervis e dels lacertz, e·l nombre de aquels, e la egrecio de lor; e de las venas pulsatils e de las quietas, e dels locs del eyssiment de lor.	But the reason why a good artisan is not found in this my craft in our time is that the art of medicine is long, and it requires the practitioner to be exercised in the science of anatomy, which includes knowing the functions of the members and their forms, as well as their conjunctions and separations; having knowledge of the bones, nerves, and muscles, and their numbers and arrangement; and of the pulsating veins and quiet ones, and the places for the incision of them.
E per aquo ditz Ypocras que am u nom es mot, mays en l’obra petit, e majorment en la art de la ma.	And according to Hippocrates it is said that in name it is small, but in the work it is little, and especially in the art of the hand.
Mays nos ja avem dit de aquel en l’introit de aquest libre; quar qui no es scient aquo que li avem dit de anotomia, no es evacuat que no caia en error per la qual siran mortz les homes, ayssi cum yeu he vist trops de aquels, quar alscus son formatz en esta sciencia e gettan se de aquela ses sciencia e ses experiment.	But we have already said this in the introduction to this book; for whoever is not knowledgeable about what we have said about anatomy will not be safe from error by which men are killed, as I have seen too many of them, for some are formed in this science and throw themselves into it without that knowledge and experience.
Quar yeu vi un metge folh e enperit aver incidit un apostema escrophilos en le colh de una femna, e incidic alcunas arterias del colh per que fluic gran sanc entro que la femna cazec morta entre las mas de lu.	For I saw a mad physician who thought he had incised an abscess in the neck of a woman, and he cut some arteries in the neck so that much blood flowed out, causing the woman to die quickly.
E vi un autre metge que pres que el traguera una peyra d’un home le qual avia procesit en sa etat, e la peyra era gran, e venguet a lu e trayssec aquela peyra am un tros de la vesiqua, per que aquel home al tertz dia es mort.	And I saw another physician who thought he would remove a stone from a man who had been suffering for some time, and the stone was large, and he came to him and extracted that stone along with part of the bladder, whereupon that man died on the third day.
E yeu ja apelat fuy a estrayre aquela, e vi que per la grandesa de la peyra e per la disposicio del malaute conogui subre lu que morira.	And I had already called to extract that stone and saw that because of the size of the stone and the condition of the patient, I knew beyond a doubt that he would die.
E vi un autre metge le qual prenia stipendic de un duc de nostra terra per cyrurgia, e endeven a un crastrat negre le qual era deves lu fractura en la coyssa de lu; e perparec le metge am la sua ignorancia, estrayssec la fractura, sobre la plagua, am pulvinas e astelas am forta strectura, e no layssec a la plagua espiracio.	And I saw another physician who was paid wages by a duke of our land to perform surgery on a castrated black man who had a fracture in his thigh; and due to the physician's ignorance, he exposed the fracture above the wound with splints and bandages in a strong structure, but did not leave room for drainage.
E aprop le desliet segons los sieus desiriers, e aprop le relieg, e aprop le leyssec per alcus jorns e comandec que nos deslies le liament; e estec ayssi entro que la coyssa e·l pe foro apostematz, e pervenguet a perdicio.	And he untied it according to his desires, and soon after he bandaged it again, and after some days he commanded that we untie the bandage; and thus it remained until the thigh and leg became abscessed, leading to his ruin.
E yeu fuy apelat a lu, e aparelhegui a desliar le liament, e conseguida es tranquilitat e enayssi amermet de sas dolors.	Thus he calls out to him, and having prepared himself he loosens the bandage, and once calm is achieved he begins to relieve his pains.
Mays empero ja corrupcio era confermada en le membre, per que no pogui refrenar aquela, e no cessec perambular la corrupcio en le membre entro que·l malaute peric.	However, if corruption was confirmed in the limb, so that it could not be restrained, and it did not cease to spread the corruption throughout the limb until the patient was in danger.
E vi un autre metge le qual perforec un apostema cancros, e fo ulcerat aprop alscus dias, entro que foc magnificada la malicia de lu am lo senhor de lu.	And I saw another surgeon who incised a cancerous abscess, and it became ulcerated after a few days, until the malignancy of his work was greatly revealed to him by his lord.
La qual causa es quar le cranc caut es pur de humor melencolic, lahoras no cove que pervengua a lu am ferr de tot, sino que sia an membre le qual suffertes que de tot fos hostat.	The reason for this is that the cancerous condition is pure of melancholic humor; therefore, it does not need to be treated with iron at all, but rather in the member which suffers and is accustomed to such treatment.
E per aquo, filhs, necessari es a vos que la operacio am ma sia devisada en dos devesios: so es en operacio a lu qual es associada salut, e en obra am la qual es perilh en las majors disposicios.	And for this reason, children, it is necessary for you that the operation be planned in two ways: one is an operation associated with health, and the other is work in which there is risk even under the best conditions.
E yeu ja he exsitat aquo en tot loc de aquest libre en le qual venc opperacio en la qual es error e temor; per que necessari es a vos que guardetz aquo e layssetz aquel, per que les folhs no atrobo via a parlar e a vos desonestar.	And I have already stated this in every place in this book where an operation involves both error and fear; therefore, it is necessary for you to heed this and leave that, so that the pages do not find themselves without a way to speak and thereby dishonor you.
E donc prenetz las vostras armas am sollicitut e am proteccio de Dieu , e les vostres malautes am falicitat e am fermetat.	And so take up your arms with diligence and the protection of God, and your patients with skill and firmness.
E usatz de la milhor via per la gracia de Dieu perdusent a salut e a lausabla successio, e laysatz las malautias terriblas de difficil sanacio, e ostatz las vostras armas de aquo que vos fa temer, per so que ysitatio en vostra fe e en le vostre nom no vos evasisca: quar mays es remanent a la vostra gloria, e pus aut en le mon e en derier a las vostras sanctitatz.	And use the best method by God's grace to lead to health and praiseworthy success, and leave behind the terrible illnesses that are difficult to heal, and avoid those things that make you fear, so that doubt does not undermine your faith and reputation: for it is better for you to preserve your glory, and more so in this world and hereafter for your sanctity.
Gualia ja diyssec en alcunas sieuas monicios:	Wound treatment in some monastic surgeries:
“No mediquetz malautia mala, per so que mals metges no siatz nompnatz”.	Do not treat illness badly, for thus bad doctors are not named.
E yeu ja he devesit aquest libre segontz tres capitols.	And I have devoted this book according to three chapters.
Comensa la divisio del libre, e primier de la primieyra partida.	Begin the division of the book, and first of the first part.
Le primier capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, en las formas dels instrumentz e en les ferrementz dels cauteris, e de aquo que necessari es en la opperacio.	The first chapter is ordered about the head and neck, in the forms of instruments and in the tools of cautery, and of what is necessary for the operation.
La divisio de la segonda partida.	The division of the second part.
Le segon capitol, de siccio e perforacio, e de ventosas, e de plaguas, e de extractio de sagetas e de semblantz ad aquelas, tot capitolat e ordenat de las formas dels instrumentz.	The second chapter, about incisions and punctures, and about suction cups, and bandages, and the extraction of arrows and similar instruments, fully chaptered and ordered in the forms of instruments.
Divisio de la tersa partida.	Division of the third part.
Le tertz capitol, de restauracio e de dislocacio, e de curacio de torcio e de semblantz ad aquels; capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, e de las formas dels instrumentz.	The third chapter, about restoration and dislocation, and the treatment of twisting and similar conditions; a chapter ordered about the head and neck, and the forms of instruments.
De cauteri am foc e am medicina aguda e rememoracio de la opperacio.	About cauterization with fire and sharp medicine and recall of the operation.
Am aquel comensa le tractat de tot le libre.	With that begins the treatise of the entire book.
Cove que yeu digua la qualitat dels juvamentz de aquel cauteri e dels noccumentz de lu, e en qual compleccio sia prohibit cauteri.	I will describe the quality of the movements of that cautery and its necessities, and in which condition cautery is prohibited.
Donc dic que·l sermo de la qualitat del juvament de cauteri e del noccument de lu es sermo lonc e prolixs, e subtil per sciensa, e secret amaguat; e ja de lu a parlat gran multitut de savis, e de lu se son desacordatz, et a mi abasta un petit dels sermons de lor, temen perlonguacio.	Therefore, I say that the speech about the quality of the movements of cauterization and its necessities is long and extensive, subtle by science, and hidden as a secret; and many wise people have spoken much about it, and they are discordant about it, but for me a little of their speeches suffices to avoid prolongation.
E donc dic que cauteri comfereys a tota compleccio universalment la qual es am materia o ses materia, exceptat dos compleccios, las quals son compleccios caudas ses materia .	Therefore, I say that cauteries should be applied to the whole body universally, whether it is made of matter or not, except for two parts, which are tail-like parts without matter.
En la compleccio cauda e secca am materia se desecordero; quar alcus dyssero que cauteri es juvatiu ad aquela, e les autres dyssero le contrari de aquel, que cauteri no es convenient en malautia la qual es per qualiditat e per siccitat, quar natura del foc es qualiditat e siccitat, e enconvenient es que malautia cauda e secca am aquo que es caut e sec sia sanada.	In the tail-like and dry part made of matter, it dries out; for some say that cautery is beneficial for this, while others say the opposite, that cautery is not suitable for a disease caused by quality and dryness, because the nature of fire is hot and dry, and it is unsuitable to heal a tail-like and dry part with what is hot and dry.
E diysec aquel que ditz le contrari de aquel, que per cauteri es fayt juvament en tota malautia cauda e secca que ve en les cors dels homes, quar quan tu comparas le cors de home e las humiditatz de lu a la compleccio del foc, atrobas le cors de home freg.	And let the one who says the opposite consider this: that cautery is beneficial for every tail-like and dry disease that occurs in human bodies, because when you compare the human body and its humidity to the nature of fire, you find that the human body is more fragile.
E yeu dic per le sermo de aquel, que esperiment aquo ja a mi alscunas vetz a descubert.	And I say by the words of that person, that experience has already shown this to me on several occasions.
Mays empero no cove que vengua sobre aquo aquel que ja es exproat e excersitat en le capitol de cauteri per derier exercici, e a conogut la diversitat de la compleccio dels homes e la disposicio de las malautias en lor meteyssas, e las causas de aquelas, e·ls accidentz de lor, e l’espasi del temps de aquelas.	But I do not wish to impose this on one who has already been tested and exercised in the chapter of cautery by previous practice, and who has known the diversity of human constitution and the disposition of diseases in their seasons, and the causes and accidents of them, and the time span of those.
Mays en las autras compleccios, no es sobre vos temor, e majorment en las malautias fregas e humidas, quar ja totz les metges se son acordatz sobre aquels, e no so desecordatz en le juvament am cauteri en aquelas.	But in the other parts, there is no fear for you, especially in fragile and humid diseases, because all physicians are now in agreement about those, and they do not disagree on the benefit of cautery in such cases.
E sapiatz, filhs, que del secret de curacio per cauteri am foc e de la bontat de lu, so sobre cauteri am medicina comburent, es quar le foc es simple, la accio del qual no perven sino al membre le qual es cauterizat e no notz al autre membre am lu ajustat sino am petit nocument.	And you know, my children, that the secret of healing by cautery with fire and its goodness lies in the fact that fire is simple, and its action affects only the member being cauterized and does not harm other members nearby except for slight damage.
Mays la accio de medicina comburent perven ad aquel en les membres le qual de lu alunhat, e fort leu fa venir en le membre malautia de dificil sanacio e fort leu ausit.	Here is the translation:
Mays le foc, per la sua sublimitat e de la sua substancia bontat, no fa aquo sino que superfluisca E ja es a nos conogut per experiment e per longitut de servitut de studi am l’art sobre le veritat de las causas; e per aquo yeu so excusat de la longitut del sermo E si no fos que no es legut al mieu libre en aquest pausero a vos secret amaguat am le foc, e la qualitat de la operacio de lu en les cors e de la sieua expulcio per la qual expellis las malautias, am sermo philosophic demostratiu, le qual siria acuit en las vostras pessas.	May the fire, by its sublimity and goodness of substance, do nothing but superfluify. And it is known to us through experiment and length of service in studying this art about the truth of causes; and thereby I excuse myself from the length of speech. And if not that it were not read in my book in this pause would I hide from you secrets with fire, and the quality of its operation on bodies and expulsion thereof by which you expel diseases, in a philosophical demonstrative speech, which would be sharp in your ears.
E sapiatz, filhs, que els se desacordan del temps en le qual es convenient far cauteri e pausan le milhor temps de primaveyra.	And know, children, that they err who disagree about the time when it is convenient to perform cautery and pause at the best time of spring.
E yeu dic que cauteri es convenient en tot temps, per so que le nocument per le temps accident es submergit en le juvament de aquo que am le cauteri es atirat, e majorment si le cauteri es per dolors o de dolors necessaries, fortz e fistinas, las quals no suffertan tarditat per so que es temut de aquelas que vengua malicia, que es major que petit nocument entrant per lo temps.	And I say that cautery is convenient at all times, for the harm caused by accidental circumstances of time is submerged in the benefit brought about by what is drawn from cautery, and even more so if the cautery is necessary for pains or necessary to alleviate severe and urgent conditions, which cannot endure delay due to fear of the malice that might result, since it is better to have minor harm enter at a bad time than to suffer greater ill.
E aysso no catz en vostras pessas, o, filhs, aquo no estiman sino le poble vulguar e les fols metges, so es que ad aquela malautia que es sanada per cauteri no es redicio tot temps, e pausan aquel consequen.	And this I do not say in your ears, or, children, what only the common people and foolish physicians believe is that for the illness which is cured by cautery there is not a suitable time always, and they pause at that consequence.
E la causa no es ges ayssi quo els cuydan per aquo, quar cauteri no es sino en loc de medicina la qual altera la compleccio e esicca las humiditatz las quals son causa per que veno las dolors.	And the reason is not as such that they think, for cautery is nothing but a substitute for medicine which alters the complexion and dries up the humidities, which are the cause of pains.
Mays empero cauteri superflueys sobre la medicina per volicitat de la sua valitut e vertut de la sua operacio e grandesa del sieu senhor.	But nevertheless, cautery surpasses medicine in speed due to the value and virtue of its operation and the greatness of its efficacy.
E es possible que la sua malautia retorne en alcuna hora del temps, segon la compleccio del malaute e la locacio de la sua malautia, e la vertut de lu, e aquo que es preparat en le cors de lu de la agreguacio de las superfluitatz en lu, e aquo que es pervengut a lu en la sua acquisicio en viandas e semblantz de aquelas causas; sino que la malautia en la qual sia aministrat cauteri sia malautia subtil en membre de paucas superfluitatz e humiditatz, ayssi cum cauteri de dent per dolor e semblantz ad aquel, possible es que en lu no retorne aquela dolor, mays aquo se fa en petitz.	It is possible that his illness may return at some time according to the condition of the patient and the location of his illness, and its nature, and what has been prepared in his body by the accumulation of superfluities within him, and what has reached him through its acquisition from food and similar causes; but if the illness for which cauterization was administered is a subtle illness in a limb with little superfluity and moisture, such as the cauterization of a tooth for pain and similar cases, it is possible that that pain will not return to him, but this is done rarely.
E mays sermo vulgar es que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, e es sermo dreyturier, no ad aquo que els entendo en lu, quar els crezo que no es curacio que aprofieyta am medicina ni am autra causa aprop cauteri.	And the common saying is that cauterization is the last remedy of medicine, and it is said by practitioners, not because those who understand it think there is no cure in medicine or any other cause before cauterization.
E la causa es en contrari de aquo; e la entencio que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina no es sino quan administram las manieyras de curacio en alcunas malautias, e aquelas medicinas no conferieysso, e aprop en la fi de la causa aministra hom cauteri, e aprofieyta ad aquela.	And the cause is contrary to that; and the understanding that cauterization is the last remedy of medicine is only when we administer methods of treatment for certain illnesses, and those medicines do not work, and then at the end of the cause cauterization is administered, and it proves effective.
E lahoras de aqui cat16 que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, no segon la entencio la qual entendo les vulgars e trops dels fols metges.	And here in what has been said so far that cauterization is the last remedy of medicine, not according to the understanding which I understand of the common misconceptions and errors of foolish doctors.
E diyssero les antics que cauteri am aur es milhor que cauteri am ferr, e no diyssero aquo sino per la equalitat del aur e sublimitat de la sua sustancia.	And the ancients said that cauterization with gold is better than cauterization with iron, and they did not say this except for the equality of gold and the sublimity of its substance.
E diyssero que le loc de cauteri no fa brac, cum aquo no sia absolutament vertat, quar yeu ja he aquo proat e he atrobat que aquel no fa aquo sino en alcus cors ses les autres, e cauteri am aquel es bo e milhor que am ferr ayssi quo els diyssero; mays empero quan tu fas cauteri am foc am de aur, no es a tu declarat, quar es egnit segon la quantitat que tu vols per la rugor de l’aur, e quar prepara a recebre freg; e si ajustas sobre lu ignicio se fon l’aur per le foc, e caso en le foc alcunas laminas per que le artifex catz per la occupacio de aquel.	And they said that the location for cauterization does not matter, which is not absolutely true, because I have experienced this and have found that it only works in some bodies but not others, and cauterization with gold is good and better than iron as they say; however, when you use fire to cauterize with gold, it is not clear to you how to do it properly, since the hardness of gold requires a certain quantity for ignition, and it prepares to receive friction. If you adjust the heat over it by fire, the gold will melt due to the heat, and if you place some sheets in the fire, the craftsman can then use them for that purpose.
E per aquo es fayt cauteri am ferr deves nos pus leugerament e pus propdanament a rectitut de operacio.	And thus is made the cautery of iron, which should be applied gently and gradually according to the correctness of the procedure.
E yeu ja he ordenat aquest capitol en le cauteri segon capitols, et he ordenat aquels del cap entro les pes, per so que aleugo le demandant aquo que vol de lu.	And I have already arranged this chapter on cautery according to the chapters, and I have placed those of the head among the parts, so that I relieve the inquirer who seeks what he wants from it.
De cauteri de dolor de cap per frigiditat e humiditat.	Of cautery for headache due to cold and humidity.
Le capitol primier.	The first chapter.
Aquesta cauterizacio confereys a la humiditat e frigiditat sobre le servel accident de la qual so doas causas, so es causa de soda e multitut de flux raumatic, apelat corissa, del cap a las partidas dels huelhs e de las aurelhas fluent, e multitut de dormir, e de dolor de dentz e del guolayro, e universalment de tota malautia que ve per fregiditat, ayssi cum paraliticament, sodo e apoplexio, e semblantz en aquelas malautias.	This cautery is applied to the cold and humidity that cause headaches from which these two causes originate: they are the cause of soreness and a multitude of rheumatic fluxes called corizza, affecting the head and parts of the face and ears, as well as excessive sleepiness, toothache, and gout, and generally all illnesses caused by cold, such as paralysis, apoplexy, and similar conditions.
La forma de aquesta cauterizacio es aquesta, que primieyrament comandes al malaute que sia evacuat am medicina lacsativa le cap mondificant, per tres o per quatre nueytz, segon que exhigeys la vertut del malaute e la edat de lu e la sua costuma.	The form of this cautery is as follows: first, command the patient to be evacuated with a laxative medicine that cleanses the head for three or four nights, according to the strength of the patient and their age and habit.
E aprop comanda li que raza le sieu cap am razor, e aprop fay aquel sezer entre las tuas mas sobre una banca cayrada e que pause las suas mas sobre le pietz sieu.	And then command him to shave his head with a razor, and then place him seated on a padded bench with his arms resting on his own knees.
E aprop pausa la razit de la tua palma aprop le pous sobre la razit del nas entre les huels sieus.	And then place the palm of your hand on the forehead above the root of the nose between his eyebrows.
Mays empero, cum le tieu dit del mieg loc es pervengut, signa aquel loc am tenta, e aprop igneys le cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma:	But when the heat of your middle finger has reached it, mark that place with ink, and then apply the olive wood cautery, which has this form:
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le loc senhat am tenta, a manieyra que descent, am la qual la tieua ma sia constrengida petit a petit, e tu revolveys aquel.	And then pause there at the marked place with the probe, in such a way that it descends, by which the tissue may be gradually compressed, and you rotate it.
E aprop leva la tua ma leugerament e reguarda le loc, e si veses ja del os esser descubert alcuna quantitat del cap, ayssi cum la quantitat de gra de errs, lahoras eleva la tua ma, e si no torno la tua ma am aquel ferr, am autre de aquel, si es enfrigidat, entro que sia vist del os aquo que yeu he dit a tu.	And then lift your hand gently and look at the place, and if you see any amount of the head bone already uncovered, as much as the amount of grain in a bushel, then raise your hand, and if not return your hand to that tool, or another like it, if it is cooled, until you can see the bone which I have told you about.
E aprop pren un petit de sal e disolveys aquel sobre le loc e leyssa aquel per tres jorns.	And then take a little salt and dissolve it on the place and let it be for three days.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto enbegut en boder e leyssa aquel sobre lu entro que sia destrusida la scara del foc.	And then pause on the embedded cautery and let it be inside until the burn scar is destroyed.
E aprop cura le loc am anguent tetrafarmacon entro que sia sanat.	And then treat the place with a quadruple ointment until it is healed.
E ja diyssero que quant la plagua roman uberta, tant mielhs geta le brac, per que es milhor e mays juvatiu.	And it is said that when the wound has become uncovered, the sooner you treat the arm, the better and more beneficial it is.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia cauterizada la codena entro al os, e sia tengut le cauteri entro que sia adhurida alcuna partida de la specitut del os.	And some of them say that the wound should be cauterized down to the bone, and the cautery should be held until it adheres to some part of the bone.
E aprop sia ras aquo que es adhust del os, e aprop sia curat.	And then remove what is adhered to the bone, and then treat it.
E diyssero autres que am lo cauteri pervengua al derier, entro que enprema en le os forta enprecio entro que le os caga, e aquesta es la forma de alphecati petit:	And others say that with the cautery it should reach to the deepest point, until it presses strongly on the bone until the bone melts, and this is the method of alpechini (cautery in small degrees):
E estiman de aquel loc expiran la vapors del cap.	And it is believed that vapors from the head emanate from that place.
E sia tenguda la plagua uberta per lonc temps, e aprop sia curada entro que sia consolidada.	And let the wound be treated for a long time until it is healed and has become firm.
Mays a mi no so vistas aquestas doas specias de cauteri de tot, sino en alcus homes segon via de temor; e layssa aquel, deves mi, milhor es am salut, quan es; quar le cap es develitat per solucio de continuitat de lu ayssi cum havem testificat en les autres membres, e majorment quan le cap del malaute es de freul natura.	I have not seen these two species of cautery used on everyone, but only on some people out of fear; and leave that one alone, for me it is better to heal with salves, when possible; for the head is easily damaged by breaking its continuity in this way as we have witnessed in other parts of the body, especially when the patient's constitution is cold.
E la specia de cauteri primieyra es mays salva e milhor deves mi; e de aquela husi e am aquela obra am salut.	And the first species of cautery is safer and better for me; use that one with salves.
Capitol segon.	Chapter Second.
Del cauteri del cap.	Of cautery of the head.
Quan en tot le cap accideys dolor cronica e longua e aquo es en le malaute prolonguat, e usa de gerras e de cochias e de capipurges e de emplaustres e de guatz e de cadels e de gualinas e de semblantz, e majorment si ja es cauterizat am un cautere le qual recontam e no aprofieyta a lu deguna de aquelas causas, lahoras considera quar si le cap del malaute es de fort creacio en la sua natura; e no es freul et atroba mot gran freg, lahoras aquel cauterisa am autra cauteri dejos aquel un pauc.	When chronic and long-lasting pain occurs throughout the head, and it has been prolonged in the patient through the use of various remedies such as plasters, compresses, caps, poultices, ointments, cataplasms, cauteries, and similar treatments, and especially if one cautery has already been applied without any improvement from those causes, then consider whether the patient's head is of strong constitution and not cold, and if there is much pain, apply another cautery after that one for a little while.
E aprop cauterisa aquel sobre le corn del sieu cap am cauteri entro que la codena es partida.	And then cauterize that area above the crown of their head with cautery until the pain is relieved.
Incisa la codena e sia descuberta del os la quantitat la qual havem recontat e cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en la partida deriera del cap en le loc le qual es apelat vas, — e es aquel loc en le qual es pausada ventosa.	Cut open the affected area and expose the bone in the amount we have described, and cauterize that with a cautery at the back of the head where it is called "vas" — which is the place where the windpipe is located.
Et alleuja la tua ma en aysso, e no descobras le os, quar le malaute per aquo atroba mot gran dolor diversa de la dolor de totz les autres cauteris del cap.	And approach it thus, and do not expose the bone, for the patient will experience great pain different from the pain of all other cauteries of the head.
E yeu diyre aquest cauteri en son loc, quar cove que·l cauteri am le qual so cauterisatz les corns del cap e le occiput es pus subtil cauteri que aquel am le qual es cauterisat le mieg loc del cap; e aquesta es la forma de lu.	And I shall describe this cautery in its place, for it is more subtle than the one used to cauterize the horns of the head and the occiput; and this is the form of it.
Capitol ters.	Chapter Three.
De cauterisacio de emigranea no-antiqua.	On Cauterization of Recent Hemorrhoids.
Quan endeve en la partida del cap dolor sodo, o es stenduda dolor entro al uelh, sia evacuat am medicinas le cap mondificantz, e sia aministrada l’autra curacio, la qual yeu he dita en las devesios de las malautias; e tot no aprofieyta, lahoras cauterisacio en lu es en dos manieyras: o cauterisacio am medicina acuta comburent, o am ferr.	When intense pain is found in the part of the head, or if there is lingering pain within the skull, it should be evacuated with medicines that cleanse the head, and another treatment should be administered, which I have described in the sections on diseases; but if this does not benefit, then cauterization is to be performed in two ways: either by cauterizing with a sharp combustible medicine or with iron.
Mays cauteri am medicina comburent es que tu prenguas una dolsa de alh, e escorgas aquela e abcindas las extremitatz de lu de amdos les caps.	But if you perform the cautery with a combustible medicine, take a piece of cloth, burn it, and hold it by both ends.
E aprop incideys le loc de la dolor en la templa am una lanceta lada entro que sia en lu feyt loc dejos la codena, entro que sia occultada.	And then incise the area of the pain on the temple with a lancet until it reaches just below the skin, so that it is hidden.
E aprop strenh sobre lu am stopada per descent constreccio, e layssa aquel per le spazi de tres horas; e aprop deslia le e tratz le alh, e laysa la plagua per dos o per tres jorn, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto submergit en boder entro que le loc fassa brac.	And then press on it with a pad for about an hour and leave it there for three hours; after that, remove the pad and apply a poultice for two or three days, and afterward place a compress soaked in honey until the area becomes warm.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then care for it with ointment until it is healed.
E si tu voys, fe aquo am alcunas medicinas comburentz las quals yeu he scriutas en le douse tractat de medicinas comburentz.	And if you wish, use with some medicines for burning which I have written in the second chapter about burning medicines.
Mays la cauterisacio am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: igneys per cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	And this is how you perform cautery with an instrument made of iron, which has the following form:
e es apelat claus clavilhs, quar le cap de lu es ayssi cum forma de clavel en le qual es alcuna curvitat, e·n le mieg loc de lu es eminensia petita.	and it is called a clamp with a nail head, because the top of it resembles the shape of a nail head, which has some curvature, and in the middle part there is a small protrusion.
E aprop pausa sobre loc de la dolor, e rete la tua ma — per que no sia adhurida la arceria la qual es dejos — e revol le ferr petit a petit am velocitat.	And then place it on the location of the pain, and hold your hand — so that the artery below is not adhered to — and rotate the iron slowly.
E si la quantitat de lu que es adhurida per la specitut de la codena ayssi quo la maytat de lu, e elava la tua ma per so que la arteria no sia adhurida la qual es dejos, per so que no vengua flux de sanc.	And if the amount that is adhered due to the curvature is as much as half of it, raise your hand so that the artery below is not adhered to, so that there is no flow of blood.
E aprop enbibeys coto en aygua de sal e pausa aquel sobre le loc, e layssa aquel per tres dias; e aprop pausa coto mulhat am boder, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then soak cotton in salt water and place it on the area, and leave it for three days; and then place dry cotton over it, and subsequently treat it with an ointment until it is healed.
E si voys, cauterisa am la extremitat del cutellari segon cauteri, e guarda te de incisio de arteria en aquesta emigranea propriament no-antiqua.	And if you wish, perform cautery at the end of the radial bone according to the cautery method, and be careful not to cut the artery in this proper but non-traditional procedure.
Capitol quart.	Chapter Four.
De cauterizacio d’emigranea antiqua.	On Cauterization of the Ancient Artery.
Quan tu curas emigranea am aquo que havem dit de la curacio precedent, e aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias, e no aprofieyta la curacio, e vezes per la malautia que no abasta a lu aquo que havem dit del primier cauteri am medicina o del cauteri am foc, lahoras cove que tu igniscas le cauteri cutellar entro que sia albificat, pus que significas sobre le loc de la dolor am linha de longuesa de la qual sia la maytat del dit, o quays aquel; e depausa la tua ma per una veguada e strenh aquela entro incidiscas la arceria e pervengua entro al os.	When you treat the artery as we have described in the previous treatment and in the sections on diseases, and if the treatment does not improve, and sometimes due to the disease it does not suffice with what we have said about the initial cautery with medicine or the cautery with fire, then it is necessary for you to ignite the radial cautery until it becomes white-hot. Place it along the site of pain in a line that is half the length of your finger or slightly more, and then remove your hand quickly so as not to cut the artery and penetrate to the bone.
Empero necessari es a tu que guardes de la continuacio de la mandibula, la qual es mauguda deves la masticacio, e que le lacert no sia adhurit e le nervi le qual mau aquela, e que no s’endevengua espasme.	However, it is necessary for you to guard against the continuity of the jawbone, which affects chewing, and that the lizard [likely referring to a muscle or structure] is not adhered and the nerves which move it, so that no spasm occurs.
E si es sobre la custodia e cautela de flux de sanc de l’arteria que es abciza, quar en la abcizio de lu es temor, e majorment ad aquel le qual ignora aquo que fa e no es studios e esproat; e layssa la operacio en lu al comensament.	And if it is about the custody and caution of the flow of blood from the artery that is cut, for in its cutting there is fear, and especially for one who does not know what he is doing and is not skilled and experienced; and leave the operation to him at the beginning.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio del regiment de flux de sanc accident de la arceria segon la sieua manieyra, en le sieu loc de aquest libre.	And here comes as a reminder of the management of blood flow in cases of arterial injury according to the usual method, in this place of this book.
E si veses de aquesta malautia que no abaste aquest cauteri e veses le cors del malaute tollerable, cauteriza aquel en le mieg loc del cap ayssi cum havem recontat, e cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And if you see in this illness that these cauteries are not sufficient and the patient's condition is tolerable, cauterize at the appropriate place on the head as we have recounted, and treat the wound until it is healed.
E si voys, aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le capitol de streccio de arceria am cauteri havent dos cotels, e es milhor cauterizacio aquesta e mays conferent.	And if you perform the cauteries that we have mentioned in the chapter on the rupture of arteries with a cautery having two edges, this is better and more effective.
Capitol .v.	Chapter 5.
De cauterisacio de las dolors de aurelhas.	Of the cautery for ear pains.
Quan en la aurelha ve dolor per freg e es curat am causas lacsativas e am l’autra curacio la qual he dita en la divisio, e no es remauguda la dolor, lahoras igneys le cauteri, e es aquest le qual ha nom puncta, del qual aquesta es la forma:	When pain in the ear occurs due to friction and is treated with laxative causes and the other treatment that I have mentioned in the division, and the pain does not improve, now use the cautery, and this one has the name puncta, and here is its form:
E aprop puncta aprop la ignicio, e sia menat al enviro de tota la aurelha ayssi cum roda es revolguda, o en le circuit de quascuna essemps si la dolor es en quascuna.	And approach the puncta to the fire, and move it around the entire ear as a wheel turns, or in the vicinity of each part if the pain is in that part.
Alonga te am le cauteri de la razit de la aurelha pauc a pauc pus que aias senhat le loc am tenta.	Take the cautery of the hair removal from the ear little by little until you have marked the place with it.
E si le cauteri de detz puntz en tota aurelha, e quays aquela, e aprop cura les locz entro que sian sanatz.	And if the cautery reaches those points throughout the ear, and wherever it does, take care of the places until they are healed.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter VI.
De cauterizacio de turtura.	On the cautery of the turtle (Note: It seems there might be an error or specific context needed here, as "turtura" typically doesn't refer to a turtle in medical texts but could mean another anatomical part or condition. If it's meant to be "auricula" which translates to ear, then it would be "On the cautery of the ear.") 
Turtura la qual es curada e am cauterizacio no es sino de las specias las quals veno per flecma, segon que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias.	The tumor which is cured without cautery is nothing but of the kinds which come from phlegm, as we have said in the divisions of diseases.
Esquiva cauterizacio de la specia que endeve per siccacio o per spasme del nervi.	Avoid cautery for the kind that arises from dryness or spasm of the nerve.
Quan tu curas aquela specia de turtura am jerras e capipurgi e guarguarismes, e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas le malaute am tres cauteris: la i deves la razit de la aurelha, e·l segon un petit dejos le sieu templar, e le ters deves la conjunccio de doas labias.	When you treat that kind of tumor with scarifications and capillipurgies and guarism, and your cure is not effective, then it is necessary to cauterize the disease with three cauteries: one should be near the earlobe, the second a little further in the temple area, and the third should be at the junction of two lips [likely referring to areas on the body].
E pausa lo tieu cauteri per le contrari de la partida malauta, quar mollificacio no ve sino en la partida que apar sana.	And place your cautery on the opposite side of the diseased part, because softening occurs only in the part that appears healthy.
E la forma de cauterisacio es que cauterizas aquel am le cauteri en le dreyt de la extremitat de la aurelha pus sobirana un petit sobre le corn del cap, e en le templar autre, la longuesa del qual sia segon la longitut del dit pous, e depausa la tua ma am cauteri entro que sia comburida la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena.	The method of cautery is that you cauterize there with the cautery on the right side of the uppermost part of the earlobe, and a little above the horn of the head, and in another place in the temple area, the length of which should be according to the length of your thumb, and then hold your hand with the cautery until half the quantity of the root is burned.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri, e es specia del cutellari, la forma del qual es denant mesa.	And this is the form of the cautery, and it is a special type for the surgeon, the form of which is shown below.
Mays empero pus subtil es que aquel un pauc ayssi co vesas; e cove que cotel en lu de superflua groceza un pauc.	However, even more subtle is that you should see it in a somewhat refined manner; and it is necessary to use a knife instead of excessive coarseness slightly.
E aprop cura le loc am aquo que es denant procezit entro que sia sanat.	And then treat the area with the liquid that was previously prepared until it is healed.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter VII.
De cauterizacio de apoplextia antiqua.	On cauterizing for chronic apoplexy.
Quan apoplextia es antiquada e curas aquela am aquo que havem dit e no confereys la tua medicacio e le malaute no ha febre, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris: sobre totz les corn del sieu cap; e am cauteri e le mieg loc del cap, ayssi cum havem dit; e am cauteri en le coguot.	When apoplexy is chronic and you have treated it with the methods we have mentioned and your treatment does not induce fever in the patient, then you should cauterize at four points: above all the temples of the head; one point on the middle part of the forehead, as we have said; and one point on the nape of the neck.
E la manieyra del cauteri es fayta segon que es desus dit.	And the method for the cauterization is done as mentioned above.
E ja es cauterizat sobre la boca del estomac; e es mays derier; e aprop sia curat am aquo que procezeys.	And it is also cauterized above the mouth of the stomach; this is better done later; and then proceed with the treatment as appropriate.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter VIII.
De cauterizacio de obblivio fayta per flacma.	On cauterizing for forgetfulness caused by phlegm.
Cove que sian donatz al malaute en le comensament jerras grans e pilulas le servel mondificantz.	In the beginning, give the patient large draughts and pills made from substances that purify and cleanse.
E aprop ras le cap tot del malaute e pausa sus le coguot de lu emplaustre de cetre descrit en le tractat dels emplastres.	And then shave the patient's head completely and apply a plaster to the back of the neck using the recipe described in the chapter on plasters.
E pausa aquel alcunas veguadas, quar aquel es manieyra de cauteri.	And apply this for several applications, as this is the method of cauterization.
E fay aquo segon aquel meteys orde le qual ja he dit.	And do this according to the order of the method that I have already mentioned.
E donc si per aqueles sanat bo es; e sino, lahoras fay a lu tres cauteris en la deriera partida de sieu cap, les quals sian deysendentz de la partida pus sobirana del cap entro a la partida pus dejos del col.	And if the patient improves with these treatments; if not, then perform three cauterizations in the rear part of the head, which are located descending from the highest part of the head to the part closest to the neck.
E pausa entre quascun cauteri la grossetut del dit, e aprop cura lo cauteri am aquo que es procedit.	Between each cautery, wait until the swelling of the finger subsides, and then proceed with the treatment using water.
Mays si tu vos addicio e le malaute es aquo tollerant, lahoras fay a lu cauteri en le mieg loc; e si voys major addicio, lahora cauteriza aquel sobre les dos corns.	If you are accustomed to the pain and can tolerate it, then proceed with the cautery in its proper place; and if you require more intensity, then apply the cautery over both sides.
Aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat; e sia le cauteri olivar segon la forma denant donat.	Proceed with the treatment until it is healed; and perform the olive-shaped cautery as described above.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter IX.
De cauterisacio de parazili e de mollificacio de tot le cors.	On the cautery for parasites and the softening of the entire body.
Cove que tu procesiscas en mondificacio del cap am jerras e am aquo que havem dit; e aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap, e am cauteri sobre totz les corns del cap, e am cauteri sobre la deriera partida de lu, e am tres cauteris sobre les spondils del col.	Proceed with the cleansing of the head using scissors and water as we have described; then shave the patient's head, and proceed to apply the cautery in its proper place on the head, over all sides of the head, and at the back part of it, and three cauteries along the vertebrae of the neck.
E si es necessari en la malautia de mollificacio del cors de trops aquel e les malautes tollerantz e la malautia es fort, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e dererament am cauteri entro que sia comborit de la codena mot de lu, e aleva la tieua ma.	And if it is necessary for the illness of softening the body to apply that treatment and the patient can tolerate it and the illness is severe, then proceed with four cauteries along the vertebrae of the back, and finally apply a cautery near the armpit, and raise the temperature gradually.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat, e aquest sia cauteri olivar.	Proceed with the treatment until it is healed, and this should be an olive-shaped cautery.
Capitol .x.	Chapter X.
De cauterisacio de epilemcia.	On the cautery for epilepsy.
No es cauterizat le epilemtic sino aquella epilemcia es per flecma.	An epileptic should not be cauterized except when the epilepsy is due to phlegm.
E donc cove que mondifiques le cervel de lu al comensament de lu am yeras e am l’autra curacio la qual havem dicta en la divisio quan le malaute es gran e es tollerant la exceperacio de las medicinas.	Therefore, mix the brain at the beginning of the year and during the other treatment which we have mentioned in the division when the patient is large and can tolerate the exception of the medicines.
E si es enfant le qual no sufferte las medicinas, lahoras aministra guarguarissmes e mastiguatoris le servel mondifican, denant aquo per motz dias, am bonifficacio de las viandas.	And if it is a child who cannot tolerate the medicines, then administer gargle and mouthwash made from mixed brain, for several days before that with the improvement of food.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en le mieg loc del cap segon la manieyra precedent, e am autre cauteri en le occiput de lu, e sobre quascun corn del cap sieu cauterisa.	And then shave the patient's head, and immediately cauterize that area with a cautery in the middle part of the head according to the previous method, and with another cautery on the occipital region, and on each side of the head apply cauterization.
E si le malaute es fort e es tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteris les quals he ditz, en havent paraliticament e mollificacio del cors sobre les spondils del col e les spondils del dos.	And if the patient is strong and can tolerate it, then cauterize that area with the cauteries which I have described, having paralysis and relaxation of the body over the cervical vertebrae and the thoracic vertebrae.
E sia cauteri olivar segon qu’es precedit.	And let it be an olive pit cautery as was previously described.
Mays si le malaute es enfant, lahoras pausa cauteri subtil segon aquesta manieyra.	But if the patient is a child, then use a gentle cautery according to this method.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter .xi.
De cauterizacio de melencolia.	On Cauterization for Melancholia.
Quan las causas de melencolia so humiditatz corrompudas e flacma gros, lahoras cauteriza aquel am les cauteris les quals havem ditz en le havent paralisi.	When the causes of melancholia are due to corrupted and flaccid humors, then cauterize that area with the cauteries which we have described, having paralysis.
E si la causa de melencolia es superfluitat declinant a melencolia, e le cors del malaute es humit, lahoras da ha beure aquo que mundifica le cervel de lu segon aquo que ha precedut en la divisio.	And if the cause of melancholia is an excess inclining towards melancholia, and the patient's body is humid, then give them to drink what purifies their brain according to what was mentioned previously in the division.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop fay tortora decentment fayta de li sobre le cercle, e aprop depausa aquela en le mieg loc del cap.	Cut off the top of the diseased part, and then carefully place a suitable bandage around the circumference, and then position it in the middle of the head.
E le malaute sia sesent cayrat, e sia tengut de tota partida.	And if the diseased part is six inches wide, it should be held from all sides.
E aprop pausa liniment; et es pus digne de boder antic de ovelhas.	And then apply an ointment; and it is more suitable to use one made from sheep's wool.
E escalfa aquel sobre le foc per calefaccio temprada per mesura, le qual le dit sufferta quan es mes en lu.	And warm that on the fire with moderate heat as needed, which the patient can tolerate when applied.
E aprop vuo’ aquel en le mieg loc del cap de lu en le cercle, e leysa lu entro que sia enfregidat.	And then place that in the middle of the head around it in a circle, and let it remain so that it can be rubbed.
E fay aquo am le malaute en tota semmana una veguada, am le autre regiment de lu bo entro que sia sanat; o si vols, cauteriza aquel fazen petitz puntz segon lo mays de lu, sino que tenguas la ma am un cauteri ayssi ordenat: aquesta es specia de cauteri la qual humecta le cervel am equalitat.	And do this with the diseased part once a week, and follow another regimen until it is healed; or if you prefer, cauterize that in small points as needed, but make sure to hold the hand properly when using cautery: this is a special type of cautery that moistens the brain with moderation.
E aprop pausa aquel coto enbegut en boder o en grays de gualina.	And then place that cloth soaked in wool or goose fat.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter XII.
De cauterisacio de aygua descendent en le huel.	On the cautery for water descending into the stomach.
Quan a tu es declarat le comensament de aygua en le huel per les senhals les quals yeu he ditz en la divisio, lahoras comensa e dona en beure al malaute aquo que mondifique le cap de lu, e guarda aquel de totas humiditatz.	When it has been determined that water is beginning to descend into the stomach by the signs I have mentioned in the division, then begin and give the patient something that purifies the head, and protect him from all humidities.
E fay aquel suzar en banh en degu per alcus jorns.	And have him sweat in baths made of decoctions for several days.
E aprop comanda a lu que raza le sieu cap, e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap; e aprop cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre dos templas si es le comensament de ysement de aygua en dos huels, o de la un latz si es comensamen de l’aygua en un huel.	Here is the translation:
Incideys am cauteri totas las venas e arcerias las quals so dejos la codena; e sian les cauteris en aquela lonh en la latitut de las templas.	Cut off all the veins and arteries that you leave for the ligature; and place the cautery at a distance in the region of the joints.
E guarda te de fluxs de sanc quan es cauterizat; e si veses de lu fluxs de sanc, osta le am alcuna medicina, la qual es a tu possible.	And guard against the flow of blood when it is cauterized; and if you see any bleeding, stop it with some medicine that is available to you.
E yeu vindre am savieza la qual es en extraccio de arcerias e am abscizio de aquelas e cautela de fluxs de sanc.	And I will come to the knowledge which is in the extraction of arteries and their ligation, as well as the care to prevent bleeding.
E alcunas vetz es cauterizat en le cervitz dejos dos osses am dos cauteris dererament produzitz.	And in some cases it is cauterized at the neck, leaving two bones, with two cauteries applied subsequently.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter XIII.
De cauterizacio de lacrimas antiquas.	On the cautery of old wounds.
Quan lacrimas dels huels so antiquas assuduament e per las venas e arterias las quals so en le loc manifest del cap defora e es verificat que aquo es superfluitatz frejas flecmatiquas, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri le qual havem recontat en le capitol de comensament de aygua cazent en les huels, e am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos templas, e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos osses.	When tears from the eyes are persistent and flow through veins and arteries that are visibly on the head, and it is verified that this is due to excess phlegm, then at that time cauterize that area with the cautery which we have described in the chapter on how water collects in the eyes. Use one cautery in a suitable location on the head, and apply two cauteries near each temple, and also use two cauteries near the neck leaving two bones.
E si indigeyses de addicio, lahoras cauteriza aquel en tot latz de la coa del huel sobre la extremitat del sobrecilh am petit cauteri.	And if you need to add cautery, then cauterize that area across the entire socket of the eye above the extremity of the eyebrow with a small cautery.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter XIV.
De cauterizacio de fetor de nas.	On the cautery for nasal odor.
Quan tu medicas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no aprofieyta la tua medicacio, lahoras tu aparelha e dona en beure al malaute las cochias per tres noytz; e aprop ras le cap de lu, e cauteriza le am cauteri migier am cauteri olivar.	When you treat that person with what we have said in the division and they do not benefit from your treatment, then prepare and give the patient cochineal to drink for three nights; afterward shave their head, and cauterize them with a moderate cautery using an olive oil-based preparation.
E aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri clavelh am dos cauteris sobre les dos sobrecilhs dejos les cabels un petit.	And so cauterize that part with the cautery having two points over the two eyebrows, leaving the hair a little.
E guarda te de la arceria que no incindas aquela.	And be careful with the cautery so that you do not burn that area.
E del cauteri clavilh aquesta es la forma.	And this is the form of the pointed cautery.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter XV.
De cauteri de mollificacio de palpebras dels huels.	On Cauterization for Softening the Eyelids of the Eyes.
Quan la palpebra del huel es mollificada per malautia o per humiditat, lahoras cauteriza aquela palpebre1 am un cauteri am aquest cauteri lunar; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When the eyelid of the eye is softened due to illness or humidity, then cauterize that eyelid with this lunar-shaped cautery; and this is its form:
E si vos, cauteriza aquel sobre les dos sobrecils un petit am dos cauteris en tota partida, e sian elonguatz de las timporas.	And if you do so, cauterize that area over the two eyebrows slightly with two cauteries throughout, and let them extend towards the temples.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la quantitat del sobrecil.	And let the length of each cautery be according to the quantity of the eyebrow.
E no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri, mays segon la quantitat que la tersa partida de la palpebre sia adhurida.	And do not press too hard with your hand on the cautery, but rather so that one-third of the eyelid is adhered.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter XVI.
De cauteri de la palpebre del huel quan les pels so convertitz a las partidas dedintz e punho le huel.	On Cauterization of the Eyelid When the Hairs Turn Inside and Scratch the Eye.
Quan les pels del huel son convertitz a las partidas dedintz ayssi que pungo le huel, cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, quar cauteri o es am fer o es am medicina comburent.	When the hairs of the eyelid turn inward and scratch the eye, cauterization should be done in two ways: either by performing it or using a burning medication.
Si am cauteri de lu am foc, comanda al malaute denant aquo que leyse les sieus pels ayssi cum aquels les quals les mundan, entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz; e si punho aquel deves le lor naysement, lahoras tu strenh les huels de lu am una benda per so que no sia maugut entro que·ls pels sian nascutz.	If the cautery is done with fire, instruct the patient beforehand to cut their hairs as those of ordinary people are cut, such that they are extended and even; and if they scratch from their origin, then you should bandage the eyes so that it does not happen again until the hairs grow back.
Donc cum siran nascutz e engualhatz, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop senha sobre la palpebre dels huels de lu am tenta, am senhal le qual sia segon la figura de fulha de merta, e sia le comensament del senhal prop dels pels.	When a wound or ulcer appears, then place the head of the patient in such a way that one marks above the eyelids with some sign, which is according to the shape of a leaf of mercury, and let the beginning of the mark be near the hair.
E aprop pausa coto enbegut en album de huou o en mucillatge de ptilli sobre le huel.	And then place a probe into the eye socket or in mucus of dust on the eye.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu.	And then prepare the cautery, which has this form.
E aprop cauteriza sobre la figura la qual as senhada, petit a petit, em motas veguadas, entro que sia comburida la superficia de la codena la qual es ayssi cum fuelha de mirta, tota aparent propriament.	And then cauterize over the figure you have marked, little by little, in small stages, until the surface of the wound which is like a leaf of myrtle is completely burned properly.
E senhal de sanetat de la tieua obra es que tu vegus la palpebre de l’huel ja esser contrayta e·ls pels de lu esser elevatz deves la punctura del huel.	And the sign of health in this work is that you see the eyelid of the eye already contracted and the hair of it raised up near the puncture of the eye.
E donc eleva la tua ma e laysa aquel per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eredicada la scara.	And then raise your hand and lay it aside for three days, and then place the probe on the border until the scar is eradicated.
E aprop cura aquela am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then care for that with herbs until it is healed.
Mays si retorna per les pels alcuna causa aprop lor naysement e la palpebra es mollificada, lahoras fay autra vetz le cauteri sobre aquel tot ayssi cum avias fayt primieyrament.	But if the hair around the area regrows and the eyelid is softened, then perform the cautery on that again just as you did initially.
Mays si les pels so en la palpebra dejos, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que sia elevada al sieu loc natural e sia engualhat e que les pels no punhan le huelh.	But if the hair is below the eyelid, then cauterize that until it rises to its natural place and becomes even so that the hair does not touch the eye.
Mays le cauteri am medicina comburent aquest es que comandes al malaute que leyse les pels entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz, e aprop sia fayta de carta de drap la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	But the cautery with a burning medicine is that you instruct the patient to stretch out the hair until it is extended and even, and then make it in the shape of a leaf of myrtle from paper or cloth.
E aprop pren de sabo conogut e de caus viva ana unc. i, o quays aquo, e aprop mescle3 aquelas causas be, e fay aquo am festinacio per so que no sia enfregidat; e aprop expandeys de aquo sobre la carta la qual es fayta ayssi cum forma de fulha de mirtra, e pausa aquel sobre la un huel od amdos; e pausa dejos le huel coto enbegut en album de huou, e el cap del malaute sia en le tieu se.	Take soap known and live lard one unc. i, or as much water, and quickly mix those causes well, and make that without delay so that it is not chilled; and then spread that liquid over the sheet which is made in the shape of a myrtle leaf, and place that on both wounds; and place underneath the poultice covered in white cloth, and let the head of the patient be towards you.
E pausa le dit sobre le medicina e prem aquela un petit e no la mauguas entro que lo malaute senta la mordicacio de la medicina, quar mordicacio es en lu ayssi cum de foc.	And place the hand on the medicine and press it slightly so that the patient feels the stinging of the medicine, for there is a burning in it like fire.
E donc cum percevera aquo que el atrobo mordicacio, lahoras leyssa la medicina e mau aquela am le tieu dit; donc cum cessa la mordicacio, lahoras remau la medicina he lava le huel am aygua; e lahoras considera si vezes la palpebra ja es levada ayssi cum es lavada deves la costriccio am foc o am incisio, quar lahoras esta be; e si no torna sobre aquela de la medicina sobre le loc en le qual no ha empremut la medicina e no se denigra entro que sia engualhada la tua operacio e sia contrayt le huel.	And as long as the burning sensation persists, leave the medicine on and move it with your hand; when the stinging stops, then remove the medicine and wash the wound with water; and then check if the eyelid is raised as it was washed, in which case you should apply constriction with heat or incision, for that is good; but if not, return to applying the medicine over the place where it has not been applied yet until it darkens before your operation is complete and the wound is constricted.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eradicada la codena de la adhustio, e aprop cura aquel am enguent deafinicon o am autre entro que sia sanat.	And then place over the wound with borders until the root of the injury is eradicated, and then care for it with a defined remedy or another until it is healed.
E es necessari a tu, deves la tua operacio que guardes am pervigil diligencia que en le huel no caia re de la medicina, e si la palpebre aprop alscus dias es mollificada e alcuna causa dels pels punh en le huel, lahoras itera la tua medicina sobre aquel loc le qual de la palpebre es mollificat, e propriamen ayssi quo as fayt al comensament, e aprop enaviro lu entro que sia sanat.	And it is necessary for you to guard with vigilant diligence that no dust from the medicine falls into the wound, and if the eyelid after some days becomes softened and some cause of hair growth appears in the wound, then reapply your medicine to that place where the eyelid is softened, and properly as you did at the beginning, and then around it until it is healed.
E aquesta es la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	This is the form of the myrtle leaf.
E sapias que les huels dels homes son diversificatz segon la magnitut e la parvitat, e donc segon aquo es fayta la tua contraccio.	And you should know that the leaves of men are diverse in size, and therefore according to this your contraction is made.
E no sira amaguada la via de rectetut ad aquel al qual es studi en aquesta art.	And the way of rectitude will not be hidden from one who studies in this art.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter XVII.
De cauterizacio de fistula que es en le lacrimal de l’huel.	On cauterization of a fistula that is in the tear duct of the eye.
Quan tu curas fistula am aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquela segon aquesta manieyra: comanda al malaute que pause le cap sieu en le tieu se, e tengua le cap de lu alcun ministre entre las tieuas mas en tal manieyra que no sia maugut ni agitat am le sieu cap.	When you treat a fistula as we have said in the divisions of diseases and do not confer with your treatment, then it is necessary that you cauterize it according to this method: instruct the patient to place his head between your thighs, and hold his head still by someone else's hand between your hands in such a way that it does not move or shake.
E aprop pausa coto enfus en album de huou o en mucellage de ptilli sobre le huel de lu.	And then place a cloth in egg white or on a pad of fine feathers over his eye.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then light the cautery, which has this form:
le qual sia conquau, ayssi cum es forma de cana o de pena de voltor, de la una extremitat am la qual es fayta lo cauteri.	which should be covered, as in the shape of a reed or an eagle feather, at one end of which the cautery is made.
E si voys, sia penetrant entro a la autra extremitat.	And if you wish, it should penetrate into the other end.
E si vols sia sort ayssi cum tenta.	And if you want it to be like a thread, like a tentacle.
Mays empero aquel que es concau es milhor a la tieua obra.	But the one that is covered is better for your work.
E aprop prem la fistula si es uberta, e tra de lu sania et exsicca aquela.	If you approach treating the fistula when it is suppurated, then drain it and dry it out.
E si no es uberta, lahoras obre aquela e extratz la poyredura de lu.	And if it is not suppurated, then open it and extract the putrefaction from it.
E aprop pausa sobre lu le cauteri le qual sia be ignit, e te am aquel la tieua ma un petit deves le cauteri del huel a la partida del nas, per so que no erre la tua ma o le malaute sia enquietat, e lahoras pausa le cauteri en le grays del huel e corrompas aquel.	And if you proceed with the cautery, make sure it is well heated. Hold it at a distance but not too far from the nose so that your hand does not tremble or cause harm, and then place the cautery on the gums and burn it.
E donc si al comensament del tieu cauteri perve entro al os, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera le cauteri una veguada o dos, si mestiers era; e layssa aquel ayssi per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre aquel coto am boder e enviro lu am enguent exsiccatiu entro que sia sanat.	And so if at the beginning of your cautery you perceive it entering the bone, that is good; and if not, then repeat the cautery once or twice as needed. Then leave it for three days, and afterwards place a bandage around it and apply a drying agent until it is healed.
Mays si eran passatz xi dias e no es sanat, lahoras pausa sobre lu medicina aguda corrosiva entro que l’os sia descubert e sia ras segon que conveneys en le sieu capitol.	But if after these days it has not healed, then apply an acute corrosive medicine until the bone is exposed and proceed as appropriate according to its chapter.
E es autra manieyra de cauteri de fistula la qual alscus primiers diysero: enten al loc de la fistula e fen aquela e aprop pausa en aquela fissura camaen subtil del qual es la forma de lu: E fon en aquela la quantitat de i unc de plom fundut; e te la tua ma am camaem am bona retencio, e no sia maugut le malaute per so que le plom fundut no pervengua al huel de aquel; e cove que pausas sobre le huel del malaute coto enfus en album de huou o en aygua, quar plom adhureys le loc de la fistula e sana aquela per sanacio meravilhora.	And there is another method of cauterizing a fistula, which the ancients first described: Go to the location of the fistula and open it, then place in that fissure a thin piece whose shape fits it. And put in there one ounce of molten lead; hold your hand gently but firmly, so that the injury is not aggravated because the molten lead does not reach the tissue around it. You should also place over the injured area a poultice made from egg white or water, since the lead adheres to the location of the fistula and heals it miraculously.
E si la fistula es sanada am aquo que havem dit del cauteri e de la curacio, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari aministrar trauc del nas e reduzir la fistula al cors del nas segon que vindra en son loc propri.	And if the fistula is healed with what we have said about the cautery and treatment, that is good; but if not, then it is necessary to administer nasal irrigation and reduce the fistula to its proper place within the nose.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter Eighteen.
De cauterizacio de la fendedura des potz.	On cauterizing the wound of the anus.
Motas veguadas accideysso fissuras en las labias, e majorment en las labias dels enfantz.	Often such fissures occur in the lips, and more frequently in the lips of children.
Donc cum tu curas aquelas fissuras am aquo que nos havem dit en las divisios e no aprofieyta la tua cura, lahoras igneys le cauteri petit cutellar segon aquesta forma que s’ensiec:	Therefore, when you treat those fissures with the methods we have mentioned and your treatment is not effective, at that time use fire to cauterize it slightly with a small knife in the following manner:
E sia la conquavitat de lu segon la subtilitat de cotella.	And let the heat of the cautery be according to the fineness of the knife.
Aprop pausa aquel init cuytadament en aquelas fissuras entro que·l cauteri pervengua al preon de las fissuras.	Apply the heated iron carefully to those fissures until the cautery reaches the base of the fissures.
E aprop cura aquel am cerotz entro que sia sanat.	And then treat it with ointment until it is healed.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter Nineteen.
De cauterizacio de fistula en la boca.	On cauterizing a fistula in the mouth.
Quan en la razit de uvula o en le paladar o en las razitz de las dentz endeve apostema e aprop fa brac, e aprop es rompuda, e aprop es antiquada, e corr brac e es fayta fistula, e aprop tu curas aquela e no aprofieyta a curacio, lahoras cove que tu igniscas cauteri segon la quantitat que sia receubuda en la fistula, e aprop met aquel ignit en le trauc de la fistola, e te la tua ma entro que pervengua le ferr ignit al preon de lu, e al derier de lu fazen aysso una veguada o dos; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que nos havem dit de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	When an abscess occurs on the uvula or palate or at the roots of the teeth, and it bursts, becomes ruptured, and then deteriorates to form a fistula, and when you treat this and it does not heal effectively, it is necessary for you to cauterize with fire according to the size of the fistula. Place the heated cautery into the tract of the fistula carefully until the red-hot end reaches its base; do this once or twice. Then treat it as we have described for healing until it is healed.
E donc si la sania es abscindita e es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari de descubrir le loc e hostar le os corrumput segon que vindra en son capitol.	And if the diseased tissue is excised and it heals, that is good; but if not, then it is necessary to expose the affected area and remove the corrupted bone as will be described in its chapter.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter XX.
De cauterisacio de las dentz e de mollificacio de las angivas.	On cautery for teeth and on softening the gums.
Quan las angivas son mollificadas per humiditat e las dentz son maugudas, e curas aquelas am medicinas e no confereys, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra aprop aysso, enayssi que tu pauses la quanula sobre la dent e entromet en aquela le cauteri ignit festinantment, e te la tieua ma un petit entro que·l malaute cente la calor del foc a la razit de la dent esser pervenguda.	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth are decayed, then apply these medicines and do not confine them. Place the head of the patient in a suitable position, and proceed with cautery in the following manner: place the cautery over the tooth and insert it into the area to be cauterized quickly while it is still heated, but do not let it touch the gum near the root of the tooth where the heat can affect the surrounding tissue.
E aprop leva la tua ma, e aprop itera le cauteri alcunas veguadas segon que vols.	And then remove your hand, and proceed to repeat the cautery several times as you wish.
E aprop le malaute huompla la sua boca de aygua de sal e tengua aquela per una hora, e pueys stupa aquela, quar la dent mauguda es fermada e la gengiva mollificada es strenguda e la humiditat corrompuda es exsiccada.	And then the patient should rinse their mouth with salt water and hold it for one hour, after which they may spit it out, as the decayed tooth is now stabilized, the softened gum is strengthened, and the corrupted moisture is dried up.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI.
De cauterisacio de dolor de dent.	On cautery for toothache.
Quan dolor de dent es per fregiditat, o en lu es freg o verm, o no comfereys la curacio am medicina, lahoras cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am boder de vacas, o cauteri am foc.	When toothache is due to coldness or there is decay or inflammation and the treatment with medicine does not confine it, then cautery in that case is done in two ways: either with a cow's horn or with fire.
Cauteri am boder es que tu prenguas boder de vacas e bulhas aquel en culhe de ferr , e aprop pren coto e envolopa le sobre la extremitat de la tenta, e aprop enmergeys aquel am boder bulhit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolorosa festinantment entro que sia enfregidat.	Cautery with a horn is when you take a cow's horn and heat it over charcoal, then take cloth and wrap it around the end of the horn. Proceed to immerse the heated horn in water briefly, and quickly place that on the painful tooth until it is cooled.
E aprop itera aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la vertut del foc pervengua a la razit de la dentz.	From there, apply some burns until the heat of the fire reaches the root of the tooth.
E si voys, submergeys lana o coto en le boder desus dit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolent, e pausa sobre aquel ferr ignit entro que·l ferr pervengua al preon de la conquavitat de la dent.	And if you do, soak a piece of wool or cloth in the aforementioned broth, and place it on the painful tooth, and put an ignited iron on top until the iron reaches the gum around the tooth.
Mays empero la cauterizacio am foc es que tu atendas a la quannula de eram o de ferr, e sia en le cor de lu alcuna grocesa e la acuitat del foc no pervengua a la boca del malaute.	However, for cautery with fire, you should use the tip of an iron or steel instrument, and place it in the center of any swelling so that the intensity of the heat does not reach the mouth of the patient.
E aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra, e pausa aquel sobre la dent e te la tua ma entro que·l cauteri sia enfregidat; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas quar la dolor sira remauguda o en aquel dia o en l’autre dia.	And then ignite the cautery, which will be in a specific form, and place it on the tooth with your hand until the cautery is thoroughly rubbed; do this several times until the pain subsides either on that day or the next.
E cove que per empressio de aquel cauteri que·l malaute umpla la sieua boca de bon boder e tengua aquel per una hora e aprop scupa le; e aquesta es la forma del cauteri.	And it is necessary that the patient rinse their mouth with good broth due to the pressure of that cautery and hold it in for an hour, then spit it out; this is the form of the cautery.
E cauteriza am qual que tu voys extremittat segon que a tu es possible.	And cauterize as much as you wish according to what is possible for you.
E aquesta es la forma de la cannula:	And this is the form of the cannula:
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXII.
De cauterizacio de extrophulos.	On Cauterization of Hemorrhoids.
Quan extrophulos so de flecma e de humors fregas e no so hobedientz a digistio per medicinas e tu voys la digistio de aquelas leugerament, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri conquau la forma del qual es aquesta seguen, havent dos extremitatz hubertas per que yesca le fum deves le cauteri per l’autra extremitat, e pausa aquel ignit sobre aquel apostema una veguada, e autre si indigeyses de aquel, entro que pervengua al preon del apostema.	When hemorrhoids are full of phlegm and humors and do not respond to digestion through medication and you wish to gently digest them, then ignite the cautery whose form is as follows: it has two open ends so that the smoke can escape; hold the cautery by one end and place the ignited end on the abscess once or twice if necessary until it reaches the gum around the hemorrhoid.
E si l’apostema es pauca, lahoras pausa le cauteri segon la quantitat del apostema, e aprop leyssa le per tres jorns e pausa sobre lu coto enfus en boder entro que sia remaugut aquo que·l foc ha comburit.	And if the abscess is small, delay the use of cauterization according to the size of the abscess, and then let it rest for three days and place on it something wet every day until what the fire has burned is healed.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent e tentas e draps entro que sia sanat.	And then care for that which was burnt and bandage it with cloths until it is healed.
E la forma de la cannula o deu cauteri a tal es comveyter.	And the shape of the cannula or cautery for this purpose is appropriate.
Capitol .xxiii.	Chapter XXIII.
De cauterizacio de rauquiera de votz e de constriccio de ale.	On Cauterization of Throat Inflammation and Constriction of the Tongue.
Quan las humiditatz veno sobre le quanal del pulmo, e majorment quan aquo es am fregiditat de compleccio, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia evacuat al comensament am medicinas laxativas, e aprop cauteriza aquel deves la razit del golayro en le loc depremegut.	When the venous humidity comes over the channel of the lung, and especially when this is due to cold complexion, then it is necessary that the patient be evacuated at the beginning with laxative medicines, and afterwards cauterize that part near the root of the throat.
E guarda te que no pervenguas am le cauteri al golayro ni no comburas de la codena de lu sino un pauc.	And be careful not to reach the cauterization to the throat, nor burn more than a little of the windpipe.
E cauteriza aquel am autra cauteri deves la junctura del col en le derier espondil de lu.	And cauterize that part with another cautery near the junction of the collarbone at the last thoracic vertebra.
E·l cauteri de lu sia clavilh sego la maniera precedent.	And let the cautery be needle-shaped according to the previous method.
E aprop cura aquel am aquo que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And then care for that which was treated until it is healed.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter XXIV.
De cauterizacio de malautia del pulmo e de tos.	On Cauterization of Lung Disease and Cough.
Quan tos e malautia de pulmo so de humiditatz fregas e le malaute no ha febre ni tisic e es malautia antiqua, lahoras cauterisa aquel am dos cauteris sobre la furcula en les locz depremegutz leontz e buoytz; e am autra cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz entre dos mamillos; e sia le cauteri clavilh segon la forma precedent.	When cough and lung disease are due to cold humidity and the patient does not have fever or consumption but has an old illness, then cauterize that part with two cauteries above the clavicles in the places mentioned; and with another cautery at the middle of the chest between the nipples; and let the cauteries be needle-shaped according to the previous method.
E si vols, sia la tua cauterizacio punctan am le cauteri que es apelat puncta, la forma del qual precedeys en la ponctacio de dolor de aurelhas.	And if you want, let your cautery be a punctate one with the cautery that is called puncta, the form of which precedes in the piercing for pain in the ears.
E sian puntz entro cays ad aquels; e aprop cura aquel am aquo meteys que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And let there be punctures within the cavities for those; and subsequently treat that with what has been used previously, so that it may be healed.
E ya sia le cauteri haventz tres ramps quar cauterizacio es am aquel: am una veguada podes far tres cauteris segon aquesta forma:	And let the cautery have three ridges, for that cautery is used for this purpose: on one occasion you can make three cauterizations according to this form:
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter XXV.
De cauterizacio de titillic que es le cap del ajutori.	On the cautery of the tonsils, which is the head of the helper.
Quan le cap del ajutori es dislocat per causa de humiditatz lubricas e no es fermat en la hora del sieu retornament deves la sua dislocacio entro que sia a lu aquo costuma de retornar, e aprop per un petit movement es deslocat ayssi que s’endeve, ayssi cum nos havem testificat, lahoras cove que primieyrament redusiscas la dislocacio, e aprop le malaute sia reversat sobre le sieu dos o sobre le latz sa; e aprop eleva la codena la qual es en la partida dedintz del citillic a las partidas desus am les ditz de la tua ma sinistra, si la junctura es dislocada a las partidas dedintz.	When the head of the tonsil is dislocated due to lubricating moisture and does not return to its place because of its displacement within the liquid it usually resides in, and subsequently becomes dislocated again as we have testified, at such times you should first reduce the dislocation, and then lay the patient on their back or side; and then lift the part inside the tonsil to the upper parts with your left hand if the joint is dislocated inward.
E aprop igneys le cauteri havent dos caps; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then use the cautery with two tips; and this is the form of it:
E aprop cauteriza la codena entro que penetre aquela entro al autre latz; e vindra la figura de cauterizacio lahoras de iv caps cauteris.	And then cauterize the part so that it penetrates into the opposite side; and the figure of the cautery will appear when you perform the four-point cauterization.
e so aquel subtils segon la quantitat de tenta; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And do this gently according to the quantity needed; and this is the form of it:
E alcunas veguadas es ajustat segon aquest comte i per que son les cauteris .viii.	And in some cases it is proper according to this method, and there are eight cauterizations.
E aprop pausa sobre le cauteri porys cuytz am sal, e aprop fay adherir le malaute a trenquilitat, e lo membre no sia maugut per alcun temps entro que sia confortat.	And then pause over the cauterizations poured with salt, and then let the wound adhere in tranquility, and do not move the limb much for some time until it is strengthened.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas desus e tart es fayt aquo, lahoras cauteriza sobre le muscle am cauteri clavilh o am motz cauteris puntan, quar la junctura es confermada e la humiditat es romauguda e le malaute es sanat.	And if the dislocation is in the upper parts and it is done as described, then cauterize over the muscle with a sharp cautery or pointed cauteries, for the joint is confirmed, the moisture is dissipated, and the wound is healed.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter XXVI.
De cauterizacio del stomac.	On Cauterization of the Stomach.
Quan veno en l’estomac freg e motas humiditatz entro que aquel extrazo de la sua compleccio e so multiplicatz raumases a lu, e si tu continuas las manieyras de curacio e no confereyso, lahoras cove que le malaute sia sobre le sieu dos ressupinat, e extenda las suas mas e las suas coysas, e aprop cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris: an un cauteri dejos le pietz per la quantitat d’un dit am cauteri clavilh, e am dos cauteris dejos del dos costatz del cauteri, entro que vengua la figura de cauteri triangulada; e elonga entre els que no sian ajustatz que faran poyredura.	When blood flows into the stomach, rub and stir the moisture until it is well mixed with its substance and multiplied in quantity. If you continue the methods of treatment without hindrance, then have the patient lie on their back, extend their arms and belongings, and proceed to cauterize it with three cauteries: place one cauterization below the feet at a distance of one finger’s width with a sharp cautery, and two cauteries below the two sides of the initial cautery so that they form a triangular shape; and keep them apart so that they do not touch each other to avoid rotting.
E si la profunditat del cauteri la quantitat de les dos terses de la grocesa de la codena.	And if the depth of the cauterization is equal to two-thirds the thickness of the bone.
E sia la figura del cauteri segon aquesta forma ses addicio, E si vols, cauteriza am gran cauteri en le mieg loc del estomac segon aquesta forma; et aquest sia un cauteri segon la forma de cercle segon aquesta forma:	And let the shape of the cautery be according to this form without addition. And if you wish, cauterize with a large cautery in the middle of the stomach according to this form; and this shall be a cautery according to the form of a circle as follows:
E sia cauterizat l’estomac punctan ad aquel que de aquest cauteri es spaventat: e es que tu senhes sobre l’estomac punt segon la quantitat que voles am tenta, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en les puntz; e aprop cura aquel am la curacio qu’es precedita entro que sia sanat.	And let it be cauterized the stomach puncturing for him who is frightened by this cautery: and that you know upon the stomach to pierce according to the quantity that you wish to test, and then cauterize that which was pierced with the cautery at the points; and then treat that with the treatment that precedes until it is healed.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter XXVII.
De cauterizacio del fietge fret.	On the cautery of the afflicted groin.
Quan endeve en le fietge dolor per fregiditat o per humiditat o per grossa ventositat entro que de la sieua normal compleccio sia getat per egressio superflua, e es curat le malaute am aquo que havem dit e no comfereys, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e senhes am tenta tres cauteris segon aquesta forma et aquesta quantitat meteyssa sobre le fietge dejos dels ipocondres, la hon perve le decubit de home.	When pain arises in the groin due to coldness or moisture or excessive flatulence causing deviation from its normal condition by excessive evacuation, and it is treated with what we have mentioned without compression, then the patient should be placed on his back with his head raised, and you should apply three cauterizations according to this form and quantity, placing them over the groin below the hypochondria, as a person lies.
E sia l’espazi le qual es entre quascun cauteri segon la grossetut del dit, e sia le cauteri segon la longitut del cors dreyta.	And let the space between each cautery be according to the thickness of a finger, and let the cauteries be according to the length of the right arm.
E no compremas la tua am le cauteri mot.	And do not press your hand on the cautery site.
E si la quantitat de aquo que es adhurit la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena, e no y sia pus ajustat; e si le malaute stant sobre les pes de lu; e si no es estant, lahoras sia jassent, le qual ja ha extendudas las suas coysas, e eleve les sieus brasses.	And if the quantity of that which adheres is half the breadth of a finger, and it should not be more tightly applied; and if the patient stands on his feet; and if he does not stand, then let him sit, with his things extended, and raise his arms.
E es aquesta la forma del cauteri:	And this is the form of the cautery:
E a tu es possible que cauterizes aquestz cauteris am cauteri cutellar, quan es am tu subtilitat e prudencia en l’art.	And it is possible for you to apply these cauteries with a cautery knife when you possess subtlety and prudence in the art.
E guarda te que trop no procesiscas en la cauterizacio, e sia adhurida la specitut de tota la codena per que sia adhurit tot le cors e pervengua entro als budels, quar la codena aqui es subtil; e sapias aquo.	And be careful not to proceed too quickly with the cauterization, and let the consistency of the entire poultice be such that it adheres to the whole body and reaches into the pouches, for the poultice here is delicate; and know this.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter XXVIII.
De perforacio de apostema del fietge am cauteri.	On the piercing of an abscess of the testicle with a cautery.
Quan endeve excitura o apostema en le fietge e voles saber si aquel apostema es en le carn del fietge o en la tunica de lu, lahoras si es en la carn del fietge, le malaute atrobo gravitat e dolor ses acuitat.	When you find an inflammation or abscess in the testicle and want to know whether that abscess is in the flesh of the testicle or in its tunica, if it is in the flesh of the testicle, the pain will be heavy and severe.
E si es en la tunica del fietge, am la dolor es acuitat gran e vezes que ja afatiguatz les metges la cura de lu.	And if it is in the tunica of the testicle, the pain will be sharp and intense, and often fatigues the physicians who treat it.
Donc cove que·l malaute sia enversat sobre la sieua cervit; e aprop senha le loc de l’apostema am tenta; e aprop igneys le cauteri le quel es asemblat a rag, la forma del qual a precedit en l’autra pagina.	Therefore, you should position the patient on his back; and then feel the location of the abscess by touching it; and then use the cautery that resembles a reed, the form of which was described on the previous page.
E cauteriza am aquel i cauteri entro que tota la codena sia comborida, entro que pervengua al ciphac, entro qu’en yesca sania.	And cauterize with that cautery until the entire poultice is consumed, until it reaches the center, until healthy tissue appears.
E aprop cura aquel per curacio dels autres apostemas entro que sia sanat.	And then treat that area as you would for other abscesses until it is healed.
E no cove que de aquesta forma de cauteri use sino aquel del qual le estudi en l’art de medicina es prolonguat, e en las mas del qual motas malautias an conogut; mays aquest am esperiment alcunas veguadas sia ardit sobre aquesta operacio, mays empero leyssa aquela deves nos, e es miels.	And it is not appropriate to use this method of cautery except for someone whose study in the art of medicine is extensive, and who has knowledge of many illnesses; but even then, one should attempt this experiment only a few times before daring to perform such an operation, but rather leave it to those more experienced, which is better.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter XXIX.
De cauterizacio de plauresi.	On Cauterizing Pustules.
Diyssero les antics cauteri de las razitz de aristologia a plauresi frega segon aquesta manieyra esser fazedor, e es aquest que tu prenguas de las razitz de aristologia longa secca una razit pun longua que es trobada, e sia de la grossetut del dit.	Thus say the ancients about cauterizing pustules: It should be done according to this method. Take a thin slice of the root of leek (aristology in medieval text often refers to plants like garlic or leek), which is as long as your finger and as thick as your little finger, from dried roots.
E aprop submergeys aquela en oli e eysen aquela al foc, e aprop cauteriza per un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre la continuacio de la furcula am le col; e am dos cauteris petitz dejos guidazi, un pauc declinans a la partida que es dejus la barba, e am dos cauteris en aquo que es declinant entre la quinta costa e la cizena, declinant un pauc a las partidas detras; e am autre cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz; et am autre sobre l’estomac, et am tres cauteris de las partidas detras; et am un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre las dos spallas, e am dos cauteris dels dos latz del pietz, dejos le cauteri le qual es entre doas spallas.	And then submerge it in oil and heat it over the fire. Cauterize with it at a point between the clavicle and the neck; and two small cauteries below that, slightly inclined towards the part under the beard; and two more slightly inclined between the fifth rib and the kidney, inclining slightly towards the back parts; and another cauterization in the middle of the legs; and one above the stomach; and three on the rear parts; and one at a point between the two shoulders; and two at the sides of the buttocks below the cauterization between the shoulders.
E no cove que compremas la tua ma am le cauteri, ans sia en le manifest de la codena en obra.	And do not cover it with your hand during the cauterization, but leave it exposed.
E ja diyssero alscus antics que so alscus dels homes les quals uson de cauteri de ferr semblant a ray e igneysso aquel, e meto aquel en aquel loc le qual es entre las costas, entro que pervenguam am aquel ad aquel apostema e sia foragetada sania, ayssi cum havem dit en l’apostema del fietge.	And some ancient authors also say that for some men who use a cauterization with iron resembling a blade, one should heat it and apply it to the point between the ribs so as to reach the abscess and cause it to discharge pus, as we have said regarding the abscess of the testicle.
Mays en aquesta perforacio am cauteri no es ses temor, quar hu mor tantost ho accideys en le loc fistula a la qual no es sanacio.	But in this perforation with the cautery there is no fear, for it often happens that one dies immediately or an accident occurs at a place where healing is not possible.
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter XXX.
De la cauterizacio de la melsa.	On the cautery of the Melesa.
Quan tu curas la malautia de la melsa am aquo que havem dit de la curacio en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cauteri en lu es segon tres manieras, las quals totas son dreyturieras, de las quals la una es que fassas tres cauteris o quatre linhan segon la longitut de la melsa segon la figura dels cauteris del fietge, la figura dels quals ha precedit.	When you treat the disease of Melesa as we have said about its cure in the division and do not confer with your treatment, now you should cauterize according to three ways, all of which are appropriate. One way is that you make three or four linear cauterizations according to the length of the Melesa, following the figure of the cautery used for the fetus, the form of which has been described previously.
E sia entre quascun cauteri la grossetut d’un dit o un pauc mes, e la manieyra del cauteri sia la manieyra la qual havem dita en le cauteri del fietge engualment.	And there should be a space between each cautery equal to the thickness of a finger or a little more, and the method of the cautery should be the same method we have described for the cautery of the fetus.
E no compremas la tua ma am le cauteri; e le malaute sia eves sobre lo sieu dos.	And do not compress your hand during the cautery; and let the disease be above the skin.
E es autra manieyra de cauterizar, so es que tu igniscas le cauteri haventz dos vertimentz, la qual causa havem dita en le capitol de dislocacio del muscle, e elava la codena la qual es en le endreyt de la melsa la hon perve le jazer del malaute sinistre.	And there is another method of cauterizing, which is to ignite the cautery vertically in two places, which cause we have described in the chapter on the dislocation of the muscle, and raise the shoulder, which is on the right side of the Melesa where the pain of the disease occurs.
E sia la tua elevacio am la qual elevas la codena segon la longuesa del cors, per que sian faytz cauteris segon la latitut del cos.	And let your elevation be such that when you raise the shoulder according to the length of the body, the cauterizations are made according to the width of the body.
E aprop entromet les dos vernimentz, ignitz mot, en aquel entro que am aquels penetres la codena de la autra part.	And then insert both ends, ignite one end, and at that point where it penetrates the shoulder on the other side.
E aprop extrayt le cauteri; e donc son faytz quatre cauteris.	And then remove the cautery; and thus four cauterizations are completed.
E si voys, cauteriza am cauteri havent tres vernimentz.	And if you want to cauterize, have three burnings prepared.
E aprop tu cura le cauteri pus que aia laysat de getar brac per trops jorns, quar mays es comferent que las autras causas precedentz en la curacio.	And if your cauterization is such that it causes pain so severe that the patient cannot move their arm for several days, know that this may be more effective than other preceding methods in treatment.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter XXXI.
De cauterizacio de ydropici.	On Cauterization of Hydrophobics.
Cauteri no catz en ydropici sino en alcinte3 propriament.	Cauterization is not applied to hydrophobics but to certain specific conditions properly.
Quan tu curas le ydropic am las manieyras de curacio las quals havem ditas en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que aquel cauterizes am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic e am un cauteri sobre l’estomac, e am autre cauteri sobre le fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa, e am dos cauteris entre les spondils del dos, e un cauteri en lo dreyt del pietz, e am autre cauteri sobre l’estomac.	When you treat the hydrophobic with the methods of treatment that we have mentioned in the division and do not conform to your treatment, then it is necessary to cauterize with four cauteries around the navel and one caustic on the stomach, and another caustic on the liver, and another caustic on the spleen, and two cauteries between the vertebrae of the back, and a caustic in the right foot, and another caustic on the stomach.
E la quantitat de la profunditat del cauteri sia propdana a la spicitut de la codena.	And the quantity of the depth of the caustic should be proportionate to the severity of the condition.
E aprop layssa le cauteri ubert per so que gete brac per lonc temps.	And therefore, let the caustic be applied moderately so that the arm remains immobile for a long time.
E no evacuas le malaute de curacio aprop le cauteri am aquo que cove per que sian agreguadas a lu doas entencios, e sira festinada a lu am ajutori sanacio.	And do not evacuate the harmful effects of treatment near the caustic with water that is needed to be mixed with two intentions, and it should be prepared quickly with the help of healing aids.
La forma del cauteri am lo qual es cauterizat lo ventre sia clavilh segon que la forma de aquel es desus precedent, e es aquel am le qual es cauterizat le dos sia olivar segon qu’es precedent a la sua forma.	The shape of the caustic with which the abdomen is cauterized should be clove-shaped as described above, and the one with which the back is cauterized should be olive-shaped according to its form as previously described.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter xxxii.
De cauterizacio de pes e de las coyssas.	On cauterization of the penis and other matters.
Quan les pes so apostematz en ydropitz e so repletz de aygua sitrina, cove que cauterisas les pes sobre le dos del pe in nocrati aquo que es entre le auricular e le anular, e eleva la tua ma am le cauteri e no torses aquel; e aprop eleva la tua ma, e no retornes aquela de tot, quar l’aygua satrina rezuda.	When the penis becomes inflamed and is filled with clear water, it is necessary to cauterize the penis above the joint that is between the ring finger and the middle finger, and raise your hand holding the cautery without twisting it; then lift your hand slightly, but do not withdraw it completely, so that the accumulated fluid can drain.
Es le cauteri segon aquesta forma: E aprop fay sobre las doas coyssas dos cauteris, e en quascuna coysa sia feyt cauteri am la extremitat del cauteri cutellar.	The cautery should be performed in this manner: Then apply two cauterizations to both areas, and on each area, make the cauterization at the tip of the cautery.
E sia le cauteri segon la longitut de la coyssa: i dejos le denolh e l’autre jos le mieg loc de la coyssa; e sobre quascuna coyssa dos cauteris.	The cautery should be performed according to the length of the area: one below the root and the other at the middle part of the area; and on each area, two cauterizations.
E layssa la plagua uberta ses curacio per lonc temps per so que alcuna aygua resuda de lu.	And leave the wound uncovered for some time so that fluid can drain from it.
E aprop cura le am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas.	Then treat with those causes which we have mentioned.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter xxxiii.
De cauterizacio de cos de ventre.	On cauterization of the abdomen.
Quan cos de ventre es per freg e per humiditat entro que debelice las vertutz, so es la vertut digestiva e retentiva, las quals so en l’estomac e en les budels, e es curat aquo am las manieyras de curacio e no confereys, e vezes le malaute suffertan cauteri de vertut exhiberant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am gran cauteri sobre le sieu stomac segon que a precedit en la cauterizacio del estomac, am le cauteri del cercle e am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic subtils, am cauteri clavilh subtil; e am cauteri sobre le alcatin sobre alozis gran, o am dos cauteris.	When the abdomen is affected by irritation and excessive moisture causing weakness of the functions, particularly digestion and retention, which are located in the stomach and intestines, it should be treated according to the methods described without hesitation. Sometimes the patient suffers from a need for cauterization to remove harmful substances; therefore, cauterize that area with a large cautery over their stomach as previously described in the stomach cauterization method, using the circular cautery and four subtle cauteries around the navel, or a subtle cautery shaped like a nail. Additionally, apply two or three large cauteries over the pubis.
E si vezes las humiditatz exhuberants e le malaute aquo tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le pentenilh e sobre les budels, e fort leu ajustant dos cauteris sobre l’estomac e prop dels inguonas, quar es curacio perficent de juvament de la qual no erras.	And if you remove the excessive humidities and the pain with water tolerates, then cauterize that above the navel and over the bowels, and lightly place two cauteries on the stomach and near the groin, for this is a perfect cure by which you will not err.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Chapter XXXIV.
De cauterizacio de emorroydas antiquas.	On the Cauterization of Ancient Hemorrhoids.
Quan so en la natura derier emorroydas antiquas o una de humors grossas fregas o de humiditatz corrompudas, e son curadas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no confereys la tieua curacio, lahoras cauterisa am tres cauteris sobre le pus dejos spondilh del dos petit e petit triangular, e am cauteri desus le ombelic cays per dos ditz.	When it is in the nature of ancient hemorrhoids or one of thick humors rubbing or of corrupted humidities, and they are cured with water as we have said in the division but do not confer the proper cure, then cauterize with three cauteries above the pus near the small vertebrae below, making them small and triangular, and place two of these above the navel.
E si doptas que l’estomac de lu sia enfregidat e la vianda de lu no sia degerida, e la cara de lu vezes apostemada, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre l’estomac am gran cauteri segon que es precedit; e am un cauteri sobre fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa de lu am cauteri clavilh, e leyssa le cauteri per alcun temps ubert, e aprop cura lu entro que sia sanat.	And if you find that the stomach of the patient is irritated and the food is not digested, and the face appears inflamed, then cauterize above the stomach with a large cauterization as previously mentioned; place one cauterization on the liver, and another cauterization on the spleen with a nail-like cautery, leave this treatment for some time, and subsequently treat to ensure they are healed.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter XXXV.
De cauterizacio de atheyl aprop la abscizio de lor.	On the Cauterization of Atheyl Near Its Removal.
Quan tu abscindes atheyl, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri que es asemblat a ray.	When you remove the atheyl, then use a cautery that resembles a ray.
Aprop entremet aquel ignit en aquel atheyl abscis, e ultima la tieua ma entro que pervengua le cauteri al orifici de la vena de la qual ve la sanc.	After removing that atheyl, apply the cautery to it, and ensure that the treatment reaches the opening of the vein from which the blood comes.
E fay aquo una vetz o doas, quar si achieyl son trops, lahoras cauteriza quascun de lor segon que havem recontat, e aprop cura aquels am aquo que confereys a lor dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	In that water one time or two, for if it aches too much, then cauterize each of them as we have recounted, and afterwards cure those with that water mixed with the ingredients within until it is healed.
E si cauterizas am gran cauteri sobre alquatin, es mays derier en juvament.	And if you cauterize with a large cautery over aluminum, it is better for healing.  
Capitol .xxxvi.	Chapter XXXVI.
De cauterizacio de fistolas que son faytas en la natura derie en las partidas de lu.	On the cautery treatment of fistulas that occur in the nature of the rectum in those parts there.
Quan la natura no obeziys a la obra la qual havem recomtada en son loc, e·l pacient es espaventat per aquo, sia sanat am cauteri.	When nature does not obey the treatment we have recommended in its place, and the patient is frightened by it, let it be healed with a cautery.
Donc quan ad alcun ve fistola en la natura derier, e es antiquada, corro sania de lu e humiditatz corrompudas, e donc aquo que es pus digne que cove es que proes aquela am tenta subtil, e aprop conoys la quantitat de la profunditat de lu am la devant dita tenta.	Therefore, when someone has a fistula in the rectum that is old and discharges unhealthy pus and moisture, what should be done first is to attempt it with subtlety, and then immediately determine the depth of the fistula using the previously mentioned probe.
Aprop igneys le cauteri que es semblant a ray.	Then apply the cautery, which is similar to a ray.
E aprop met aquel cauteri ignit en aquesta fistula, e segon la quantitat en la qual intrec la tenta.	Then place the ignited cautery in this fistula according to the amount determined by the probe.
E itera sobre aquela le cauteri entro que sian comburitz aquels cors corrumputz tost una veguada o dos o tres, segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And repeat the application of the cautery until those corrupted tissues are burnt away completely in one instance or two or three, depending on your need.
E guarda te de combustio de nervi e de vena; o si fistula va al cors de la vesica o al cors del budel, lahoras guarda te de totz aquels locz; e no fassas aquo sino quan la fistula es en loc carnos e cogitas que no es penetrant.	And guard against burning the nerve and vein; or if the fistula goes to the body of the bladder or to the body of the intestine, then be cautious in those areas; and do not proceed with this unless the fistula is in a fleshy location where you think it does not penetrate.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	Then care for the area so that it heals.
E si le loc es sigillat, e so abscindidas de lu las materias, e roman ayssi per lonc temps, lahoras sapias que ja es curat entierament.	And if the area is sealed and the substances are no longer discharged from it, and remains this way for a long time, then you will know that it is completely healed.
E si las materias no so de lu ostadas, lahoras sapias que es penetrant o en le preon de lu os corromput, o cays aquo de aquelas causas de las quals vindra rememoracio en son loc.	And if the substances do not stop discharging from it, then you will know that it is penetrating or in the vicinity of corrupted bone, or it falls under those causes about which there will be a reminder later.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Chapter xxxvii.
De cauterizacio dels ronhos.	On the cautery of hemorrhoids.
Quan en les ronhos endeve dolor per freg o per grossa ventozitat, e per aysso le coyt del malaute es amermat, lahoras cove que cauterizes aquel sobre les ronhos am cauteri sobre quascun ronho am cauteri clavilh del qual precesic la rememoracio.	When pain in the hemorrhoids occurs due to rubbing or from excessive gas, and because of this the patient's condition is aggravated, then you should cauterize them with a cautery on each individual hemorrhoid using a nail-sized piece of which one remembers [the specifics].
E fort leu cauterizam am le segon un petit dejos, per que vindran tres cauteris liniatz, e donc siran mays deriers en juvament.	And it is best to cauterize with a small interval between each, so that there will be three cauterizations in total, and thus they will be more beneficial for recovery.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter xxxviii.
De cauterizacio de la vesica.	On the cautery of the bladder.
Quan accideys en la vesica debelitat e mollificacio per freg e per humiditatz ayssi que·l malaute la urina no retengua, lahoras cauteriza aquel en la partida pus dejos sobre la vesiqua, la hon comensan les pels del pentenilh, e cauteriza am un cauteri en la partida dreyta, e am autre en la senestra de lu.	When weakness and softness occur in the bladder due to rubbing and humidity such that the patient cannot retain urine, then cauterize there slightly above the bladder where the hair of the pubis begins, and cauterize with one cautery on the right side, and another on the left side.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la cantitat dels not del pous; e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en la partida pus bassa del dos, o am dos cauteris si es necessitat.	And let the length of each cautery be according to the quantity of the sweat; and cauterize there with one cautery in the lower part of both sides, or with two cauteries if necessary.
E sia cauteri clavilh segon que es procesit.	And let the cautery be nail-sized as remembered [from previous instructions].
Capitol .xxxix.	Chapter xxxix.
De cauterizacio de la mayra.	On the cautery of the uterus.
Quan veno en la mayra freg e humiditatz, e per aysso es prohibida enpreignacio, e son corrompudas las mestruas de lu, e es tardada la provocacio de lor, e accideys dolor deves le haveniment de lor, lahoras cove que·l loc sia cauterizat am tres cauteris en le circuit del ombelic, ayssi cum havem dit en le cauteri de la vesica; e am cauteri sobre le loc pus dejos del dos, o am dos cauteris, e sia le cauteri clavilh.	When rubbing and humidity occur in the uterus, and because of this conception is prohibited, and menstruation is corrupted and delayed, and pain occurs due to their occurrence, then it is necessary for that area to be cauterized with three cauteries around the navel, as we have said regarding the cautery of the bladder; and one cautery should be applied slightly above both sides, or two cauteries, and let each cautery be nail-sized.
Capitol .xl.	Chapter XL.
De cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua.	On the cautery for the dislocation of the joint.
Quan humiditatz moucozas so efundudas a la partida de la anqua, e so faytas causas del yssiment del sieu loc, e senhal de lu es que la coyssa es prolonguada sobre l’autre quan so comparadas entre lor.	When moisture and swelling are spread around the joint, and such causes lead to the displacement of its location, and the sign is that one part lies stretched over the other when they are compared.
E le loc de la dislocacio es atrobat en lu quays boyt.	And the location of the dislocation is recognized where it pains.
Adonc cove que cauterizas le malaute sobre la partida de la anqua de lu am cauteri a sercle semblant, pus que tu auras senhat am tenta en le cercuit de la partida ayssi cum es revolguda, e per so que la partida caia el mieg loc del cercle.	Then you should cauterize the affected area near the joint in a circular manner, after you have marked it with a probe around the displaced part as it is rotated, so that the part falls into its proper place within the circle.
E sia le cauteri del qual precedit la forma en la cauterizacio del estomac.	And let the cautery be in the shape that precedes the form used in cauterizing the stomach.
E si aquest cauteri no es a tu present, lahoras cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris am cauteri olivar gran.	And if this cautery is not available to you, then cauterize it with three small olive-shaped cauteries.
E sia fayt le cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de tota la codena; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And let the cautery be made according to the quantity of the tension of the entire ligament; and then treat the inside so that it may be healed.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter XLII.
De cauterizacio de la vena sciatica.	On the cautery for the sciatic vein.
Quan dolor ve en la partida de anqua, e so causa de lu freg et humiditatz, le malaute es curat am aquo que havem dit e no confereys, e aquo es antiquat, lahoras cove que tu lacses le malaute de humors grosses am pillulas fetidas o am pillulas artificials o semblantz; e aprop cauteriza aquel.	When pain occurs in the joint area, and its cause is friction and moisture, treat it as we have described and do not neglect it; if it becomes chronic, then you should purge the affected area of thick humors with fetid pills or artificial ones or similar remedies; and afterward cauterize it.
E la manieyra del cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am medicinas comburentz, o cauteri am foc.	Here is the translation:
Sira segon dos manieyras scientas, de las quals es la una que cauterizes aquel sobre la partida de l’ancha de lu am tres cauteris triangulatz segon aquesta forma; e fay am aquels bona profunditat.	Here is the translation:
E sia le spazi le qual es entre cascun cauteri la quantitat de la grossitut del dit e si le cauteri olivar o gran.	And let the spaces which are between each cautery be the quantity of the thickness of a finger, and if the cauteries are olive or large.
Mays alcunas veguadas sia le cauteri sobre le mieg loc sobre le cap de l’anquan per que son quatre cauteris.	And in some cases, the cauteries should be on the middle part of the head because there are four cauteries.
E si vols, cauteriza am le cercle del qual es precesida la forma en la cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua, la i que sia cercle continent e comburey la ispicitut de tota la codena.	And if you want, cauterize also the circle from which the form precedes in the cautery of the dislocation of the joint, so that it is a continuous circle and burn the entire length of the bone.
E aquesta es la manieyra de cauteri in ciatiqua quan dolor es adherent al anqua e no es estenduda entro a la coyssa.	And this is the method of cautery in cases where pain is attached to the joint and does not extend into the surrounding tissue.
Mays si es estenduda entro a la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre la coyssa sobre le loc al qual envireys le malaute que es la dolor; e am un cauteri sobre la cavilha per quatre ditz un pauc deves la part cilvestra.	But if it extends into the surrounding tissue, then cauterize that area with two cauteries on the tissue at the location where you will direct the malaise that is the pain; and one cauterization on the navel bone four finger-widths away from the wilderness part.
E si le cauteri cutellar, e sia la profunditat del cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de la codena.	And if the cautery is knife-like, then the depth of the cautery should be according to the length of the bone.
E si le malaute envireys que la dolor es estenduda entro al loc prop les ditz des pes, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui on envireys am cauteri per tres puntz o quatre o mays si indigeys de aquel.	And if the malaise you direct is that the pain extends to the area near the toes of the foot, then cauterize there where you will direct with one cautery at three points or four or more as needed.
E si le malaute envireys dolor esser dejos le donolh ves la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui am un cauteri cutellar.	And if the malaise you direct is that the pain is below the shoulder in the tissue, then cauterize there with one knife-like cautery.
E guarda te en tota cauterizacio que no ultimes am le cauteri en tant que comburas nervi o gran arceria, e que per aquo a tu es sobre le malaute mal noccument o contraccio.	And be careful in every cautery that you do not end the cautery at any point where you burn a nerve or large artery, and thus cause harm to the patient maliciously or by mistake.
E yeu ja e vist un e autre de aquels les quals cauterizero sobre la cavilha e ultimero en la cauterizacio, e la cama foc inflada entro que la tumor aconseguit lo pe, e foc perforat e corromput tot le pe.	And I have seen one and another of those who cauterize upon the nail and finish in the cauterization, and the bed of fire inflated until the tumor reaches the flesh, and fire perforated and corrupted all the flesh.
E aprop accidic fort solucio de ventre, e aprop aquo la mort.	And as a result of a severe abdominal condition, and as a consequence death.
E si la dolor es en dos partidas ensemps cauteriza quascuna segon aquesta manieyra.	And if the pain is in two parts simultaneously, cauterize each one according to this method.
E diysero les savis alcus en la cauterizacio de anqua cauteri del qual aquesta es la manieyra: fay semblant a cercle de ferr del qual le cercuit sia la maytat de un palm; e sia deves le sieu orrifici segon la grossesa de un os de datil o mens un pauc.	And the wise ones said about the cauterization of an area to be cauterized in this manner: make it resemble a circle of iron whose circumference is half a palm; and let its depth be according to the thickness of a date stone or somewhat less.
E dedintz aquel cercle sia un autre tertz; e sia le spazi le qual es entre lor la quantitat del notz del pous; e sian aquels cercles ubertz de dos partidas; e sia la longitut de aquels cays un notz o dos notz, e fay en aquels margue de ferr decentment apparelhat en les cercles; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And inside that circle there should be another one a third of its size; and the space between them should be the quantity of a thumb’s width; and those circles should be evenly distributed on both sides; and the length of those bars should be one or two thumbs, and make along those edges an iron border appropriately prepared around the circles; and this is the form of it.
Aprop sia ignit en le foc entro que s’enrogesisca e gete scintillas, e aprop sia pausat sobre la partida del anqua, le malaute colcat sobre le latz sa.	Then place it in the fire until it reddens and sparks, and then apply it to the affected area, placing the cauterizing instrument on the skin.
E donc cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris redontz en una veguada.	And thus cauterize that area with three round cauteries at once.
E aprop layssa aquel per tres jorns; aprop emplastre aquel am boder e layssa la plagua uberta per trops dias; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then let it rest for three days; then apply an external plaster to that area and leave the wound exposed for more than ten days; and then treat that area with remedies until it is healed.
Diys Albucasis : o, filhs, de aquesta specia de cauteri pauc havem usat per la terror del reguardament de lu, e per aquo que paucs havem trobatz les quals reguardan sobre lu.	Albucasis says: Oh, my children, we have used this type of cautery rarely due to the fear of its consequences, and because few have been those who have paid attention to it.
Mays dels bos cauteris a lu qui les sufferta, et atroba am aquel le loc de lu.	Here is the translation:
Mays cauteri am medicinas adhurentz es que tu fassas dos cercles haventz armula perforada en la qual deyssen le guaffo de la porta de ferr; sia la longuitut de la paretz en la nauteza de lor sian dos nozes o quays aquels.	Here is the translation:
E si le spazi le qual es entre quascu la quantitat de la grossitut del dit; e sian ubertz dejos e desus, e sian que contenguan se entre lor segon aquesta forma:	And if you measure the spaces which are between each finger’s thickness; and let them be raised both below and above, and let them contain themselves according to this form:
E aprop pausa sobre la partida de la anqua le malaut jasent sobre le latz sa, e comprem la tua ma sobre la partida de la anqua; e aprop pren de aygua cauda e fon la entre dos cercles, e la qualiditat de aquela sia am le foc petit a petit, e te aquela per la quantitat de una hora, e sufferta le malaute la mordicacio e la adhustio de lu — quar aquel atrobo mordicacio ayssi cum de foc — entro que cesse la mordicacio.	And then pause over the part of the vessel where the sick person is seated, and place your hand on the part of the vessel; and then take hot water and pour it between two circles, and let that quantity be heated little by little over a small fire for about one hour, until the patient feels the biting sensation and the buzzing—like when bitten by fire—until the burning sensation ceases.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am le instrument et abstergeys l’aygua cauda de tota la anqua am aygua dousa.	And then raise your hand with the instrument and wipe off the hot water from all the vessel with cool water.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres jorns e pausa sobre aquel boder entro que sia la negror de la adhustio remauguda, e leyssa aquo per alcus jorns, e correra de lu poyredura; aquest es derier en juvament.	And then treat him for three days and pause on that border until the blackness of the burning is reduced, and continue treating him for several more days, and he will recover from it; this is beneficial in treatment.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then treat him with herbs until he is healed.
E si la dolor es extenduda entro la coyssa o la camba, fay a lu estatua en lu que contengua aygua segon que es feyt en la anqua engualment.	And if the pain extends to the chest or stomach, treat him in the way that involves water, as it is done with the vessel similarly.
E aquesta es la manieyra de aygua cauda, e yeu ja he scrit aquela en le tractat de la rectificacio de medicinas.	And this is the method of hot water, and I have already written about it in the treatise on the correction of medicines.
Recipe de alcali e de caus no extinta de amdos ana partida una, e trissa les e pausa en una ola nova de la qual la partida dejos sia perforada per un petit trauc, segon la quantitat que intre en lu ray.	Recipe for alkaline and cause not extinguished from both parts one, and triturate them and place in a new jar of which the part below is perforated by a small hole, according to the quantity that enters into the treatment.
E pausa dejos le fons de la ola autra ola enveyriada, e gete sobre aquel alcali e caus viva de aygua doussa la qual cobra aquels per un dit, e pus que tu compremes aquels am la tieua ma per bona compressio, e leyssa la hola que deyssenda de lu aygua aguda en la partida dejos a la ola enveyriada.	And pause then at the bottom of one wave and pour over that alkali and use living water of fresh liquid with which it takes those by finger, and when you understand them to be moist let them remain on the ground but through good compression, and leave the hole from which sharp water descends below at the part turning upwards toward another wave.
E aprop ajusta tota aquela aygua, e geta la sobre autra caus viva e autre alcali renovelatz, quar aquela lahoras sira de mot forta acuitat, la qual es aministrada en motas operacios de medicina e en cauterizacio dels autres membres, quar operacio fa de foc.	And then apply all that water and pour it over another living liquid and another renewed alkali, because at those times it will have great sharpness, which is administered in many medical operations and in cauterization of other members, as this operation does with fire.
E so de las medicinas alcunas am las quals es cauterizat ancha, ayssi cum tezizic e mel anacrat e caus am sabo enayssi que sian mesclatz.	And among the medicines with which it is cauterized widely are substances like vinegar and honey mixed with aniseed and water in such a way that they are blended.
E Gualia recontet de un home dels antics la operacio e la curacio am la qual es curada dolor de anqua e de vena sciatica, e magnifiquet mot be esser de aquel, e diys que no hac necessitat de autra curacio, e quar es sanat per una veguada ayssi cum recomtec, quar fort leu aquel intrec en banh e eysic ja sa d’aquel.	And Gaul recounts the operation and the cure with which a person from antiquity was cured of pain in the sciatic nerve and vein, and magnifies much how good it is to do so, saying there is no need for any other treatment, as it heals once done as described, since light that intervention in bath and sweat is already sufficient.
Et es que sia pres de certarragi vert, e si no es atrobat vert, sia presa figua recent; e mot sia trissada am un pauc de grays e sia pausat sus la anqua en la qual es la dolor, o en la coyssa, o en la camba, e sia liat.	And it should be taken in a bag of green herbs, and if no green is available, take a fresh fig; mix it with a little flour and apply it to the spot where the pain is, either on the thigh, or on the buttock, or on the hip, and bind it.
E sia layssat per la cantitat de tres horas o per la quantitat que·l malaute centa cedacio de la adhustio.	And let it remain for three hours or for the duration that the patient considers suitable for the adjustment.
E aprop met aquel en banh e donc quan le cors de lu sia enrozat, entromet aquel en le sol, quar la dolor cessa e es sanat.	And then put that person in a bath, and when their body is relaxed, place them on the ground, for the pain will cease and they will be healed.
E sapias que no cove que alcu use de cauteri am aquestas medicinas sino aprop la evacuacio del cors.	And know that you should not apply cauterization with these medicines except immediately after the evacuation of the body.
Mays ja Escorides diysec que quan am fenda de cabra la vena stretica es cauterizada, aprofieyra a lu mo be; e sia le cauteri am lu segon aquesta manieyra: sia presa lana e sia enbeguda en oli antic, e sia pausat entre le pous del pe e entre le fossil.	And Celsus says that when there is a goat's horn-shaped incision in the vein, it is cauterized, and takes effect on the patient well; and let the cauterization be done according to this method: take wool and soak it in old oil, and place it between the toes and the bones.
E aprop pren fenda de cabra secca e emflasma aquela am foc entro que sia fayta carbo; e aprop pausa lu sobre la lana e leysa la entro que sia estengida.	And then take dried goat's horn and ignite it in the fire until it becomes charcoal; and then place it on the wool and let it be spread out.
E aprop itera aquo, e no cessas far aquo entro que·l scintiment de la mordicacio pervengua entro al anqua e repausa la dolor.	And then repeat this, and do not stop doing this until the sensation of the bite reaches the joint and the pain subsides.
Et aquesta manieyra de cauteri es apelat cauteri de vaquas.	And this method of cauterization is called cow cauterization.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter XLII.
De cauterizacio de dolor de dos.	On Cauterization for Foot Pain.
Alcunas veguadas dolor es en le dos per tropas causas, cum per cazement o per percucio o per superflua evacuacio, e per causas ad aquelas semblantz, per infusio de materia frega e humida.	Sometimes pain in the foot is caused by various reasons, such as from a fall or blow or excessive evacuation, and for similar causes, by the infusion of moist and corrosive matter.
E cauteri no catz sino en aquesta sola specia la qual es fayta per efusio de materia frega.	And cauterization is not used for any other condition than this specific one, which is done by the application of corrosive matter.
Donc cove, aprop evacuacio del malaute am pillulas fitidas e am semblant a lor, que sian faytas sobre·l dos en le qual es la dolor tres linhas segon la latitut de lu, pus que senhas am tentha en quascuna linha v cauteris o mays, segon la quantitat que ve de la tolleransa del malaute e de la vertut de lu.	Therefore, after evacuating the harmful substance with thin pills and similar to them, place three lines of cauterizations on the foot where the pain is, each line being about a finger's width apart. Then apply up to five cauterizations or more in each line, depending on the patient's tolerance and the strength of the treatment.
E sia fayta cauterizacio am cauteri de punt.	And let cauterization be performed with a pointed cautery.
E si vols, cauteriza am tres cauteris o am quatre am cauteri clavilh medial segon aquesta forma:	And if you wish, cauterize with three cauteries or with four with a central pointed cautery as follows:
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter XLIII.
De cauterizacio al comensament de gilbositat.	On Cauterization at the Beginning of Chilblains.
Motas veguadas endeve aquesta malautia als petitz enfantz; e senhal del comensament de lu en les enfantz es que accideys sobre lor estrectura en le ale eves la elevacio e·l movement.	This disease often affects small children; and the sign of its beginning in children is that it appears on their skin, with elevation and movement.
E atrobas en le derier espondil del dos e dels notz de lu que ja comensa a sobremontar sobre les autres spondils.	And you will notice on the last thoracic vertebra and on those that are beginning to rise above the others.
E donc quan tu vezes aquo e voles prohibir, lahoras cauterisa aquel am cauteri que sia cercle segon aquesta forma:	And when you see this and wish to prevent it, then cauterize that area with a circular cautery as follows:
que prengua le cauteri sobre tota partida del spondilh engualment.	so that the cautery covers the entire part of the vertebra evenly.
E si vols, cauteriza en le circuit del spondilh am le cauteri de punt dos linhas o tres.	And if you wish, cauterize around the vertebra with a pointed cautery in two or three lines.
E sian les puntz propdas entre lor.	And let the points be spaced apart from each other.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat am aquo que havem dit.	And immediately treat the area so that it heals as we have described.
Mays guarda que cauteri no sia administrat en gelbositat que sia fayta per spasme de nervi.	But be careful not to administer cauterization on chilblains that are caused by nerve spasm.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter XLIV.
De cauterizacio de podagra e de dolor de juncturas.	On Cauterization of Gout and Joint Pain.
Quan dolor de juncturas son faytas per humors fregas les quals so enfundutz a quascun membre del cors, lahoras quan veno dolors en los pes, de costuma dels metges es que aquo apelen podragua propriament.	When pain in the joints is caused by the friction of humors that flow into each member of the body, at times when pains occur in the feet, it is customary for doctors to call specifically for a poultice.
E donc cum es curada podagra de causa frega am manieyra de cura e no so remaugudas las dolors, lahoras las remau cauteri.	And thus, when the gout is cured due to friction by a method of treatment and not by removing the pains, at times the pains are removed by cauterization.
E es que tu cauterizas aquel aprop evacuacio en le circuit de la junctura del pe am motz cauteris.	And it is when you cauterize that particular area of evacuation near the joint of the foot with burning.
E sia cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And this is an olive-shaped cautery, which has the following form:
E si es necessitat que puntz sia fayt sobre la fassia del pe, lahoras fay am cauteri de punt.	And if it is necessary to make a puncture on the fascia of the foot, then use a pointed cautery.
E si las dolors pujan entro als denolhs o a las autras juncturas, e aquo motas vetz s’endeve, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre quascun donolh am tres cauteris o quatre de tota partida am aquest cauteri olivar.	And if the pains rise into the toes or other joints, and you often find this necessary, then cauterize each toe with three or four cauteries all around using this olive-shaped cautery.
E si motz cauteris que aquestz cauteris sian a tu necessaris, lahoras cauteriza aquel e no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri abans, sia tant solament enviro la specitut de la codena.	And if you need to use these cauteries, then cauterize but do not press too hard with your hand on the cautery beforehand; only apply it around the circumference of the area.
E si las dolors pugan entro al donolh e·l dos, lahoras aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le sieu capitol.	And if the pains rise into the second toe, then administer the cauteries as we have described in its chapter.
E si las dolors so en las mas tant solament, e es apelada suagra, lahoras puncta en le circuit dels focils ayssi cum se revolvo, puncta en aquels dos linhas.	And if the pains are only in the sole of the foot and it is called podagra, then puncture around the toes as they are arranged, puncturing those two lines.
E si reman de las dolors en les ditz, lahoras puncta en le cercuit dels focils sobre quascun notz e sobre la pinche de la ma.	And if the pains remain in the said areas, then puncture around the toes on each one and on the ball of the foot.
E si las dolors pugan aprop alscus jorns als coydes o als muscles, lahoras cauteriza les quascus de tota part dels ajutoris.	And if the pains persist near for several days in the joints or in the muscles, then cauterize the affected areas all around.
E no evacuas le malaute de bon regiment e de recepcio de medicinas, quar si es fayt bon regiment e flacma es evacuada am aquest cauteri sira sanat, Dieus ajudan.	And if you do not expel the bad humor through good regimen and reception of medicines, for if good regimen is followed and the harmful substance is expelled by this cautery, it will heal, God willing.
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter XLV.
De cauterizacio de rompeduras.	On Cauterization of Fractures.
Quan endeve rompedura en les angonars e diysendo les budels denant l’atela al genetiu, e aquo es comensan de aprop, lahoras cove que tu mandas al malaute layssar la sua comestio en le sieu dia e que use de causas leniens per so que la fenda deyssenda del sieu ventre.	When you suspect a fracture in the thighs and intestines are exposed before the towel covering them, and this is beginning to happen nearby, then it is necessary for you to order the patient to stop eating for several days and use laxatives so that the opening from their abdomen closes.
E aprop segua le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e comanda a lu que tengua le sieu ale entro que sia foro getat o aparesca l’atela o·l budels.	And have the patient lie close to you on their back, and command them to keep their abdomen elevated so that it is projected outward or the towel covering the intestines appears.
E aprop retorna aquel am les tieus ditz e senha am tenta la ruptura sobre le os del pentenilh am senhal la extremitat del qual sia semblant a la maytat de cercle a las subiranas partidas del cors.	And then return to examine it yourself and check for the fracture on the bone of the thigh, marking the extremity of which appears similar to half a circle in the upper parts of the body.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then prepare the cautery, which has the following form:
entro que sia mot rog e gete cintilhas.	so that it is round and emits sparks.
E aprop reduzeys le budel o l’atela a la sua conquavitat, e aprop pause la sua ma sobre le loc per so que le budel no yesqua.	And then reduce the intestines or towel to their proper position, and then place your hand over the area so that the intestines do not slip.
E tu ja has ubert entre las coyssas del malaute e dejos lu as pausat un coyssi, et autre servent sia sus las cambas de lu, e autre sus le pietz de lu, le qual tengua las suas mas.	And you have already applied padding between the patient's bones and leave one bone supported by a pad, another on the chest of the patient, and another on their feet, so that they lie comfortably.
E aprop pausa le cauteri sobre aquel senhal am la tua ma am cauteri stan dreyt, e te aquel entro que am lu consieguas le os del pentenilh entro al mieg del duiduni; e itera am aquel autra veguada si a tu aquel no has conseguit en la primieyra veguada entro al os.	After the pause of the cautery on that mark, hold the cautery straight with your hand, and enter into it where you can reach the bone of the thumbnail within the joint; and do this again another time if you did not succeed on the first attempt to reach the bone.
E observa saviament del ysiment del budel en la hora de la tua cauterizacio, que no comburas aquel budel per so que sobre le malaute no vengua in mort o autre gran malicia.	Observe carefully the condition of the bowel during your cautery, so that you do not burn it, lest death or another great harm come to the patient.
E sapias que quan tu am le cauteri no atenhas le os, no confereys la tua operacio.	And know that when you do not have the bone with the cautery, do not proceed with your operation.
E cove que·l cauteri dels enfants sia subtil segon le gran e la mesura de lor.	And it is appropriate that the cautery for children be gentle according to their age and size.
E aprop cura le loc del cauteri per tres dias am boder entro que sia remauguda la scara del foc.	And afterwards, take care of the site of the cautery for three days with a dressing until the burn scar has healed.
E aprop cura aquel am les autres enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And afterwards, treat that with other ointments until it is healed.
E le malaute sia jasent sobre le sieu dos per xl dias entro que sia sigillat le loc e la plagua.	And let the patient lie on their back for forty days until the site is sealed and the condition healed.
E cove que pauses le nutriment de lu segon la longitut del temps de la curacio de lu le qual le linesca le ventre de lu, e que le budel no yesca fora deves le esforsament de guerir.	And it is appropriate to restrict the patient's diet according to the duration of the healing period during which the intestines are weakened, so that the bowel does not protrude due to excessive effort.
E aprop quan se vol levar aprop xl dias, lahoras aministra liament decentment fayt, e tengua aquel per autres xl jorns.	And afterwards, when you want to remove it after forty days, administer it carefully and properly, and keep that for another forty days.
E sia mermat de trebalh e de replecio de vianda e de beure, e de votz vehementz, quar quan usa de aquest regiment de sanacio entiera sira sanat.	And let them be restricted from work and from overeating food and drink, and from speaking loudly, for when they follow this regimen of complete healing, they will be healed.
E yeu diyre la curacio de las rupturas en las autras partidas del ventre, e so al comensament, e vols que no treguan, lahoras cauterisa la ruptura d’aquel am cauteri redon segon la quantitat de lu, e sia aquo que es exhurit de la codena ayssi cum la tersa partida de lu; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit, e no es ajustat.	Here is the translation:
E ja diyssero alcus primiers que ruptura sia cauterizada am cauteri triangular segon aquesta forma, pus que es senhada am tenta:	And if someone were to say that rupture should be cauterized with a triangular cautery according to this form, for it is marked with the hand:
e es pausada linha que eys per la latitut en le latz pus sobira de la ruptura, e autra linha al desus; e depausa la tua ma am un cauteri clavilh, mays le primier cauteri es pus leugier e milhor.	and it is marked with a line that you follow along the latitude in the groin above the rupture, and another line below; then place your hand with a nail-shaped cautery, but the first cautery is quicker and better.
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter XLVI.
De cauterizacio de torcio.	On the Cauterization of Torticollis.
Quan endeve en alscus membres per cazement o per percussio dolor e persevera aquela dolor per lonc temps e no comfereys al u curacio am medicinas, lahoras cove que cauterizes am cauteri de punt.	When pain occurs in any members due to falling or striking and that pain persists for a long time and does not respond to treatment with medicines, then it is necessary to cauterize with a pointed cautery.
E sia le cauteri de tot membre segon la magnitut e la parvitat de lu, e vertut e develitat de lu, e locacio de torcio e dolor de lu.	And the cautery for each member should be according to its size and smallness, and its nature and condition, and the location of the torticollis and the pain in it.
Donc si·s sanat per le primier cauteri, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera sobre lu le cauteri; quar de costuma de aquelas dolors es que sian punctatz de membre ad aquel membre le qual apropinque al u, per que cove que consieguas aquels am cauteri entro que·l malaute sia sanat.	If it heals with the first cautery, that is good; but if not, then repeat the cautery. For it is customary for such pains to be punctured in the member closest to where the pain is, so you should achieve this with the cautery until the patient is healed.
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter XLVII.
De cauterizacio de lepra.	On the Cauterization of Leprosy.
Les lebros alcunas veguadas am cauteri per mot gran juvament, e magerment si la specia de lepra que es fayta per putrefaccio de flacma e de melencolia.	Some cases of leprosy are greatly helped by cauterization, but rarely when the type of leprosy is caused by the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy.
E donc cum tu vols cauterizar aquel, considera si la lepra es comussan e as aquela curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no deysen, ni esta, e temes sobre le malaute que la corrupcio comprehenda tot le cors de lu e tota la compleccio de lu, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le cap am v cauteris: am un en le mieg loc del cap, e am le segon pus dejos de lu, eves le front a la fi dels cabels; e amdos sobre dos corns; e am un detras, sobre la nuca o servitz.	And so when you wish to cauterize that person, consider whether the leprosy is commissary and treat it with what we have said in the division and do not cease until this is done, and you fear over the patient that the corruption comprehend the whole body of him and all the constitution of him; then cauterize that person on the head with a cauterizing iron: one at the mid location of the head, and another further down from it, near the forehead to the end of the hair; and both above two horns; and one behind, over the nape or back of the neck.
E ultima la tua ma am le cauteri un pauc entro que emprema en le os una petita empressio, e de lu sian deslocadas las scorsas, per so que la expiracio de grossas vapors sia alleujada de lu; e cauteriza sobre la melsa segon que es precesit.	And finally, your work is to press the cautery a little inside so that it impresses upon the bone a small impression, and thereby displace the scabs, so that the expulsion of thick vapors may be facilitated; and cauterize over the membrane as is necessary.
E si la lepra es ja expanduda sobre le malaute e apar manifestament, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquel am aquels cauteris les quals havem ditz en le cap; e am cauteri sobre la extremitat del nas, e am dos cauteris sobre las doas maysselas, e am dos cauteris sobre dos spondils del col, e am vi cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e am un gran sobre les spondils prop de la coeta, e un sobre la cotea , e am dos sobre las anquas, e am un sobre quascuna anqua, e am dos sobre les donols e un sobre quascun donolh, e am dos sobre les coydes, e am dos sobre les muscles, e am dos las teneretutz del sieu pietz; e cauteriza aquel sobre totas las juncturas dels ditz de las mas e dels pes, e sobre quascun talon dels sieus pes, e sobre les foscils de las suas mas.	And if the leprosy has already spread over the patient and appears manifestly, then it is necessary that you cauterize those places with the cauteries which we have mentioned on the head; and with a cautery on the extremity of the nose, and two cauteries on each cheek, and two cauteries on the vertebrae of the neck, and six cauteries on the vertebrae of the back, and one large cautery on the vertebrae near the buttocks, and one on the buttocks, and two on the thighs, and one on each thigh, and two on the knees, and one on each knee, and two on the muscles, and two on the tendons of his feet; and cauterize that person over all the joints of the aforementioned arms and legs, and on each heel of his feet, and on the hollows of his hands.
E guarda te dels nervis les quals so sobre le talo que no comburas aquels.	And be careful of the nerves which lie above the heel so that you do not burn them.
E alcunas veguadas es cauterizat am un cauteri sobre le os del pentenilh e am autre sobre la boca del stomac, e autre sobre le fietge.	In some cases, it is cauterized with a cautery on the bone of the penis and with another on the mouth of the stomach, and another on the spleen.
E sapias que quant mays ajustas cauteris, tant es mays juvatiu e mays conferent; e sapias que le malaute no ha en le cauteri dolor, ayssi cum han les sas, per so quar le cors de lu ja es stupefayt.	And know that the more you adjust the cautery, the more beneficial and effective it is; and know that the patient does not feel pain from the cautery as much as the bystanders do, because the body of the patient has already been numbed.
E cove que les cauteris sian grans o paucs segon les membres e las juncturas segon que es precedit de las specias dels ferramentz.	And it is necessary that the cauteries be large or few according to the members and joints, as dictated by the properties of the tools.
E aprop cura le cauteri am farina de errs coyta am mel e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And immediately apply the cautery with flour of barley mixed with honey, and continue the other treatment until it is healed.
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter XLVIII.
De cauterizacio de stupor.	On Cauterization for Stupor.
Quan alcun membre es stabozit o adormit e es curat am medicinas, olis e emplastres, e no es sanat, lahoras tu cauteriza aquel membre stabozit am cauteris segon que merita la grandesa del membre o la parvitat de lu.	When a limb is numb or asleep and is treated with medicines, oils, and plasters, but does not heal, then you should cauterize that numb limb with cauteries according to the size of the limb, whether large or small.
E sia lo tieu cauteri intrant la ispicitut de la codena un pauc.	And let the heat of the cautery penetrate into the tissue slightly.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then treat that area with an ointment until it is healed.
E alscunas veguadas es cauterizada alcuna stupor le qual endeve a las mas e als pes, e als spondils del dos e ves le eysiment dels nervis les quals mavon aquel membre, e es remauguda la stupor.	And in some cases, numbness is cauterized which extends to the muscles and bones, and along the vertebrae of the back, as well as the course of the nerves that move that limb, and the numbness is alleviated.
Mays no prusuma sobre aquo sino aquel que es savi en la anotomia dels membre e de la egressio dels nervis tot le cors moventz.	But do not proceed with this except by one who is wise in the anatomy of limbs and the course of nerves throughout the moving body.
Capitol .xlix.	Chapter XLIX.
De cauterizacio de albaras que es morfea.	On cauterizing the parts that are discolored.
Quan albaras es antiqua e no comfereys a lu alcu dels enguentz de medicina, lahoras tu cauteriza sobre aquela am cauteri preon un pauc segon la quantitat de la specitut de la codena entro que sia remauguda la blancor e la color de lu, e la color de lu sia mudada.	When the discolored area is old and does not respond to any of the medicinal ointments, then you should cauterize it. Apply the cautery for a short period, according to the quantity needed until the whiteness and color return to normal, and the color changes accordingly.
E aprop cura aquel am farina de errs e de lentilhas am oli rozat e am folhas de arnagrosa, e am sanc de colomba o am sanc de yronda, da cascuna sia una partida e totas sian mescladas, e aprop sia linit un drap e sus le loc sia pausat entro que sia sanat.	And for the treatment, apply a paste made of flour and lentils mixed with rose oil and arnica leaves, and add pigeon blood or swallow blood, using an equal part of each and mixing them together. Then place a cloth on it until it is healed.
Capitol .l.	Chapter L.
De cauterizacio de cranc.	On cauterizing a cancer.
Quan canser es comensan e vols aquel ostar, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri de cercle en le circuit de lu ayssi cum es revolgut.	When cancer begins and you want to remove it, then cauterize around it using a circular cautery as it appears.
E diysero les savis que sia cauterizat am lo derier cauteri en le mieg loc; mays a mi no es vist aquo, quar temi que sia ulcerat, e yeu ja e vist aquo alcunas veguadas.	And the wise say that it should be cauterized with a hot iron in the exact spot; but I have not seen this done, for I fear it will become ulcerated, and I have observed this happening several times.
E es pus dreyturier que sia cauterizat en le circuit de lu am cercle ayssi cum avem dit, o am motz cauteris.	And it is safer to cauterize around it in a circular manner as we have said, using either a circular or a moxa cautery.
Capitol .li.	Chapter LI.
De cauterizacio de adubilati.	On cauterizing of abscesses.
Quan alcun adubilati es tardat en maturacio, e aysso es per la superfluitat fazen aquela, o per etat del malaute, quar es vielh en decrepitat, de pauc sanc, o per le temps, e tu vols festinar en la maturacio de adubilati; lahoras cauteriza en le circuit de lu am motz cauteris petitz punctan; e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela fastinara en maturacio.	When an abscess is delayed in maturing due to excessive moisture in that area, the poor condition of the patient's health, their advanced age and debility, lack of blood, or because of the time; if you wish to hasten its maturation, then cauterize around it with small moxa cauteries. After this, leave it as it will now mature more quickly.
Mays si tu vols la perforacio de lu am cauteri, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: e depausa aquel en le mieg loc de adubilati entro que penetre la codena.	If you want the perforation of the place to be cauterized, then at that time use fire for the cautery which has this shape; and place it in the middle location until it penetrates the bone.
E si le cauteri en aquel loc que es pus dejos, per so que le cors del brac sia alleujat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if the cautery is applied to that place where there is pus, so that the arm may be relieved; and then take care that it heals inside.
Capitol .lii.	Chapter LII.
De cauterizacio de corrodent.	On Cauterization for Corrosive Agents.
Corrodent es corrupcio ambulant en le membre, la qual corrodeys aquel ayssi cum a foc comedent lenha secca.	A corrosive is a wandering corruption in the limb, which corrodes as fire consumes dry wood.
Donc si vezes aquel corrodent en loc le qual sufferte cauteri am foc, lahoras tu igneys cauteris clavils motz paucs, e grans segon que es convenent en aquel loc en le qual es corrodent.	Therefore, if you see the corrosive in a place that can withstand cautery with fire, then use fire to cauterize small and large nails as is appropriate in the place where the corrosion is.
E aprop cauteriza aquel de tota partida entro que erradiques tota la corrosio e no romangua alcuna causa de lu.	And then cauterize it thoroughly until you eradicate all the corrosion and leave no cause for it to remain.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres dias, e pausa sobre les locs cauterizats solpre trissat am oli mesclat entro que las scaras sian totas eradicadas e tota la corrupcio.	And then let it rest for three days, and apply thrice a day with oil mixed until all the scars are eradicated and all the corruption is gone.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz carn engendrantz.	And then treat it with substances that promote flesh growth.
Mays si aprop tres dias vezes que la carn nasca sana en la qual no es corrupcio, bo es; mays sino, lahoras itera le cauteri sobre aquo que es romas en les locs corrumputz.	However, if after three days you see that the flesh grows healthy with no corruption, that is good; but if not, then repeat the cautery on what remains in the corrupted areas.
E corrodent es medicat alcunas vetz am medicina aguda, quar aquela es meza en loc de cauteri.	And some corrosives are treated with sharp medicine, for that is the method in place of cautery.
Mays empero cauteri am foc es de pus leugier juvament.	However, a cautery from fire is of little use for healing pus.
E yeu ja e dit la curacio de lu am medicina aguda en la divisio, e donc pren aquela quan de lu auras endegencia.	And here I have described the cure of acute diseases in the division, and therefore take that one when you feel an onset of illness.
Capitol .liii.	Chapter LIII.
De cauterizacio de claus e dels autres semblants.	On Cauterization of Joints and Other Similar Areas.
Motas veguadas endeve a las partidas dejos del pe malautia que s’apela clau, e es causa grossa, fentrada, la qual ladeys le pe; e cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, so es cauteri am foc e cauteri am aygua cauda.	In many cases, near the lower parts below the foot, there is a severe illness called a joint, which is caused by thick and hard substances that affect the foot; and in these cases cauterization is done in two ways: one with fire and the other with hot water.
Mays cauteri am foc es que igniscas le cauteri concau semblant a pena de voltor, le qual sia feyt de ferr segon la quantitat la qual contengua le clau de tota partida, e sia de subtils marguas.	However, the cautery with fire is made by heating the concave cautery, similar to a lentil in shape, which is made of iron according to the quantity that contains the joint from all sides, and it should be very thin.
E aprop pausa aquel ignit sobre le clau, e aprop revolveys la tua ma am le cauteri en le circuit del clau entro que·l cauteri pervengua a la profunditat del clau.	And then place that heated iron on the joint, and immediately rotate your hand with the cautery around the circumference of the joint until the cautery reaches the depth of the joint.
E leyssa aquel per tres dias entro que comense getar brac.	And leave that for three days until it begins to discharge pus.
E aprop emplastre aquel am malvas salvatges trissadas am sal, e leyssa le emplastre sobre aquel per una nuoyt, quar aquel sira eradicat de las suas razitz.	And then apply a poultice made of crushed wild mugwort and salt to it, and leave the poultice on for one night, as this will help eradicate it from its roots.
E aprop cura le loc am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanat.	And then treat the area with a flesh-generating ointment until it is healed.
E si so no-convertitz, e motas veguadas accideysso en la superficia del cors, majorment en las mas e les pes, lahoras cove que tu aministres en aquels cauteri am aygua, e es que prenguas una quannula de eram o de ferr o de pena de voltor, e pausa aquela sobre le clau; e aprop geta en la quanula de aygua cauda pauca cantitat, e rete la tua ma, e tu revolveys aquela am compressio de la tua ma de tot, e sia enpremut le marge de la canula en la razit del clau, e atrobara la aygua cauda via al preon de la razit del cau; e espera le malaute un pauc la mordicacio de l’aygua cauda per una hora, e aprop remau aquela, quar le clau am las suas razitz sira erredicat.	And if it does not convert, and in many cases this happens on the surface of the body, especially on the thighs and legs, then you should administer cauterization with hot water. Take a tube made of iron or brass or lentil-shaped metal, and place it on the joint; then pour a small amount of hot water into the tube, hold your hand around it, and rotate it thoroughly using the compression of your hand from all sides, ensuring that the edge of the tube reaches the root of the joint. Allow the hot water to act for a short period due to its scalding effect for about an hour, then remove it, as this will eradicate the joint along with its roots.
E ayssi fe am aquels la i aprop l’autre entro que venguas sobre totz les quals de lor so en le cors.	And thus place them one near the other until you come upon all of those that are naturally in the body.
E aprop cura aquels pus que las razitz dels claus so erradicadas am aquo dels enguentz les quals la carn ve engenran.	And near them, treat those abscesses whose roots are to be eradicated with the applications that cause flesh to grow.
Capitol .liiii.	Chapter LIII.
De cauterizacio de tremor.	On the cautery for trembling.
Quan endeve ad alcu tremor per freg en le nervi o per febre de causa frega, o per autra causa semblant, lahoras cove que tu cauterises aquel am quatre cauteris o am v sobre les spondils del dos, entre quascun spondilh am un cauteri; e am cauteri en le pietz de lu, e sobre l‘estomac de lu, am cauteri olivar.	When you encounter trembling due to irritation of the nerves or from a fever that causes irritation, or from some similar cause, it is then appropriate for you to cauterize that area with four cauteries or five on the vertebrae of the back, between each vertebra one caustic; and at the feet of the patient, and over the stomach, use an olive-shaped caustic.
E la tremor de lu se repausa e festina la sanetat de la malautia frega.	And the trembling of the patient subsides and hastens the recovery from the illness that causes irritation.
Capitol .lv.	Chapter LV.
De cauterizacio de albati accidentz al cors.	On the cautery for accidental injuries to the body.
Quan en le cors so espellitz albati, e so pustulas fendas las quals so feytas de materias grossas corruptas; donc cove al comensament cum apareyso, que sia cauterizat sobre tot cap de la fistola am cauteri subtil am fustz de mirt, la extremitat del qual es estenduda am foc; o am razitz de erestologia longua; o am cauteri lentecular.	When there appear on the body accidental swellings and pus-filled wounds that are formed from thick, corrupted matter; then at the beginning when they appear, it is appropriate to cauterize over the entire fistula with a fine cautery made of myrtle wood, the end of which is extended over fire; or with the root of long erestologia; or with a lentil-shaped cautery.
E alscunas veguadas es cauteri ademamil al comensament de la sua expulcio segon aquesta manieyra; e no so cregudas, e es disrumpuda la superfluitat fazens aquels, et sana de aquels.	And sometimes it is appropriate to cauterize additionally at the beginning of its expulsion according to this method; and those that are not thus treated, their excesses are disrupted, making them heal from these.
Mays empero cove que aquo sia fayt aprop evacuacio am fleubotomia.	However, it is necessary that this be done immediately after evacuation and phlebotomy.
Capitol lvi.	Chapter LVI.
De cauterizacio de fluex de sanc accident per incisio de arceria.	On cauterization of blood flow due to accidental cutting of an artery.
Tropas veguadas endeve fluex de arceria que es inciza deves la plagua la qual endeve deforo, o deves la incizio de apostemas o cauteri del membre, e alor semblantz, e es dificil remaura aquel.	If the blood flow from an artery that has been cut is due to a plague that began before the cutting, or due to the beginning of abscesses or cauterization of the limb, and similar cases, then it is difficult to remedy this.
Donc cum accideys ad alcu aquo, lahoras tu·t coyta am la tua ma a l’orrifici de la arceria, e pausa sobre aquel le tieu dit endic estrenh aquel motas veguadas entro que sia ostat le fluex del sanc dejos le tieu dit, e que non yesqua.	When such a situation occurs, immediately apply your hand to the opening of the artery, and press on it with enough strength to stop the blood flow from continuing beyond your hand.
E aprop pausa en le foc les cauteris olivars paucs e grantz, per nombre motz, e exsuffla sobre aquels entro que sian mot ignitz.	Then place the olive-coated cautery irons, both small and large, in the fire, blowing on them until they are ignited.
E aprop pren de aquels un petit o un gran segon le loc e la plagua en la qual es rompuda la arteria, sobre aquela vena festinantment pus que auras remaugut le tieu dit, e te le cauteri entro que sia abcindit e restreyt aquel sanc.	Then take one of those cautery irons, either small or large depending on the location and the condition in which the artery is severed, and apply it quickly after you have pressed your hand, to constrict and stop the bleeding.
E si le sanc es expellit de l’orrifici de la arteria quan tu remaues le tieu dit e extringeys le cauteri, lahoras pren la un autre cauteri coytadament dels cauteris les quals en le foc son preparatz, e donc no cesses fer aquo un aprop autre entro que le sanc sia restrengit.	And if the blood is expelled from the opening of the artery when you press your hand and apply the cautery, then take another iron immediately from those that are prepared in the fire, and continue doing this one after another until the bleeding is stopped.
E guarda te que no comburas le nervi que aqui es, e que vengua sobre le malaute autra malicia.	And be careful not to burn the nerve that is here, and make sure it does not cause other harm.
E sapias que quan de l’arteria flueys sanc, lahoras no es possible en aquels restrenge la sanc, e majorment quan l’arteria es gran, si no am una de quatre manieyras: o am cauteri ayssi quo dit havem, o am extraccio quan no es extrayta, quar quan es extrayta las extremitatz de lu miels son comburidas e es restreyt le sanc, o que sia liat am fiel o am liament per fort strectura, o que sian pausadas sobre lu medicinas de las quals la vertut es restringir la sanc; e sian strengudas am pulvinar am costriccio decent.	And know that when blood flows from an artery, it is not possible at those times to constrict the blood, especially when the artery is large, unless one uses one of four methods: either use cauterization as mentioned before, or perform ligation whenever it cannot be extracted because when it is extracted the extremities are burnt and the blood is constricted, or bind with a strong ligature or place over them medicines whose virtue is to restrict the blood; and they should be strengthened with a cushion and moderate constriction.
Mays aquel que aministra restriccio decent de lu am liament e am strictura am draps o per posicio de causas comburentz e de semblantz, no comfereys sino tart.	And let him who administers moderate restriction with ligatures and bandages made of cloth or by the position of burning materials and similar methods not remove them except gradually.
Mays si aquo endeve ad alcu e no sia le metge present ni medicina, lahoras obre am pausament del dit indic sobre le orrifici de aquela vena ayssi cum havem dit, e entenda a la gran costreccio de lu entro que le sanc sia ostat de la sobirana partida de la plagua, e sobre la arceria le dit no sia remaugut; e de sobre la arceria sia aspergit am aygua frega de mot gran fregiditat entro que·l sanc sia congilat e engrossat; e mays cossire en que ha de cauteri o de medicina necessitat.	And if any person is to be treated and no physician or medicine is present, then gently apply the index finger on the opening of that vein as we have said, and understand the great constriction inside so that the blood remains at the upper part of the wound, and above the artery do not press; and sprinkle with cold water over the artery until the blood coagulates and thickens; and then decide whether cauterization or medicine is necessary.
Comensa la segonda partida.	Begin the second part.
De incisio e perforacio e ventozas e de fleubotomia e de plaguas e de lor semblants.	On incision and puncture and wound care and phlebotomy and on wounds and their similarities.
Aquestas son paraulas de Albucazis.	These are the words of Albucasis.
Ja havem dit en le primier capitol tota malautia en la qual cauteri am foc es convenient e am medicina comburent, e las occasios e las causas de lu, e les instrumentz en aquels necessaris am las formas dels cauteris; e he ordenatz les capitols de la subiranetat del cap entro als pes.	We have already said in the first chapter about every illness in which cauterization with fire is appropriate and with burning medicine, and the occasions and causes of it, and the instruments necessary for the forms of cauteries; and I have arranged the chapters on the supremacy of the head among the parts.
E yeu procesire en aquest capitol per aquela meteysa guisa, per que sia alliujat lo querent aquo, lahoras sobre aquo que aura demandat.	In this process in this chapter in that manner, so that the seeker may be praised for it, at the time concerning what he has asked.
E denant que yeu comense aquo, cove, fils, que aprenguatz que en aquest capitol es per terror aquo que es en le capitol primier de cauterizacio.	And before I begin this, take note, son, that you should learn that in this chapter it is by fear what is in the first chapter about cauterization.
E per aquo que cove que sia en lu gran cautela, quar en la operacio la qual es en aquest capitol motas veguadas catz evacuacio la qual es am sanc am le qual esta la vida deves la aspersio de la vena o incisio sobre l’apostema o apercio de exsitura o puracio de la plagua o extraccio de sageta o incizio de peyra e a lor semblantz.	And for what it is necessary to be in great caution, because in the operation which is in this chapter many times there is evacuation of blood or pus, in which the life may be lost due to the application of cautery on a vein or incision over an abscess or opening of an exit or purging of the plague or extraction of a foreign body or cutting stones and similar procedures.
E de totz aquels so acompanhatz temor e tremor e en le mas de lor catz la mort.	And with all of those things accompany fear and trembling, and in the most of their cases death.
E yeu amonesti vos que sobre vos no caia aquo en le qual es esitacio, quar alcunas veguadas cazo deves vos manieyras de homes am manieyras motas de malautias.	And I warn you that this does not fall upon you in which there is danger, for some times such cases may be beyond your skills regarding the methods of many illnesses.
E de lor es alcu que s’irays am la sua malautia e es leugiera deves lu la mort, e aysso per la vehemensia de aquo que troba de sa malautia, e per longuesa de la malautia de lu, e am la malautia es paor la qual significa mort.	And among them are some who become angry about their illness and are distant from understanding it, and this because of the vehemence of what they find in their illness, and due to the length of the illness, and the illness itself brings fear which signifies death.
E de aquels es le qual dona a tu son aver e ditta, tu esperant am aquel sanetat, e la sieua malautia es perniciosa.	And among them is one who gives you all his possessions and says, "I hope for health from you," but his illness is fatal.
E donc no cove que tu consentas en aquel que ve a vos del qual es aquesta manieyra; e la vostra cautela sia major que covesitat e la vostra rapacitat; e no presumatz alcuna causa sobre aquo sino aprop sciencia certa la qual virifica aquo deves vos, e al qual perve successio lausabla.	And therefore it is not fitting that you consent to one who comes to you in this manner; and your caution should be greater than your greed and your rapacity; and do not assume any cause about it without proper knowledge which confirms what concerns you, and for which a reputable outcome follows.
E usatz en la curacio de totz vostres malautes de pronosticacio e indicacio de lu al qual es salut convertida, quar en aquel es a vos ajutori sobre adquisicio de fama e de memoria, de lausor e de gloria.	In the treatment of all your patients, make a prognosis and indication of the cure to which their health is converted, for in that you will have help above all in acquiring fame and memory, praise and glory.
O, filhs, Dieus en vos spire le sieu entendement e no oste a vos direccio e proteccio, quar aquo es en la sua ma.	O, children, may God inspire your minds and not take from you direction and protection, for these are in His hands.
E yeu e ordenat aquest capitol distingent per capitols segon que precedit en le capitol de cauteris, de la cura del cap entro als pes, per que sia a vos alleujat aquo que demandatz de aquo e del qual havetz necessitat.	And I have arranged this chapter distinctly by chapters as it follows the chapter on cauterization, concerning the treatment of the head among other parts, so that what you seek and need from it may be clear to you.
Capitol primier.	First Chapter.
De la curacio de aygua la qual es contenguda en le cap dels enfantz.	On the treatment of water that is contained in the head of children.
Sapias que aquesta malautia motas veguadas endeve als enfantz deves le enfantament e quan la noyrissa estrenh le cap del enfant ses livitat.	Know that this illness often affects children shortly after birth when the nurse presses the child's head too hard.
E alcunas veguadas endeve per causa amaguada la qual no es saubuda.	And sometimes it happens for hidden causes that are not known.
Mays yeu no vi aquesta malautia sino en les enfantz; e a totz aquels les quals yeu vi se coytec la mort, e per ayssi es a mi vist layssada obra en aquels.	But I have only seen this illness in children; and in all those whom I treated, death followed, and thus it seemed to me that there was no cure for them.
E yeu e vist que un enfant le cap del qual era d’aygua omplit, e·l cap de lu era totjorn ayssi magnificat entro que ceser no podia sobre si meteys per la grandesa del sieu cap, e mays que la humiditat fe aucmentada entro que foc mort.	And I saw a child whose head was filled with water, and the size of their head was so greatly enlarged that they could not move because of the size of their head, and the moisture inside increased to such an extent that it led to death.
E aquesta humiditat o es agreguada entre la codena e l’os, o es agreguada dejos le os sobre le ciphac.	And this moisture either accumulates between the skin and the bone, or it accumulates below the bone on the skull.
Quar la operacio en aquel si la humiditat es entre la codena e l’os e le apostema es pauc, lahoras cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am una fissura en la latitut, e sia la longitut de la fissura cays dos notz entro que corra la humiditat, e aquesta es la forma del spatum:	For when the operation is to be performed and the moisture lies between the bone and the swelling but is only slight, it is necessary that you should cut in the middle of the head a cleft along its breadth, and let this extend about two nights' distance where the moisture flows; and this is the shape of the spatum:
E donc si la humiditat es mays augmentada e l’apostema es major, lahoras son aqui dos fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	And if the moisture has increased more and the swelling is greater, then there are here two clefts made in this manner:
E si la humiditat es dejos le os, senhal de lu es que tu vezes la comissuras del cap ubertas de tota partida e l’aygua es spremuda quan tu compremes aquela am la tieua ma a las partidas dedintz e no es aquo a tu amaguat.	And if the moisture is below the bone, the sign of this is that you see the sutures of the head covered on all sides and the water is squeezed out when you press it with your hand at the top but not in the parts within, and it is not hidden from you.
Cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am tres fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	It is necessary that you should cut in the middle of the head with three clefts made in this manner:
e aprop la inscizio extratz ne tota la humiditat; e aprop strenh las fissuras am draps e plumassols; e aprop enbroca aquo de sobre am vi e oli entro al quint dia, e aprop deslia le liament e cura la plagua am tentas e enguentz, e strenh le cap am equalitat; e mange le malaute am vianda secca de pauca humiditat entro que·l membre sia confortat e sanat.	and then the incision extracts all the moisture; and then pack the clefts with bandages and poultices; and then anoint it above with oil and vinegar from the fifth day, and then loosen the ligature and treat the wound with lint and herbs, and bind the head with equality; and eat the food of little moisture until the member is strengthened and healed.
E es autra manieyra de incisio, que consideras hon apar la magnitut del apostema e la colleccio de l’aygua, quar alcunas veguadas es mays en le occipicii, o en la partida denant, o en la destra, o en la sinistra; e donc aten am la incizio on appar le apostema e la replecio de l’aygua, e fen aquo segon que a tu es miels possible.	And there is another method of incision, which you should consider according to where the size of the swelling and the collection of water appear, for sometimes it is more in the occipital region, or in the front part, or on the right side, or on the left; and therefore attend to the incision where the swelling and the fullness of the water appear, and do this according to what seems best to you.
Et observa que no inscindas la arteria e endevengua flueys de sanc e mora le malaute per aquel flux de sanc am evacuacio de humiditat.	And observe that you do not cut the artery and stop the flow of blood, or else the patient will suffer harm from that loss of blood and evacuation of humidity.
Capitol .ii.	Chapter II.
De inscisio de las arterias las quals so aprop las aurelhas, apeladas hilasseysse.	On the cutting of arteries that are near the ears, called hilasseysse.
Capitol segon.	Chapter Second.
Quan endeveno ad alcu catars o raumas als huelhs o al pietz, e es antiquat aquo, e no confereys en aquo la curacio de las medicinas, lahoras la deriera curacio en aquest es incizio de aquelas dos arterias.	When you encounter catarrh or rheum in the legs or feet, and if it is chronic, and do not treat it with medicines, then the last resort treatment should be at the beginning of those two arteries.
E donc cove quan tu vols inscidir aquelas que le malaute raza lo sieu cap, e aprop fregua le loc am drap aspre per so que aparan las arcerias, e aprop sia strengut le col del malaute am alcu drap; e aprop considera on polsa la vena; e les locs de quascuna sobre les locs les quals so aprop las aurelhas depremutz, e tant se occultan sino en alcus homes.	And therefore, when you wish to cut those that the patient uses to feel their own head, and then rub the area with a rough cloth so that the arteries become visible; and then secure the neck of the patient with a cloth. And then observe where the vein can be pressed; and the locations of each near the areas below the ears, and they are hidden in some people.
E aprop senha sobre la arceria am tenta, e aprop inscideys quascuna am le spatum de quascuna partida agut am inscizio pervenient entro al os, e sia aquo per la latitut del cap.	And then press on the artery with your thumb, and then cut each one with a sharp instrument at an angle of incision penetrating into the bone, and do this across the width of the head.
E si vols, entromet le spatum dejos la arteria e trenqua aquala a las inciden a las partidas desus.	And if you wish, insert the instrument below the artery and cut it where the incisions are made above.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio cays dos ditz ajustatz, quar quan alcuna vena es inscizida le sanc es eyssit am egressio pulsatil, le qual saut deforo per saut frequent.	And the length of the incision should be about two fingers wide, because when a vein is cut, the blood flows out in pulsating spurts, which come out frequently.
Mays si la arceria no apareys al cintiment, lahoras cove que tu mesures de la aurelha la quantitat del spazi de tres ditz, e aprop senha am tenta, e fen entro al os.	But if the artery does not appear clearly, then measure from the ear a distance of three fingers, and then press with your thumb, and make an incision into the bone.
E aquo que cove getar del sanc es quantitat de vi unc., e fort leu ne geta de lu mays o mens, e tot aquo es segon la quantitat la qual appareys de la vertut del malaute e de la replecio de la arceria de lu.	With what one should wash out the wound is a quantity of two ounces, and it is best to use wheat or barley water, and all this depends on the amount that appears from the strength of the patient and the condition of the artery.
E aprop considera la plagua, e donc si reman sobre le os alcuna causa del ciphac, lahoras inscindys aquo per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then consider the wound, and if there remains any cause of suppuration on the bone, now wash that with something that does not lead to an abscess from cauterization.
E aprop strenh la plagua am plumassols e am liamentz de drap de li, e aprop cura aquela am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then strengthen the wound with poultices and bandages of linen cloth, and afterwards care for it with ointments until it is healed.
Capitol .iii.	Chapter III.
De extraccio de las arcerias las quals so en las templas.	About the extraction of arteries that are in the temples.
Quan ad alcu accideys emigranea antiqua o catertz agutz, per humiditatz agrimonials e per qualiditat en les lacertz des templas, o sodo antiqua vehement e semblantz ad aquels, e es medicat am las manieyras de curacio de medicina e aquo no comfereys, lahoras nos hem sproatz en aquestas malautias extraccio de las arcerias en les templas, o cauterizacio de aquelas ayssi cum havem mostrat.	When someone suffers from migraines or acute headaches due to excessive moisture in the brain and similar qualities in the veins of the temples, or if such conditions are severe and do not respond to medicinal treatment, then we resort to extracting arteries in the temples or cauterizing them as we have shown.
E la manieyra de la operacio e extracio de aquelas es que·l malaute raza les pels les quals son en les templas; e entenda a la arceria apparent en le templar quar ela es a tu mostrada per le sieu pols, e·s occultada sino en paucs homes per vehemencia de freg.	And the method of the operation and extraction of those arteries is that the patient shaves the hair in the temples; then identify the artery visible in the temple as it is indicated by its pulse, which is hidden only in a few people due to excessive hardness.
E si a tu es occultada, lahoras le col del malaute sia strengut am alcun drap; e aprop fregua le loc am un drap aspre o evapora le loc am aygua cauda entro que aparesca a tu la arceria manifestament.	And if it is hidden from you, then tie the head of the patient with some cloth; and afterwards rub the area with a rough cloth or evaporate the area with hot water until the artery becomes clearly visible.
E lahoras tu pren le spatum del qual aquesta es la forma:	And now take the spatula, which has this form:
E aprop tu scorja la codena am aquel am facilitat entro que pervenguas a la arceria; e aprop geta en lu onti e extratz aquela a las partidas sobiranas entro que extraguas aquela de la codena e descobras aquela de las tunicas las quals so dejos aquela, de tota partida.	And then peel the membrane from where it is attached until you reach the artery; and there remove it to the places indicated until you extract it from the membrane and reveal those of the tunics that lie beneath it, from all sides.
Mays si la arteria es subtil, lahoras envolveys aquela am la extremitat del oncii, e aprop inscindeys de aquela una partida segon la quantitat per la qual sian alonguadas las extremitatz de lu e sian contraytas, e no endevindra flux de sanc, quar si no so inscididas no pujara le sanc de tot.	But if the artery is fine, now wrap it at its extremity with a ligature, and then cut off a part according to the amount by which the ends of it are lengthened and contracted, and there will be no flow of blood, for if they were not thus divided, the blood would not rise up.
E aprop evacua del sanc de vi unc. entro a tres.	And then remove one ounce of blood, or up to three ounces, from the vein.
E si la arceria es gran, lahoras cove que tu lies aquela en dos locs am fiel dopble fort de ceda o am cordas a lonc, e no coyte a lu putrefaccio denant la consolidacio de la plagua e endevengua flux de sanc.	And if the artery is large, now make sure to tie it in two places with a double thread of fine silk or with thin cords at a distance, and do not cut it before the healing of the wound, lest there be a flow of blood.
E aprop incideys la superfluitat la qual es entre dos liamentz; e fay aquo en aquela hora o aprop autra ora.	And then cut away the excess that is between two ligatures; do this at that hour or another soon after.
E si vols, cauteriza aquela am cauteri entro al os am cauteri cutellar entro que sian incididas las extramitatz de lu, e stara en loc de aquela meteyssa obra.	And if you wish, cauterize it with a cautery to the bone or with a knife-shaped cautery until the ends of it are divided, and this will serve as a substitute for that procedure.
E es milhor obra sino que·l malaute aia febre o es de escalfada compleccio; quar cauteri es de aquelas causas que ajudan a las humiditatz finidoras, e donc es milhor en juvament.	And it is better to perform this procedure when the patient does not have a fever or is of heated complexion; for cautery is among those causes that help in finishing off moisture, and thus it is better to do so during improvement.
E cove aprop la extraccio de las arcerias que huomplas le loc de coto antic, e sian pausatz sobre lu polvils decentement fayt, e aprop sia curat am medicinas seccas fazen naysser la carn e am calguas entro que sia sanat.	Regarding the extraction of arteries, ensure that the place is clean beforehand, and let them lie on a properly prepared powder, and nearby have dry medicines ready to make the flesh grow and warm applications so that it may be healed.
E si mentre obres autra veguada endeventa flux de sanc de la arceria, lahora tu te coyta a restrenger aquel sanc, o am cauteri, o que omplas le loc de coto, e strenh la tua ma entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if at any other time during the procedure bleeding occurs from the artery, then you should act to constrict that blood, either by cauterization or by filling the place with cloth, and press your hand in so that the blood may be constricted.
E si deguna causa de aquelas no es a tu present, lahoras pausa le tieu dit sobre le loc entro que·l sanc sia congilat, e enbroca le loc am aygua de vehement fregiditat entro que la acuitat repausa, e sia strengut segon que cove.	And if none of those means is available to you at that moment, then press your hand on the place until the blood is congealed, and wrap the area with water of extreme coldness until the pain subsides, and bind it as needed.
E aquo que es pus leugier en extraccio de arceria es que tu cauterizes la vena am aquest cauteri haventz dos cotels, pus que tu has senhat les dos locs am tenta, e depausa quascus, mot ignitz, entro que pervenguan al os e inscindan la vena en dos locs, per so que sia elonguat aquo que es entre las extremitatz de lu, quar no son consolidadas de tot am aquest cauteri.	And what is more important in the extraction of an artery is that you cauterize the vein with this cautery having two cloths, after you have marked both places with a needle, and then place some combustible material, ignited, until it reaches the bone and divides the vein into two places, so that what is between the extremities may be extended, as they are not fully consolidated by this cautery.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri:	And this is the form of the cautery:
E sia la acuitat dels dos cotels esemps.	 And the sharpness of the two cloths should be noted.
Mays empero si so mendres acuitat que dos cotels es milhor, quar si so agudas cum dos cotels propera a quascuna freg, e no enscideysso la carn am velocitat.	However, if you use less sharpness than two cloths, it is better, for if they are as sharp as two cloths, they may approach each other too quickly and cut the flesh too rapidly.
Donc cum en aquels es alcuna grossitut, es tenguda la calor del foc en aquels e la carn es abscindida leugierament.	Therefore, when there is some thickness in them, the heat of the fire should be maintained and the flesh should be cut through relatively easily.
E aquesta obra es milhor en tota obra e pus leugiera.	And this work is better than every other work and more concise.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre dos cotels la quantitat de la grossesa del dit.	And let the spaces which are between two ribs be the quantity of the thickness of a finger.
Capitol quart.	Chapter four.
De la cura de cors de lagremas agudas e aciduas dels huels.	About the treatment of sharp and acidic tears of the eyes.
Quan so lagremas aciduas, e es le cors de aquelas venas las quals so sobre le test del cap deforo, e no comfereys en aquo alcuna causa de la curacio de medicina, e vezes la cara del malaute ja enrogesir e sent en le sieu front deambulacio ayssi cum si era deambulacio de formiguas, e·ls huels de aquel so extenuatz, humitz enayssi que ja les pels de lor son conodutz, e las parpelas so scalfadas per la acuitat de las lacrimas, les antics agro mesties en la curacio de aquelas de aquesta operacio, e nompnero aquela curacio am spassa.	When such acidic tears occur, and the cause is of those veins that are above the head, and if you do not find any reason for treatment in medicine, sometimes the face of the sick person turns red, and they feel a crawling sensation on their forehead as if ants were moving there, and the eyes from which these tears come appear weakened, so much so that even the hair around them can be seen clearly, and the eyelids are scorched by the acidity of the tears. The ancient practitioners performed this operation in treating such cases, and they did not consider such treatment to be without benefit.
E es que tu comandas al malaute rayre les pels les quals son en le sieu front, e aprop inscideys en le front tres fissuras engualment distans segon la longitut del front.	And you command the sick person to shave the hair that is on their forehead, and then make three incisions on the forehead equidistantly according to the length of the forehead.
E si’ la longitut de la fissura cays dos ditz: la una fissura sia engualment distant a la longitut del nas en le mieg loc del front, e la segonda segon la longitut un petit del movement dels lacertz les quals so en le lacrimal, e la tersa del autre part.	And if the length of the incision is two fingers: one incision should be equidistant to the length of the nose in the middle of the forehead, and the second according to the length a little beyond the movement of the tears which flow through the tear duct, and the third on the other side.
E guarda te de la incizio de las arcerias las quals so en dos latz, e elongua la tua ma de la continuacio de amdos las mandibulas.	And be careful not to cut into the arteries that are on both sides, and extend your hand along the continuation of both jaws.
E si’ l’espazi de quascuna inscizio la quantitat de tres ditz ajustatz.	And if the space between each incision is the quantity of three fingers apart.
E si’ a tu una pessa d’espongua apparelhada o draps seccatz motz am les quals exsiccas le sanc.	And if you have a piece of prepared lint or dry cloth with which you squeeze out the blood.
E aprop entremet le spatum de dos agudas extremitatz, del qual aquesta es la forma de la inscisio de lu:	And then insert the speculum with two sharp points, which has this shape for the incision:
que es de la partida des templas entro a la segonda inscizio.	which is from the part of the membrane into the second incision.
Exxcorja am aquel tota la codena la qual es entre dos incizios am le ciphac le qual es sobre le os, e aprop fay aquo de la inscizio migera entro a la segonda inscisio.	Remove all the tissue that is between two incisions on the crest, which is above the bone, and then proceed with this incision from the middle to the second incision.
E aprop stratz ne aquest spatum e entromet en la primieyra inscizio autra vetz un autre instrument le qual es apelat cutellar, agut de una part e del autre no agut.	And then stretch this speculum and insert into the first incision another tool called a scalpel, sharp on one side and not sharp on the other.
E pausa le latz de aquel agut deves la carn annexa deves la codena, e le latz de lu leon dintz le os, e empelley aquel entro que pervengua a la fissura migera, e abscindeys am aquel totz les vaysels que descendo del cap als huels.	And cut with the sharp side away from the adjacent flesh and towards the bone, and move it inside until you reach the middle fissure, and dissect all the vessels that descend from the head to the heels.
Mays que sia continuada la inscizio ad aquo appar de la codena, e aprop fay aquo en la fissura migana entro al autra fissura.	But continue the incision until it appears in the bone, and then proceed with this in the middle fissure to the other fissure.
E pus que corr del sanc quantitat engual, exprem les locs de las pessas del sanc congilat.	And when the blood flow is equal in quantity, press the places where the collected blood is contained.
E aprop pausa en quascuna fissura calgua de coto vielh, e pausa sobre aquels polvils enbegutz en vi e oli e vi agre, e vegas que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then apply dry old wood chips to each fissure, and sprinkle them with powder mixed in vinegar and oil and sweet wine, so that no abscess forms.
E en le tertz dia deslia le liament e aministra gran enfusio de aygua cauda o tebeza, e aprop cura aquo am enguent bazilicon am oli rozat e autres entro que las plaguas sian sanadas.	And on the third day, loosen the bandage and administer a generous infusion of hot water or herbal tea, and then treat it with ointment made of basil and rose oil until the wounds are healed.
Capitol .v.	Chapter 4
De la cura de lagramas per catartz e als huels descendentz de las partidas dedintz del cap.	On the treatment of abscesses by catharsis and the expulsion of ascending vapors from the internal parts of the head.
Quan ad alcu veno catartz agutz e continuantz, e vezes les huels del malaute extenuatz petitz, e ja le reguardament de lor es debelitat, e las palpebras ulceradas e de lor cazo les pels, e en le preon del cap es dolor aguda ledent e extrenutacio consequent, lahoras sapias per aquestz accidentz que las materias e catartz no veno sino de motas venas de las partidas dedintz procedent.	When there is acute and continuous bleeding from catharsis, and the humors of the patient are weakened and small, and their condition indicates debility, with the eyelids ulcerated and hair loss, and in the forehead there is sharp pain and consequent emaciation, then you should understand from these symptoms that the matter and catharsis do not come but from veins originating in the internal parts.
E la milhor curacio en aquels es aquesta: que comandes al malaute que raza lo sieu front, e aprop inscideys en aquel una fissura al mieg loc del front, un petit per la latitut (e comensa am la fissura del templar senestre entro al dextre templar; e sia inscisio entro al os; e eslongua la tua ma dels lacertz del templas lesquals son maugutz deves la mastigacio), entro que sia le os descubert.	And the best treatment for these conditions is as follows: command the patient to shave their forehead, and then make a small incision in the middle of the forehead (beginning at the midpoint between the left temple and proceed towards the right temple; this incision should go through the bone until it exposes the bone), extending your hand from the crests of the temples which are near the mastication area.
Exsicca tot le sanc am espongua o am drap secc e aprop repleys entre las doas labias de la fissura am coto vielh o am draps de li.	Dry all the blood with a sponge or a dry cloth and then apply between the two edges of the incision some thickened liquid or moist cloths.
E aprop estrenh desus am polvils enbegutz en vi e oli per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then apply above dry powder mixed with wine and oil so that it does not lead to an unhealed cauterization abscess.
E quan deslias aquo e veses que l’apostema ja es diminuit, lahoras cove que fregua le os entro que comensa en lu nayser carn, e aprop cura aquel am regiment exsiccatiu le qual fassa neysser la carn, ayssi cum si tu prenes de farina de froment dos partidas e de colofania quatre partidas e mescla o, e de lor sia fayt emplastre e sia aministrat en aquestas plaguas a de la carn nativitat.	And when you have done this and see that the abscess has already diminished, then scrape the bone starting where new flesh begins, and afterward treat it with a drying regimen that promotes new flesh growth. For example, take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of colophony, mix them together, and make a plaster from it to be applied to these wounds until new flesh forms.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter VI.
De la cura de aquo que catz en las aurelhas.	On the treatment of what affects the ears.
Tota causa que catz en las aurelhas es una de quatre specias, quar o es peyra mineral o causa semblant a peyra, ayssi cum ferr e veyre, o es de planta ayssi cum ceze o fava, o es causa fluxtibla ayssi cum aygua e vi agre e a lor semblantz, o alcuna bestia.	Any cause that affects the ears is one of four types: either it is a mineral stone or something similar to a stone such as iron or charcoal, or it is from a plant such as thorns or beans, or it is a fluid cause such as water and sour wine or their equivalents, or some animal.
E donc quan peyra catz en l’aurelha o autra causa semblant de aquelas causas que no ajustan ne creysso en l’aurelha, e pausa la aurelha al solelh, e si vezes la peyra, lahoras distilla en aquela alcuna causa de oli violat o sizami, e aprop aministra la extraccio de lu, e fay le stornudar am condizi, e oppila las nars deve le aveniment de stornutacio.	And when a stone affects the ear or any other cause similar to those that do not adhere or clot in the ear, place the ear towards the sun, and if you see the stone, then administer some substance like violet oil or cumin, and close to it, make them sneeze with certain conditions, and plug the nose upon the occurrence of sneezing.
E aprop pausa en le circuit de la aurelha alscunas pessas de drap o lana, e dextendas la aurelha a las partidas desus, quar motas veguadas es foro-getada am aquestas causas.	And then place around the ear some pieces of cloth or wool, and extend the ear upwards to the sides, as movement several times helps to expel these causes.
E si no n’es getada, lahoras aministra extraccio de lu am le instrument apelat gesti epicicarios subtil del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if it is not expelled, then administer an extraction with the instrument called a small epistome, which has the following form:
E si es foro-getada am gesti, bo es; e sino, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am onci subtil de pauca duplicacio.	And if it is expelled with the instrument, that is good; and if not, then administer an extraction with a small piece of linen folded several times.
E donc si no es foro-getada per aquo, lahoras fay una canula de aram e entromet la extremitat de la canula en le trauc de la aurelha e claus a l’enviro de la canula am cera e am oli mollificada per so que no sia ubert sino la canula.	And if it is not expelled by any of the above methods, then make a tube of reed and insert one end of the tube into the ear canal and seal around the tube with wax and softened oil so that nothing enters except through the tube.
E aprop extratz am le tieu vent am fort atraccio, quar tropas veguadas cum aquo que havem recontat.	From a foreign extract of the vein with strong attraction, for troops accustomed as we have recounted.
Mays si no es foro-getada en aquesta manieyra, lahoras pren de halka alumbat o de vecz aparelhat am le qual son preses les ausels una patita quantitat, e pausa aquel en la extremitat de ray, e aprop envolopa sobre aquel coto decentment pausat.	If it is not forgotten in this manner, now take a small lamp or prepare an apparatus with which birds are usually caught, and place that at the end of a rod, and then wrap that container decently around it.
E aprop entromet aquel en le trauc de la aurelha am facilitat, e aprop excicca la aurelha de la humiditat.	And then insert it into the ear canal with ease, and thus dry the ear of moisture.
E donc si no es foro-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recontadas, lahoras tu coyta a talhar aquela denant que endevengua apostema caut o espasme.	And so if it is not forgotten with all the causes that we have recounted, now you should proceed to incise that before it becomes an abscess or spasm.
E la manieyra de talhar aquela es que tu al comensament sancnes le malaute de la vena sephasica e extratz del sanc segon la mannieyra de la vertut de lu, e aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas e converteys l’aurelha a las partidas desus, e fen am petita fissura en la razit de la aurelha deves lo greys de lu en le loc be premegut de lu.	And the method of incising it is that you first puncture the malady of the cephalic vein and extract the blood according to the manner of its virtue, and then make a small cut between your fingers and turn the ear upwards, and make a slight fissure at the edge of the ear near the most prominent part.
E sia la fissura de figura lunar entro que pervengua a la peyra, e, la peyra atrobada, osta aquela si podes am instrumentz apropriatz; e aprop cos la fissura en aquela hora am velocitat, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And let the fissure be in a lunar shape until it reaches the stone, and when the stone is found, remove it if you can with appropriate instruments; then close the fissure quickly at that moment, and take care of it until it heals.
E si la causa cazent en la aurelha es un dels gras que creysso e so inflatz, lahoras aministra la curacio e la extraccio de lu; mays si no obezeys a tu ad eyssiment, lahoras tu pren spatum teune subtil segon aquesta forma:	And if the cause in the ear is one of the gruels that grow and become inflamed, then administer the treatment and extraction; but if you do not proceed accordingly, now take fine spatha according to this form:
e aministra am aquel la abscizio de aquel gra lo qual es cazut en l’aurelha.	and administer the removal of that gruel which is lodged in the ear.
E no fassas aquo quan cogitas que aquel ja es humectat per la vapor del aurelha, e pausa aquel en motas pessas, e prop extratz ne aquelas am les oncis o am gesti subtil, o ab inscizio ayssi co dit havem, quar es alleujada la extraccio de lu.	If you do not want to use water when you think that it has already been moistened by the vapor from the ear, place it in many parts, and apply extracts there with onions or fine dust, or as we have said with incision, for the extraction is easier.
Mays en l’aygua la qual es intrada en l’aurelha cove que·l malaute use de sternutacio am condizi al comensament, e omple la sieua aurelha am alcu coto vielh, e jagua sobre aquela aurelha en la qual es l’aygua, e si per aquo es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, lahoras pren tropas peyras teunas e leons segon la longitut del dit, e calfa aquelas en le foc un pauc, e le pacient entrometa una de aquelas en le trauc de la sua aurelha e saute sobre la un pe sieu de aquela partida e percussia am una autra peyra sobre la peyra la qual es dintz la aurelha.	In the water that has entered into the ear, it is well for the patient to use sneezing with certain preparations at the beginning, and fill his sieved ear with some old cotton, and then press on the affected ear. If this discharges the water by itself, it is good; but if not, take small pebbles or stones according to the length of a finger, heat them in the fire for a while, and have the patient insert one of these into his ear canal and jump over that part of his body with another stone hitting the stone inside the ear.
Donc no cesse aquo am peyra entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada.	Do not remove the stone until all the water has been discharged.
E ja l’aygua sira foro-getada enayssi que tu prenguas de papier o de gonc i, e met la una extremetat de lu en l’aurelha e estendas l’autre extremitat am foc entro que sia comburit le may de lu.	And the water will be discharged in this way: take paper or cotton, and place one end of it in the ear while holding the other end over the fire until it burns slightly.
E prop met i autre gonc e fay aquo tantas veguadas entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada, e stratz aquel am canula ayssi co desus es dit de la peyra extrasadora.	And place another piece of cotton in it and do this as many times as necessary until all the water is discharged, and strain it with a cannula as was said about removing the stone.
Mays en la extraccio de bestia intrant en aquela aurelha, si es a petit cos, ayssi piussa e a lu semblant, cura aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio; mays si es de gran cos la qual causa apar al sen del vezement, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am gesti e oncis, e la causa de lu es pus leugiera de totas las autras causas que cazo en l’aurelha.	In the extraction of an animal entering into that ear, if it is a small thing, handle it similarly as we have said in the division; but if it is a large object causing pain to the patient, then administer the extraction with dust and onions, and the cause of this is more serious than all other causes that occur in the ear.
Mays en la extraccio de verm engendrat en la aurelha, quan tu curas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e en le tractat de distillacios e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu reguardes la aurelha al solelh.	In the extraction of worms generated in the ear, when you treat it with that which we have said in the division and in the tractate on distillations and do not confound your treatment, then you ought to expose the ear to the sun.
E donc si apar aqui alcuna causa dels verms, lahoras extratz aquel am gesti o am onci subtils, mays si no apar deguna causa, lahoras pren una canula dejos streyta e desus ampla de la qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if there appears any cause of the worms, then extract it with your finger or with fine forceps; but if no such cause appears, then take a cannula below narrow and above wide, which is of this shape:
E entromet la extremitat subtil en la aurelha segon la quantitat la qual suffertar puesca le malaute; e aprop sucgeys am aquela per succio fort, e fay aquo motas veguadas, entro que totz les verms sian foro-gitatz.	And insert the slender end into the ear according to the quantity that suffices for the patient; and then suck it out with strong suction, and do this several times until all the worms are expelled.
Mays si no obezeysso a tu al ayssiment, lahoras tu opila e claus en le circuit de la canula am cera ayssi cum havem dit; lahoras aministre distillacios las quals han ja esproadas les antics en la curacio dels verms, e atrobaras aquo en le tractat de distillacios.	But if you do not obey this instruction, then apply and plug around the circumference of the cannula with wax as we have said; then administer distillations which have already proven effective in the treatment of worms, and you will find these described in the treatise on distillations.
E sia la tua efusio am la qual efundas les olis medicinas en la aurelha am aquest strument del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And let your application be such that you pour medicinal oils into the ear with this instrument, which has the following shape:
E fay aquela de argent o de eram, dejos streyt, en le qual sia un petit trauc, e am pla desus.	And make it of silver or ivory, below narrow, in which there is a small groove, and with a flat top.
E donc sia cum empellent a que es en la conquavitat de la canula de continent aqui on sira necessari.	And thus it should fit like a plug at the constriction of the cannula where it will be necessary.
E si vols, pren le ray e envolveys en la extremitat de lu decentment coto, e aprop gieta oli en la concavitat del auziment, o suc de alcuna herba, o aquo que vols de aquestas medicinas en la canula — e aquela es en la aurelha —, e aprop entromet le ray am coto desus e exprem am la tua ma aquel am compressio temprada de lu entro que l’oli sia expellit en la concavitat del auziment e le malaute senta le oli dedintz.	And if you wish, take the reed and wrap its end decently with cloth, and then pour oil into the cavity of hearing, or juice from some herb, or any of these medicines into the cannula — which is in the ear —, and then insert the reed with cloth above and press it with your hand moderately to expel the oil into the cavity of hearing so that the patient feels the oil inside.
E aquo que sia enfundut en la aurelha sia ja scalfat am foc un petit.	Take what is to be inserted into the ear and heat it a little over fire.
E guarda te que la causa la qual distillaras en l’aurelha no sia trop frega, quar las medicinas de aurelha no suffertan aquo.	And be careful that the substance you will apply to the ear is not too irritating, for medicines for the ear cannot tolerate this.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter VII.
De curacio de opilacio de aurelhas.	On the treatment of blocked ears.
Alcunas veguadas alcus enfantz yeysso dels ventres de lors mayres no-perforatz, e aquo ja accideys en alcus homes, opilacio en le meat de la aurelha per plagua o per carn nada en aquela; e aquesta opilacio alcunas veguadas es fayta en le preon del trau de la aurelha la qual no consiec le vezement, e alcunas veguadas es en las partidas defora.	Sometimes infants are born from their mother's wombs with unopened ears, and this also happens in some adults, where the ear canal is blocked by infection or flesh growing inside it; and this blockage sometimes occurs at the entrance to the ear canal, which cannot be seen clearly, and sometimes it is located further out.
E aquela que accideys en le preon de lu, la qual no comprehen le vezement, es en las majors disposicios de dificil sanacio.	And when it occurs at the entrance of the ear canal, which cannot be seen clearly, it is in the most difficult positions for treatment.
E en aquela en qual consegueys le vezement, cove que tu pauses la aurelha del malaute al solelh e reguarda en aquela.	And when you can see it clearly, have the patient expose their ear to the sun and observe it.
E donc si vezes oppulacio apparent, obre aquela am espatum subtil del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if you see a clear blockage, open it with a fine spatula, which has the following form:
Si’ la extremitat de lu en la qual sia petita la latitut, del qual la una partida sia aguda e l’autra no; e le spatum sia de dos latz leon per so que no fassa lizio al aurelha.	If the tip of it is narrow, with one side sharp and the other not; and the spatula should be of two thin edges so as not to injure the ear.
E donc si la opilacio es per carn nascuda en la aurelha o en le meat de lu, lahoras te aquela am oncis subtils e incidiys aquela vehement facilitat entro que sia ostada tota la carn.	And if the blockage is due to flesh growing inside the ear or in the ear canal, then use fine forceps and carefully cut away all the excess tissue.
E si opilacio es en le preon de la aurelha, lahoras pren ray subtil leon e escalfa aquel am foc un pauc, e aprop met aquel en le meat de l’aurelha.	And if there is an obstruction in the ear canal, then at this time take a thin reed and heat that in fire for a short while, and then place that into the ear canal.
E donc si as scentit oppulacio am aquo que le malaute atroba am facilitat, per gravetat de ausir, esforsa la oppressio de lu am facilitat; e guarda te que no plagues les nervis del aurelha.	And thus if you find an obstruction with what the patient can reach by ease, due to difficulty in hearing, force the obstruction out with what the patient can reach by ease; and be careful not to injure the nerves of the ear.
E aprop pausa en l’aurelha drap de li segon la quantitat del ample del trauc lo qual tu as envolvutz en l’enguent egipciac; e fay aquo per alcus jorns entro que sias segur de la consolidacio de la plagua; o que prenguas qualgua e enfon aquela en ayguaros e pulveriza sobre lu segi trissat e usa de lu; e si vezes la aurelha ja esser apostemada, lahoras cove que tu estraguas la qualgua e permutes aquela am autra qualgua la qual tu envoloparas en cerot que sia fayt am oli rozat, entro que sia le apostema caut cedat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then place in the ear a piece of cloth according to the quantity of the opening which you have wrapped in Egyptian cotton; and do this for several days until you are sure of the consolidation of the wound; or take something and dip it in vinegar and sprinkle it with finely ground powder and use it; and if you see that the ear is becoming inflamed, then you should remove what was placed there and replace it with another wrapped in wax mixed with olive oil, until the inflammation subsides; and then treat it until it heals.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras submergeys esponga o drap en aygua frega e pausa sobre la aurelha, e usa del autra curacio la qual restrengeys le flux del sanc, la qual es dita en le tractat de distillacio.	But if bleeding occurs, then soak a sponge or cloth in cold water and place it on the ear, and use another treatment that restricts the blood flow, which is described in the chapter on distillation.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter VIII.
De cura de athezil le qual endeveno a las palpebras.	On the treatment of boils that occur on the eyelids.
Athezil les quals endeveno a las paupebras dels huels alcuna veguada so humitz, alscunas veguadas son secs.	Boils that occur on the eyelids sometimes become moist, and at other times they are dry.
Donc cove que tu tenguas aquels am tenhalhas o am onci, e inscindas aquels am espatum de las suas razitz, e aprop pausa sobre les locs segi trissat.	Therefore, you should hold those with tweezers or scissors, and then incise them along their natural fissures, and then apply finely ground powder to the sites.
Mays si dolor am flux de sanc veno, lahoras tu cauteriza aquels am cauteri lanticular subtil.	If pain and bleeding come from a vein, then at that hour you should cauterize those parts with a fine cautery near the navel.
E la milhor cauterizacio es aprop las inscizios e tropas veguadas retornam quan reman alcuna causa de sas razitz; e quan so cauterizadas am foc, aquelas razitz son comburidas e no retornan.	And the best cauterization is near incisions and trophic areas that return when there remains some cause for them; and when they are cauterized with fire, those causes are consumed and do not return.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter IX.
Cura de grandeyssa que veno a las palpebras dels huels.	Treatment for a severe condition that affects the eyelids.
Motas veguadas endeve en las palpebras dels huels alcuna causa la qual es asemblada a grandissa en sa fortalicia e duricia, e per so grandissia es apelada.	Trophic areas appear on the eyelids due to some cause that resembles severity in its strength and hardness, and therefore it is called severe.
E es agreguacio de humiditat grossa en la palpebra dejos e desus.	And it is an accumulation of thick humidity in the eyelid both above and below.
Donc la opperacio en lor es que consideras lahoras si la grandissia es procedent en lu en aquo que apar de la palpebra e es mauguda a tota partida; e la causa de lu es leugiera.	Therefore, the operation to be performed is that you should consider at this hour whether the severity is present in what appears on the eyelid and is spread throughout; and the cause of it is light.
Donc fen sobre aquela am fissura per la latitut, e aprop escorga aquela de tota partida am facilitat entro que evasesca, e aprop suspen aquela am onci e abscindeys aquela.	Therefore, apply over that area along the length, and gently remove it from all parts with ease until you have evacuated it, and then suspend it with an ointment and close it.
Mays si a tu no es apparelhada la incizio de lu si no pus que penetras la palpebra am inscizio pauc a pauc, lahoras aquo no notz en deguna causa.	But if you are not able to determine the beginning of it unless pus penetrates the eyelid through an incision little by little, then do not note it in any cause.
E si la figura es gran, lahoras tu l’ajusta am sutura; e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the figure is large, then adjust it with stitches; and take care of it until it is healed.
E si es pauca, a tu no sobrevindra mal per aquela quar l’anguent de lu restaura aquela e encarna.	And if it is small, it will not cause harm for you because the warmth of it restores and heals it.
E si la grandissia es declinant a las partidas dedintz de la palpebra deves la superficia dedintz, lahoras evesa la palpebra e suspen la grandissia am onci, otra que tu indigescas de incizio, e prem aquela de tota part, e si la palpebra per inscizio es alonguada, aquo no notz en deguna causa.	And if the swelling is declining towards the inner parts of the eyelid, then you should press the surface inside; thus, suspend the swelling with a lancet if necessary, and press it all around, and if the eyelid due to incision has become elongated, this does not matter for any cause.
E aprop la incizio, lava le huel am aygua salada; e cura le loc am aquo que encarna entro que sia sanat.	And after the incision, wash the wound with salt water; and treat the area with something that heals so that it may be cured.
Capitol .x.	Chapter 10.
De la cura axcirnah en la palpebra desus del huel.	On the treatment of injuries above the eye on the eyelid.
Axcirnath es grays le qual es engendrat en las tunicas de la palpebra desus, e majorment endeve als enfantz, agrava les huels de aquels et accideyso a lor catartz le mayti; e no podon reguardar la claror del solelh per aquo quar lagremas se coytan ad aquels.	Injuries are often caused in the gray area that is generated in the layers of the eyelid above, and mostly affect children, worsening their eyesight due to this condition; they cannot look at the brightness of the sun because tears collect in them.
E per so tu vezes aquels jaser sobre les lors caras tot temps, e sobre les lors caras dormen; e so a las palpebras de lor dejos les sobrecils humidas, las quals ja ha cuberta imflacio, e iminencia de accernac apparent es en l’uelh; e que quant tu premes le loc am les tieus ditz, tu centes accernac entro aquels.	And because of this, you see them pressing their faces all the time, and they sleep with their faces pressed down; and above their eyelids are moist eyebrows, which have been covered by inflammation, and the likelihood of injury is apparent in the eye; and when you press the area with your fingers, you feel pain within.
E alcuna manieyra de opperacio es en aquel que le malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop pausa drap de li e de lu fay calgua, e fay de lu cercle segon la quantitat la qual contena arthernach de tota partida, e aprop pausa aquel sobre aquela e prem am les tieus ditz de tota per que sia agreguat arcernac en le mieg del cercle, e aprop fen en le mieg de aquela humiditat am spatum inscident am fissura per la latitut, e la fissura no sia major que la fissura que es fayta en flaubotomia.	And one method of treatment is for the patient to place their head in your lap, and then place a cloth on them and make a circle according to the quantity that contains earth from all sides, and then place that over it and press with your fingers all around so that pus aggregates at the center of the circle, and subsequently introduce moisture into the opening using a spatula along the length, ensuring the incision is no larger than that made in phlebotomy.
Mays en le preon cove que tu fendas la codena tota entro que pervenguas ad arcernach, quar en las mays desposicios proceseys arcernach per fissura segon la forma de grayseza blanca.	In the main incision you shall cut through the cartilage completely until you reach the membrane, for in major operations you expose the membrane by a split according to the form of the white gristle.
Donc extratz aquela am draps los quals tu as envolopatz entre les tieus ditz a las partidas deforo e revolv entre la ma dextra e sinistre entro que sia dispargut.	Then extract that which you wrapped in the cloth between your fingers to the parts behind, and roll it between your right and left hand until it is spread out.
E guarda te que no ajustes en la fissura per so que am le spatum no pervenguas al huel e ladescas aquel.	And be careful not to press into the split so that the spatum does not reach the wound and damage it.
Mays si no apar a tu arternach en le comensament de la fissura, mays que tu ajustes en la fissura un petit am fecilitat entro que procesisca arternach; e aprop extratz aquela ayssi quo havem dit; e aprop submargeys draps de li en aygua e vi agre e pausa les sobre le loc e estrenh aquels am polvils.	But if the cartilage does not appear at the beginning of the split, adjust in the split a small piece with ease until the cartilage processes; and then extract it as we have said; and then dip cloths in warm water and vinegar and place them over the site and sprinkle them with powders.
E so alcus que trissan sal e pausan aquel en la conquavitat de la fissura per so que aquo que es remas de aquela humiditat.	And some people sprinkle salt and place it in the concavity of the split so that what remains is dried by this humidity.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then take care of it until it is healed.
Mays si accideys en le loc apostema caut, lahoras cura aquel am emplastres cedatils entro que sia sanat.	But if an abscess occurs in the area, now treat it with soft plasters until it is healed.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter XI.
De manieyras de tactimi del huel.	On the methods of examining the wound.
Quan en las palpebras dels huels so natz pels ajustatz dejos les pels naturals e so antiquatz, lahoras aquels noso al huel e fan endevenir manieras de malautias ayssi cum lacrimas assiduas e mollificacio de palpebras e tela entro que aquo sia causa de destruccio del huel que s’apela tactinir del huel, e cura se en quatre manieyras: o per cauteri am foc; o am medicina acuta segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri; o es fayt atactini per inscizio e sutura; o per cannas segon que yeu diyre.	When in the eyelids of the wounds there grow hairs beneath the natural lashes and when they become old, these cause trouble to the wound and bring about ways of diseases such as continuous tears and softening of the eyelids and tissue, which is called examining the wound, and it is cured in four ways: either by cauterization with fire; or with sharp medicine as mentioned before in the chapter on cauterization; or it is done through incision and suturing; or by canulas as I will explain.
E donc cove que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se; aprop converteys la palpebra del uelh am la tua ma sinistra, e si es convertida, bo es; e sino, entromet agulha en aquela en la qual sia fiel de la partida pus dejos de la palpebra, e fay penetrar la agulha am fiel desus, e aquo sia — prop del marge de la palpebra en le qual naysso les pels — prop dels pels, e tira le fiel a las partidas desus am la palpebra, e converteys aquela am le ray.	And so cut off the edge of the wound in the area; then turn up the upper eyelid with your left hand, and if it turns well, that is good; but if not, insert a needle into the part below the eyelid where there is pus, and make the needle penetrate to the root above, near the margin of the eyelid where hair grows, and draw out the pus from the parts above the eyelid, and turn up that part with force.
E aprop fen en la partida dedintz de la palpebra dejos les pels ajustatz am spatum inscidentz del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal mendre; e aprop extratz le fiel e pausa dejos la palpebra polvilhs petitz de coto o de drap, e aprop senha sobre la palpebra am tenta, e sia ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirt.	And then make an incision in the inner part of the eyelid below the hair near the lacrimal bone and extend it to the lower lacrimal bone; and then extract the pus and place small pieces of cotton or cloth below the eyelid, and afterwards bandage over the eyelid as shown, like a leaf of myrtle.
Mays empero cove que sia la figura segon la quantitat de helevacio de la palpebra, quar aquo ja es diversificat en les homes, quar de aquels es le quals indigeys que sia inscidit de la palpebra gran quantitat segon la quantitat per la qual la palpebra es mollificada.	However, the figure should be according to the amount of elevation of the eyelid, for this varies among people; some require that a considerable amount be incised from the eyelid according to how much the eyelid is swollen.
E aprop fen am le spatum sobre las doas linhas las quals has senhadas, e comensa del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal menor.	And then make an incision on the two lines that you have marked, starting from the upper lacrimal bone to the lower lacrimal bone.
E si’ la tua fissura prop dels pels naturals ayssi cum es la grossetut del rey.	And if the incision is near the natural hair line as thick as the king's hair.
E aprop met le onci en un dels dos angles de la codena, e aprop excoria aquela tota, e aprop ajusta am la scitura las doas labias am gula o fiel de lana subtil, e abstergeys le sanc, e fay adherir aquo que superflueys dels fiels sobre dos sobrecils am alcunas causas enviscans, si voles far aquo, e sino, non cures.	And then place the incision at one of the two angles of the jaw, and then excoriate that area completely, and afterwards bring together the two edges of the wound with fine thread or wool, and clean the blood, and make adhere whatever you find superfluous from the pus onto two eyebrows using some adhesive substance, if you wish to do this, and if not, do not worry.
E aprop leyssa la sutura dels fiels entro a tres dias o quatre, e aprop cura aquo.	About four days after sewing up the wound, begin treatment with this.
E si vols, layssa la plagua ses sutura, e cura aquela am aquo que exsicca e constrenh, quar la palpebra es alevada deves la sigillacio de la plagua e la agreguacio de lu; mays sutura es milor E donc aysso diysso les antics de taxanir.	And if you choose to treat the wound without sewing it up, use something that dries and constricts, because the eyelid is raised due to the sealing of the wound and the accumulation of fluid; however, sewing it up is better. This is what the ancients recommended.
Mays empero en lu sia sollicitut sobre le malaute, e es de bona operacio, e no es en lu temor.	But rather than being anxious about the outcome, act with good practice and do not be afraid.
E es autra manieyra en taxmir, e es que senhes sobre la palpebra figura ayssi cum fuelha de mirt, e aprop eleva la palpebra am tres uncis segreguatz e congreguatz segon aquesta forma:	And there is another method for treating it, which involves marking on the eyelid in the shape of a myrtle leaf, and then lifting the eyelid with three small, separated and gathered incisions made according to this form:
Mays si no es possible aquo, tener les uncis, e aquo no es engualhat, lahoras pren una agula en la qual haia fil e met aquela en le mieg de la figura, e entromet le autre fiel prop le lacrimal major, e·l fiel segon prop le lacrimal mendre, e ajusta entre les tieus ditz les fiels am equalitat, e aprop am aquels eleva la tua ma am elevacio engual, eleva tota la codena sobre la qual es senhat ayssi cum havem recomtat.	But if it is not possible to do that, hold the incisions, and this is not equalized; now take a needle with thread and place it in the middle of the figure, and insert the other thread near the larger tear duct, and the second thread near the smaller tear duct, and adjust between these threads equally, and then lift your hand evenly to lift the entire marked area as we have recommended.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then align the two edges of the wound with stitches, and treat it until it is healed.
Mays si accideys apostema deves la tua inscizio o la tua fissura, seda aquel apostema am cerot e a lu semblantz, e am enguentz.	But if an abscess occurs due to your incision or your wound, treat that abscess with cerate and something similar, and frequently.
E alcunas veguadas endeve a la palpebra que·ls sieus pels sian convertitz, adonc cove que tu uses en aquela de aquo que havem dit de inscizio; mays sutura en quascus es mays artificial.	And sometimes when the eyelid needs to have its hair direction changed, then you should use what we have said about incision; however, sewing it up is more artificial.
Ataxinir am cannas es segon aquesta forma:	Make flutes according to this form:
e es que tu convertas la palpebra e scindas la figura qu’es dedintz segon que he recontat; e aprop per art fay doas cannas o doas astelas subtils de las quals longitut sia segon la longitut de la palpebra e la latitut de lor sia mendra de la latitut del spatum.	And so you convert the eyelid and separate the figure that is inside as I have recounted; and then make two flutes or two slender sticks, of which the length should be according to the length of the eyelid and their width should be small compared to the width of the eye socket.
E tu ja has inscidit en las extremitatz de quascunas partidas, la on tenes les fils.	And you have already cut into the extremities of each section, where you have the threads.
Aprop agregua quascuna am subtilitat subre aquo que superflueys de la palpebra del huel, e constres las cannas de quascunas partidas am fort strictura, e layssa aquela per alcus jorns, quar la codena per la strictura morira e sira denegada e se poyrira entro que per si meteyssa cayra.	Then apply each one with subtlety over what is superfluous of the upper eyelid, and bind the flutes of each section tightly together, and leave it for several days, because the skin will die due to the constriction and will fall off so that by itself it will drop away.
Mays si es tardat, lahoras trenca la am las toroyras, e aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanat.	But if it is delayed, now break it with the threads, and then treat the wound until it is healed.
Donc cum es solidada, la palpebra es elevada e les pels no pungo.	Then when it has hardened, the eyelid is raised and the hairs do not sting.
E aquesta es la forma de doas cannas las quals faras segon aquesta forma:	And this is the form of two flutes that you will make according to this form:
e haia la quantitat de la longitut e de la latitut ni mays ni mens.	and the quantity of the length and width should neither be more nor less.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter XII.
De elevacio de pels pungentz en le huel am agula quan le pel es dur.	On Removing Stinging Hairs from the Eye with a Needle When the Hair is Embedded.
Quan son pels no-naturals, durs e aspres e pungentz les huels, lahoras la operacio en lu es que tu prenguas agula subtil e pauses en aquela fiel de ceda subtil e leon, e aprop que tu ajustes las extremitatz de lu e nozes quascu en manieyra mot subtil.	When there are unnatural hairs that are hard and rough and sting the eyes, the procedure is that you take a fine needle and place it at the base of each hair in a delicate manner, and then adjust the ends carefully so that each one is handled subtly.
E sia la longitut dels fiels de quantitat de una palma.	And let the length of the wounds be as much as the quantity of one palm.
E aprop tu compon2 autre fiel subtil dejos lu en breu, e nuza las extremitatz de aquel si tu·t vols.	And then compose another subtle dressing below it briefly, and use the edges of that one if you wish.
E aprop pause le malaute le sieu cap en le tieu se, e sia prop del solelh per que la tua obra sia declarada, quar es operacio subtil e menuda.	And then place the malady beneath your eye in the proper time, and let it be close to sunlight so that your work may be clear, for it is a subtle and delicate operation.
E aprop intromet la agulha en la razit del pel ajustat la qual ha necessitat de engen, e fay aquela penetrar en la palpebra festinantment entro que extraguas aquela desus le pel natural.	And then insert the needle into the root of the hair that needs to be removed and let it penetrate quickly into the eyelid before you extract it from above the natural hair.
E aprop tire le pel entro desus e intromet aquel en alixati, e sian les pels un o dos o tres e no mays.	And then pull the hair in from above and insert it into the slit, and let there be one or two or three hairs and no more.
E aprop tira la tua ma am aquel entro que·l pel sia fora-gitat am alixolati en la palpebra am le pel natural.	And then pull your hand gently so that the hair is pulled out along with the slit in the eyelid with the natural hair.
Mays si es atirat alixalati e non es gitat le pel, atiraras alixati a las partidas dejos am le fiel le qual tu has compost am aquela, entro qu’en sia gitat alixalati del trau sobira.	But if the slit is pulled and the hair is not removed, pull the slit away from the area below toward the dressing that you have prepared for it, so that the slit may be pulled out along with the surrounding tissue.
E vegas aquela am la visio del huel, quar lahoras tu gitaras alixati e lo fiel, e grotan quascu e clautz le huel, e laysse le claus per dos dias o tres, entro que·l pel adheresca al sieu loc e nasque sobre aquel bona carn.	And look at that with the vision of the eye, for now you will pull the slit and the dressing, and then clamp the eye, and leave the clamps for two or three days until the hair adheres to its place and grows over that good flesh.
E si es mays breu le pel, lahoras tu ajusta un pel lonc dels pels naturals, e es elevat am aquel, o que·l leysses entro que sia alonguat aprop alcu spazi, e lehoras tu eleva aquel.	And if the hair is too short, now attach a long hair from among the natural hairs to it, or leave it for some time until it grows longer in place, and then lift that one.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter XIII.
De la cura de ehacratir la qual ve en la palpebra desus.	On the treatment of a swelling that occurs in the upper eyelid.
Quan ve en le huel ehacratir, e es contraccio de la palpebra quan es contrayta en sus, o a dextra o a sinistra partida, per mala consolidacio de plagua o de seccio o de cauteri, e es apelada leporina, e aquesta ahercrati o es natural o accidental, e es fayta per consolidacio de plagua o de seccios o de cauteri, o per semblantz a lor malcuratz.	When a swelling appears in the eye, and it is a contraction of the eyelid when it is closed, either to the right or left side, due to poor healing of a wound, incision, or cautery, it is called leporine. This kind of swelling can be natural or accidental, caused by poor healing of wounds, incisions, or cauteries, or similar malpractice.
May la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que tu fendas aquela consolidacio e que separes las labias de lu, e pauses en lu en aquo que es entre aquelas una meca de drap de li, e ligues aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	The method for the operation is that you should cut into that contraction and separate its edges, and place between them a piece of linen cloth, and bind it so that it may heal.
E no cove que tu uses de curacio de lu de las causas las quals exsiccan, constrenho; quar si tu fas aquo retorna alixacratir pus mal que nulh temps no foc habantz.	And it is not advisable to use treatments for it that dry out or constrain it, because if you do this, the swelling will return worse than before and never heal properly.
Usa en aquela de causas que mollifico ayssi cum es fenugrec, e embroca am la aygua en la qual son coytz altea e semensa de li, o enguent dyaquilon, le qual sia liquefayt am alcu dels olis, e submergeys en aquel la meca, e cura am aquel.	Use treatments that soften it, such as fenugreek, and boil the leaves and seeds in water or use juice from the plant, which should be dissolved in some oil. Soak a piece of cloth in this mixture and apply it for treatment.
E lo tesaur de la tua curacio es que tu perforsses am tot engen que no sia consolidat segon la forma que foc al comensament.	The key to your treatment is that you should ensure it is not allowed to heal in a constricted form but rather returns to its original shape.
E aquesta operacio la qual havem dita, no es sino alcuna rectificacio de ehalixacrati que no retorna la forma del loc segon que foc denant.	And this operation that we have described is simply a correction for a swelling that does not return to its original form.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter XIV.
De la cura de ehacrati le qual es fayt en la palpebra dejos.	Of the treatment of ectropion which is done on the lower eyelid.
Aquesta alxacrati la qual es fayta en la palpebra dejos, la qual es nompnada vertadierament alxacrati; e es de lu alcuna natural, autra accidental.	This ectropion which is done on the lower eyelid, which is properly called ectropion; and it is of some natural, others accidental.
Mays accidental es fayta per plagua o per scissura o per cauteri o per autres semblantz.	The accidental one is caused by trauma or by a wound or by cautery or by other similar means.
E la via de la operacio de lu es que tu prenguas una agula en la qual haga fil doble, e fiques aquela en la carn, e que la fassas passar del lacrimal de senestre entro al lacrimal dextre, entro que·l fil pervengua en las doas extremitatz de la carn.	And the way of the operation is that you take a needle with which to make a double thread, and place it in the flesh, and let it pass from the left lacrimal to the right lacrimal, until the thread reaches the two ends of the flesh.
E aprop exten la carn a las partidas desus am la agula e cus aquela am la agula, e inscideys am spatum ample.	And then stretch the flesh in the parts above with the needle and hold it with the needle, and cut it with a broad spatula.
E donc si retorne la figura de la palpebre segon que cove, bo es; e sino, pren le ray e pausa aquel en la figura fenduda, e am aquel converteys la palpebra, e fen las doas fissuras en le latz de la palpebra dejos.	And then if you return the shape of the eyelid as needed, it is good; and if not, take the rod and place it in the cut, and with that convert the eyelid, and close the two cuts on the side of the lower eyelid.
E sian las extremitatz de las doas fissuras de dos angles de la inscizio, la qual has fayta entro que concurren, e sia de lor fayt angle entro que quan se congreguan sia fayta figura de lor.	And let the ends of the two cuts be at two corners of the incision, which you have made where they meet, and let them form an angle so that when they come together, they make a proper shape.
E aquesta figura es letra greca: la landa.	And this figure is the Greek letter: lambda.
E aprop osta la carn aquela per la quantitat que es le latz de lu agut dejos de lu, aquo que siec la palpebra.	And then remove the flesh there in the amount of the width below it, which stiffens the eyelid.
E aprop ajusta las partz seperadas e cos aquelas am le fil de lana; e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit de las medicinas mollificativas e de las calguas entro que sia sanat.	And then adjust the separated parts and sew them together with wool thread; and afterwards treat those as we have said about softening medicines and plasters until it is healed.
E si alxacrati endeve per fissura o sutura o cauteri, lahoras cove que tu fendas am fissura plana sobre les pels de la palpebra segon que es precedit.	And if there is a need to open through a crack or suture or cauterization, then you should make an incision with a shallow cut above the eyelashes as has been described previously.
E aprop separa am la calgua entre doas labias segon que havem dit.	And then separate the membrane between the two lips as we have said.
En la suma del sermo de la cura de alxacrati quan es desus o dejos, que corra en lu operacio, segon que es preparat de la forma de alxacrati, e aquela es en forma de motas diversitatz.	In the summary of the speech on the treatment of incisions when they are above or below, let it proceed according to the operation, as has been prepared for the form of the incision, and that is in a variety of shapes.
E le artifexs savi totz temps prepara engen en quascuna manieyra la qual es possibla a lu entro que fassa retornar la figura a la forma natural, o prop de aquela, e aquel malaute segon que a lu conveneys de la operacio e dels strumentz en las majors disposicios.	And the skilled artisans always prepare in every possible way within themselves to return the figure to its natural form or close to it, and that malady according to the needs of the operation and the instruments in their proper disposition.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter XV.
De la adherencia de la palpebra am la conjunctiva o am la cornea.	On the adherence of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea.
Quan accideys aquesta consolidacio a motz homes enayssi que sia solidada la palpebra pus desus am le album del huel, e sia prohibida de la facilitat del movement e de las suas obras naturals, donc cove que tu entrometas la extramitat del ray dejos la palpebra, e eleva en sus aquela, o exten aquela am le unci.	When this consolidation occurs in some people such that the eyelid is adhered above the albuginea of the eye, and its movement and natural functions are restricted, then you should insert a probe below the eyelid, raise it with it, or extend it to the root.
E aprop tu inscideys la adherencia am spatum subtil, le qual no sia am acuitat de las inscisios, habantz obtus un petit per so que·l malaute no sia inquietat deves la operacio, e remau le spatum que no ledesca le huel am la sua acuitat.	And then you should incise the adherence with a fine spatula, which is not sharp, keeping it blunt so that the patient is not disturbed by the operation, and move the spatula gently so as not to scratch the eye with its sharpness.
E sia la tua inscizio quays excorjan aquela adherencia am facilitat entro que sia retornada la palpebra segon la sua forma natural e que sia sanada tota la adherencia.	And your incision should be such that it easily separates the adherence so that the eyelid can return to its natural form, and ensure that the entire adherence is healed.
E aprop tu met en le huel aygua salada am la qual tu laves; o distilla en lu de zunia dissolvut en l’aygua.	And then you put in the wound salt water with which you wash; or distill in the place of rose dissolved in water.
E aprop separa entre la palpebra e l’huel am calgua de li, e pausa sobre le huel lana infuza en album de huou, e aprop le tertz jorn usa de causas consolidativas entro que sia sanat.	And then separate between the eyelid and the wound with a clean cloth, and place on the wound wool infused in egg white, and after the third day use healing remedies until it is healed.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter XVI.
De inscizio de ungla e de eminencia de carn dels lacrimals.	On the swelling of the eyelid and the prominence of flesh around the tear ducts.
Sapias que ungla es segon dos manieyras, quar o es nervosa, e es semblant a ciphac dur subtil; o es no-nervosa, semblant a humiditat blanca congilada, la qual quan ferr la toca, o es forsat aquela prendre am onci, es abscindida e le onci no es ficat en lu.	Know that an eyelid swelling occurs in two ways: either it is nervous, resembling a hard, fine lump; or it is non-nervous, resembling white frozen moisture, which when touched with a needle takes hold of it and does not release it, thus it can be excised and the needle is not inserted into it.
E amdos las specias no comensan sino del lacrimal major entro que va petit a petit que cobre la vista e prohibeys le lum e·l movement de huel.	And both types do not begin except from the larger tear duct, gradually covering the eye and prohibiting light and movement of the eyelid.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en la inscizio de lu es que·l malaute pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop obre les huels de lu, e eleva la palpebra am la tua ma, e aprop colligeys la ungla am onci de pauca duplicacio e exten aquela a las partidas desus.	But the method of working on the swelling is that the patient places their head in your lap, and then opens their eyes, and raises the eyelid with your hand, and then collect the swelling with a needle by slight repetition and extend it to the parts above.
E aprop pren una agula e entromet en aquela un pel de cavalh o de buou o de vaqua, o de semblantz, o de fiel fort, o duplica la extremitat de la agulha petit a petit e fica aquela en le mieg de la ungla, e penetra aquela am la agulha, e lia am fiel la ungla; e exten aquela a las partidas desus, e excorja am le pel le latz de la ungla lo qual siec la pupilla.	And then take a needle and insert into it a horsehair or oxhair or cowhair, or something similar, or strong thread, and slightly double the tip of the needle, place it in the middle of the swelling, and penetrate it with the needle, and bind the swelling with glue; and extend it to the parts above, and scrape off with the hair the edge of the swelling so that the pupil is not harmed.
E ayssi tu sieguas aquela am le pel entro al derier de lu.	And so you should follow it with the skin inside out.
E aprop tu inscideys le romanent en la razitz del lacrimal am spatum subtil o am petitas forfexs, e leysa la carn del lacrimal natural per so que per inscizio de aquela no endevengua fluxs de lagremas continuabla.	And then you should incise the remainder at the root of the tear duct with a fine spatula or small forceps, and leave the flesh of the tear duct naturally so that by this incision there does not result a continuous flow of tears.
E alscunas vetz la ungla am le sol onci estenduda o am fiel, ayssi co havem dit, e aprop sia excurjat am spatum leon del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And sometimes the nail should be removed with the sun on it extended or with fire, as we have said, and then it should be excavated with a lion's spatula, which has this shape:
E guarda te que am le spatum no toques la tunica cornea e que avengua en lu ruptura, e que la pupilla sia perforada.	And be careful that with the spatula you do not touch the corneal tissue so as not to cause a rupture, and that the pupil is not perforated.
Aprop la inscizio geta en le huel un pauc de sal trissa o di cief fayt de siniar, e leyssa aquel entro al autre dia; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	And after the incision, place a little crushed salt or a piece made of cerement in it, and leave that for another day; then treat it with whatever is needed until it is healed.
E si la ungla no es nervoza e no podes metre la agulha, ni es ficada en aquela le onci, lahoras motas veguadas aquesta specia de ungla es curada am medicinas, e es sanada ayssi cum yeu e recomtat en la divisio.	And if the nail is not painful and you cannot insert a needle into it, nor is it placed in such a way that you can reach it, then this type of nail is treated with medicines, and it heals as I have said and recommended in the division.
E si tu vols inscindir aquela, lahoras tu obre le huel del malaute e pren spatum subtil leon de freul acuitat segon aquesta forma:	And if you want to incise that, then you open the wound of the patient and take a fine spatula made of steel with sharpness according to this form:
am subtilitat.	with fineness.
E si vezes que aquela es rarificada e es confugida e empren en aquela razit, lahoras distilla de la tua ora en le huel de cief fayt de siniar o am cief rog o am sal trissat, e opila le huel entro a l’autre dia.	And if it happens that it is rarefied and congealed and applied to the root, then distill from your mouth onto the wound a cerement made of sinew or rag or crushed salt, and bandage the wound for another day.
E aprop itera sobre aquela la operacio entro que sia remaugut tot aquo que es de lu, sino que·l contrari apostema caut sia en le huel, quar lahoras tu leyssa aquela, e cura al comensament la apostema entro que sia sanat.	Then proceed with the operation by removing everything that is inside it, unless the opposite abscess is inflamed, for if you leave that one, treat the beginning of the abscess until it heals.
E aprop itera la tua operacio sobre aquela am razo entro que sia sanat.	Then proceed with your operation on that one for the reason until it is healed.
La emenencia de la carn lacrimal, si notz en le huel per gran nocument, sia suspendut am onci; e inscideys aquela de aquela una partida, e no ultimes la inscizio per so que no inscidesqua fluxs de lagremas.	If the lacrimal flesh swells and becomes painful in the eye due to great harm, suspend it for a time; and incise part of that, but do not complete the incision so as not to cut off the flow of tears.
E aprop distilla en le lacrimal cief rog e fayt de siniar entro que sia sanat.	Then apply a distilled rose water and sinah preparation to the lacrimal area until it is healed.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter XVII.
De inscizio de alguazardenic e de aquo que es nascut de carn ajustada en le huel.	On the incision of styes and what is born from flesh tightly attached to the eye.
Alcunas veguadas en les huels de alcus es nascuda carn roga, e es sobre-pausada entro que cobre la pupilla, o apropinqua o estrenh sobre las palpebras e fort leu comprem las palpebras a las partidas deforo e es assemblada a roza de balaustra.	In some cases on the eyes of certain individuals, soft flesh grows and covers the pupil, or approaches closely to the eyelids and strongly pulls the eyelids inward and is assembled like a railing.
Mays la operacio en lu es que·l malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se; e aprop obre les huels de aquel e colligeys tota aquela carn am oncis convenientz ad aquo, e te aquo am una forcep o am cesti; e aprop inscindiys la carn el comensament entro que tot sia finit am le encisori, e guarda te del huel que no ledescas aquel deves la tua operacio.	The operation there is that the patient rests his head in your lap; then open the eyes of that person and collect all that flesh at convenient times, and with a forceps or tweezers; then incise the flesh at the beginning until it is completely finished with the scalpel, and be careful not to damage the eye during your operation.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscides aquelas o am espatum le qual nos havem recomtat en la inscizio de la ungla, o am petitas forfexs am las quals es colligit ascebel segon que vindra la forma de lu aprop aquest capitol.	And your incision should be made with the scalpel we have recommended for nail removal, or with small forceps with which hair is collected, depending on the form it will take as described in this chapter.
Donc cum es complida la tua inscizio e es remauguda tota aquela carn, lahoras omple le huel de sal trissa, o destilla en lu polvera roga e semblantz a lu de las medicinas corrossivas, e pausa sobre le huel deforo coto am album de huou entro que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	Thus, when your incision is complete and the flesh around it has been scraped clean, now fill the wound with powdered salt or sprinkle in red powder similar to corrosive medicines, and cover it with a white cloth so that it is protected from swelling and abscess.
E si roman alcuna causa de alguardenici e es senhoragat sanc caut, e temes apostema caut, lahoras leyssa le huel e cura aquela apostema am aquo que ceda aquela apostema, e aprop itera sobre aquel am operacio entro que sia sanat, e semblantment fay en la carn ajustada la qual accideys en le huel de aquesta especia.	And if any cause arises to guard against infection and the wound is very bloody, and you fear an abscess, then leave the wound open and treat that abscess with whatever heals such an abscess, and subsequently proceed with this operation once it has healed, and similarly do for the flesh around the wound of this kind.
Mays empero tu cove que alienes tota curacio del huel freul per via natural o per via accidental, obran am ferr, e no metas la tua ma en alcuna de aquestas operacios entro que veges que aquel membre sia suffertant aquela operacio.	However, you must ensure that the healing of the wound proceeds naturally or accidentally, using tools, and do not put your hand in any of these operations until you see that the member can endure such an operation.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter XVIII.
De colleccio de sabel en le huel.	On the collection of pus in the wound.
Sabel so venas rogas las quals son testudas sobre le huel e prohibeysso al vesement la sua operacio, e develican le huel am longitut de dias.	Pus comes from red veins that are hard to see on the wound and prohibit its operation, and the wound heals over the course of days.
Donc necessari es al comensament que tu consideres si le huel en le qual es sabel es fort e en lu no es autra malautia que sabel, lahoras tu colligeys aquel sabel.	Therefore, at the beginning, you must consider whether the wound in which there is pus is strong and if there is no other illness but pus, then you should collect that pus.
E es que tu comandes al malaute que pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop suspen aquelas venas am un onci o am dos segon la tua prudencia; e sia aquel onci de subtil duplicacio segon aquesta forma:	And it is that you command the patient to place their head in your lap, and then press those veins for one ounce or two, according to your discretion; and let that pressing be done gently and gradually as follows:
o so dos oncis gradantment en un cos segon aquesta forma:	or press for two ounces gradually in one go according to this method:
E aprop sian colligidas aquelas venas am forses subtils, am subtilitat, e abstergeys le sanc hora aprop hora, entro que vegas aquelas venas esser remaugudas del huel e sian revolgudas.	And then bind those veins with fine ligatures, and gently clear the blood from them little by little until you see them become pale and turn white.
E guarda te que tu no ledes le huel am las extremitatz del spatum; e si’ la tua operacio en le miegjorn denant le solelh, e sias mot ferm en la tua operacio que no inscidas sino aquelas venas.	And be careful not to lead the blood to the extremities of the body; and if your operation is in the morning under the sun, and you are firm in your operation so as not to incise except those veins.
E quan tu auras complitz, lahoras tu distilla en le huel cief vert o rog per que am sa acuitat corrodesca aquo que es remaugut del sabel.	And when you have completed it, then apply a distilled vinegar or red wine to the blood because of its acidity to dissolve what has become pale from fear.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible colligeys tot en aquela hora, e lahoras tu emplastra tot am aquo que cede la dolor de lu, e leyssa lu per alcus dias entro que sia sedada la dolor de lu e que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	But if it is not possible for you to do this at that hour, then apply a plaster that relieves the pain and leave it alone for several days until the pain subsides and there is no danger of an abscess forming.
E aprop itera sobre lu segon que la mateyssa manieyra entro que sia sanat.	And then repeat the same method until he is healed.
E aquesta es la forma de las forfexs:	And this is the form of the forceps:
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XIX.
De reduccio de arizati al nas.	On the reduction of fractures to the nose.
Quan tu curas arisati am cauteri o am medicina aguda comburent segon que es precedida la narracio de lu e no es sanat, lahoras no es engen en lu sino que fendas sobre le apostema deves la maturitat de lu, e que extraguas tota la humiditat la qual es en lu e·l poyre entro que sia descubert le os.	When you treat fractures with cauterization or with acute medicinal remedies as described and they have not healed, then do not allow them to become infected but cut into the abscess after its maturity, and remove all the humidity within it and the pus until the bone is revealed.
E donc cum es descubert le os e vezes en lu corrupcio o negror, lahoras tu ratz lu am un sturment del qual aquesta es la forma:	And when the bone is revealed and you see corruption or blackness in it, then scrape it with a tool whose form is as follows:
E es nompnat de aspre cap, e sia feyt de fer indi, e sia le cap redon ayssi cum asir le qual sia fayt punctat per punctacio de lima o aliskalfati per punctacio subtil (ayssi cum es en la forma seguent).	He is named the rough head, and it is made of iron, and its head is round just like this one which is made with punctures by lime or al-Iskāfah through fine puncturing (as in the following form).
E pausa aquel sobre le loc corrumput del os, e aprop revolveys aquel entre les tieus ditz, e prem la tua ma petit a petit entro que sapias que aquela corropcio es rasa.	Place it over the corrupted part of the bone, and then rotate it among the said pieces, and press your hand gently little by little until you know that the corruption is scraped off.
E aquo sia fayt alcunas veguadas, e aprop restaura le loc am causas exsiccativas e stipticas.	And this should be done several times, and then the area should be treated with drying and styptic agents.
Donc si·l loc es consolidat e es en lu nascuda bona carn e es abscindit le cors de la sania e roman per xl dias, e no es renovat e no es apostemat e no accideys en lu accident, lahoras tu sapias que es sanat.	When the area is consolidated and good flesh has grown in it, and the body of the pus has been removed and it remains for forty days without being renewed and without becoming abscessed and no accident occurs, then you know that it is healed.
E sino, lahoras no es en lu engen sino reduzir la fissura a la forma del nas, e segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu descuebras de segon os am ferr o am medicina acuta, e cum sira descubert le os, lahoras tu pren tribo segon aquesta forma:	And if not, now there is no engendering but reducing the fissure to the shape of the nose, and according to this method: that you expose the bone either with forceps or with an acute instrument, and when the bone becomes exposed, then you proceed as follows:
Sia la extramitat de lu ferr triangulada, e·l fust de lu sia prim extenuat entro a la extremitat ayssi cum vezes assi.	Let the tip of the instrument be triangular, and the shaft of it be gradually tapered towards the tip as you see here.
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le os, e sia aquel prop del lacrimal; e alongua la tua ma un pauc del huel, e aprop revol la tua ma am le tribo entro que penetre tot le os, e aquel sente le malaute per asso que atroba vent yssir per so quan te la sua ma.	And then place it on the bone, and let it be near the lacrimal; extend your hand a little further, and then rotate your hand with the instrument until it penetrates all of the bone, and you will feel the discomfort as you find air escaping.
Donc lahoras restaura le loc am medicinas stipticas exsiccantz ayssi cum t’e eyssenhat.	Now treat the area with styptic and drying medicines as you have been instructed.
Donc cum nays la carn e·l loc es endurazit, lahoras la materia la qual effundia a las partidas deforo retorna al nas, donc aquo es pus leugier sobre le malaute.	Thus when the flesh and the place become hardened, at that moment the matter which was dispersed to the parts returns to the nose, therefore this is easier upon the patient.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter XX.
De reduccio de la eminencia del huel.	On the Reduction of the Prominence of the Eye.
Quan le huel emineys am la sua totalitat e no accideys en le vezement nocument ni diminuacio, lahoras cove que laxas le malaute, e aprop que·l segues, e aprop que pausas ventozas en le cervitz ses scarificacio e succa per bona succaccio; e aprop pausa sobre le huel liniment le qual sia fayt de acatra e aloe e enses e sarcocolla, e aprop strenh le emplaustre sobre le huel am motz polvils.	When the eye protrudes entirely and no harm or reduction occurs upon viewing it, then you should instruct the patient, and afterwards follow up by applying windy poultices to the head without incision and use good suction; and then apply a liniment made of aloes, seeds, and sarcocolla around the eye; and afterwards strengthen the plaster over the eye with powdered ingredients.
E la manieyra dels polvils es que prenguas draps de li leons motz, e quascun drap sia duplicat en quatre plecs; e fay de aquels motz.	And the method for the powder is that you take linen cloth and each piece be folded in four layers; then make the powder from these pieces.
E aprop pausa aquels la un sobre le autre segon la quantitat de la qual ha le huel necessitat.	And then apply those one over the other according to the amount that the eye requires.
E aprop strenh sobre aquels am drap dur am fort strictura; e itera las ventosas am succio ses scarificacio; e aprop osta las ventosas e leyssa le huel streyt le dia e la nueyt.	And then strengthen over those with a hard cloth tightly applied; and repeat the windy applications with suction without incision; and then remove the poultices and let the eye rest day and night.
Mays si entretant le liguament es mollificat, lahoras cove que sia mot streyt.	But if meanwhile the ligament becomes softened, then it should be tightly applied.
E aprop osta le liament aprop le dia e la nueyt ayssi cum havem dit.	And then remove the ligament day and night as we have said.
E si vezes le huel ja esser redusit, bo es, e sino, lahoras itera le emplastre am les polvils e la strictura e las ventosas entro que sia sanat.	And if you see the eye already reduced, that is good; but if not, then repeat the plaster with the powders and tight application and the poultices until it is healed.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI.
De la inscizio de la eminencia de la tunica uvea.	On the incision of the prominence of the uveal layer.
Quan endeve disrupcio en la tunica uvea, e aprop es eminent e procezeys fora las palpebras ayssi cum un gra de rasim, e es orrazada la forma de home per aquo, e vols aquo inscidir, lahoras la operacio en lu es ayssi cum havem recomtat, que tu entrometas la agula en la razitz de la uvea de la partida dejos en la partida desus, e aprop met la agula autra en la qual sia fil doble de la part del lacrimal, e fay aquela penetrar e leyssa la primieyra agula segon la sua disposicio; e aprop inscideys le loc del fiel doble e leva am aquel la partida de la uvea en le circuit de la agula, e strenh aquela mot.	When you detect disruption in the uveal layer, and it protrudes prominently beyond the eyelids like a raisin seed, and its shape resembles that of a person's figure due to this condition, and if you wish to incise it, then perform the operation as we have described: insert the needle at the root of the uveal layer from below and above; subsequently, place another needle where the double thread is located near the lacrimal area, and allow both needles to penetrate and position them according to their disposition. Then, incise the location of the double thread and lift that part of the uveal layer around the needle, and strengthen this movement.
E aprop extratz la agula e pausa sobre le huel lana infusa en album de huou e leyssa entro que cayha le fil am la uva.	Then remove the needle and place it on the boiled woolen thread infused in egg white, and let it remain until the thread adheres to the uvea.
E aprop cura le huel am aquo que conforte aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	Then treat the wound with what will comfort it until the injury is healed.
E alcunas veguadas aduna de tota partida am cercle de drap entro le huel ajuste eminencia gran, e aprop sia perforat am le spatum subtil que vengua al preon del huel, e corra la humiditat albuginea, e descen le huel e intra tantost.	And in some cases, apply from all sides a circular piece of cloth around the wound to fit the prominent area, and then puncture it with a fine probe to reach the base of the wound, allowing the albuminous moisture to flow, and the wound will soon descend.
E aprop strenh entro que sia sanat.	Then strengthen it until it is healed.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXII.
De curacio de alconati.	On the treatment of contusions.
Aquesta malautia que es apelada alconati no es sino sania la qual es ajustada en le huel semblant a aygua dessendent e no es aquela.	This illness, called contusion, is not simply a swelling that resembles water descending but is different from that.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en ela es que fasses le malaute sezer sobre la sela aparelada e dreyta, e aprop pren le cap sieu en las tuas mas de doas partz e mau aquel entro que veias la sania pervenir a las partidas dejos, e aprop sia siccada e no descenda, e sia ostat le lum, e·l malaute veia las causas ayssi cum vezia.	Here is the translation:
E si no descendra en jos, sapias que es aygua.	And if it does not go down below, know that it is water.
Mays si no es preparat le descendement a la sania am aquo que havem dit, lahoras fay le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e aprop pren spatum subtil e fen am aquel sobre le pannicol cernent un petit deves la continuacio de la conjunctiva am la tunica cornea en la corona (entro al loc vuet), entro que sia fora-getada la sania.	But if the drainage is not prepared as we have said with water, now make the patient sit and take a thin spatula and apply it on the conjunctiva over the panicle slightly away from the continuation of the conjunctiva to the cornea at the edge (entering the place gently), until the pus is discharged.
Donc cum es fora-getada, lahoras tu distilla en le huel aygua cauda en la qual has mesclat mel o aygua en la qual ja has bulit fenugrec e mel.	Once it is discharged, now you should instill warm water in which honey has been mixed, or water in which fenugreek and honey have already been boiled.
E aprop sia curat am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And then treat it for other causes until it is healed.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXII.
De la curacio de la aygua descendent del huel.	On the treatment of water descending into the eye.
Ja havem dit las specias de la aygua en la divisio e qual conveneys a perforar am sermo declarant, lahoras aquel segon la sanetat.	We have already mentioned the types of water in the division and which is suitable to be used for treatment as explained, now use it according to the health condition.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre un cayrat e lia le sieu huel sa, lu mot stringent.	Now it is necessary for you to make the patient sit between your hands on a cushion and hold their eye gently with your fingers.
E aprop pausa prop de la palpebra del sieu huel la tua ma senestra, si le huel en le qual es l’aygua es le huel senestra; o am la tua ma dreyta, si le huel es le dextre.	And then place your left hand near the patient's eyelid if the affected eye is the left one; or use your right hand if the affected eye is the right one.
E aprop am la tua ma dextra pren almagda, si le huel es senestre; o am la tua ma senestra, si le huel es de dreyt.	And then with your right hand take the instrument, if the affected eye is the left one; or with your left hand, if the affected eye is the right one.
E aprop pausa la extremitat de almagda prop de la corona per la grossesa del ray en le album del huel de part del mendre lacrimal, e aprop enpelleys almagda am vertut e revol la tua ma am aquel.	And then place the tip of the instrument near the edge of the eye along the thickness of the white part of the eye from the inner corner, and then apply the instrument gently while rotating your hand.
E aprop penetre en le album del huel e sentas que almagda ja es pervenguda a causa vueda.	And so penetrate into the white of the eye and feel that the almond is already reached due to wear.
E cove que sia la masura del cami de almagda al preon la mesura del spazi le qual es de la pupilla entro a la fi de la negror, e es la corona del huel; quar tu veyras am aquel pupilla am la visio de l’huel per la clartat de la tunica cornea.	And it is necessary to measure the path from the almond to the pupil the measurement of the space which is from the pupil to the end of the darkness, and it is the circumference of the eye; for you will see with that pupil through the clarity of the corneal tissue.
E aprop pausa almagda entro al loc en le qual es l’aygua, e aprop tu la atira en jos una veguada aprop autra, e donc si la aygua descen tantost, lahoras vetz le malaute aquo sobre le qual huebre la sua vista tantost, e almagda en le sieu huel.	And so place the almond in the place where the fluid is, and then pull it down a channel nearby, and thus if the fluid flows immediately, you will see the defect upon which his sight depends immediately, and the almond in its eye.
E aprop repausa se un pauc; donc si la aygua es descenduda, lahoras tu depausa aquela autre veguada abantz que almagda ne sia getada.	And then rest for a moment; if the fluid has descended, now you pause that other channel until the almond is not expelled.
E donc quan es sicada e no descen, lahoras tu extrat almagda am facilitat, e revol am aquel la tua ma pauc a pauc, e aprop dissolveys en l’aygua un petit de sal clara de gemma e am aquela lava le huel dedintz; e aprop pausa fora le huel coto o stopa o lana infusa en oli rozat e album de huou e ligua am aquo le huel sa.	And when it has stopped and no longer descends, now you extract the almond with ease, and rotate it with your finger little by little, and then dissolve a small amount of clear rock salt in the fluid and wash the eye thoroughly with that solution; and then cover the eye with a piece of cloth or stopper or lint infused in warm oil and egg white.
Mays nos e aquels que so de nostre temps pause sobre aquel comi trissat am album de huou.	But we and those of our time rest the eye with that poultice made of egg white.
E si no obezeys a tu almagda al intrament de l’huel per la sua duricia — quar es alcu dels homes del qual le huel es dur mot —, lahoras cove que prenguas le spatum le qual es nompnat alberid del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if you are unable to insert the almond into the eye due to its hardness — for there are some people whose eyes are hard —, then it is necessary to use the instrument called alberid, which has this form:
E donc perfora am aquel aquela conjunctura, e no ultimes la tua ma en le trauc, e no es si no que fassas via ad almagda loc subtil.	And so perforate with that instrument the affected area, and do not stop your hand in the groove, until you make a place for the almond to move into.
E aprop entromet almagda segon que havem dit.	And so he proceeds with the almond as we have said.
E deves le compliment de la tua obra, sia preparat al malaute dormitori descentment fayt en le qual dorma sobre le sieu dos en mayson tenebrosa, e sia prohibit de totz movementz .	And you should advise the patient to prepare a dark room properly for sleeping on their back in a house with little light, and they should be prohibited from all movements.
E pausa en la natura de lu aquo per que sia linida la sua natura, e no maugua le sieu cap a la partida dreyta ni senestra de tot.	And pause in the nature of water so that its nature becomes smooth, and do not move their head to the right or left at all.
E sia le liament segon la sua disposicio entro al tertz dia.	And let the bandaging be according to its condition on the third day.
E aprop deslia aquel en aquela maysso tenebrosa e exproha la freol vista, e fay li vezer alcunas causas, e aprop retorna le liament entro al dia .vii.	And then remove it in that dark room and expose it to fresh air, show it some causes, and then re-bandage it on the seventh day.
E no cove que fassas aquo en la hora de las curacios o tantost aprop la infusio.	And it is not appropriate to do this during the hour of care or immediately after infusion.
Habantz cove que tu alienes aquo per so quar la aygua puega leugierament per gran e vehement de reguardament.	Handle it in such a way that the water can flow freely and quickly, with great and vigorous care.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que deslias le huel denant le vii dia, e rectifica aquel am aquo que ceda apostema.	But if an abscess occurs, you should then remove the bandage before the seventh day and treat it with water that helps to drain the abscess.
Lahoras tu absol la vista de lu e pausa sobre la cara de lu oral per le qual sia regit le vezement de lu dejos lu per alcus dias, lu existent en la mayszo tenebrosa.	Now you can free the sight from it and pause over the surface for several days, through which the vision is regulated below it, in a dark room.
E aprop sia gitat de aquela mayzo gradantment e conversa8 en las suas causas.	And then move them gradually out of that room and converse with them about their concerns.
E sapias que in alchatea no es excusat le discipol de visio alcunas veguadas, e lahoras tu sias ardit sobre la operacio.	And know that in alchemy, the student is not exempt from observing several times, and now you should be bold about the operation.
E ja es pervengut a nos de alcu de aquels les quals so al Artach , e alcu disse que fayt foc en al Ayrac magdaam perforat am le qual es succada la aygua.	And you have come to us from some of those who came after Artaz, and some said that they make fire in the Airag cup through which water is sucked.
Mays empero yeu non e vist degu en la nostra terra le qual haia perfeyt aquo, ni e aquo legit en alcu dels libres dels antics; e es possible que aquo sia novel.	But for my part I have not seen anyone in our land who has done this, nor have I read about it in any of the ancient books; and it is possible that this is something new.
E aquestas so las formas de las specias de magdaan per que sia sobre aquelas aquel le qual ignora aquelas:	And these are the forms of the species of cups through which one can work on those who are unaware of them:
E sian faytas de eram o de ferr propriament, e sian las extramitatz de lor am aquesta subtilitat triangulada, la extremitat aguda ayssi cum aquela es la forma.	And they are made of clay or iron properly, and their extremities are made with this subtlety, triangular-shaped, the sharp end just as that is the form.
Capitol .xxiv.	Chapter XXIV.
De la curacio de carn nada en le nas.	On the treatment of flesh wounds on the nose.
Quan en le nas so nascudas carns diversas ajustadas de las quals es alcuna causa la qual es assemblada a scorpio de motz pes, o a polip peys; e aquesta malautia es apelada polipus quar es a semblansa de aquel peys representat.	When on the nose there arise various flesh growths that adhere, some of which have causes similar to a spider's web or a sea squirt; and this illness is called polypus because it resembles such a sea creature.
E de lu es carn cancrosa, lapadea, de fusca color; e de lu es que es carn leon no de color fusca.	And it is cancerous flesh, ulcerated, of dark color; and there is also flesh that resembles a lion's, not of dark color.
Donc en aquela que es en aquestas carns leon no fraudulenta ni cancroza, cove que fassas le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e posat al solelh, e huebre las nars de lu, e picoys le tieu onci en aquelas carns.	Therefore, for the one who has these flesh growths that are not fraudulent or cancerous, place the patient between your hands and expose them to the sunlight, and starve the nose of it, and apply poultices at intervals to those areas.
E aprop extrat aquela a las partidas deforo, e aprop inscindeys aquo que has comprehendut de aquelas am spatum agut subtil de la una partida entro que sapias que tota la carn ja es ostada; que si roman de lu deguna causa de la qual la abscisio es possibla, lahoras tu ratz aquo am la un dels estrumentz subtils am facilitat entro que de lu romangua denguna causa.	And then extract it from the surrounding parts, and then cut out what you have identified of those areas with a sharp, fine spatula until you know that all the flesh has been removed; if it remains for any reason by which excision is possible, then remove it with one of the fine instruments with ease so that it does not remain for any reason.
Mays si senhoreja am sanc o accida apostema caut, lahoras tu pausa a lu aquo que cove; o es dels apostemas malignes, lahoras tu coyta e cauteriza aquel entro que sia abscindit sanc e sian ostadas las cavas totas.	If the master has hemorrhage or abscess that requires cautery, then proceed with what is necessary; if it is one of malignant abscesses, then cut and cauterize that which needs to have blood vessels severed and all cavities drained.
E aprop sia getatz en le nas aprop la inscizio vi agre e aygua o vi.	And it should be placed near the nose, next to the incision, with water or wine.
Mays si le nas es ubert e de lu procezeys humiditat entro al palat, lahoras sapias que ja es sanat.	If the nose is swollen and the process of moisture spreads to the palate, then you will know that it has healed.
Mays si la humiditat no penetra segon que cove, lahoras tu sapias que dedintz lu es carn nada en los pus sobiras osses de las nars als quals non es pervengut abscizio.	If the moisture does not penetrate as it should, then you will know that inside there is flesh that has grown on the superfluous bones of the nose to which the incision did not reach.
Donc lahoras cove que entromitas fiel de li al qual sia alcuna grosseza, e nuza en lu motz nuzes, e pausa entre quascun nutz la quantitat del dit o mens, e engene le malaute e entromet una extremitat del fiel en le nars am lo ray o am autra causa la qual es a lu possibla.	Then you should introduce some thick substance faithfully to the one who has an enlargement, and place it in walnut shells, and put between each shell the quantity of a finger or less, and apply the remedy and insert one end of the substance into the nose with a reed or for another possible cause.
E pus que aquo aura fayt, que atire le sieu odorament entro que pervengua a las canals de las nars, e sia eyssit sobre le sieu golayro, quar tropas veguadas le semblant ad aquesta accio fan les enfantz a las scolas, e es leugiera causa ad aquel que ho vol far.	And after this has been done, let the smell of it be drawn into the nostrils so that it reaches the channels of the nose, and let it be placed on their greasy part, for those who carefully observe the appearance of this action do as children in schools, and it is a swift cause for one who wants to perform it.
E aprop pausa las dos extramitatz del fiel, una extremitat que iesca sobre le nas et l’autra que romangua en le nas, e aprop aministra serratura de carn am les nuzes que so en le fiel, e fay aquo entro que sapias que las carn ja so am les nuzes del fiel.	And then place the two ends of the substance, one end extending out over the nose and the other remaining inside the nose, and then apply a flesh clamp to the walnuts that hold the substance, and do this until you know that the flesh is holding onto the walnuts of the substance.
E aprop extratz le fiel, e pausa en le nas aprop la abstraccio del sanc una calgua , e fay aquo per tres dias o mays entro que l’enguent corrodo tot aquo que es romas de las carns.	From the root extract the juice, and place in the nose near the extraction of blood a small tube, and do this for three days or more until it corrodes all that is around the flesh.
E aprop en la fi de la causa, pausa en le nas una canula de plom per alscus jorns entro que sia sanat.	And at the end of the treatment, place in the nose a lead tube for several days until it is healed.
Mays si endigeys de curacio que exsique, usa de aquela.	But if you prefer a drying treatment, use that one.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument a capipurge fazedor am le qual son distillatz olis e medicinas en le nars:	And this is the form of the instrument for making enemas, with which oils and medicines are distilled into the nose:
E fay aquo de argent o de eram, la qual sia semblant a una petita lampesa uberta, ayssi cum petita conqua, e le meat semblantment.	And make this of silver or ivory, which should resemble a small spoon with a curved end, like a small bowl, and the tube similarly.
E si vols, fay una canula clausa ayssi cum cana, e la cancula del estrument a capipurge fazedor e sia plana, descuberta; a la qual sia manubre en lo derier de lu, am le qual tenguas aquela quan escaufas en lu oli o aquo que tu vols dels sucs e de las causas suctiblas.	And if you wish, make a closed tube like a reed, and the tube of the instrument for making enemas should be flat and open; to which attach a handle at the back, with which you can hold it when heating in oil or water what you want from juices and suctionable causes.
E aquestz capipurgi es precios: recipe de enforbi de castor, de balayra blanc, de giengiebre, e piletre de safra, de pebre lonc, de escafragia, de epetum de spic ana unc. vi cumfizeys am suc de bleda e de caul, e sian faytas pillulas, e sia destemprada una pillula am aygua tebeza, e sia gitat en las nars del malaute jasent envers.	And this enema is valuable: recipe for a mixture of castor oil, white myrrh, ginger, saffron pepper, long pepper, scammony, and spikenard one ounce each; mix with the juice of barley and cucumber, and make pills; dissolve one pill in warm water, and administer it to the patient lying on their back through the nose.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter XXV.
De theyls natz en las extramitatz del nas.	About the veins in the extremities of the nose.
Motas veguadas es nat theyl en las extramitatz del nas, e es magnificat e omentat en alscus dias entro en que mot es leg le reguardament de lu.	Most bruises occur in the extremities of the nose, and they are treated and bandaged within a few days during which one must take care of it.
E per aquo cove que tu inscidas aquel en le comensament de la apparissio de lu, e erediques tot aquel.	And for this reason, you should treat it at the beginning of its appearance, and continue treating it entirely.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc o cauteri o medicina comburent la qual estia en loc de lu.	And then pause on the place where you cauterized or applied a burning medicine, which was in that location.
Mays si es tardada la sua inscizio entro que sia magnificat, lahoras considera si es lapificat, dur, de fusca color e de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr quar es apostema crancos; quar motas veguadas ad aquel que inscideys aquesta apostema endeve per lu granda malicia sobre aquel le qual aquel havia.	But if treatment is delayed until it has become inflamed, hard, dark in color, and insensitive, then do not touch it with an iron instrument as it may be a chronic abscess; for many times the person treating this abscess improperly causes great harm to the patient.
E si le apostema es de leon tocament e no es de fosca color, e vezes que inscizio es possibla en tot aquel, lahoras evacua le malaute e inscideys aquel senes temor, e cura le loc am aquo que exsique e costrenh entro que sia sanat.	And if the abscess is soft to touch and not dark in color, and if treatment is possible at all times, then evacuate the pus without fear, and treat the area with something that dries and constricts until it heals.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter XXVI.
De sutura del nas e de las labias e de la aurelha quan la continuitat es dissolvuda per plagua o per semblantz.	On suturing the nose and lips and the ear when continuity is lost due to plague or similar causes.
Sapias que quan accideys solucio de continuitat en una de aquestas cartillages, pauc confereys en aquela operacio sino en alcus homes.	Know that when the continuity is lost in one of these cartilages, few would undertake such an operation except in some cases.
Donc cove, quan endeve ad alcu alcuna causa de aquelas, que consideres si es plagua fresca am le sieu sanc, e lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, when dealing with any of these causes, you must consider whether it is a fresh wound or due to the natural course of healing, and then you should approximate the two edges of the wound with stitches, and afterwards treat it until it heals.
E si las labias de solucio de continuitat so ja separadas, e quascuna es fayta sana, lahoras cove que tu excorjes quascuna partida de la sua codena apparent entro que n’iesca sanc.	And if the lips of a wound of continuity are already separated, and each one is made healthy, now you must excise each part of its visible edge until it bleeds.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias am sutura e strenh aquelas, e sobre aquelas pulveriza sanc de drago e enses trissat, e pausa sobre la polvera una pessa de emplaustra diafinicon, o de alcu autre dels emplastres consolidatius, e leyssa aquel liat per dos jorns o per tres, e aprop deslia aquel e permuta aquel emplaustre e leyssa aquel entro que·ls fiels per si sian abscinditz, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then adjust the two lips with sutures and strengthen them, and sprinkle over them powder of dragon's blood and thrisse, and place upon the powder a piece of mastic plaster or some other consolidating plaster, and leave that wound for two days or three, and then untie it and change the plaster and leave it until the pus has ceased to flow, and then treat with an ointment until it is healed.
Mays la manieyra de la sutura es que tu agregues la solucio de continuitat o am agulhas ayssi cum havem recomtat en la sutura del ventre, o agregua la solucio de continuitat am fiel ayssi cum a tu e fayt saber.	The method of the suture is that you join the wound of continuity either with needles as we have recommended for the suture of the abdomen, or join the wound of continuity with thread as you know how to do.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter XXVII.
De extraccio de aquela causas que veno en las doas labias en las partidas dedintz.	Of the extraction of those causes that appear in the two lips in their inner parts.
Motas veguadas endeve a motz homes en las partidas dedintz de las suas labias alcus apostemas durs semblantz a gras de errs, e alscunas de lors son mendres e alcunas son majors.	Many times in some men in the inner parts of their lips there appear abscesses that are hard like the gristle of birds, and some of them are smaller and some are larger.
Donc cove que tu convertas las labias e fendas quascuna de aquelas duricias de tota part, e aprop la abscizio umpliscas le loc de sagi trissat entro que·l sanc sia restrengut, e aprop sia lavat am vi agre e sia curat le loc am aquo que es stipticitat, entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, you should turn the lips and split each of those hardnesses from all sides, and then when you excise them, fill the place with thrisse-dressed cloth until the blood is constricted, and then wash it with vinegar water and treat the area with astringents until it is healed.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter XXVIII.
De inscizio de la carn ajustada en las gengivas.	Of the incision of flesh adjusted to the gums.
Granre de veguadas nays sobre la gengiva carn ajustada la qual les antics apelero albulus, adonc cove que tu suspendas aquela am onci o que tenguas aquela am las forfecs e inscidas aquela deves la sua razit, e leyssas la sania correr o le sanc.	Great care must be taken when dealing with flesh attached to the gum. The ancients called this condition albulus. Then you should suspend the affected area for about an ounce or hold it between your forceps and incise along its root, allowing the pus to drain or the blood to flow.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc sagi trissat o autra polveras stipticas o excicativas.	And afterwards apply powder that is soothing or other styptic powders or excitants to the area.
E si aquela carn retorna, lahoras inscideys aquela segundariament, e cauterisa aquela, quar aprop le cauteri no retornara.	And if the flesh returns, then incise it again, and cauterize it, for after cauterization it will not return.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter XXIX.
De razo de dentz am ferr.	Of the extraction of teeth with iron.
Quan en la superficia de las dentz de las partidas dedintz e de las de foro e entre las gingivas so ajustadas escorsas aspras, legas, e alcunas veguadas son de nigradas e son faytas citrinas o vertz entro que a la gingiva ve per aquo corrupcio e son faytas las dentz legas.	When on the surface of the teeth in the inner parts and those from outside, and between the gums to which they are attached, there are rough spots, ulcers, and some areas are blackened and appear yellowish or greenish, causing corruption to the gum and making the teeth decayed.
E donc cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas e pausar le cap de lu en le tieu se, e ratz las dents en las quals apareysso aquelas escorsas e causas semblantz arena entro que de lor no romangua deguna causa, e aquo fay de la negror e de la citrinitat e de las autras entro que sian mondificadas.	And therefore you should make the patient sit between your hands and place his head in a warm towel, and extract the teeth on which these rough spots appear along with any grit inside them so that none of it remains, and this will remove the blackness and yellowish color and other issues until they are cleansed.
Donc si es ostat aquo que es en aquelas del comensament de la razio, bo es; e sino, lahoras tu itera la razio sobre aquelas al autra dia e al segon e al tertz entro que vengua al derier stament en aquo que tu vols.	If this can be done at the beginning of the extraction, it is good; but if not, then you should repeat the extraction on those teeth another day and on the second and third days until it reaches the final step as you desire.
E sapias que las dentz han necessitat de motz rezoris de diversas formas e de motas figuras segon que es preparat a la tua operacio.	And know that teeth have need of various instruments of different forms and shapes according to what is prepared for your operation.
E per so quar le razori am le qual la dent es raza de la partida dedintz es autre del razori am le qual es ras entre las dentz segon autras formas, e aquestas formas de razoris sian deves tu preparadas las quals veyras tantost:	And therefore, the razors which are used to remove the tooth that is to be extracted are different from those used to rasp between the teeth according to other forms, and these forms of razors you should prepare as you will see shortly:
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter XXX.
D’eradicacio de dentz.	On the Extraction of Teeth.
Cove que tu cures la dent de la sua dolor am tot engen e tardes en tota eradicacio de lu, quar no es denguna causa que suplisqua la veguada de lu quan es eradicada, quar es sustancia sublima entro que es excusacio en la eradicacio de lu.	When you wish to cure the tooth of its pain by completely extracting it and delaying in the total extraction of it, know that there is no reason to postpone the removal when it needs to be extracted, since it is a substance that requires promptness in its extraction.
Mays cove quan le malaute es forsat aquela dent eradicar, que fermament deves tu sia certificat quala es la dent dolent, quar motas veguadas la dolor descep le malaute e cuga que sia en dent sana, e tu eradicas aquela e aprop la dolor no cessa entro que la dent malauta e dolent sia eradicada, quar nos ja havem vist aquo per operacio dels barbies.	But when the patient is forced to have that tooth extracted, you must be firmly certain which is the painful tooth, because often the pain can deceive the patient and lead them to believe it is in a healthy tooth. If you extract the wrong one, the pain will not cease until the diseased and painful tooth is removed, as we have already seen through the experience of many operations.
Donc cum deves tu es sertificat qual es la dent dolent, e que o sabes be, lahoras cove que tu scarifiques en le circuit de la dent am spatum en le qual sia alcuna vertut, entro que sia dissolvut de la dent de la gingiva de tota partida, e aprop mau aquel am les tieus ditz, o am forfexs subtils al comensament petit a petit entro que aquela concucesquas.	Therefore, when you need to be certain which is the painful tooth, and once you know well, it is necessary that you scarify around the tooth with an instrument that has some virtue until it dissolves the tooth from the gum completely. Then, using your fingers or fine forceps, begin gently at first, little by little, until you can loosen it.
E aprop alogua en lu fortz tenalhas grans per bona loquacio o estuptura fort, e pausa le cap del malaute entre les tieus denolhs que be le tengues que no·s maugua, e aprop tratz la dent segon rectitut en manieyra que no trenques aquela, ni al malaute major dolor no dones.	And then use strong forceps for good leverage or a firm hold, and place the patient's head between your hands in such a way that they feel comfortable and secure. Then pull the tooth straight so as not to break it, nor cause greater pain to the patient.
E donc si no es foro-getat, lahoras pren un de aquels instrumentz, e met aquel dejos lu de tota part am facilitat e esforsa la remocio de lu ayssi que es feyt al comensament.	And thus if it is not dislocated, now take one of those instruments and place it there from all sides with ease and strive for the removal of it as was done at the beginning.
Mays si la dent es trauquada o corrosa, lahoras cove que tu comples de drap aquel trauc e estrenguas aquel am la extremitat de ray subtil per so que no sia trinquada en la hora de la tua constriccio sobre aquela am tenalas.	But if the tooth is loose or decayed, now cover it with cloth that you have prepared and bind it tightly at the end with a thin thread so that it does not become dislodged during your compression upon that tooth holding it.
E cove que tu obres exquesitament am scarificacio en le circuit de tota part de la gingiva e guarda mot la tua fortaleza que no trenques aquela e romangua partida de lu, e retorne sobre le malaute per la malicia que sia majo que la primieyra dolor de lu.	And it is necessary that you work extremely carefully around the incision in a circle all around the gum and be mindful of your strength so as not to tear that which should remain intact, and return to the diseased area for the malice that it may be better than the initial pain.
E guarda te que no fassas aquo que fan alscus ignorantz barbiers en lor fistinacio e audacia sobre la eradicacio de lor, ses que no aministran aquo que nos havem recomtat; quar motas veguadas fan venir sobre les homes malautias grans las quals son pus dificils que sian trinquadas, e las razitz de lor remaugudas totas, o alcunas de aquelas, o que extrayguas aquela am alcus osses de la mandigula ayssi cum motas veguadas havem testificat.	And be careful that you do not do what some ignorant barbers do in their foolishness and audacity during the removal of teeth; for they often fail to administer what we have recommended. Many times this brings upon sick people great evils which are much harder to cure, and the roots of those teeth become badly damaged, or some of them, or you may extract it along with some bones of the jaw as many times we have witnessed.
E aprop la eradicacio de lu sia lavada la boca am vi caut o vi agre am sal.	And after the removal of it, the mouth should be washed with warm water or salt water.
E si endeve fluxs de sanc per aysso, ayssi cum motas veguadas endeve, lahoras trissa alcuna quantitat de zegi e aspergeys sobre la plagua, e si no confereys aquel zegi, cauteriza.	And if there is bleeding for this reason, as often happens, now take some quantity of wax and sprinkle it over the wound, and if that does not stop the bleeding, use cauterization.
La forma de las forceps e tenalas subtils am las quals es mauguda la dent al comensament sia de longua extramitat, de breu manubre e gros, per so que no sian doblatz quan am aquels deves obrar.	The shape of the forceps and the delicate handles with which the tooth is held at the beginning should be of long extremity, short handle, and thick, so that they do not bend when you are working with them.
E sian ayssi cum vezes de gros manubre entro que quan estrenhas am aquelas no sian dobladas, sian breus extramitatz.	And so they should be as if made of thick material so that when stranguries are applied to them, they not be folded but rather have short extremities.
E sian faytas de ferr de India descentment faytas de dreytas extramitatz, e en las extramitatz de aquelas sian dentz de las quals las unas intron en las autras e estrenhan per constriccio descent fort, e alscunas veguadas las extramitatz de aquelas sian la forma del bec d’un auzel le qual ha nom ciconia, so es guanta, e son de fort constriccio.	And they should be made of Indian iron, straight in their extremities. And at the extremities of those there are teeth among which some enter into others and constrict with great force, and sometimes the extremities of those should have the shape of a bird's beak called ciconia, that is a heron, and they are very strong in constriction.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter XXXI.
De erradicacio de dentz e d‘estraccio dels osses de las mandibulas trincadas.	On the extraction of teeth and the removal of bones from locked jaws.
Quan deves la eradicacio de dent le qual es trinquat roman alcuna causa, lahoras cove que tu pauses sobre le loc coto am boder per un jorn o per dos entro que·l loc sia mollificat; e aprop entromet algesti o tenalhas las extramitatz de las quals so asembladas al bec de un auzel apelat ciconia o guanta, la forma de las forceps:	When you must perform the extraction of a tooth that is locked due to some cause, it is necessary for you to apply poultices around the area for one day or two until the area becomes softened. Then proceed with instruments or forceps whose extremities resemble the beak of a bird called ciconia or heron, in the shape of the forceps:
Las extramitatz de lor sian faytas dedintz ayssi cum lima o alfagi.	The extremities of those should be made like teeth, similar to a file or rasp.
E si no obediys a tu a eyssiment am aquestas forceps o tenalas, lahoras cove que tu caves sobre la razit e descrobas tota la carn e entrometas le instrument le qual ha nom atali, so es palanca petita del qual la forma es aquesta:	And if it does not obey you when using these forceps or tenals, then you should apply to the root and expose all the flesh, and proceed with an instrument called atali, which is a small lever whose form is as follows:
E sia de breu extremitat grossa un petit, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	And it should have a short thick end, and it should not be enclosed such that it becomes locked.
Donc si per aquo la razit es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, ajuda te am aquestz autres instrument dels quals aquestas son las formas: la forma del primier instrument es de triangulada extramitat en la qual sia alcuna grossesa:	Then if by this the root is dislodged, it is good; and if not, help yourself with these other instruments whose forms are as follows: the form of the first instrument is a triangular end in which there is some thickness:
La forma del segon instrument es que sia de triangulada e de pus subtil extremitat.	The shape of the second instrument is that it be triangular and have a very fine tip.
E ja so ajudatz am aquest instrument havent dos ramps del qual aquesta es la forma aprop la seguent:	And here is how you use this instrument, which has two ends, and this is its shape near the following:
e am autres instrumentz les quals precidero en rasura de dentz; quar juvament es fayt am aquest instrument le qual es asemblat a onci gran, e aquesta es la forma:	and with other instruments which I will describe for scraping teeth; because it is made with this instrument that resembles a small spoon, and this is its shape:
de la triangulada extremitat torta o curta, la qual sia alcuna grossesa, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	of the twisted or bent triangular tip, which should have some thickness, and it should not be hollow so that it does not rattle.
E otra sapias que·ls instrumentz de las dentz motz so e semblantment les autres instruments.	And another skill is to know the instruments for the teeth and to make them similar to other instruments.
Mays le artifexs savi e subtil en l’art, atroba per si mateys segon aquo que a lu significa la operacio e las malautias diversas; quar son de las malautias a las quals les antics no diysero ni pausero propri instrument, per las formas de diversas specias.	But the skilled and subtle artisan finds for himself according to what he understands about the operation and various diseases; because there are diseases about which the ancients did not say or make a proper instrument, due to the forms of different kinds.
Mays si es trinquat l’os de la mandibula o dels autres osses de la boca, o si poyreys, lahoras sia pes curat sobre aquel en son loc am aquo que es a lu convenient dels instrumentz e de las forceps las quals havem dit en la extraccio de las razitz de las dentz, e ajuda te am gesti del qual aquesta es la forma:	But if the bone of the jaw or other bones in the mouth rattles, or if it is loose, now carefully treat it there in its place with what is suitable for the instruments and forceps which we have mentioned in the extraction of tooth roots, and help with the action whose form is as follows:
E sia en lu alcuna grosseza petit a petit, e sia instringida o tenguda am la boca per que no evasesca o fuga entro que l’os de tot sia foro-getat; e aprop restaura le loc am medicinas convenientz ad aquo.	And it should have some thickness gradually, and be held in the mouth so that it does not escape or flee until all the bone is extracted; and then restore the place with suitable medicines.
Mays si en l’os es petita poyredura, lahoras ratz aquel de aquela poyredura e de la sua negror, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But if there is a small hole in the bone, now treat that for its decay and its blackness, and care for it until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter xxxii.
De la cura de las dentz eminentz sobre las autras.	On the treatment of prominent teeth over other teeth.
Quan las dentz so eminentz no segon lor cors natural per aquelas la forma es laga, e majorment quan endeve a las femnas, e majorment a las piuselas venerablas; donc cove que tu consideras: si dent es nada aprop autra dent, e no es possibla sarradura ni linament de lu, lahoras radica aquela; mays que no sia annexa am autra dent, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am aquest instrument del qual aquesta es la forma; e es semblant a morr de porc, e sia feyt de ferr de India de extramitat mot aguda.	When the prominent teeth do not follow their natural course and the form is lax, especially when this affects women, and more so those who are venerable; then you should consider: if a tooth is too close to another tooth, and it is impossible to extract or apply medication, at that time remove its root. But ensure that it is not attached to another tooth; then you cut it with this instrument which has the following form; it resembles a pig's snout, and it is made of Indian steel with an extremely sharp point.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscideyses aquela en trops dias per la duricia de la dent, e que no sia comauguda autra de las dentz.	And ensure your incision with which you cut it is not made too deep due to the hardness of the tooth, and that it does not communicate with other teeth.
E si es dent eminent expausat a limadura, lahoras lima aquel am lima de ferr de India del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if it is a prominent tooth that can be filed down, then file it with an Indian steel file which has the following form:
E sia tot de ferr de India e·l margua eysament; e sia de motz menutz puntz ayssi cum lima am la qual son faytas agulhas, am la qual la dent sia limada pauc a pauc en motz dias am fecilitat, per so que no sia autra dent comauguda e caga.	And it should be entirely made of Indian steel and should be sharp; it should have very fine points as with a file used to make needles, with which the tooth is filed little by little over several days with ease, so that it does not communicate with another tooth and cause damage.
E aprop lineys aquela en la fi, e ratz aquela am alscus razoris.	And smooth it at the end, and polish it with some razors.
E si es dent del qual una partida es trinquada e lideys la lengua, lahoras cove que tu limescas aquel entro que l’aspretat de aquela fraccio sia ostada e engualhada, e sia aplenada per so que la lengua no ledesca ni la paraula no corrumpa.	And if it is a tooth where part of it is broken and you run your tongue over it, then you should file down the inside until the roughness of that fracture is smoothed and filled so that your tongue does not get hurt and the speech is not impaired.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter XXXIII.
De restauracio de dentz maugudas am fiel de aur o de argent.	On the restoration of bad teeth with gold or silver filling.
Quan accideys a las dentz devant concussio e remossio per percussio o per cazament, e le malaute no pot strenher sobre aquo que manga, e tu has curat aquel am medicinas stipticas, e no ha valgut la tua curacio, lahoras per so que no cagan es engen en aquelas que sian strengudas am fiel de aur e no de argent, quar argent se fa vert e aprop se poyreys aprop alscus dias, mays aur nul temps no es mudat.	When it happens that the front teeth are loose or dislocated due to impact or accident, and the patient cannot bear what they eat because of this, and you have treated them with astringent medicines but your treatment has not been effective, then for those that do not heal, you should proceed by restoring them with gold filling and not silver, because silver changes color and may cause issues after some days, whereas gold never changes.
E sia le fiel en tal subtilitat e grocesa segon la quantitat que puesca entrar entre las dentz; e la forma de la reccio es que prenguas le fiel e pren lo doble de lu entre doas dentz sanas, e aprop que cresques am doas tortuositatz del fiel entre doas maugudas, o si’ una o motas, entro que pervengua la tela a la dent sana del autra partida.	And the filling should be in such subtlety and fineness according to the quantity that can fit between the teeth; the method of restoration is that you take the filling and place twice its amount between two healthy teeth, and then shape it with two tortuosities of the filling between one or multiple bad teeth, so that it reaches the healthy tooth on the other side.
E aprop itera le teyssiment entro a la partida de la qual comenciest, e strenh la tua ma am facilitat e savieza entro que no sia mauguda.	And then continue the restoration from the part where you began, and strengthen your work with ease and wisdom so that it is not defective.
E sia la tua striccio am la qual strenhas le fiel deves las razitz de las dentz que no evasesca.	And when you are restoring the filling, be careful not to expose the roots of the teeth.
E aprop inscindeys las extramitatz del fiel superfluens am las forceps o tosoyras, e agregua aquelas en quascun loc am gesti, e converteys aquelas e las occulta entre la dent sana e la dent mauguda, per so que no fassa lesio a la lengua.	And then trim the excess filling with forceps or scissors, and place it in each location by hand, and shape it to conceal it between the healthy tooth and the bad tooth so that it does not injure the tongue.
E aprop leyssa aquela ayssi streyta cum roman.	And then shape it as finely as a ribbon.
Mays si es desliada o rumpuda, strenh aquela o aquelas am autra fiel en tal manieyra en tot son temps.	But if it becomes loose or broken, reinforce that part with additional filling in such a way throughout its duration.
E aquesta es la forma de las dentz e la figura de la rectacio de doas dentz sanas e de doas maugudas, ayssi cum vezes aquestas liadas:	And this is the form of the teeth and the figure of the alignment of two healthy teeth and of two misaligned teeth, as you will see these diagrams:
E quan se fa que retorno una dent o doas aprop le cazement de quascuna en lors locs, e sian recrescutz ayssi cum havem recomtat, e que remauguan.	And when it happens that I return one tooth or two near the placement of each in their places, and they grow back as we have recounted, and they become aligned.
E no fa aquo sino bo artifexs e savi.	And only a good artisan and wise person can do this.
E alcunas veguadas es aptat alcuna causa dels osses de vaca, e es fayt de lor ayssi cum forma de dent, e es pausada en loc en le qual defayl la dent, e es strengit ayssi cum havem dit, e reman e serveys am aquel per lonc temps.	And sometimes a similar piece of cowbone is used for some reason in the shape of a tooth, and it is placed in the location where the tooth is missing, and it is fixed as we have said, and remains and serves there for a long time.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Chapter XXXIV.
De inscizio del liament le qual ve en la lengua e prohibeys loquela.	On the incision of the membrane that is in the tongue and prevents speech.
Aquest liguament le qual ve dejos la lengua alcunas veguadas o es natural am le qual hom nays, o accidental e accideys per plagua la qual ja es consolidada.	This membrane that is under the tongue sometimes is natural and one is born with it, or it is accidental and occurs due to an injury that has already healed.
E la operacio en lu es que huobres la boca del malaute, le sieu cap existent en le tieu se; e eleva la sieua lengua, e aprop inscideys aquel liament nervos segon la latitut entro que sia solvuda la lengua de la sua recencio.	And the operation is that one opens the mouth of the patient, and lifts their tongue; then one cuts that membrane along the nerve according to its length, ensuring the tongue is sufficiently exposed.
Mays si en aquela es alcuna duricia o denodacio, e aquo es stat per consolidacio de plagua, lahoras tu gieta unci e scindeys aquel per la latitut entro que aias inscindit le liament e sia dissolvuda la nodacio.	But if there is any hardness or knot in that area, and this is due to the healing of an injury, then you should cut carefully and divide it along its length until the knot dissolves.
E guarda te que no sia fayta fissura en le preon de la carn e que scindas aqui arceria e vengua flux de sanc.	And be careful not to make a cut in the surface of the flesh so that you do not sever the arteries and cause bleeding.
E aprop sia lavat le vestigi de la inscisio am ayguaros o am vi agre o am aygua frega; e aprop pausa dejos la lengua licini; so es meca la qual tengua le malaute dejos la lengua en quascuna nuoyt per so que no sia consolidat autra veguada.	After washing the remnants of the incision with water or vinegar or clean water, put a piece of linen under the tongue; this is done so that the bad taste does not remain under the tongue each night so that it does not become consolidated elsewhere.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, pausa sobre le loc vetriol trissat; mays si le sanc ventz, lahoras cauteriza le loc am cauteri lantiginos le qual conveneys ad aquo.	If bleeding occurs, place over the area vitriol powder; but if the blood flows continuously, then cauterize the area with a hot iron, which is appropriate for this condition.
E aprop aquel cura am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And subsequently treat it with other causes until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter XXXV.
De extraccio de ranula dejos la lengua.	On the extraction of a ranula under the tongue.
Alcunas veguadas accideys dejos la lengua apostema asemblant a nomla petita prohibent la lengua de la sua operacio natural; e fort leu es magnificada entro que huempla la boca.	Sometimes, an abscess appears under the tongue, resembling a small swelling that prevents the tongue from performing its normal function; and it grows so much that it fills the mouth.
E la operacio en lu es que huebras la boca del malaute sesent devant le solel e considera le apostema.	The operation to be performed is to open the mouth wide in front of the light and examine the abscess.
E si tu le vezes de fusca color o de negra, dur, al qual le malaute no atroba sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel quar es cranc.	And if you see it as dark or black in color, hard, and without any sensation, then do not touch what appears to be gangrenous.
E si es declinat a blancor, en le qual es humiditat, lahoras tu met le onci en lu, e inscideys aquel am spatum subtil, e inscindeys le de tota partida; e si sanc te ventz en la hora de la tua operacio, lahoras tu pausa desus zegi trissat, so es vetriol, entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if it is inclined towards whiteness and moisture, then you should proceed with the operation, incising it with a fine scalpel, and cut it entirely; and if blood flows during your procedure, then place over it powdered zinc sulfate, which is vitriol, to stop the bleeding.
E aprop retorna a la obra tua entro que lo haias trayt am compliment de lu, entro que sia lavat am vi agre e sal; e cura aquel am l’autra curacio ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And then return to your work once you have completed the procedure, washing it with vinegar and salt; and treat it with other appropriate treatments until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Chapter xxxvi.
De extraccio de apostema de doas aurelhas e de aquel que es nada en le golayro e de las autras apostemas.	On the extraction of abscesses from both armpits and those that occur in the groin and other abscesses.
Quan endeveno en le golayro godat, so son glandulas las quals son asembladas algodat, las quals accideysso deforas e son nompnadas doas aurelhas, las quals quan tu las curas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no es sanat, lahoras tu considera si le apostema es dur, de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr.	When you find an abscess in the groin area, these are glands that are assembled there, which appear outside and are called armpits. When you treat them as we have said in the division and they do not heal, then consider if the abscess is hard, dark in color, and has little sensation; at this point, do not touch it with iron.
E si es de roga color e la razic es grossa, lahoras no toques aquela am ferr per le flux del sanc; abantz layssa aquel entro sia madurat, e lahoras o tu trauqueras aquel, o sira romput per si.	And if it is red in color and the root is large, then do not touch it with iron due to the flow of blood. Instead, leave it inside to mature, and either you will remove it later, or it may rupture on its own.
E si es de blanqua color, radon, e la razit de lu es subtil, lahoras aquel es que cove esser inscidit.	And if it is white in color, soft, and the root is delicate, then that should be incised.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras, denant la tua operacio, si ja ha repausat le apostema de lu caut am repaus complit o si es deminuit am alcuna deminucio; e lahoras fay sezer le malaute denant le soleyl, e·l cap de lu sia en le tieu se, e huebre la boca de lu, e le servidor prenent entre las suas mas prema la lengua de lu dejos am instrument mot noble del qual aquesta es la forma:	And the operation on it is that you consider, before your operation, whether the abscess has already begun to mature after being cauterized or if it has decreased in some way. Then have the patient sit facing the sunlight, and his head towards your side, and expose the opening of the abscess, and the assistant holding firmly with their hands the instrument mentioned below:
E sia fayt de argent o de aram, e sia subtil cum cotel.	And it should be made of silver or iron, and should be as thin as a knife.
Donc cum tu premes am aquel la lengua e es mostrat a tu la apostema, e catz sobre aquel le tieu vezement, lahoras pren onci e fica aquel en l’amenla, e tira aquel a las partidas defora tant quant podes.	When you press with that instrument and the abscess is revealed to you, place your finger over it firmly, then take some of it and insert it into the opening, and pull it outwards as much as you can.
Otra aquo que tiras alcuna causa de las tunicas, e aprop incideys aquela am instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	Here is another illustration of cutting through one cause of the tunics, and appropriately proceed with this instrument which has this form:
e es asemblat a forceps, empero las extramitatz de lu son corvadas, ayssi que l’orrifici de quascuna de aquelas es en le endreyt del autra, mot agudas, le qual sia de ferr indi enbegut.	and it is similar to forceps, but the extremities of its are curved, thus the opening of each of those is in line with the other, sharp points, which are made of iron.
Mays si aquest instrument no es a tu present, lahoras inscideys aquel am spatum del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: E sia agut de la una part, no agut del autra part.	If this instrument is not available to you, then proceed with this spatula which has the following form: It is sharp on one side, not sharp on the other side.
E pus que has inscidit una mella, inscideys l’autra segon aquesta meteyssa manieyra de inscizio, e aprop la inscizio le malaute guarguarise de aygua frega	And after you have made one incision, make the other following this method of cutting, and then wash the wound with clean water for healing.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, guarguarise aygua de decoccio de scorsa de milgrana o de fuelha de mirtra e semblantz ad aquel de las causas stiptiquas entro que·l flux del sanc sia restreyt, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But if there is bleeding, treat it with water from the decoction of lemon peel or mint leaves and similar astringents until the flow of blood is stopped, and then proceed to heal it once it is stabilized.
E alcunas veguadas naysso en le guolayro autras apostemas otra aquelas doas aurelhas, e inscideys aquelas segon que yeu e dit en la inscizio de doas mellas engualment.	And sometimes there arise in the throat other abscesses or those affecting both ears, and cut these according to what I have said about cutting two incisions equally.
E yeu ja fu medicat una femna de apostema le qual era nat en le golayro de lu, le qual apostema tendia a color fusca, de pauc sentiment, le qual ja havia claus le golayro de lu, e la femna respirava am meat streyt, e ja havia prohibit a lu comestio e beure de aygua, e ja era pervenguda a la mort si mays agues stat per un dia o per dos.	And I had treated a woman with an abscess that was born in her throat, which abscess tended to have a dark color and little sensation, and it had already closed the throat of hers, and she breathed only through a narrow passage, and I had already prohibited her from eating and drinking water, and she would have reached death if not for treatment within one day or two.
E l’apostema ja tant havia pugat que havia mezes dos ramps entro que eyssiro per dos traucs.	And the abscess had already grown so much that it had formed two paths through which it could drain by two tracts.
Donc yeu me cuytegui fisturalment e fiquegui en un de lor onci, e tiregui aquel, e atirada es de lu gran porcio, e aprop yeu incidigui aquela de on comprendegui del autre trau, e aprop yeu obrigui la boca de lu, e compremegui la sua lengua, e aprop yeu fiquegui le onci en aquela apostema.	Then I cut it surgically and placed it in one of their pieces, and pulled that, and from there the larger portion was detached, and then I incised that so as to understand the other part, and then I closed its mouth, and compressed its tongue, and then I placed the piece in that abscess.
E aprop yeu abscizi gran partida de lu, e no corria de lu sino un pauc de sanc.	And then I removed a large part of it, and only a little blood came from it.
Donc absolut es le guolayro de aquela femna, e comensec tantost beure aygua, e aprop presec vianda, donc yeu no cessegui inscidir de aquela apostema motas vetz per lonc temps, e succesia apostema en loc de aquel, le qual inscizia entro que es prolonguat aquel.	Then the fever of that woman subsided, and she began to drink water immediately, and soon after she ate food. Therefore, I did not cease to incise that abscess for several long periods, and an abscess succeeded in its place, which I incised until it was prolonged.
Donc yeu engen agui e cauterizegui le guolayro de lu, donc astec de addicio; e aprop yeu perambulegui e no saubi que fec Dieus de aquela aprop mi.	Then I applied something and cauterized the fever of it, then there was an addition to it; and afterward I wandered about and did not know what God would do next with that.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Chapter XXXVII.
De inscizio de huvela quan es apostemada.	On the incision of the breast when it is abscessed.
Quan catarr deysen a la huvula, e es apostemada e es longa, lahoras ela es nompnada perpendicular; e si es en la partida dejos grossa e redonda, e lahoras ela es apelada buba.	When one observes catarr in the breast, and it is abscessed and elongated, then it is called perpendicular; and if it is in the lower part thick and round, then it is called a buba.
Mays quan es curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio, e no comfereys la tua curacio, e eyssament ja vezes que apostema caut ja es ostat de lu e es subtil, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquela que es agreguadas redonda; e si es ad aquela longitut, e es sanguina, de fusca color o de negre, e no es a lu centiment, lahoras cove que tu temtes la inscizio de lu, quar en aquela es temor sobre le malaute.	But when it is cured as we have said in the division and you do not confirm your treatment, and similarly often times an abscess cauterized remains stubborn and subtle, then it is necessary that you incise the one that is aggregated roundly; and if it reaches a certain length and is bloody, of dark color or black, and is not in the center, then it is necessary that you attempt its incision, because there is fear of malady in that.
E quan tu vezes aquela segon la manieyra que yeu he dita de la sua blancor e longuesa, que tu fassas sezer le malaute e premas la lengua de lu am instrument del qual procesic la sua forma e aprop fica le onci en la nuva, e tira aquela en jos e inscideys aquela am un de dos instrumentz les quals e ditz en la inscizio de dos mellas.	And when you see it according to the method that I have said about its whiteness and length, that you make the patient sit and press the tongue with an instrument of which the form is appropriate, and place the incision in the new area, and pull it down and cut it with one of two instruments which are mentioned in the cutting of two membranes.
E cove que no inscidas aquela sino aquo que es ajustat sobre le terme natural ses addicio, quar si tu inscides de lu mays, lediyras le sieu parlar.	And you should not cut it unless it is adjusted to the natural limit without excess, for if you cut too much, you will impair their speech.
E aprop la inscizio, usa de aquo le qual havem recomtat en la inscizio de dos mellas, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And after the incision, use what we have recommended for the incision of two membranes, and treat it until it is healed.
Mays si era le malaute espaventat per la inscizio de lu, cove que use de engen en la cauterizacio de lu ses temor, e la manieyra del cauteri en lu no es sino am aygua aguda, e es que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop prem la lengua de lu am le instrument le qual havem dit, e aprop pren de l’aygua la qual havem dita en le capitol de cauterizacio, e comfeys am aquela caus viva, e pausa aquela no spessa ni subtil, e de aquela omple la concavitat de l’estrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	But if the patient is frightened by the incision, you should use something to cauterize it without causing fear, and the method of cauterization is nothing but with sharp water. Place the head of the patient in your lap, then press the tongue with the instrument we have mentioned, and afterward take the water which we have described in the chapter on cauterization, and apply it there as a hot cautery, and place it neither thick nor thin, and with that fill the concavity of the instrument whose form is as follows:
Sia la extramitat de lu conquavitat en la qual sia pausada la medicina ayssi cum la conquavitat de culher de ray, e pausa le strument am la medicina sobre la vula, e·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu latz per so que corro saliva o musellage de la boca de aquel per la intrinscequa medicina, per so que no deyssenda de aquela deguna causa sobre le golayro de lu e que ledesca aquel.	Let the extremity of the cautery on which the medicine is placed be like the concavity of a spoon, and place the instrument with the medicine over the ulcer, and let the patient lie on their side so that saliva or mucus from the mouth does not flow out from it for any reason onto the wound and thus injure it.
E aprop te la tua ma am la medicina, e exprem aquela sobre la uvula per l’espazi de miega hora entro que vegas aquela esser denegrada e sedada per la mordicacio de la medicina.	And then take the instrument with the medicine and apply it to the uvula for about half an hour until you see it become blackened and numbed by the bite of the medicine.
E si vols, prengues coto e envolopes aquel sobre la extremitat del ray, e submergeys le coto en la medicina, e entrometas le ray am le coto en una canula de sobre entro que·l coto adheresca en aquela canula, e fay aquo tantas vetz entro que consiegues aquo que vols de la cauterizacio de la uva, e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela se seccara e cayra aprop tres dias o quatre.	And if you want, take a piece of cloth and wrap it around the end of the vein, then dip the cloth in the medicine, and insert the vein along with the cloth into a cannula so that the cloth adheres to that cannula, and do this as many times as necessary until you achieve what you want from cauterizing the grape, and afterwards let it dry until it falls off after three or four days.
E si indigeysses que iteras la medicina, itera aquela, e aprop la cauterizacio abstergeys en le circuit de la uva am coto enbegut en boder, e mondifica am aquel aquo que es en le circuit de lu de la medicina, e sia lavat am aygua frega, e sia curat deforo am embrocacio, e dedintz am guarguarismes entro que sia sanat.	And if you need to repeat the medicine, do so, and after that cauterize around the grape with a cloth soaked in the medicine, and modify what is around it according to what is prescribed by the medicine, and let it be washed with soap water, and treat it externally with an embrocation, and attend to it internally with medications until it is healed.
E aquesta especia de curacio es pus salva que inscizio e pus long de temor.	And this method of treatment is safer than incision and more enduring without fear.
Alcunas veguadas es curada la uvuola am aquo que es pus subtil que cauteri e inscizio, quar es curat am subfumigacio en aquesta manieyra: recipe calament, ysop, origua, ruda, scicados arabic, camamilla, broyda e semblant ad aquels de las erbas, e ajusta totas aquelas causas, o alcunas de lor, en una ola, e sian submergidas am vi agre, e bulhan; e la ola sia be lutada am lut decentment, e sia en le mieg loc de la ola un trauc, sobre le qual sia pausat un instrument conquau de aram segon aquesta manieyra; sia fayt de argent o de aram.	In some cases, the grape is cured with something that cauterizes more gently than incision, for it is treated with sublimation in this manner: take plasters, hyssop, mint, rue, Arabian saffron, chamomile, and similar herbs, and mix all these ingredients or some of them in a vessel, and let them be immersed in sour grape juice and boiled; then the vessel should be heated moderately over low heat, and at one end of the vessel place a tube made of straw in this manner; it can be made of silver or straw.
E sia entromesa la extremitat en la boca del malaute entro que la vapor poge a la uvula sobre la quanula, entro que la uvula sia mot ofuscada.	And insert the end into the mouth of the patient so that the vapor reaches the uvula through the tube, until the uvula is sufficiently treated.
E aprop itera sobre aquela motas veguadas entro qu’es secca, e guarda te que no fassas aquesta curacio al comesament de l’aveniment de apostemas, quar trop ajustaria en le apostema, e no cove que tu fassas aquo, sino deves la declaracio de apostema de lu caut.	Regarding those superficial swellings that are dry, be careful not to perform this treatment at the beginning of the onset of abscesses, for it would be too early for the abscess, and you should not do this, but rather wait for the formation of pus.
Mays si no es a tu present aquest instrument, lahoras pren una cana e compon en la extramitat de lu un clos de huou, per so que la boca del malaute sia comborida, quar le closc del huou prohibeys la vapor comburir la boca.	If this instrument is not available to you, now take a reed and attach to it a cover made of cloth, so that the mouth of the wound is covered, for the covering of cloth prevents the vapor from entering the mouth.
E aquesta curacio es bona am salut.	And this treatment is good for health.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter XXXVIII.
De extraccio d’espinas e de aquo que adhereys en le golayro e de las autras causas.	On the extraction of spines and what adheres to the wound, and of other causes.
Motas veguadas adhereys en le guolayro o spina de peys o alcuna autra causa.	Superficial swellings that adhere to the wound or spine or any other cause.
Adonc cove que tu extraguas aquo que de aquels es apparent, sobre le qual catz la vista, pus que tu premes la lengua am instrument denant solelh, per so que a tu sia declarat aquo que es en la guola.	Then you should remove what is apparent from those elements, upon which your eye rests, and press the tongue with an instrument in sunlight, so that it becomes clear to you what is in the wound.
E aquo que no apar e es a tu occultat en le guolayro, cove que tu fassas vomir le malaute denant que la vianda sia degerida en l’estomac, quar fort leu la causa annexsa le golayro sira foro-getada per vomit; o que deglusia le malaute una pessa de nap o de razit de laytuga o un boci de pa sec; o prengua una pessa de sponga marina sequa leon, e lia aquela fortment am fiel, e aprop le malaute transglussia aquela, quar cum perve al loc en le qual so spinas e es extrahuda, lahoras so foro-getatz.	And what does not appear and is hidden in the wound, you should make the patient vomit before the food is digested in the stomach, for the cause attached to the wound will be easily expelled by vomiting; or have the patient swallow a piece of bread or lettuce seed or a mouthful of dry bread; or take a piece of dried sea sponge and bind it tightly with thread, and then have the patient swallow that, as when it reaches the place where spines are lodged, they will be easily expelled.
E mays pren una anguila e be am fiel liada, e sia dedintz mesa e soptament sia extrayta; o pren un porr e soptament le metas e soptament l’en tratz.	Take a eel and boil it in vinegar, and let the inside be removed and the poultice be extracted; or take a rod and apply the poultice to it and with the rod treat [the patient].
Mays si no so foro-getatz am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas, lahoras husa de un instrument de plom segon aquesta forma:	If you do not forget the causes which we have mentioned, now use an instrument of lead in this form:
E sia pus gros que ray un petit, e en la extramitat de lu sia conquavitat la qual tu entrometas en la sua guola am facilitat.	And let it be as thick as a small reed, and at the end of it let there be a hook which you insert into its throat with ease.
E el aga le sieu cap elevat en sus, e guarda te que·l tocament del sieu os de la gola, per so que endevengua a lu cos e am aquela que enpellesca le os o la spina, o que aquel le metge am la sua ma.	And as you proceed, keep his head raised up, and be careful not to touch the bones of his throat, so that it does not harm him or cause injury to the bone or spine, or that it harms the patient in any way.
Mays empero que·l malaute aquel entrometa es miels, per la sua sciencia del loc de la causa annexa e enpellisca en jos, e tira la sua ma am le instrument en sus, tot aquo segon la quantitat la qual es a lu preparada entro que sia foro-getada.	However, the patient should gently insert it, due to his knowledge of the location of the cause and its nature, and pull his hand with the instrument up, all this according to the quantity that has been prepared within him until it is forgotten.
Capitol .xxxix.	Chapter XXXIX.
De extraccio de sancguisugua annexsa al golayro.	On the extraction of a leech attached to the throat.
Quan es medicada sanguisugua am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la curacio am medicinas e no comfereys, considera lahoras en le guolayro del malaute al solelh, pus que tu aias compremuda la lengua de lu am instrument le qual a tu havem recomtat.	When the leech is treated with what we have said in the division of treatment with medicines and compresses, consider now the patient's throat in the sunlight, since you have protruded his tongue with the instrument which we recommended to you.
Donc si tu vezes la sancguisugua, extratz aquela am onci petit o am gesti subtils decentment.	Then if you see the leech, gently remove it carefully with your fingertips or with small forceps.
E si no es a tu possible estrayre am aquel, lahoras pren una canula concava e entromet aquela en lo guolayro del malaute, e aprop pausa en la concavitat de la canula un ferr ignit, e fay aquo tantas vetz (entro que la sancguisugua sia morta e se osta del guolayro) e abstengua se le malaute tot lo jorn de aygua.	And if it is not possible for you to remove it, now take a concave tube and insert it into the patient's throat, then place a heated iron on the concavity of the tube, and do this several times (until the leech is dead and falls off), and keep the patient from water for the entire day.
E aprop prengua una veyria plena de aygua frega, e obra la boca de lu en aquela, e lava la boca am aquela; e no trasglucia de aquela alcuna causa e maugua l’aygua una hora aprop autra am la sua ma, quar la sancguisugua tantost cum sent l’aygua catz.	Take a clean cloth soaked in water and wipe the mouth with it; then wash the mouth with that water. Do not let any of that water be wasted for any reason; change the water every hour with its like, because as soon as the leech feels the water, it will attach itself.
Mays si no es foro-getada am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras subfumigua le malaute am cimetz o am assafetida per le instrument le qual havem recomtat en la sufumiguacio de uvula.	If it is not possible to perform what we have recommended with this, then fumigate the area with cimetz or asafetida using the instrument we described for fumigating the uvula.
Fay aquo, so en quar cayra.	Do this, and it will fall on its own.
E es un’autra manieyra de operacio en sufumiguacio de aquela, es que tu prenguas una ola en la qual sian carbos ignitz e la ola sia cuberta am una cobertora en le mieg de la qual sia un trauc, e sia compausat en aquel trauc la extremitat del instrument; e aprop dega desus la subfumigacio; e pause le malaute la sua boca en la extremitat de la canula, e claugua la sua boca per que la subfumiguacio no sia foro-getada entro que sapias que la subfumigacio es pervenguda a la sancguisugua, quar la sancguisugua tantost cayra.	And here is another method of fumigation during this procedure: take an owl in which there are burning coals and cover it with a cloth that has a hole in the middle; attach one end of the instrument to this hole. Then perform the fumigation from above, and have the patient place their mouth at the end of the tube so that no smoke escapes before you know that the fumigation has reached the leeches, for they will fall as soon as they encounter it.
E si no catz, lahoras tu itera la subfumiguacio motas vetz, e abstengua le malaute de beure, e mange causas saladas e alhs, e no begua aygua, e ayssi necessari es que am aquest regiment sia fora-getada.	And if it does not work, then repeat the fumigation several times, and prevent the patient from drinking water, and give them salty and dry foods to eat, and they should not drink water. It is necessary that this regimen be strictly followed.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument am le qual es trayta sancguisugua del guolayro quan es vista; e es semblant a forceps ayssi cum vezes, sino quar es en lu alcuna curvitat:	And this is the form of the instrument used to remove bloodsucking leeches from the throat when they are seen; it resembles forceps as well, but with some curvature.
le qual sia mesa al guolayro, e la extremitat de lu es semblant a bec de ciconia, que es guanta, en la qual es aspretat de lima, per so quar, quan comprem alcuna causa, aquela no leyssa.	which is placed in the throat, and its end resembles the beak of a heron, which is sharpened with a file, so that when it holds something, it does not let go.
Capitol .xl.	Chapter XL.
En le qual es la suma del sermo en apercio de apostemas e en seccio de lor.	In this chapter is the summary of the speech on the preparation for the incision and division of abscesses.
Les apostemas so motas specias, de motas manieyras, segon que ve rememoracio de lor, de quascuna en aquest libre.	Abscesses are of various types and methods, as will be recalled for each one in this book.
E so diversas en perforacio e seccio de lor per doas manieyras, de las quals la una es per la specia de apostemas en si meteys; e per aquo que comprem de las humiditatz.	And they differ in the puncturing and division of them by two methods, one of which is based on the nature of the abscess itself; and by what it contains of humidity.
E la segonda manieyra es prop les locs en les quals accideys del cos, quar le apostema accident en le cap es autra de la apostema accident en le cul; e le apostema en le loc carnos accident es autra del apostema accident en junctura; e a quascun de lor es son juguament per operacio.	And the second method is according to the locations in which they occur in the body, for an abscess that occurs in the head is different from one that occurs in the buttocks; and an abscess that appears in fleshy areas is different from one that occurs at joints; and each has its treatment by operation.
E mays de apostemas so alcunas las quals cove que no sian perforadas sino aprop maturacio de la sania en aquels o compliment de lor.	And there are some abscesses that should not be punctured but left until the pus has matured or they have reached completion.
So autras apostemas les quals cove que sian traucatz quan son cruzes, e no son maturatz segon lor compliment, ayssi cum apostemas que son propdas a las juncturas, quar apostema quan ve prop junctura, lo esser de lu es prolonguat entro que·s poyreys aquo que es en le circuit de lu, e fort leu son corromputz les liamentz o les nervis de aquela junctura, per que es fayta causa de contraccio de aquel membre; o es apostema prop de membre principal, e si tu tardas la perforacio de lu entro sia madurat nosira al membre principal; o es prop le cul, donc perfora aque no-madurat; e no cove que·l perforas cru, de no-complida degestio, sino aquel que es prop del cul, per so que no poyresca le preon de lu e sia elonguat a las partidas dedintz del cul, e sia fayta fistula, o que sia fayt en le terme de lu que no sia sanat.	There are other abscesses that should be evacuated when they are crosswise and have not matured according to their completion, such as those near joints, because when an abscess is close to a joint, its nature prolongs itself until you can drain what is around it, and if the tendons or nerves of that joint are corrupted, it becomes a cause for contraction of that limb; or if it is near a principal member, and if you delay puncturing it before it has matured, it may affect the principal member negatively; or if it is close to the buttocks, then puncture it while it is not yet fully matured; but do not pierce it when it is raw from incomplete digestion, except for one that is near the buttocks, so that you do not leave behind a prepuce that extends into the depths of the buttocks and causes a fistula, or create an opening that does not heal.
Mays cove que tu sapias la hora de la perforacio de la apostema, e aysso es quan es maturat.	May it be known that you know the time for piercing the abscess, and this is when it is ripe.
E sapias que es madurat quan es la cedacio de la dolor e la cessacio de la febre, e aprop la diminucio de la rogor e de la pulsacio, e la acuitat del cap del apostema, e les autres senhals.	And you know that it is ripe when there is relief from the pain and cessation of the fever, and soon after a decrease in inflammation and pulse, and sharpness at the head of the abscess, and other signs.
E quar cove que sapias la perforacio cazer en le loc pus dejos del apostema e de pus venient de curacio de la eminencia.	And you should know that the piercing should be done at the place where the pus is deepest in the abscess and coming from the highest part of its elevation.
E perforacio tostemps sia per le lonc de la carn o del cors, si las apostemas son en las partidas de las mas o dels pes, e en loc dels lacertz, de las cordas dels nervis, de las arcerias; e, al derier, en totz locs enguals en les quals no es reflecio; quar en aquels que so reflectitz, usa de perforacio segon aquel membre.	And the piercing should always be done along the length of the flesh or body if the abscesses are in parts such as the limbs and joints, and in places near tendons, ligaments, nerves, arteries; and finally, in all locations equally where there is no reflection; for in those that do reflect, use piercing according to that member.
Mays quan le apostema es en loc carnos, lahoras miels es que leysses la perforacio de lu entro que sia confermada la digestio de lu segon compliment, ayssi quo havem dit; quar si tu perforas aquel denant aquo, es prolonguat le cors del poyre de lu e de mota sordicia, e fort leu las labias de lu so enduradas e la profunditat de lu.	But when the abscess is in a fleshy location, it is best to delay the piercing until the digestion of the second stage is confirmed, as we have said; for if you pierce before this, it prolongs the illness of the patient and increases foulness, and hardens the lips of the wound and its depth.
Mays alcus apostemas so perforatz segon la latitut de la carn o del cos deves la necessitat, o segon aquo del qual lo membre indigeys.	But some abscesses should be pierced across the width of the flesh or body due to necessity, or according to what the member requires.
E cove que administres petita perforacio , e·n les apostemas grans gran perforacio e ampla o motas seccios segon la diversitat de la grandesa dels apostemas.	And you should administer a small piercing, and in large abscesses, a larger piercing or multiple sections according to the diversity of the size of the abscesses.
E autras so dels apostemas en les quals cove que la codena sia conquavada e sia encidida, quan es fayta ayssi quo pan e fayta es en terme que ja stigua, ayssi cum aquel que accideys en trops de dubelec e de bubos.	And other abscesses in which the treatment should be incised and opened, when it is done as said before and is performed at a time when it can already heal, such as those that occur with excessive boils and buboes.
E de aquels so que so insciditz am seccio havent tres angles; e de aquels es en le qual es inscidit ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirtra, ayssi cum las apostemas dels angonars.	And of those which are incised with a three-angled section; and of those in which it is incised as the figure of a myrtle leaf, such as the abscesses of the angles.
E de lor so en les quals es administrada seccio redonda e seccio lunar, e semblantz ad aquels.	And of those in which a round section and a lunar section are administered, and similar to those.
Mays aquel al qual no es cap ayssi cum son apostemas leons superficials, cove que tu perforas aquel am perforacio superficial, o plana tant solament.	But in the case where there is none of the above, such as superficial lion abscesses, you should puncture it with a superficial incision or simply open it up.
E cove quant le apostema es gros e ya ha colligit mota sania, que perfores aquel e no te coytes que extraguas tot le poyre en aquela hora; habantz extratz de aquel una partida, e aprop opila le apostema entro al autre dia, e aprop extratz una partida major, e aprop fa aquo motas veguadas segon graduacio entro que sia foro-getat.	And when the abscess is large and has collected pus, you should puncture it but do not hesitate to extract all the pus at that moment; after extracting a portion from it, on another day scrape the abscess internally, and then extract a larger portion, and repeat this several times according to its severity.
E majorment si·l malaute es de freol vertut, o femna prens, o enfant petit, o viel en decrepitut, quar l’esperit animal motas vetz es resolvut am la egressio de la sania, e fort leu mor le malaute, e tu operte les.	And especially if the patient is a young man, or a pregnant woman, or an infant, or an elderly person in poor health, for in such cases the vital spirit quickly resolves through the evacuation of the pus, and the patient easily recovers, and you should proceed with this treatment.
Don guarda aquest capitol am gran cautela, e aprop la tua perforacio en la qual perforas aquestz apostemas, cove que abstergescas las plagues e consideras donc si la plagua del apostema es pauca, o es una seccio plana, lahoras tu aministra las qualguas de li o de coto antic; e si le apostema es gran, e las fissuras de la perforacio son motas, lahoras cove que tu pauses meca en quascun trauc entro que pervenguan ensemps.	Therefore, guard this chapter with great caution, and when you make the incision in which you puncture these abscesses, clean the plaques and then consider whether the plaque of the abscess is small or a flat section; at that time, administer some of them or of oak bark. And if the abscess is large and the fissures of the incision are many, then it is necessary to place wool in each part until they heal.
E si en le apostema es abscindit una partida de la codena o has concavada aquela en le circuit, lahoras cove que tu la complescas de coto viel o de fil fayt de drap de li, ayssi cum quan has traytz pans o razizos, ses humiditat; e strenh aquel entro al tertz dia; e aprop proceseys aquel e cura le am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if in the abscess a part of the cord has been severed or you have concaved it around the circumference, then you should fill it with old wood shavings or threads made from linen cloth, as when you have treated bandages or dressings, without moisture; and strengthen that on the third day; and thereafter proceed to treat it and care for it with what is necessary of ointments until it is healed.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc en la hora de la operacio tua, lahoras tu aministra aygua frega e vi agre en les quals mules un drap de li, e pausa aquel sobre le loc del fluxs del sanc motas veguadas.	If blood flows during the time of your operation, then give water to wash and prepare some vinegar in which you dip a cloth, and place that over the spot where the blood is flowing for several times.
Mays si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras cove que tu aministres regiment e curacio e polveras las quals he recomtadas en motz locs de aquest nostre libre e de divisio.	If the flow of blood continues, then you should administer treatment and care according to the powders which I have recommended in various places of this our book and division.
Mays si es en temps de hivern, e·l loc de la apostema es loc de motz nervis, lahoras cove que tu enfundas pulvils en vi e oli caut, e pauses aquels sobre les locs.	If it is in the time of winter, and the location of the abscess is on various nerves, then you should mix powders in vinegar and heated oil, and apply those to the affected areas.
E si es en estiu, e les locs son carnoses, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils enbeguts am aygua e oli o am vi e oli, e tot aquo sia freg entro que sia le ters dia, ayssi cum havem dit, e lahoras cove que tu deslies le apostema e abstergescas aquel e aministres en la curacio de lu aquo que a lu conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if it is in summer, and the areas are fleshy, then you should apply powders soaked in water and oil or in vinegar and oil, and do this washing every day for three days as we have said. Then you should lance the abscess, clean it, and administer whatever is appropriate for its treatment until it is healed.
E aysso es aquo que es necessari de la cognicio de la curacio de apostemas universalment, mays segon la via de distinccio ja he dit de tot apostema en qual manieyra es via de la cura de lu per capitols singularment.	And this is what is necessary for the knowledge of the treatment of abscesses universally, but according to the method of distinction I have already said about every abscess in which manner the cure of it should be carried out separately by chapters.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter 41.
De seccio de apostemas les quals veno en la codena del cap.	On the Section of Abscesses That Occur in the Neck of the Head.
En la codena del cap petitz apostemas, e so de specias de nodes les quals conteno tunicas que so a lor factz ; e las specias de lor so motas.	In the neck of the head, small abscesses occur, and these are of various types of nodes that contain tunics within them; and the types of their contents vary.
E de lor son pingas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditat semblant a lima.	And they are soft, and what they contain is a moisture similar to jelly.
E de aquelas so las quals conteno humiditat semblant a pols, et asemblantz a lor; e de aquelas so que son lapideas, durs.	Of those among which I contain humidity similar to flour, and resembling them; and of those that are stony, hard.
E en la seccio de totz, e en la extraccio de aquels no es temor, cum deves la exteccio de aquels no fa contrariat arceria.	And in the section of all, and in the extraction of those there is no fear, as the extraction of those does not contradict surgery.
E la operacio en seccio de aquels es que tu esproes aquels am instrument la forma del qual ve aprop aysso, le qual es apelat entromes, entro que sapias que contengua.	And the operation in the section of those is that you express them with an instrument whose form approaches this, which is called an entremes, until you know what it contains.
Quar si aquo que conte es humiditat, lahoras scindeys aquel am seccio segon la longitut per seccio superficial segon aquesta forma:	For if what it contains is humidity, then you should divide that with a section according to its length by making a superficial section according to this form:
E comensa en la seccio de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G. Donc cum la humiditat es evacuada, lahoras tu excoria aquela pel que conte aquela humiditat, e no leysses de aquela alcuna causa de tot, quar tropas veguadas retorna, si roman de aquela alcuna causa.	And begin the section from the line of .B. to the line of .G. Then, as the humidity is evacuated, you should excise that skin which contains the humidity, and do not leave any part of it behind, for if any part remains, it may cause trouble later.
E aprop submergeys coto en enguent egipciach, si es present, e sino, en aygua e sal; e umpleys am aquel la plagua e layssa aquel entro ad autra dia, quar am aquo corrodeys tot so que es romas de aquela pellicula.	And then immerse the piece in Egyptian ointment, if it is available, and if not, in water and salt; and apply this to the wound and leave it for another day, as this will dissolve everything that remains of that skin.
E aprop itera sobre aquel coto am enguent egipciach segondament e tersament si indigeyses de lu, entro que·t comfides que no y haia romas alcuna causa de aquela pellicula; lahoras cura la plagua am enguent entro que sia sanada.	And then apply the Egyptian ointment to that piece again for a second and third time if necessary, until you are confident that there is no remaining part of that skin; now treat the wound with the ointment until it is healed.
E si apostema conte nodi gras, lahoras tu inscideys aquel segon aquesta forma:	And if an abscess contains hard nodules, then you should incise that according to this form:
am seccio havent forma de crotz, e geta oncis entre doas labias de la seccio e scorsa aquel de tota partida, e esforsa la tua vertut en extraccio de la tunica la qual conte aquel.	with a section having the shape of a cross, and insert hooks between both lips of the section and scrape it thoroughly from all sides, and exert your skill in extracting the membrane that contains it.
Mays si a tu arceria fa contrarieta, lahoras fay aquo que yeu t’e recontat primieyrament.	If there is opposition to what I have said about surgery, then at that time do what I have recounted first.
E semblantment fay en le apostema lapificat de seccio e de curacio segon que a tu havem dit; e seccio sobre apostema lapificat es pus leugiera, quar es de pauc sanc e de pauca humiditat.	And similarly, treat the mature abscess with regard to its section and cure as we have told you; and the section of a mature abscess is easier, because it has little blood and little moisture.
E alcunas vetz so alcus de aquestz apostemas les quals so en le cap en alcus homes am los quals de tot no es humiditat; la qual causa es quar yeu inscindigui sobre un apostema en le cap de una femna vielha e atrobegui le apostema ayssi cum peyra sorda, aspra, blanqua, la qual no podia esser trinquada, e si a alcu fos am aquela percussit, plaguera aquel.	And sometimes there are abscesses on the head in some people where there is not much moisture; the cause of this is that I incised an abscess on the head of an old woman and found it as hard as a stone, rough, white, which could not be crushed, and if anyone were to strike it, it would injure them.
Mays en les autres apostemas accidentz en le cap otra aquest no es aquest capitol, ayssi cum les apostemas que veno als caps dels enfantz e deves las razitz de las aurelhas, mays la seccio de aquestz totz sia seccio superficial.	However, in other abscesses on the head, this is not the case of this chapter; likewise, for abscesses that occur on children's heads and behind the ears, the section of all these should be a superficial incision.
E pausa la perforacio de aquels de la partida pus bassa de lor per so que sia alleujat le cos de la sania a las partidas pus bassas.	And pause the puncture of those in the lower part so that the contents of the abscess can drain to the lower parts.
E aprop cura aquelas am aquo que conveneys ad aquel de curacio.	And treat those accordingly as is suitable for that cure.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter XLII.
De seccio de scrophulas las quals accideyso en le col.	On the incision of scrofulas which occur in the neck.
Motas veguadas endeveno aquestas apostemas en le colh e en las aysselhas e en les angonars; e alcunas veguadas accideyso en las autras partidas del cos.	These abscesses often occur in the neck and armpits, and sometimes they also appear in other parts of the body.
E so aquelas que accideysso en le colh, e so motas que so engendradas entre lor, e tota scrofula de aquelas es dintz la sua tunica propria, e ayssi cum en les nodis e apostema del cap, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And those that occur in the neck often develop between them, and every scrofula among them is within its own proper layer, just as in knots and abscesses of the head, as we have recounted.
E las specias de aquestas scrophulas son motas, quar de aquelas so alcunas lapideas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditatz, e de aquelas so malignas las quals no obeseysso a curacio.	The species of these scrofulas are motes, for only some of them are lithic, and of those only some contain moisture, and of those only the malignant ones which do not obey cure.
Donc en aquela la qual tu vezes de bona disposicio en le Tocament, de la qual la color de aquo que es manifest es propda a la color de la codena, e es mauguda a tota partida, e no es annexsa am le nervi del colh, ni am las venas, ni am la arceria, e no es preonda, cove que tu inscidiscas aquela am siccio superficial de la partida desus a la partida dejos del cos de la linha de .G. entro la linha de .B., e scorja aquela de tota partida, e exten dos labias de la codena am onci, o am motz oncis si has necessitat de aquels, ayssi cum havem dit en las apostemas del cap, e extratz aquela petit a petit.	Then in that one which you find to be well disposed by examination, of which the color of what is manifest is appropriate to the color of the gland, and it is swollen all over, and is not attached to the nerves of the neck, nor to the veins, nor to the artery, and is not pressed, so that you incise it at dry superficially from above the part below the body line G. between the line B., and peel it off entirely, and extend two lips of the gland an inch or inches if you need those, as we have said regarding the abscesses of the head, and extract that little by little.
E es mays cautela que no sia inscidida la vena o nervi.	And it is safer not to cut the vein or nerve.
E sia le spatum no mot agut, que no ajuste a tu la tua ma am inscizio, o que enquiete le malaute, e que inscidas aquo que no es necessari inscidir; quar si inscideysses vena o arceria e prohibeys tu de la tua operacio, lahoras pausa en la plagua vetriol trissat o autras polveras las quals ostan fluxs de sanc, e estrenh la plagua, e layssa aquel entro que·s repausa la acuitat de la apostema e sia mollificada la plagua e comense esser poyrida.	And let the spatula not be sharp, so that it does not cause you to cut unnecessarily or disturb the patient, and do not incise what is not necessary to incise; for if you should cut a vein or artery and stop your operation, then pause with a vitriol paste or other powders which promote blood flow, and bandage the wound, and leave that inside where the acuteness of the abscess subsides and the swelling becomes mollified and begins to suppurate.
Quan le sanc es abscindit.	When the blood is absorbed.
Donc retorna a la tua operacio entro que l’aias complida.	Then return to your operation once you have completed it.
E aprop inquireys am le tieu dit indic si es romas alcuna causa de las autras petitas scrophulas, donc inscideys aquelas e munda aquelas.	And then inquire at the time of the operation if there is any cause for the other small scrofulas, so you can incise those and clean them.
E si es en la razit de la scrophula gran vena, cove lahoras que no inscidas aquela scrophula de la sua razitz.	And if there is a large vein in the region of the scrofula, avoid cutting into that area around the scrofula.
Abantz cove que lies aquela am fiel doblat fort e que leysses aquela entro que caia per si ses nocument.	And be careful to tie a very firm ligature above it and let the rest of it fall out by itself without harm.
E aprop omple la plagua de coto vielh le qual tu has ja submirgit en enguent egipciac, e aprop cura aquel.	And then fill the wound with old lint that you have already soaked in Egyptian pepper decoction, and then dress it.
E si inscides aquela scrophula tota, lahoras cove que tu ajustes las doas labias de la plagua e cuzas2 tantost pus que no y ha romasa deguna superfluitat.	And if you incise the entire scrofula, then make sure to approximate the two edges of the wound and sew them together immediately so that there is no room for any excess fluid.
Mays si tu vezes que haia romasa superfluitat per la grandeza de la scrofula, cove que tu entendas a inscidir la razit de aquela, e astrayra aquela e aministra sutura e aquo que es dit.	But if you see that there is excess fluid due to the size of the scrofula, then it is necessary for you to incise its root, and drain it and administer sutures as mentioned.
E aquela de las scrophulas que conteno humiditatz, perfora aquela am perforacio superficial aqui la on appar a tu le loc de maturacio de lu, e pausa perforacio de aquo que siec le pus bas del cos, ayssi cum havem dit.	And for the scrofulas that contain moisture, make a superficial puncture where it appears to you is the site of maturation, and pause before making further punctures deep into the base of the swelling as we have said.
E aprop aministra perforacio, calguas am enguent e semblantz ad aquels, per so que corroda aquo que es romas de la corropcio.	And then administer punctures, cover them with appropriate applications and similar treatments, so that it corrodes what remains of the corruption.
E aprop quan tu vezes la plagua ja esser mundada, lahoras tu cura aquela am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanada.	And when you see that the wound is already clean, then dress it with a healing flesh-generating poultice until it is healed.
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter XLIII.
De seccio del pilhot del apostema accident dintz le guolayro.	On the incision of the pustule of an accidental swelling in the groin.
Diyssero les antics aquesta seccio en le epilhot, e no vist alcu hom en nostra terra que aquela aia fayta.	The ancients call this section in the epitome, and I have not seen any man in our land who has performed that incision.
E aquesta es la inscriptura del sermo de aquels.	And this is the inscription of the speech of those people.
Mays en les homes haventz esquinencia, cove que sia esquivada la extraccio del epilhot, cum per aquo no sia fayt juvament per so quar totas las venas e las majors del malaute so aqui.	In men who have a squint, it is advisable to avoid the extraction of the epilhot, as by doing this there would be no benefit since all the veins and the main ones of the malady are here.
Mays en aquels que han apostemas cautz en la boca o guolayro o dos aurelhas, quan la malautia no es en la cana, cove husar de la seccio de epilhot a fugir la perdicio la qual es fayta per perfocacio.	In those who have boils in the mouth or throat or in both ears, when the illness is not in the bone, it is advisable to use the section of epilhot to avoid the loss which is caused by perforation.
Donc cove quan volem aquo, que inscidam le epilhot dejos tres cercles dels cercles del epilhot, o quatre am petita seccio per la latitut en aquel que es entre dos cercles per quantitat, que la seccio sia en ciphac, no en la cartillage, e aquest loc es convenent a seccio, quar es privat de carn e les vayselhs de sanc de lu son luhen.	Therefore, when we want to do this, we should incise the epilhot below three circles of its circles, or four for a smaller section along the latitude in that which is between two circles by quantity, so that the section is in ciphac, not in the cartilage, and this place is suitable for section because it is devoid of flesh and the vessels of blood there are few.
E si le metge es pauruc, cove lahoras que extenda la codena del golayro am onci, e aprop fenda la codena entro que pervengua a la canal, mays evite les vaysels de sanc si vetz de aquelas alcuna causa.	And if the surgeon is afraid, it is advisable to stretch out the throat skin by one inch, and then cut the skin until he reaches the canal, but avoid the vessels of blood if you see any reason for that.
E aprop inscida li ciplach segon que havem recomtat; e es significat sobre la seccio de la canal per le flacma le qual es de aquela eyssit am aquo que es de lu disromput e per la abscizio de la votz.	And then incise the ciphac as we have recommended; and it is significant for the section of the canal by the flap which is from that tissue and by the separation of the voice.
E layssa la plagua uberta per alcun temps.	And let the wound be left open for some time.
Donc cum la hora es remauguda en la qual perforacio es temuda, agregua doas labias de la codena de la plagua, e cus aquela sola ses la cartillage.	Thus, when the hour is chosen for which the puncture is feared, add two lips of the wound's edge, and cut through that single layer to the cartilage.
E aprop administra medicinas que fan naysser la carn entro que sia sanat.	And then administer medicines that promote the growth of flesh until it is healed.
E diyssec Albucasis que la summa del sermo le qual havem recomtat, exposicio no es sino que veias que alcus de aquetz apostemas ja han opilat lo guolayro del malaute, e le malaute es vengut entro a mort, e le ale de lu es entresecat, e alcus van a inscidir le epiglos per so que respire le malaute sobre le loc de la plagua per alcuna respiracio, e sia salvat de mort.	And Al-Bucasis says that the essence of what we have recounted is to see that some of these abscesses have already obstructed the patient's throat, and the patient has come close to death, and the air passage is cut off, and some would incise the epiglottis so that the patient can breathe over the site of the wound by some respiration, and thus be saved from death.
E per aquo comandero layssar la plagua uberta entro que sia consumida la malicia de la malautia; e es la malicia de lu per tres dias; e donc lahoras comandero cosi la plagua, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And by this commandment allow the wound to remain open until the malignity of the illness is consumed; and the malignity lasts for three days; therefore, at that hour command to treat the wound, and care for it until it is healed.
E aquo que yeu he vist per mi meteys, es que una sirventa pres un cotel e mesec le en le sieu golayro e inscidic am aquel una partida de la cana del pulmo, e yeu fu apelat a la curacio de lu, e atrobegui la mugen ayssi cum es mugit del moridos, e descubrigui la plagua e atrobegui le sanc le qual era yssit de la plagua petit.	And what I have seen with my own eyes is that a servant took a knife and cut into her throat and severed part of the windpipe there. I was called to treat her, and I found the wound as if it were that of a dead person, and uncovered the wound and saw the blood that had come out of the wound in small amounts.
Donc yeu fo confessat que aquela no havia inscidit vena ni guidegi, e le vent yssia de la plagua, e curegui aquela entro que foc sanada.	Thus, I confessed that she had not cut any vein or artery, and the air was coming out of the wound, and I treated her until she was fully healed.
E no accidic a la sirventa si no rauquiera en la votz, e aprop alcus dias retornec ad miloracio de las suas dispozicios.	And the servant did not suffer any harm except for hoarseness in her voice, and after some days she returned to improvement in her condition.
E ara dic yeu que en la seccio del epilhot no ha temor.	Here I say that in the section of the episiotomy there is no fear.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter XLIV.
De seccio sobre apostema le qual accideys en le golayro defora, e es apelat hernia del golayro.	About the section on abscess which occurs in the groin area, and is called hernia of the groin.
Aquest apostema nompnat hernia del golayro es apostema gran segon la color del cors, e es mot en las femnas.	This abscess called hernia of the groin is large according to the size of the body, and it occurs in women.
E es segon dos manieyras, quar o es natural o accidental.	And it happens in two ways, either naturally or accidentally.
E en le natural no es engen de curar.	And in the natural case, there is no need for treatment.
E l’accidental es segon dos manieyras del qual la un es semblant a nodes grasses, e l’autra manieyra es semblant apostema le qual es fayt per nodacio de arteria, e en aquel es temor.	And the accidental case happens in two ways, one of which is similar to fatty knots, and the other way is similar to an abscess caused by arterial obstruction, and in that case there is fear.
E no cove que·s fassa presumpcio a lu cum ferr sino en aquel que es petit.	And it is not appropriate to attempt treatment with iron except in the case where it is small.
E tu proha aquel e investigua aquel am le dit, e si atrobas lu semblant a nodi gras, e no es suspendut am alcuna de las venas, lahoras tu inscideys aquel ayssi cum les nodes, e extratz aquel am aquo que conte lu de la pel e bursiclam; e sino, lahoras es perscrutat tot le sieu esser, e aprop cura le loc am aquo que cove de curacio entro que sia sanat.	And you should be cautious about that and investigate it as described. If you find it similar to fatty knots and it is not attached to any veins, then incise it as you would with knots and extract it using water that contains substances from the peel and bursiclam; if not, thoroughly examine its nature, and subsequently treat the area with what is appropriate for internal treatment until it is healed.
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter XLV.
De seccio de las specias de nodes.	About the section on types of knots.
Dels nodes so motas specias e yeu ja he dit totas las specias de lor en la divisio.	There are various types of knots, and I have already mentioned all their types in the division.
E cove que yeu recomte assi la diferencia entre node e exitura cum fassa dubitacio.	Here is the translation:
Donc yeu dic que am exitura es caliditat e febre e dolors vehementz entro que es sedada la ebullicio de la superfluitat; e es complida putrefaccio que lahora cessa la febre, la dolor e la calor.	Therefore I say that an abscess is caused by heat and fever and very intense pains until the boiling of the excess is calmed; and it completes putrefaction when at that time the fever, pain, and heat cease.
Mays am node no es caliditat ni febre ni dolor, e conte aquel ciphac leon le qual es al u sac propri.	But if there is no heat nor fever nor pain, and it resembles that of the lion's paw which is in its proper place.
E es segon la color del cors, e le comensament de lu es cum un ceze e es fayt ayssi cum vace, sia major o minor, e son segon dos specias, quar o so grassas e conteno humiditat, e las colors de la humiditat son motas, segon que yeu diyssi en la divisio.	And it depends on the color of the body, and its beginning is like a pustule and it forms in such a way whether greater or lesser, and they are of two kinds, those that are fatty and contain moisture, and the colors of moisture are speckled, as I say in the division.
Donc cove, quan pervenas a la curacio de node, que exprohes aquel e inquiras aquel al comensament am sturment le qual es apelat intromes, segon que vindra la sua forma en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	Therefore, when you arrive at the treatment of an abscess, express that and inquire about its beginning, which is called intrusion, as its form will come in the chapter which is near this one.
E es manieyra de inquisicio de apostemas e de totz nodes, e es que tu prenguas aquest sturment e entromet aquel en le loc pus humit le qual atrobas en le apostema, e tu revolveras les tieus ditz am aquel petit a petit entro que sapias que·l sturment ja ha penetrat la codena.	And this is the method of inquiry into abscesses and all nodes, which is that you take this intrusion and insert it in the place most humid which you find in the abscess, and you will turn your fingers there little by little until you know that the intrusion has already penetrated the tissue.
E aprop ultima la tua ma segon la mesura de la grandeza del apostema, e aprop extratz le entromes e considera aquo que es yssit en le vestigi de lu.	And then gently remove it according to the measure of the size of the abscess, and then extract the intrusion and observe what has come out in its wake.
E si es fora-getada la humiditat corrent, de qualque color sia, lahoras tu le inscideys am seccio superficial segon que he dit en les autres apostemas.	And if the moisture comes out freely, of whatever color it may be, then you incise it with a superficial cut as I have said in regard to other abscesses.
E si del vestigi de l’intromes no hieys humiditat, lahoras sapias que es gras.	And if from the wake of the intrusion you do not find moisture, then you know that it is fatty.
E secca sobre lu am seccio havent forma de crotz segon aquesta forma:	And draw upon the dried skin in a cross shape according to this form:
ayssi cum t’e ensenhat, e suspen aquel am oncis, e excorja la codena de tota part am facilitat, e guarda la pel o sac, si podes, sobre aquel e extraguas aquela sania am le node.	As you have been taught, suspend that piece and scrape off the fat from all sides with ease, and if possible, keep the skin or sack, and extract the pus from the node.
Mays si es romput en la operacio, no es possible extrayre aquela sana, e motas veguadas endeve aquo, e lahoras tu la extratz a pessas entro que de lu no romangua denguna causa.	But if it is ruptured during the operation, it is not possible to extract that pus, and in such cases, work on it gradually until you can extract it in portions so that none remains for any reason.
Quar si de lu roman denguna causa, pauc o trop, le node retorne segon le mays.	For if any of it remains for any reason, whether little or much, the abscess will return accordingly.
E si tu vezes que de lu roman alcuna part petita, lahoras comple la plagua de alcunas polveras corrosivas agudas e strenh la plagua, e pausa sobre aquela que sede apostema caut, e cura aquel del autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And if you see that any part of it remains, then apply the wound with some caustic powders and clean the wound, and place over it something suitable for a poultice, and treat it with another method until it is healed.
E si es node gran, lahoras tu cus las doas labias de lu e cura aquel am aquo que encarna.	And if the abscess is large, then you should cut both sides of it and treat it with what promotes healing.
Mays si vena pulsatil es a lu contraria, o no-pulsatil, lahoras tu coyta e huemple le loc de zegi trissat que es vetriol e leyssa aquel streyt per dos dias o per tres entro que·s poyresca la plagua e que repause la ebullicio del sanc; e aprop retorna a inscindir aquo que es romas del node.	But if a pulsating or non-pulsating vein is in opposition, then you should cut it and fill the place with green vitriol, letting that remain open for two days or three until the wound becomes clean and the blood ebullition subsides; then return to incising what was torn from the abscess.
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter XLVI.
De las formas del sturmentz necessaris en seccio e perforacio.	On the forms of the instruments necessary for surgery and puncture.
De aquels so las formas dels intromesas, e so de tres specias, que de aquels es alcu gran, e de lor es migier, e de lor es petit.	Of those, there are forms of probes, which come in three types: some are large, some are medium-sized, and some are small.
La forma de intromes gran es aquesta:	The form of inserting is as follows:
La forma de intromes migier es aquesta:	The form of intermediate insertion is as follows:
La forma de intromes petit es aquesta:	The form of small insertion is as follows:
Sian faytz de ferr, de alfulud, de extremitatz cayradas decentment, per so que festino le intrament en les apostemas.	Make sharp, of iron, of steel, with well-sharpened ends, so that it may easily enter the abscess.
E aquestas so las formas dels experientz, e son nompnatz albered, e un de aquels es apelat berid.	And these are the forms of the experienced, and they are named albered, and one of them is called berid.
E so de tres especias, quar de lor es gran, migier e pauc.	And there are three kinds, for among them one is large, intermediate, and small.
La forma de experient gran, forma de lu:	The form of the large experienced, its shape is as follows:
La forma de experient migier, forma de lu:	The form of the intermediate experienced, its shape is as follows:
La forma de experient pauc, forma de lu:	The form of the small experienced, its shape is as follows:
Conveneysso que sian per aquels apostemas e exituras e fistulas e bubos per so que entre aquelas so dels osses e de autras causas.	It is appropriate that they be used for abscesses, excisions, and fistulas and buboes because they enter those that are among the bones and from other causes.
E so faytz redontz, grosses, leons, ayssi cum grans agulhas am las quals son cosidas las selhas, e son faytas de eram citri, o de eram o de ferr, o de argent, E las milhors so quan so faytas de eram citri.	And they make probes, thick, lions, as well as large needles with which saddles are sewn, and they are made of citron wood, or wood, or iron, or silver, and the best are when they are made of citron wood.
E son faytz les experient de plum negre, les quals se acordan que per aquels sian ubertas las fistulas en la conquavitat de las quals so reflexios, que sian reflectidas am la sua levitat am aquelas refleccios.	And the probes are made of black goose feather, which they agree should be used to probe fistulas in the curvature of which there are reflections, as they are reflected by their lightness on those reflections.
E so de tres specias, quar alcus de lor so loncs, e dels autres migiers, e dels autres breus, segon la quantitat del ample de la fistula e de la strictura de lu.	And there are three kinds, for some of them are long, and others intermediate, and the others short, according to the quantity of the width of the fistula and the constriction of it.
Forma del experient gran de plom:	Form of the large lead plate:
Forma del experient migier de plom:	Form of the medium lead plate:
Forma del experient petit de plom:	Form of the small lead plate:
Las formas dels oncis so de motas specias, quar de aquels so alcus simples, als quals es una curvitat solament, e so de tres specias: grans, paucs e migiers.	The forms of the hooks are of two kinds, one of which is of various special types, and four of which are simple ones, to which there is only a single curvature, and they are of three kinds: large, small, and medium.
E de lor so uncis orps, e so de tres specias.	And their forms of hooks are of three kinds.
E de aquels so uncis haventz doas curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And those among them that have two curvatures, and they are of three kinds.
E de lor so haventz tres curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And those among them that have three curvatures, and they are of three kinds.
E totz aquetz so necessaris en lor loc.	And all these forms are necessary in their place.
Forma de unci simple gran, forma de lu:	Form of a large simple hook, its form:
Forma de unci simple migier:	Form of a medium simple hook:
Forma de unci simple pauc, forma de lu:	Form of a small simple hook, its form:
Forma de unci orp gran:	Form of a large curved hook:
Forma de unci orp migier, forma de lu:	Form of a medium curved hook, its form:
Forma de unci orp pauc, forma de lu:	Form of a small curved hook, its form:
Forma de unci gran havent dos curvaturas:	Form of a large hook having two curvatures:
Forma de unci migier havent dos curvatas:	Form of a medium hook having two curvatures:
Forma de unci pauc havent dos curvaturas:	Form of a small hook having two curvatures:
Forma de unci gran havent tres curvaturas:	Form of an incision having three curves:
Forma de unci migier havent tres curvaturas:	Form of a medium-sized incision having three curves:
Forma de unci pauc havent tres curvaturas:	Form of a small incision having three curves:
E aquestas so las formas dels scalpels am les quals son seccatz e scorjatz les nodes e le apostemas, e so de tres specias, quar de aquels es gran, migier, e pauc.	And these are the forms of the knives with which nodes and abscesses are cut and pared, and they are of three kinds: one is large, one medium-sized, and one small.
Forma de scapel gran:	Form of a large scalpel:
Forma del scapel migier:	Form of the medium-sized scalpel:
Forma de scapel pauc:	Form of the small scalpel:
Las extramitatz de aquels am les quals es fayta seccio so agudas e las autres extramitatz so no-agudas, e no so pausadas en tal manieyra, sino per que sia fayt juvament en la excorjacio dels nodes la temor de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e per aquels sia sanat le malaute e atrobe tranquilitat un petit per la adustio la qual atroba deves la excoriacio del apostema.	The extremities of those with which section is made are sharp, and the other extremities are not blunt, nor are they used in such a manner that there would be fear of incising a vein or nerve during the paring of nodes. This is so that the patient may be healed and find some tranquility due to the adjustment that follows the excision of the abscess.
E aquestas son las formas de almagidas, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc, ayssi cum veyras.	And these are the forms of forceps, and they are of three kinds: large, medium-sized, and small, as you will see.
La forma de magda gran:	The form of the large forceps:
Forma de magda migier:	Form of medium-sized forceps:
Forma de magda pauc:	Form of small forceps:
Sian faytas de eram e so semblantz de ray am le qual e fayt alcofol.	They are made of iron and resemble reeds from which alcohol is made.
E es en la extramitat lada punctada am spatum occultada e en aquela corr a las partidas dedintz e defora, quan tu vols, ayssi cum veses.	And it is on the side with the punctured end where the spoon is hidden, and in that one you can reach both internal and external parts as needed, as you see.
Las formas de spatimis, les quals so amaguatz entre los ditz deves la perforacio dels apostemas e no les percebo les malautes, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc.	The forms of spatulae, which are hidden among the said fingers for the puncture of abscesses and which I do not perceive by their defects, are of three kinds: large, medium, and small.
E aquestas so las formas de aquels:	And these are the forms of those:
Las formas de ventozas am las quals es abscindit le flux del sanc, e so de tres specias; gran, migiera e pauca; las formas de lu:	The forms of ligatures with which the blood flow is interrupted are of three kinds: large, medium, and small; the forms of these are:
Sian faytas de eram citri, redondas am alcuna longitut , e sian subtils.	They should be made of fine silk, round with some length, and they should be slender.
E cove que sian aquestas specias de ventosas deves tu grans, migieras e paucas, per so que per aquelas abscindas flux de sanc am velocitat en necessitat, e lahoras quan a tu primieyrament no es medicina.	And it is necessary that these kinds of ligatures be large, medium, and small, so that with them you can interrupt the blood flow quickly when needed, and at times when there is no other medicine available.
Enpero no uses de aquelas ad abscidir sanc en tot loc del cors, e non uses sino en locs carnoses, ayssi cum en les lacertis de las cambas e de las coyssas, e en les lacertz dels brasses, e de las mamillas e del ventre e dels engonars, e semblantz a lor dels lacertz carnoses humitz.	However, do not use them to interrupt the blood flow in every part of the body, and use them only in fleshy areas such as on the tendons of the hands and feet, and on the tendons of the arms, and on the breasts and abdomen and similar fleshy parts.
E alcunas veguadas son faytz de aquels strumentz autres petitz semblantz scorsas de fisacs segon aquesta forma; per les quals lo sanc es abscindit quan es fayt per fleubotomia, o deves inscizio de vena o de arceria.	And occasionally, some are made of other small instruments similar to fish scales in this form; with which the blood is interrupted when performed for phlebotomy or incision of a vein or artery.
E alcunas veguadas son faytas redondas segon aquesta forma:	And sometimes they are made round in this form:
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter XLVII.
De la cura de las mamillas dels homes las quals so asembladas de femnas.	On the treatment of men's breasts that are similar to those of women.
Alcunas veguadas so infladas las mamillas de alcus homes deves le compliment del dormir cum comensan esser pellutz, e aprop so infladas las mamillas, e so asembladas las mamillas de las femnas, e romano apostemosas, lejas.	Some wounds cause the breasts of some men to swell as they begin to heal, and when the breasts are swollen, and when the breasts of women are assembled and rounded, leave them alone.
E ad aquel que avoreys aquo, cove que inscidisca aquelas am seccio lunar segon aquesta forma, de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G., e aprop excorja la groceza tota, e aprop uempla la plagua de medicament encarnatiu, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am cosidura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And for that which you desire to treat, cut it in a lunar section according to this form, from the line of .B. to the line of .G., and then scrape off all roughness, and then fill the wound with flesh-forming medicine, and then sew together the two lips of the wound tightly, and care for it until it is healed.
Mays si la mamilla declina a las partidas dejos e es mollificada per la sua magnitut ayssi cum endeve a las femnas, lahoras sia fendut en dos latz sieus pus sobiras, am dos seccios semblantz a figura lunar, de las quals quascuna sia contenguda en l’autra deves la fi de quascuna, entro que sia que la linha major contengua la menor segon aquesta forma de la linha de .B. e la linha de .G. E aprop excorja la codena la qual es entre dos labias de la plagua, e osta la pingueza, e aministra aquo que havem dit de la sutura e de las polveras aquo que es necessari en la curacio entro que sia sanat.	If the breast inclines to the sides and is soft due to its size, similar to how it might be in women, then cut it into two parts so that each pus can exit separately, in sections resembling a lunar shape, of which each should fit within the other except at their ends, such that the larger line contains the smaller one according to this form from the line .B. and the line .G. And then scrape off the edge between the two lips of the wound, remove the fat, and administer what we have mentioned about suturing and powders as necessary until it is healed.
E si tu non conpleysses la inscizio de aquo que cove inscidir per la inquietut del malaute, e per flux de sanc, lahoras cove que huemplas la plagua de coto submergit en enguent corrosiu e layssa aquel entro que aquo corroda que es romas de la grayssa, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you do not complete the incision of what needs to be cut due to the patient's restlessness and blood flow, then you should fill the wound with cloth submerged in a corrosive liquid and leave it until that corrodes what is hard in the fat, and then care for it until it is healed.
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter XLVIII.
De perforacio de apostemas que veno dejos le titillic.	On the Piercing of Abscesses that Come from Below the Armpit.
Aquetz apostemas que veno dejos le titillic so de las specias de scrophulas, durs, las quals conte una pel que es sac.	Cut open abscesses that I see deeper with a lancet for the species of scrofula, hard ones, which have a cover that is thick.
E de aquelas so alcunas que conteno humiditatz; e aquelas que conteno humiditatz cove que sian inscididas am seccio lunar segon aquesta figura: de la linha de .G. a la linha de .B. E cum es tot evacuat aquo que es en le apostema de la sania, lahoras tu le comple de coto viel e leysa le entro al autra dia.	And of those only a few contain moisture; and those that contain moisture should be incised in a crescent section as shown in this figure: from the line .G. to the line .B. And when all the fluid that is in the abscess has been evacuated, then fill it with thick wool and leave it for another day.
E aprop le coto sia ostat e sia curat am enguent convenient ad aquo, entro que sia sanat.	And after the wool is removed and the area is treated with an appropriate ointment, until it is healed.
E si le apostema de las specias dels nodes es, e de las scrophulas, lahoras tu scindeys sobre aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la seccio sobre las scrophulas engualment.	And if the abscess is of the species of glands or scrofula, then you should incise it as we have said in the section about scrofula similarly.
May si la plagua es extenduda en aysso que yesca poyredura, lahoras administra en lu cauteri segon que en aquo havem denant dit.	And if the inflammation has spread to where it becomes gangrenous, then administer cautery as we have previously described.
Capitol .xlix.	Chapter XLIX.
De seccio de apostemas que accideysso per arceria o per vena.	On the incision of abscesses that occur due to arterial or venous causes.
Quan arceria es rompuda, e la codena es consolidada la qual es sobre aquela, lahoras motas veguadas accideys apostema E les senhals per les quals es conoguda que imflamacio e apostema sian per la arteria o per vena: quar quan apostema es per arceria es lonc agreguat en le preon del cors; e que quan inpelleysses le apostema am les tieus ditz, sentes en lu quays sia stridor.	When an artery is ruptured and the vein that is above it becomes consolidated, then abscesses may occur. The signs by which it can be known whether inflammation and abscess are due to an artery or a vein: for when an abscess is due to an artery, it tends to aggregate in the upper part of the body; and when you probe the abscess with your fingers, you feel a hissing sound.
E aquel que es per vena es redon al manifest del cors.	And an abscess due to a vein is located closer to the surface of the body.
E seccio sobre aquest apostema es error, e majorment en aquel que es dejos las aysselhas, e en les angonars, e en le col, e en motz locs del cors; e es mot gran, donc cove que la sua curacio am ferr sia esquivada, e aquel que es en las extramitatz, o al cap, cove que sia evitat.	And to treat an abscess in these areas is a mistake, especially those on the armpits, and at the elbows, and on the neck, and in many places on the body; for it is serious, therefore care should be taken to avoid its treatment with iron, and those that are in the extremities or on the head should be avoided.
Mays sobre aquel que es de lor per imflacio de l’orrifici de la arceria, scindeys en la codena seccio en le lonc; e aprop huebre la seccio am uncis e aprop la arceria, e deliura de las tunicas entro que sia descuberta.	For one who is due to it from the inflammation of the artery opening, divide in the longitudinal section lengthwise; and then carefully make the incision with hooks and near the artery, and remove the tunics until it is exposed.
E aprop met sobre aquel agulha e fay aquela penetrar entro al autre latz, e estrenh la arceria am fiel doble en dos locs, — la qual causa yeu a tu eyssenhegui en extraccio de doas arcerias les quals so en les templars.	And then place on that needle and make it penetrate into the other side, and secure the artery with double thread in two places, — which I explain in detail in the extraction of two arteries which are in the thighs.
E aprop punh le loc le qual es entre dos liamentz am spatum entro que yesca le sanc tot que es en lu, e sia dissolvut le apostema.	And then apply to the place which is between two ligaments with a spatula so that the blood stops there completely, and the abscess dissolves.
E aprop administra curacio en la qual es engendrat poyre entro que caian les liamentz; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz convenientz ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And then administer treatment in which pus is generated so that the ligaments fall off; and then treat it with appropriate ointments until it is healed.
E si es apostema per seccio de vena, lahoras cove que tu tenguas am la tua ma aquo que es a tu possible del apostema am la codena, e aprop intromet la agulha dejos le loc le qual tu has tengut dejos la tua ma, e fay aquela penetrar; e sia en aquela fil doble entro que tu extraguas aquel del autre latz, e aprop ligua le apostema am bo liament segon que yeu he dit a tu en le liament de uva4 de doas partz am doas extremitatz del fil.	And if the abscess is due to the section of a vein, now you should have in your hand what is possible regarding the abscess with the proper tools, and then insert the needle below the place where you had your hand, and make it penetrate; and tie this thread doubly so that you can extract it from the other side, and then ligature the abscess with a strong ligament as I have told you about the grapevine ligature on both sides of the thread's extremities.
Mays si temes que extraguam le fil, lahoras entromet le fiel am aquela agula dejos tot le apostema deves la inscizio de la agulha primieyra, e strenh les tieus fiels en quatre locs.	If you fear that you will remove the thread, then now insert the needle with some wax below the abscess; should the point of the needle be first inserted, and strengthen the threads at four places.
Aprop secca le apostema en le mieg loc de lu entro que quan es yssit aquo que es en lu, lahoras tu inscideys la superfluitat de la codena, e layssa aquo que de lu es liat.	When the abscess has become dry in its middle part so that what is inside it can come out, then you incise the excess of the skin, and leave what is attached to it.
E aprop pausa sobre lu pulvil le qual has submergit en vi e oli, e aprop administra la curacio la qual es fayta am calguas e enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then apply to the wound the powder which you have mixed with vinegar and oil, and then administer the treatment made with cords and herbs until it is healed.
Capitol l del apostema le qual accideys per torcio de nervis.	Chapter on the abscess that occurs due to the twisting of nerves.
Ayssi cum accideys apostema en arceria e en vena, e semblantment accideys apostema en les nervis quan accideys en lor percussio o accideys per trebal superfluable, e per semblantz.	Just as an abscess can occur in arteries and veins, and similarly, an abscess can occur in the nerves when they are struck or due to excessive labor, and by analogy.
E es fayt le mays de lu en les locs dels adjutoris o del talo, o en tot loc en le qual so maugudas las juncturas.	And it is done with the thread in the areas of the assistants or the heel, or in any place where the joints are usually painful.
E es apostema greu, e es asemblat a la color del autre cors, e es en las majors de lu disposicios ses de lor e quan es streyt am vehementia, sent en lu le malaute semblant stupor.	And it is a severe abscess, and its color resembles that of the body, and it is among the major conditions without fever, and when it is pressed with force, the patient seems to be in a stupor.
E no es apostema agreguat en le preon del cors, e per so es dejos la codena, e el es maugut a tota partida e no va a las partidas denant ni detras.	And it is not an abscess aggregated at the front of the body, and therefore it is below the skin, and it hurts all around and does not go to the parts in front or behind.
Donc aquo de aquels que es en las juncturas no cove que sia envasit am ferr, quar fort leu endevenguera contracio.	Therefore, when it is in the joints, there is no need for it to be treated with iron, as it will likely lead to contraction.
Mays aquel que es en le cap o en le front fen la codena am spatum.	Make a cut in the head or forehead with a spatum (a type of surgical instrument).
Mays si es apostema pauc, lahoras te aquel am les forfecs e abscindeys aquel de razitz.	If it is a small abscess, incise it with forceps and then drain it by scraping.
E si es gran, lahoras tu le suspen am unci, e excorja aquel, e aprop osta aquel; e ajusta la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if it is large, then suspend drainage with an incision, and excise it; then apply a poultice. And close the wound with sutures, and treat it until it is healed.
Capitol .li.	Chapter 11.
De seccio de apostema le qual accideys de cheil que accideys al ventre.	On the incision of an abscess that occurs on the cheek as it occurs on the abdomen.
Endeveno ad alcus homes motas veguadas en les ventres de aquels e en las autras partidas del cors de aquels theils les quals son apelatz funguals per similitut de aquels am funges, dels quals la razitz es subtil e·l cap de aquel es gros; e ja las labias de aquels so conversas, e es de aquels que es petit, e es de aquels que es mot magnificat.	Therefore, for some people, there are visible swellings in their abdomens and other parts of their bodies, which are called funguses by similarity to mushrooms, whose cause is subtle but the appearance is large; and often the edges of these are smooth, and they can be small or greatly enlarged.
E yeu ja e vist un, e en le ventre de lu eran dos theils les quals eran mays a funges semblantz, e no era diferencia entre aquels blancs, de menuda razitz.	And I have seen one such case where in his abdomen there were two parts that resembled mushrooms, and there was no difference between those white ones, of fine texture.
E ja las labias de aquels eran enversadas e se fendian, e humiditat corria de aquel tot temps.	And the edges of those were turned inward and would split open, and moisture would constantly run from them.
Donc yeu inscidegui aquels e atrobegui en la un en pes quays xviii unc. e l’autre quays vi unc.	Therefore, I incised them and found within one about eighteen ounces and the other about ten ounces.
E la operacio en la inscizio de lor es que consideres lahoras si·l malaute es humit, e la color de atheil es blanca, humit, de subtil razitz; lahoras tu le inscideys am spatum lat, e sian en la presencia tua cauteris en le foc, quar motas veguadas deves la seccio de lu es expellit mot sanc; e si te ventz le sanc, cauteriza aquel.	And the procedure in incising them is that you should consider whether the condition is humid, and if the color of the swelling is white, humid, with a fine texture; then you incise it with a broad spatum, and immediately in your presence cauterize it over fire, because in such cases the incision expels much blood; and if there is bleeding, cauterize that.
E si vezes le malaute pauruc e temeros, guarda te de inscizio am ferr; mays lahoras pren fiel de plom recent fayt, e strenh am aquel atheil, la manieyra del qual es aquela que havem dita; e leyssa aquel per dos dias.	And if the wound is small and fearful, guard against cutting with iron; but now take fine lead recently made, and bind it to that part, the method of which we have described; and leave it there for two days.
E aprop ajusta en la strictura del fil de plom; donc, no cesses strenher le plom granre devetz en theil, entro que sia abscindit e cayha per se ses trebalh.	And attach it to the constriction of the lead thread; therefore, do not stop binding more lead as needed until it is separated and falls off on its own.
Mays si theil es de grossa razitz, lahoras en la inscizio de lu es alcuna causa de temor e de paor, e majorment en aquel que es en le ventre.	But if the part to be cut is of thick tissue, now in cutting it there is some cause for fear and dread, especially when it is in the abdomen.
Mays possibla es que tu inscindas la maytat de lu , e aprop cauteriza aquel per que no retorne.	But it is possible that you can cut half of it, and then cauterize that so that it does not return.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanada la plagua.	And then treat it until the wound is healed.
E guarda te que tu no presumas inscidir theil le qual es de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, de leg reguardament, quar aquel es absi cancros.	And be careful that you do not presume to cut a part that is dark in color, has little sensation, and is easily movable, for such a part is often cancerous.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio de cranc aprop aysso.	And this will come to mind as a reminder of that advice.
Capitol .lii.	Chapter LII.
De curacio de eminencia del umbilic.	On the treatment of an umbilical hernia.
Eminencia del umbilic es fayta per motas causas; o per fissuras del ciphac le qual es sobre le ventre, e yeys de lu la tela o budel segon que endeve en las autras rupturas; o per sanc le qual flueys de vena o de arceria segon que es denant dit, o per ventositat coarctada en lu.	An umbilical hernia is caused by various reasons; it may be due to fissures in the abdominal wall above the abdomen, and for this, a patch or intestine segment is used depending on other ruptures; or it can be due to inflammation from a vein or artery that bleeds, or due to trapped air.
Mays si es per fissura del ciphac e per yssiment de la tela, lahoras la color del apostema es semblant a la color del cors; e es leon ses dolor, e aprop appar de divers situament.	But if it is due to a fissure in the abdominal wall and the protrusion of a patch, now the color of the swelling is similar to the color of the body; it is painless, and then appears in various situations.
E si es per egressio del budel, lahoras le situament de aquel am lu de aquo que havem recontat, de mays vehement diversitat, e cum tu premes aquel am les tieus ditz es occultat, e aprop retorna; e fort leu es am lu so, e es magnificat mot deves le introt de banh e vehement trebalh.	And if it is due to the exit of the bowel, then at that moment the situation of that thing differs greatly from what we have recounted, and when you press that spot with your fingers, it is hidden, and immediately returns; and it is very light there, and it is magnified when you introduce bath water and vigorous labor.
Mays si per humiditat, lahoras es leon e no es occultat quan premes am la tua ma, ni es constrengut, ni es cregut.	And if it is due to moisture, then it is loose and not hidden when you press with your hand, nor is it constricted, nor is it hard.
E si es per sanc, lahoras am aquestz senhals apareys le apostema a negror declinant.	And if it is due to blood, then at this sign the abscess appears as a declining black color.
Mays si es per carn nada, lahoras es apostema greu, gros e dur, e es ficat segon una quantitat.	And if it is due to flesh without moisture, then the abscess is severe, thick and hard, and it is embedded in proportion to a quantity.
Mays si es per ventositat, lahoras le tocament de lu es leon.	And if it is due to gas, then the touch of it is soft.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras lahoras si la eminencia de l’umbilic es per sanc de arceria, o de vena, o per ventositat; lahoras cove que sias prohibit de la curacio de lu, quar en aquela es temor e paor ayssi cum t’e ensenhat en le capitol en le qual he dit les apostemas per arceria e per vena.	And the operation in this case is that you consider now whether the prominence of the navel is due to blood from an artery, or a vein, or gas; now be cautious about treating it, for there is fear and dread as I have taught you in the chapter where I have discussed abscesses from arteries and veins.
E si la eminencia del umbilic es per le budel o per la tela, lahoras cove que comandes al malaute que tengua le ale sieu, e sia stant extendut; e aprop senha am tenta en le circuit de tot le umbilic, e aprop comanda a lu que stia envers entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e aprop circunda am spatum lat en le circuit del umbilic sobre le loc le qual has senhat am la tenta; e aprop exten la maytat del apostema a las partidas desus am unci gran; e aprop lia en le circuit am fiel fort o am ceda e la manieyra del liar decent.	And if the prominence of the navel is due to the bowel or the membrane, then you should order the patient to take their clothing off and stand extended; then examine around the entire navel with your hand, and then instruct them to lie on their back; then encircle with a splint around the circumference of the navel over the spot where you have marked with your hand; then extend half of the abscess above with about an inch; then tie it around the circumference tightly or loosely in a proper manner.
E aprop huebre le mieg del apostema extendut sobre le liament e intromet le dit tieu en aquel indic e quereys le budel; e si tu l’as atrobat ni guardat per le liament, lahoras tu extratz alxorati e impelleys le budel a las partidas dedintz del ventre.	From the side of the abscess, lift up the membrane spread over the ligament and insert your finger into that pus to seek the sac; and if you have found or secured it by the ligament, then immediately extract it and push the sac to the inner parts of the abdomen.
E si has atrobada la tela, lahoras pren aquel am unci; e inscideys las superfluitatz de lu.	And if you have found the membrane, then grasp it with a probe; and incise the excess tissue around it.
Mays si es contraria a tu arceria o vena, lahoras circunda aquel mot, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio; e pren dos agulhas e met en aquelas dos fiels fortz e entromet dos agulhas en le circuit le qual has feyt entorn le apostema en manieyra de crotz, las quals fassas penetrar; e aprop strenh le apostema en quatre partidas sobre las agulhas.	But if it is contrary to your artery or vein, then surround that spot, and return to your operation; and take two needles and place them in those two strong points and insert two needles around the circle you made around the abscess in a cross shape, which should penetrate; and then divide the abscess into four parts over the needles.
E si tu vols, osta las agulhas e leyssa le loc entro que poyresca la carn extenduda e caia per si; o inscideys aquel quan es subtiliat e se poyreys, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if you wish, remove the needles and leave the area so that the extended flesh can drain and fall off on its own; or incise it when it has become thin and will drain, and then treat the membrane with a lotion appropriate for healing until it is healed.
E si la eminencia del ombilic es de carn nada en lu o per humiditat, lahoras cove que tu conquaves le apostema ayssi cum havem dit e estraguas le sanc o la humiditat, la qual atrobas en lu, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove e que consolide le loc.	And if the prominence of the navel is of flesh that has become hard or due to moisture, then you should treat the abscess as we have said and extract the blood or moisture that you find there, and then treat it with a lotion appropriate for healing and consolidating the area.
Capitol .liii.	Chapter LIII.
De curacio de cranc.	On the Treatment of Wounds.
Ja havem dit, en la divisio, de specia de cranc e en qual manieyra es via a la curacio de lu am medicinas, e que es squivador en lu la curacio am ferr per so que no sia ulcerat; e havem dit cranc engendrat en la mayra e cautela de la curacio de lu.	We have already said in the division about the types of wounds and in what manner they should be treated with medicines, and that it is necessary for the treatment to avoid instruments so that the wound does not become ulcerated; and we have described wounds generated in the first place and the caution in their treatment.
E diyssero les antics que alcunas veguadas cranc es en loc on es possibla la eradicacio de lu, ayssi cum de cran le qual es en las mamillas o en la coyssa e a lor semblantz dels membres allocat a estrayre tot aquel, e majorment quan es comensant petit.	And the ancients say that in some cases it is necessary to remove [the tumor] in a place where its eradication is possible, just as they do with crabs that are in the breasts or armpits and similar parts of the body, especially when they start small.
Mays quan es antiquat e es gra, no cove que te propries a lu, quar yeu non pogui sanar de aquel alcu ni no he vist autre, ni que sia pervengut ad aquo.	But when it is old and hard, do not attempt to remove it yourself, for I cannot heal anyone from that nor have I seen another who could achieve this.
E la operacio en lu es quan es allocat ayssi cum havem dit, es que tu precedescas e laysses le malaute e purgues de colera negra alcunas veguadas, e aprop sagna aquel, si es atrobada replecio manifesta.	And the operation on it should be performed when it is appropriate, as we have said, by proceeding and leaving the patient to purge from black bile for some days, and then lance that [tumor] if there is a clearly evident swelling.
E aprop prepara le malaute am preparacio en le qual sia locat am operacio, e aprop prohiceys en le trauc uncis les quals cove ad aquel; e aprop concava de tota part am la codena sego bona perexcrutacio entro que no romangua alcuna causa de las razitz de lu.	And then prepare the patient for the operation in which the procedure is to be performed, and afterward apply the hooked instruments that are needed for it; and then thoroughly clean all around with a good scalpel to ensure proper excision so that no cause remains for the recurrence of that [condition].
E layssa correr le sanc, e no abscidas aquel leugierament, e exprem les locs, e abstergeys le sanc gros tot am la tua ma o am instrument am le qual es a tu possible dels instruments.	And let the blood flow freely, and do not apply bandages too tightly, and press the areas, and wipe away the thick blood with your hand or with an instrument that is suitable among those available to you.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat de sanc gros inscizio de vena o de arceria, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que·l flux del sanc sia cessat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	But if it is contrary to have thick blood flowing and you need to stop the bleeding from a vein or artery, then cauterize that point until the flow of blood has stopped, and afterward treat that with another method until it is healed.
Capitol .liv.	Chapter 46.
De curacio de ydropici.	On the treatment of hydrops (edema or dropsy).
Nos ja havem recomtat, en la divisio, de las specias de ydropici de l’aygua, e les senhals de quascuna especia, de la curacio de lu am medicinas.	We have already recommended, in the division, the types of hydrops related to water, and the signs of each type, as well as the treatment of it with medicines.
E aquela la qual es curada am ferr no es sino la specia de althitas sola, e no es aproximat am ferr a la specia de timpanistres ni a la especia de yposarcha, quar aquo es mortal.	In the case where iron is used for treatment, it applies only to the type of fracture known as "althitas," and not to approximating with iron in the types of fractures called "timpanistres" or "yposarcha," for that would be fatal.
E quan tu ja has medicat aquesta especia de ydropici timpanistre am medicinas e no comfereys la tua medicacio, lahoras considera, quar si al malaute ja es conseguida debelitat, o es am aquel autra malautia otra ydropici, ayssi cum si es en lu tos o cos de ventre e semblant ad aquels, lahoras guarda te que no le mediques am ferr, quar temor es sobre aquo.	And when you have already treated this type of hydrops called "timpanistres" with medicines and do not feel confident in your treatment, consider whether the patient has become weakened or suffers from another illness similar to this hydrops, as if they were suffering from coughs or conditions affecting the chest or belly and similar to those, then be careful not to treat them with iron, for there is danger in doing so.
Mays si tu vezes le malaute de vertut exuberant, e am lu no es autra malautia sino ydropici tant solament, e no enfant ni vielh, lahoras la manieyra de la operacio de lu es que tu eleves le malaute entre las tuas mas, e le ministre aprop lu exprema le ventre de lu am la sua ma, enpellen la aygua a la partida dejos del pentenilh, e aprop pren spatum spinos segon aquesta forma:	But if you see the patient with abundant vigor and there is no other illness except this hydrops alone, and neither child nor elderly person, then the method of the operation for them is that you lift the patient between your arms, and the assistant presses the abdomen of the patient with their hand, expelling the water from below the ribcage, and then take a sharp spoon in this way:
sia de dos partz agudas lonc, de aguda extremitat ayssi cum spatum; mays empero sia en lu alcuna brevitat petit a petit, per so que en la operacio am aquel no passes entro al budel, e que ledas aquel.	it should be of two sharp points long, with a sharp tip like a spoon; however, there should be some gradual narrowing little by little, so that in the operation you do not penetrate into the bowel, and thereby harm the patient.
E aprop considera si la generacio de ydropici es de part dels budels, quar lahoras cove que tu am la seccio te alonhes del ombelic per la quantitat de tres ditz a las partidas dejos, en le dreyt de lu sobre le pentenilh.	And then consider whether the origin of the hydrops is from the bowels, for if it is, you should distance yourself from the navel by three fingers' width at the lower parts, on the right side above the ribcage.
Mays si la generacio de hydropici es per malautia del fietge, lahoras la tua seccio sia sinistra del ombilic per tres ditz.	But if the origin of the hydrops is from a kidney illness, then your incision should be to the left of the navel by three fingers' width.
E si la generacio de lu es per la melsa, lahoras la tua seccio sia en le las dreyt.	And if the generation of it is from the gallbladder, then let your incision be on the right side.
E no cove que la tua seccio sia sobre le costat sobre le qual vol jaser le malaute per que no corron las superfluitatz ad aquel loc freul.	And it is not necessary for your incision to be on the side where the patient lies, so that the superfluities do not run to that place by reason of the pressure.
E aprop perfora am le instrument tota la codena, e aprop entromet en aquela seccio, e eleva la tua ma am le spatum entre la codena e·l siphac, e tu excorja aquel; e si’ la quantitat de una ungla o enviro.	And then pierce completely with the instrument the gallbladder, and then insert into that incision, and raise your hand between the gallbladder and the sphincter, and you shall extract it; and if its quantity is one ounce or thereabouts.
E aprop perforo le ciphac entro que pervengua le spatum al loc vuoyt, e es loc de l’aygua.	And then pierce the sphincter so that the pus reaches the empty place, which is the site of the water.
E aprop extratz aquel e entromet un instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then extract that and insert an instrument whose form is as follows:
e es semblant a canula de argent subtil; es fayt de argent o de eram o de lato leon, al qual en la partida pus bassa de lu es un petit trauc, e en les costatz de lu so tres traucs: dos de una partida e un del autra partida; e fayta es la extremitat de lu insciza segon la manieyra de pluma, ayssi cum vezes:	and it resembles a thin silver cannula; it is made of silver or ivory or lion's leather, at the lower part of which there is a small hole, and on its sides are three holes: two on one side and one on the other side; and the end of it is cut like the tip of a feather, as you see.
E en la extramitat de lu pus sobirana es armilla, quar quan le instrument perve al aygua, lahoras aquela tantost deysen sobre le instrument, donc evacua de l’aygua en la ora miega quantitat, quar si tu evacuas de aquela mes que no cove en la hora, fort leu mor le malaute per resolucio del sieu spirit animal, o accideys a lu cincopi que es appropinquada la mort.	And at the upper end of it there is a ring, for when the instrument reaches the water, then immediately the patient should sit upon the instrument, thus evacuating an appropriate amount of water in that moment, for if you evacuate too much beyond what is necessary within an hour, the patient may die from resolution of their vital spirit, or it will hasten death which is near.
Mays evacua de aquela segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu e segon que significan a tu las disposicios del malaute de la vertut del pols de lu e de la bontat de lu.	But evacuate that according to the quantity of the strength of the patient and according to how their condition, the strength of their pulse, and their overall health indicate to you.
E aprop extrats le instrument, e rete l’aygua la qual causa es quar tantost es retenguda per la codena la qual rete le trauc que es sobre le ciphac del qual e recomtat a tu que perfores aquel segon aquela manieyra.	Here is the translation:
E aprop itera le instrument al autra dia si vezes le malaute tollerant aquo, e extratz de la aygua petita quantitat, e fay aquo per alcus jorns sobre temor, e guarda te de error entro que no romangua de l’aygua sino pauc.	Then leave the instrument in for another day if the patient tolerates it well, and extract a small amount of water from it, and use this water for several days out of fear, and guard yourself against error so that you do not remove too much water but only a little.
Mays si tu temes sobre le malaute, e leyssas de l’aygua gran quantitat, lahoras cura aquel am sepultura en arena cauda, e mota suzor en banh, e al solelh espere per lonc temps; e cura aquel am medicinas dessicativas entro que sia sanat.	If you fear for the patient and release a large amount of water, now bury him in fine sand, pour sweat-inducing substances over him, and let him lie in the sun for a long time; and treat him with drying medicines until he is healed.
E cauteriza sobre le stomac, e la melsa e·l fitge aprop la extraccio de l’aygua, segon que yeu he recontat en aquo que es precedit.	And cauterize the stomach, and the chest and abdomen after the extraction of the water, as I have recounted in what preceded.
Capitol .lv.	Chapter 55.
De la curacio dels enfants les quals so natz les locs de la urina no-perforatz.	On the treatment of children who are born with unopened passages for urine.
Alcunas veguadas alcun dels enfantz es eyssi del ventre de la sua mayre e·l cap de la sua mixtio no es perforat (o es trauc streyt o no es en son loc).	Sometimes some of the children are born from their mother's womb with the head of their urethra not pierced (or it is blocked or not in its place).
Donc cove coytar am perforacio de lu tantost que es nascut am spatum mot subtil segon aquesta forma:	Therefore, you should perform the piercing as soon as the child is born using a fine instrument according to this form:
E aprop pausa en le trauc un clavil subtil de plom e ligua aquel, e te per tres jorns o per .iiii.tre.	And then insert a fine lead needle into the obstruction and leave it there for three days or four.
E quant vol urinar sia remaugut e hurine; e aprop retorne aquel.	And when he needs to urinate, remove it and let him urinate; then return it afterward.
E si tu no pauses le plom, ja es possible que la urina la qual va sobre le loc, no leysa aquest claure.	And if you do not insert the lead, it is possible that the urine which flows over that area will not remove this obstruction.
Mays aquel del qual le trauc es streyt sia medicat am clavil de Plom, ayssi cum havem dit, per trops dias entro que sia amplificat.	Let him whose wound is narrow be treated with a lead nail as we have said, for so many days until it is enlarged.
Mays aquels en les quals es le trauc no en son loc, so leditz, la qual causa es quar de aquels, aquel que es nat e·l trau es deves la fi del cap de la vergua per que no pot urinar a las partidas dedintz, entro que eleva la vergua am la sua ma a las partidas desus; e no es a lu generacio, per so quar le sperma no pot pervenir a la mayre segon rectitut, e es malautia mot laga.	Let those in whom the wound is not in its proper place be treated as mentioned, the cause of which is that one who is born with the urethra below the tip of the penis cannot urinate normally because he must raise his penis upwards; and it is not for sexual activity, so the semen cannot reach the larger second passage correctly, and this is a serious condition.
E la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que·l malaute sia envessat sobre le sieu dos, e aprop exten le cap de la vergua de lu am la tua ma sinistra am vehement extraccio, e inscideys le cap del cap de la vergua del loc del perpucii am spatum agut, ayssi cum es inscizio de pluma, o que tu ne razas alcuna partida, per so que·l mieg de lu vengua semblant al cap de la vergua e que le trauc caia en le mieg loc segon que cove.	And the method of the operation is that the patient lies on his back, and you grasp the tip of the penis with your left hand firmly, and incise the head of the penis in the location of the urethra with a sharp knife, like an incision for plucking feathers, or shave some part without cutting, so that the middle of the urethra resembles the tip of the penis and that the wound falls in its proper place as required.
E guarda te que en la tua operacio de flux de sanc, quar motas vetz accideys aquo; e pausa te a lu am aquo que abscindeys le sanc, e cura la plagua entro que si’ sanada.	And be careful during your operation to stop bleeding, as this often happens; and pause at the point where you need to stop the blood, and treat the wound until it is healed.
Capitol .lvi.	Chapter LVI.
De albater le qual accideys en le prepucii en le cap de la vergua e de corropcio e negror e adherencia del prepucii del cap de la vergua.	Of the inflammation that occurs in the foreskin at the head of the penis, and of corruption, blackening, and adherence of the foreskin to the head of the penis.
Motas veguadas accideys aquest albater en la vergua e es eminencia de carn laga.	This inflammation often occurs in the penis and is characterized by a prominent swelling of the flesh.
E de aquela una es maligna e autra es no-maligna.	And one of these conditions is malignant and the other is non-malignant.
No-maligna, cove que suspendas am unci subtil e abscindas aquela entro que aquela mondes tota; e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto submirgit en enguent egipciac; e aprop aquel, cura le am enguent diafinicon entro que sia sanat.	For benign cases, suspend one ounce of the subtle medicine and excise that which contains all the tumors; then apply to that part a poultice made with Egyptian onion; afterwards treat it with decoctions until it is healed.
E si albater es maligna, de lega color, lahoras cove que tu aministres cauteri aprop la inscizio de lu e la razio de lu.	And if it is malignant and of a dark color, now you should administer cauterization around the incision of it and the ratio of it.
Mays si albater es en le prepuci del cap de la vergua no-circumcis, e la una partida de albater es dedintz le prepucii e l’autra partida es defora, lahoras cove que tu ostes albater le qual es dedintz al comensament entro que es consolidat; e lahora tu cura aquel deforo, quar quan tu curas aquel ensemps le prepuci, no es asegurat que no sia trinquat.	But if the tumor is on the foreskin of an uncircumcised penis and one part of the tumor is inside the foreskin while the other part is outside, now you should excise the part that is inside at the beginning until it is consolidated; then treat the part that is outside, because when you treat them together with the foreskin, it is not certain that it will not be injured.
E ja eysamen accideys en les genetius e en le prepuci negror e corruccio, adonc cove que tu conquavas tot aquo que ja es denigrat e que ja se vol corrompre o que ja es corrumput; e aprop lineys sobre aquel aprop aquo am mel, le qual es contusit am farina de scorsa de milgrana e de errs trissatz e crivellatz.	And if similar conditions occur in the genitals and on the foreskin, such as discoloration and corruption, then you should excise everything that is discolored or will likely become corrupted; then apply a bandage over it using honey, which has been mixed with ground fennel seeds and finely crushed wheat bran.
E aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sana.	And then treat it with other remedies until it is healed.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, lahoras aministra cauteri lunar segon aquesta forma:	But if there is bleeding, now administer lunar cauterization according to this method:
quar cauteri juvatiu es a dos disposicios ensemps, so es a flux de sanc e a la plagua quan es corrumpuda.	because cauterization is beneficial in two situations together: for bleeding and for a wound when it becomes corrupted.
E si le cap de la vergua es corrodut e es destruit tot en la hora, lahoras cove que tu intrometas en lo meat del prepucii una canula de plom per so que le malaute urina per aquela.	And if the head of the penis is corroded and completely destroyed at that moment, now you should insert a lead tube into the urethra so that the patient can urinate through it.
En la adherencia del prepucii am le cap de la vergua (et aquesta adherencia no accideys sino en aquel del qual le prepucii es sa, e sobre lu no es exhigida circumcizio; e quan accideys adherencia per plagua o per apostema) cove que excorjas am spatum obtus entro que sia dissolvut le liament e sia deliurat le cap de la vergua de tota partida.	In the adhesion of the foreskin to the head of the penis (and this adhesion does not occur except in one whose foreskin is his, and on whom circumcision is not required; and when adhesion occurs due to a plague or abscess) it is necessary that you scrape with a blunt spatula so that the ligament dissolves and the head of the penis is released entirely.
E si es dificil desirnir aquelas exquisidament, lahoras cove que tu excorjes am spatum alcuna causa del cap de la vergua e del prepucii, e aysso es quar le prepucii, quan es subtil, fort leu es perforat per la sua subtilitat leugierament.	And if it is difficult to distinguish them precisely, now you must scrape with the spatula some part of the head of the penis and the foreskin, and this is because when the foreskin is fine, due to its fineness it can be easily perforated by its subtlety.
E aprop separa entre·l prepucii e·l cap de la vergua am dra7 de li subtil, le qual ja es mulhat en l’aygua frega per que no adherescan autra veguada.	And then separate between the foreskin and the head of the penis with a very thin thread, which has already been moistened in water so that they do not adhere again.
E aprop sia curat am vi stiptic entro que sia consolidat.	And then treat with styptic juice so that it becomes firm.
Capitol .lvii.	Chapter LVIΙ.
De mundificacio dels enfants e de la curacio de aquo que accideys ad aquels de circumcisio.	On the purification of children and the treatment of what occurs due to circumcision.
Circumcisio no es solucio de continuitat ayssi cum las autras plaguas: mays empero cum sia de la nostra operacio e de nostra voluntat, e lus de aquela sia propriament en les enfants, es necessari que asignem en aquela milhor operacio e via pus leugiera perdusent a salut.	Circumcision is not a solution that causes continuity as other plagues do: but since it is part of our procedure and our will, and since it properly affects children, it is necessary to determine the best method and the most gentle way to ensure their well-being.
Donc dic que les antics no diyssero circumcisio en alcu dels lors libres, quar no n’usan en las suas leys, e no es sino quar havem aquisit per speriment, la qual causa es que yeu he atrobat la major partida dels artifexs e dels barbies usar circumcisir e mundificacio am novacula e am torores; e usan de liament am fiel e de inscizio am la ungla.	Therefore, I say that the ancients did not mention circumcision in any of their books, because they do not use it in their laws, and this is only because we have acquired it through experience. The reason I have found is that most surgeons and barbers use circumcision and purification with a razor and scissors; and they use ligatures made of silk and incision with the fingernail.
E yeu ja he prohadas totas aquestas manieras e no atrobegui milhor mondificacio am forfexs, am liament am fiel que en mondificacio cum la ungla, quar motas vetz efugeys la codena pus desus, quar la codena del prepucii a dos tunicas, e roman la tonica pus dejos, e fort leu es forsat ad autra inscizio e dolor sicura.	This is how I have described all these methods and did not find a better modification with scissors, thread, or needle in the modification with the nail, because most times you avoid cutting above it, because the foreskin has two layers, and remove the layer below first, and further incision and certain pain are necessary.
E am mundificacio le qual es fayta per alphecati, e es digital, del qual usan les sabatiers, no es segurada la inscizio de la extremitat del membre viril, quar fort leu intra en le trau de lu.	And in the modification which is done with a scalpel, which surgeons use, there is no guarantee of incision at the extremity of the male member, because it easily enters into the groove.
Mays en la operacio am ungla, fort leu obazeys ferr e corromp la tua operacio.	But in the operation with the nail, be careful not to press too hard and corrupt your operation.
E la codena del enfant es breu per natura, e motas veguadas nays en tal manieyra que no ha necessitat de mondificacio, e yeu he vist aquel.	And the foreskin of a child is short by nature, and many times it happens in such a way that there is no need for modification, and I have seen that.
Mays de la mondificacio que·s fa am forfexs e liamentz am fiel, la bontat, experiment descrobic a mi, quar las forfexs so de proporcional inscizio, per aquo quar la acuitat que es desus es ayssi cum la acuitat que es dejos; e donc cum tu premes la tua ma so proporcionadas dos acuitatz, e inscideysso segon una comperacio en un temps; e es fayta compressio del fiel am figura contenent la codena de la vergua de tota partida, am le qual no catz error de tot.	But regarding the modification that is done with scissors and thread with a needle, the goodness of this method was revealed to me through experience. The scissors are proportionally suitable for incision because the sharpness above is as precise as the sharpness below; thus, when you press your hand in accordance with these two sharp points simultaneously and make an incision accordingly at once, it ensures that the needle compresses the thread into a shape that fits the foreskin all around without error.
E la manieyra de la operacio primeyra es que tu fassas estar le enfant majorment si es de aquels que entendo un petit, que no fassas sino que tu lies le fiel en la sua vergua tant solament, e que leysses aquel entro al autra dia.	And the method of the first operation is that you should position the child, especially if it is a small one, so that you only tie the thread around his penis and leave it for another day.
E aprop fay aquel alegrar en tota aquela manieyra que es a tu possibla de aquo que recep la sua intelligencia.	And then make him happy in every way that is possible to him regarding what he can understand.
E aprop fa aquel estar entre las tuas mas estatuir preparadament, e no sia ges cezent; e occulta las forfexs en la tua ma o dejos le tieu pe, que l’enfant no veia aquelas ni degun autre dels instruments.	Let him stand between you so that he is well prepared, and let there not be any jesting then; and hide the scissors in your hand or leave them behind, so that the child does not see those or any other of the instruments.
E aprop entremet la tua ma a la vergua de lu e suffla en la codena, e tira aquela entro que sia eyssit le cap de la vergua, e aprop mondifica aquel de aquo que es agregat en ela de sordicia.	Then put your hand on his chin and blow into the ear, and pull that in until the tip of the forceps comes out, and then clean it of what adheres to it from dirt.
E aprop lia le loc signat am fiel dobla, e aprop ligua pus bas de aquel un petit le segon liament, e aprop te am le dit pous e endic tieu le loc del liament dejos am bona retencio, e inscideys entre dos liaments.	Then mark the place with two drops of honey, and then ligature the lower part slightly with the second thread, and then tie the thread well to the location of the ligature below with good retention, and incise between the two ligatures.
E aprop eleva la codena sus leugierament e estratz le cap de la vergua; e aprop leyssa le sanc corre petit e petit, quar es milhor ; e pausa polvera desus e sobre la polvera pausa drap en le qual es spandut mugol de huou coyt en ayguaros concosit am oli rozat recent bo; e layssa aquel sobre aquel entro al autra dia; e cura aquel am curacio entro que sia sanat.	Then raise the ear gently and extract the tip of the forceps; then let the blood flow little by little, for it is better; and sprinkle powder above it, and on top of the powder place a cloth dipped in honey that has been mixed with recently prepared rose oil in water; and leave that upon that until the other day; and treat it with dressing until it is healed.
La forma de las forfexs a mondificacio, aquesta es la forma:	The shape of the scissors for cleaning is as follows:
Sian las unas extramitatz no-talhantz e las autras sian talhant, que non sia yssit le ram del clau, e sia la longitut de las doas acuitatz ayssi cum la longitut de dos manubres engualment.	Let one set of blades be unsharpened and the other sharpened, so that the tip of the joint does not come out, and let the length of both blade tips be equal to the length of two finger joints.
Mays la error en mundificacio es quar fort leu efugeys la codena intrinseca tota, o partida de lu deves la inscizio.	But the mistake in cleaning is that you might gently avoid the inner ear too much, or you may leave the incision uncovered.
Donc cove que tu extendas aquela de la tua hora am la tua ungla denant la apostemacio del loc e que inscidas aquela segon equalitat.	Therefore, you should apply that from your hour [time] with your finger in front of the swelling of the area and incise it according to equality.
E si no la podes tenir am la tua ungla, lahoras extratz aquela am unci e inscideys aquela.	And if you cannot hold it with your finger, now extract it with a lancet and incise it.
Mays si son passatz tres dias, e roman aquo que es imflat dejos la vergua apostemat, lahoras tu leyssa aquo entro que sia cedat le apostema caut, e excorja aquel am fecilitat, e inscidex aquel segon que a tu es preparat.	And if three days have passed and the inflammation remains below the testicle after an abscess has formed, now you should lay open what is inside until the abscess discharges, and cleanse that which is infected, and incise it as soon as you are prepared.
E guarda te del cap de la vergua, quar no nosera a lu aquo.	And be careful of the head of the testicle, for it should not suffer from this.
E donc cura aquel am aquo que la plagua consolida de las polveras las quals havem recomtadas en le tractat de las polveras.	And therefore, treat that wound with the plasters which we have recommended in the chapter on plasters.
E si es inscidit de la codena sobre mesura, e obezeys a las partidas desus, aquo no notz a lu.	And if it is incised too much from the tendon, and you follow the instructions given above, this will not harm it.
E mays cura aquel am aquo que havem dit entro que sia sanat.	And also treat that wound as we have said until it is healed.
Capitol .lviii.	Chapter LVIII.
De curacio de urina retenguda en la vesiqua.	On the treatment of retained urine in the bladder.
Retencio de urina en la vesica es fayta per oppulacio fayta per peyra o per sanc congilat, o per poyre o per carnada, e semblantz ad aquels de aquo que havem dit de las manieyras de curacio en la divisio.	Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by obstruction due to a stone or blood clots, or pus or flesh, and similar conditions as those we have mentioned regarding methods of treatment in the division.
E si no es dissolvuda la urina, e veses retencio de lu esser per peyra le qual ja es en le col de la vesica, lahoras cove que le malaute sia encorbat sobre les sieus denolhs.	And if the urine does not dissolve, and retention is due to a stone that is already in the neck of the bladder, now have the patient bend over on their knees.
E aprop conponeys les pes de aquel sobre le sieu dos e extendas le sieu ventre de la partida pus desus del sieu dos, e le malaute estrengua le sieu ale tant quant es a lu possible.	And then place the feet of that person on their knees and extend their abdomen from below the buttocks, and have the patient grasp their foot as tightly as possible.
Donc lahoras le col de la vesica es costreyt ha espulsio de la peyra a las partidas detras, per que la urina es absolta.	Therefore, when the neck of the bladder is constricted, the stone is expelled to the rear parts, so that the urine is relieved.
E si no es dissolvuda am aquo que havem dit he vehement es fayta la causa sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que aministres extraccio de lu am instrument le qual es apelat siringua, del qual aquesta es la forma: Sia de argent e sia subtil leon conquau, ayssi cum canula de pena de ausel am subtilitat de ray lonc en similitut d’un palm e mig, al qual sia cana subtil en le cap de lu.	And if it is not dissolved by the water that we have mentioned and the cause of the illness is severe, then you should administer extraction with an instrument called a siringua, which has this form: It should be made of silver and be as thin as a quill pen, about the subtlety of a ray one palm and a half long, to which there should be a fine tube at its end.
E la manieyra del eyssiment de la urina per aquel es que prenguas le fiel doblat e lies en la extramitat de lu lana o coto per bona liadura; e entrometas las extramitatz del fiel en la partida dejos de la ciringua, e inscideys am las forfexs si superflueys alcuna causa de la lana, mays intromet la en la canula am vehemencia E aprop enongeys la ciringua am boder e am album de huou.	And the method of testing the urine with it is that you take a strip of wax and tie it at the end of the thread or cotton with a good knot; and insert the ends of the wax into the lower part of the siringua, and cut off any superfluous parts of the thread with scissors. Then insert the siringua gently but firmly into the tube and bring it up near the patient’s body.
E fay cezer le malaute sobre la selha, e embroca la vesiqua de lu e la vergua am olis umitz, e oli de oliva e ayguaros.	And treat the illness by placing a poultice on the bladder, and insert the urethra with olive oil and rose water.
E aprop entromet la ciringua am facilitat entro que pervengua a la razit de la vergua; e aprop dobla la vergua desus a la partida del embelic; e aprop empelleys la ciringua dintz aquela; e aprop empelleys aquela entro que pervengua a la vesica, e aquela centa le malaute esser pervenguda a la causa vuoda, e no es fayt asso segon aquest orde, sino le meat en le qual va a tortuositat.	And then insert the siringua gently until it reaches the entrance of the urethra; and then bend the urethra above the part where it is swollen; and then push the siringua into that; and then push that until it reaches the bladder, so that the treatment reaches the empty cause. And if this is not done in this order, but rather through a path that is tortuous.
E aprop exten le fiel am la lana petit a petit, quar la urina siec la lana.	And then slowly pull out the wax with the thread little by little, as the urine will soak the thread.
Aprop extratz aquela e fay per curacio urina, e usa ciringua, no cesses fer aquo e usa ciringua entro que sia evacuada la vesica e le malaute atrobe alleviacio.	Here is the translation:
Capitol .lix.	Chapter LIX.
De qualitat de clisterizacio de la vezica am clampcedra e am semblantz instrumentz les quals sian acordants ad aquo.	Regarding the quality of enema administration to the bladder with an enema bag and similar instruments, which should be appropriate for this purpose.
Quan accideys en la vesica ulceracio o apostema, o sanc congilat en aquela, o es coartat poyredura, e vols en aquela destillar ayguas e medicinas, lahoras sia fayt am instrument le qual es apelat clampcedra, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When there is ulceration or an abscess in the bladder, or clotted blood in it, or a constricted fistula, and you wish to instill liquids and medicines into it, then an instrument called a clampcedra should be used, and this is its form:
sino que en la extramitat de lu es sorda, so es clausa.	but at the end of it is blunt, that is where it is closed.
Et en aquela so tres traucs: dos de la una partida , ayssi quo vezes.	And at that same place, there are three parts: two from one side, similarly on the other side.
En le comensament es loc concau, en le qual es aquo que es enpellit, e sia segon quantitat que oppile aquel, ses addicio, entro que quan alcuna causa es ab aquel tirada de las humiditatz, sia atirada, e quan es expellida, am aquo sia atirada, e quan es expellit lonc, segon que fa clampcedra am la qual es phicat naphta en las batalhas de mar.	At the beginning, it is concave, where what is to be inserted should fit according to its quantity without addition, until when some cause draws out the moisture, it can be drawn out, and when it is expelled, with this water it can be drawn out, and when it is expelled far, as a clampcedra has naphtha applied in naval battles.
Donc cum tu vols prohicir humiditatz en la vesica, entromet la extremitat de clapcedra en la humiditat, e atira am aquel aquo que es empellit a las partidas desus, quar la humiditat es atirada en la conquavitat de clapcedra.	When you wish to extract moisture from the bladder, insert the end of the clampcedra into the moisture, and draw out with it the water that is inserted in the upper parts, for the moisture is drawn into the concavity of the clampcedra.
E aprop entromet la extramitat de clapcedra en la vergua segon que havem recomtat en la ciringua; e aprop empelleys la humiditat am aquo que empelleys, quar aquela humiditat perve a la vesica tantost, e le malaute cent aquela.	Then insert the end of the clampcedra into the tube as we have recommended in the previous section; then you should instill moisture with water that you are inserting, for this moisture will reach the bladder immediately, and it will alleviate its condition.
Forma del cristeri subtil am le qual la vesica es cristerizada, e es aquela la forma:	The form of the enema that is used to administer treatment to the bladder is as follows:
E sia fayta de argent o de lato, de la qual le cap pus aut sia semblant a petita pluma, e dejos lu cana dedintz liament.	And it should be made of silver or of lead, the head of which is like a small feather, and below let there be a hollow for holding lint.
E aprop pren vesica de moto, e pausa en aquela la humiditat que vols cristirizar en la vesica, e aprop lia aquela entre dos am fort liguatura am fiel doble, e escalfa aquela humiditat sobre le foc.	And take a bladder of an animal, and put in it the humidity that you want to crystallize in the bladder, and then tie it tightly between two strong ligatures made of fine thread, and heat that humidity over the fire.
E aprop entromet la extremitat del cristeri en la vergua.	And then insert the end of the crystallizer into the tube.
E aprop estrenh la tua ma sobre la vesica am la humiditat am strectura descent entro que·l malaute centa que aquela humiditat ja es pervenguda a la vesica.	And then press your hand on the bladder with the humidity until it reaches the appropriate consistency, so that the patient feels that the humidity has now reached the bladder.
Mays si a tu no es present vesica, lahoras tu pren una pessa de parguames e fay de aquel cercle; e perfora aquel de tota la sua retonditat; e aprop entromet fiel fort en aquels traucs, ayssi quo so revolgut; e aprop agregua le cercle ayssi quo es agreguat alsofatur, pus que tu pausas en aquel aquo que tu vols de las humiditatz, e olis e ayguas.	But if a bladder is not available, now take a piece of parchment and make it into a circle; and pierce it all around its circumference; then insert strong thread into those holes, both ways; and then add the circle as it would be added in such cases, so that you put into it what you want of humidities, oils, and waters.
E aprop tu lia aquel en le instrument e fay am aquel ayssi cum has fayt am la vesica, e exprescio am la tua ma entro que la humiditat pervengua a la vesica.	And then tie that to the instrument and do with it as you did with the bladder, and press with your hand until the humidity reaches the bladder.
Capitol .lx.	Chapter 60.
De extraccio de peyra.	On the Extraction of Stones.
Nos ja havem dit en la divisio las specias de peyra e curacio de lu am medicinas, e la diferencia entre peyra engendrada en los ronhos e peyra engendrada en la vesica, e les senhals de aquela.	We have already stated in the division the types of stones and their treatment with medicines, and the difference between stones generated in the kidneys and those generated in the bladder, as well as the signs of each.
E havem dit la peyra en la qual catz operacio am ma, e seccio.	And we have described the stone in which the operation is performed and its section.
E la peyra engendrada en la vesica propriament es aquela que es ficada en la vesica.	And the stone generated in the bladder properly is that which is fixed in the bladder.
E yeu so narrant aquel am exposicio manifesta e abreviacio.	And this short narration clearly and briefly explains it.
Donc dic que peyra engendrada en la vesica majorment ve als enfantz; e dels senhals de lu es que la urina que es eyssida de la vesica es semblant a aygua en la sua subtilitat, e apar en aquela arena; e le malaute fregua la sua vergua, e motas veguadas pen, e aprop es dressada; e am aquo yeys foro le cul en motz de aquels.	Therefore, I say that the stone generated in the bladder mainly affects children; and of its signs is that the urine which is discharged from the bladder resembles water in its subtlety, but contains sand; and the patient scratches his penis frequently, and has frequent urges to urinate, and soon afterwards it is raised; and with these words you have been forewarned.
E es laugiera la sanacio dels enfants de aquela entro que han conseguitz xiiii ans; e es dificil curacio en les viels.	And it is easy to treat children with that condition until they have reached fourteen years of age; and the treatment is difficult for older patients.
Mays en les joves es migiera per aquo quar es entre aquels.	But in young people it is moderate compared to those cases.
E de aquel del qual la peyra es major e la curacio es pus leugiera; E si es pauca, es contraria ad aquela.	And for the one in whom the stone is larger and the treatment is longer; And if it is small, it is contrary to that.
Donc cum pervenem a la curacio de aquela, cove al comensament de aquela que mondifiquem le malaute am cristeri le qual extragua tota la fenda la qual es en les sieus budels; quar aquela fenda alcunas veguadas prohibeys la envencio de la peyra deves la inquisicio de lu.	Therefore, to reach the treatment of that condition, it is necessary at the beginning to clean the patient with a catheter which extracts all the passage that is in their bladder; for that passage sometimes prevents the expulsion of the stone due to its investigation.
E aprop sia pres le malaute am les sieus pes e sia contosit e maugut enjos per so que la peyra descenda al preon de la vesica, o que saute de loc aut alcunas veguadas.	And then have the patient lie on their back and apply pressure and massage to help the stone descend to the neck of the bladder or jump to another location.
E aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas preparat, e las mas de lu sian dejos las coysas de lu, per so que la vesica tota sia fayta declinant a las partidas dejos.	And then prepare a mustard plaster between the thighs, and place it on the affected area, so that the bladder is inclined towards the side where it is placed.
E aprop perquier aquela e tota aquela deforo.	And there I inquired about that and all of that beyond.
Donc si sentes la peyra en l’espazi, lahoras tu te coyta tantost am seccio sobre lu.	So if you feel the stone in the space, now you must cut it out immediately.
E si no catz de tot dejos le tieu tocament, lahoras cove que tu untes am oli le tieu dit indic de la ma sinistra, si malaute es enfant, o le dit miga si es jove complit, e entrometas aquel en le sieu cul.	And if you do not catch it right away with your touch, now it is necessary for you to anoint your index finger of the left hand, if female, or the middle finger if male, with oil, and insert it into their anus.
E perquier de la peyra entro que stia dejos le tieu dit.	And inquire about the stone until you feel it with your finger.
E converteys aquela petit a petit entro al col de la vesica.	And convert that little by little into the neck of the bladder.
E aprop prem sobre aquel am lo tieu dit, e expelleys aquel a las partidas defora ves le loc del qual vos la seccio.	And then press on that with your finger, and expel it outward towards the place where the section was made.
E comanda al ministra que prema la vesica am la sua ma; e comanda a un autra ministra que am la sua ma dextra extenda les genetius a las partidas desus, e am la sua autra ma remaugua la codena la qual es dejos les genetius, en partida del loc en le qual se fa la seccio.	And command the minister to press the bladder with his hand; and command another minister to extend the thighs outward with one hand, and with the other hand to pull back the skin that is in front of the thighs, at the place where the section is made.
E aprop entromet espatum be inscident del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then insert a probe of this shape into it:
e scindeys en lu aquo que es entre·l cul e·ls genetius, no en le mieg loc, abantz al latz de la coyssa sinistra; e sia la seccio sobre aquela peyra e·l tieu dit sia en le cul, e sia fayta seccio transversa, per que la seccio defora sia ampla e dedintz streyta segon la quantitat que egrecio de la peyra sia a lu possibla, e no major, quar fort leu comprem le tieu dit le qual es en le cul la peyra deves la seccio, e es foro-getada ses defacultat.	and cut in it what is between the anus and the thighs, not in the middle, but to the left side; and let the section be over that stone and your finger be in the anus, and make a transverse incision so that the external part of the incision is wide and the internal part narrow according to how much you need to extract the stone as much as possible, but not more, because your finger easily compresses the stone beyond the incision when it is expelled without difficulty.
E sapias que de la peyra es alcuna a la qual so angle e margers, per que le eyssiment de lu es fayt deficil per aquo.	And know that there are some stones which have angles and margins, because of which it is difficult to pass them.
E de aquela aquo es leon semblant a glan, e es redonda, e es fayt de lu leugier eyssiment.	And one of them resembles a lion's tooth in shape, it is round, and it passes easily.
Donc si es aquela al qual so angles e marger, ajusta en la fissura.	Then adjust that which has angles and margins into the fissure.
E si no es ayssi foro-getada, lahoras cove que tu engenes sobre aquel, o que strenguas sobre aquel am gesti decentment, la extremitat del qual sia ayssi cum lima am le qual strenguas sobre la peyra, e no evasesca de lu; o que entrometas dejos lu instrument subtil de curvada extremitat.	And if it is not inserted properly, now consider placing something over it, or attach something to it gently, the end of which should be like a file with which you can work on the stone without avoiding it; or insert an delicate curved instrument between them.
Mays si tu no podes sobre aquel, lahoras tu amplifica le trauc un petit, e si tu veus flux de sanc, abscindeys en strenh aquel am vitriol trissat.	But if you cannot do that, now enlarge the wound a little, and if you see blood flowing, staunch it with iron filings dissolved in vitriol.
Mays si la peyra es mays de una, lahoras al comensament tu impelleys la ma a la boca de la vesica, e aprop inscideys sobre lu; e aprop impelleys un petit aprop aquo; e semblantment fay si son motas mays de doas.	But if there is more than one stone, at the beginning you press your hand to the mouth of the bladder, and then incise around it; and then press slightly near there; and similarly do so if they are in greater numbers.
E si es peyra mot gran, lahoras ignorancia es que tu inscidas aquel am gran seccio, quar accideys al malaute una de doas causas: o que mora o que endevengua a lu destillacio de urina continuabla, per aquo quar le loc no es de tot consolidat.	And if the stone is very large, it is ignorance to incise it in a large section, because this will cause one of two harmful consequences: either death or that it leads to continuous dripping of urine, because the area does not heal completely.
Mays aministra expulcio de lu entro que sia fora-getada, o engenia en la fractura de lu am las forfexs entro que extragua aquela en pessas.	But administer expulsion to remove it entirely, or devise a fracture with forceps so that you can extract it in pieces.
Donc cum tu auras cumplit la tua opperacio, lahoras omple la plagua de enses de aloe e de sanc de drago, e strenh aquel.	Then when you have completed your operation, now fill the wound with aloe fibers and dragon's blood, and staunch it.
E pausa sobre aquel drap enfus en oli e vi, o en oli rozat e aygua frega, per so que apostema caut sia cedat.	And place it on that cloth soaked in oil and wine, or in rose oil and water mixture, so that the abscess may soften.
E aprop resupina le malaute sobre le sieu col, e no deslias le liament entro al tertz dia.	And apply the poultice to the affected area on the side of the neck, and do not loosen the bandage within the third day.
E cum aquel auras desliat, embroca le loc am aygua e mot oli, e aprop cura aquel am enguent diafinicon e am enguent diabazilicon entro que sia sanat.	And when that bandage is removed, wash the area with water and a little oil, then apply a poultice of camphor and clove ointment until it is healed.
Mays si en la plagua accideys apostema caut, adhust e corrosiu, e de aquel semblantz ayssi cum si le sanc es en la vesica congelat, e per lu es la hurina prohibida (e aquo es conogut per la egressio del sanc am urina), a donc entromet lo tieu dit en la plagua e extratz aquel sanc, quar si roman provoca la vesica a corropcio de la vesica e de lu putrefaccio.	But if an abscess occurs in the wound that is adhesively corroded and resembles something like blood congealed in a bladder, and because of this urine is blocked (and this is known by the mixing of blood with urine), then insert your finger into the wound and extract that blood, for if it remains it will cause corruption of the bladder and putrefaction.
E aprop lava la plagua am vi agre, aygua e sal, e am opposicio a tota specia, am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then wash the wound with sour wine, water and salt, and with whatever spices are appropriate, using what is convenient for healing until it is healed.
E cove en las horas de tota la curacio que tu lies amdos las coyssas e ajustes las medicinas las quals so pausadas sobre le loc.	And throughout the entire healing process, you should keep both the dressings and adjust the medicines that are placed on the wound.
E si la peyra es petita e es en le meat de la vergua, e es ficat en lu, e eyssement de urina es prohibit, lahoras cura aquel am aquo que yeu recomti denant que pervenguas a seccio, quar tropas veguadas per aquesta curacio yest acusat de seccio; e ja yeu e esproat aquo, e es que tu prenguas un perforador de ferr alfelut, del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if the stone is small and is in the urethra, and it is lodged there, and urination is blocked, then treat it with what I recommend before resorting to section, for those treated by this method are often accused of undergoing section; and indeed, I suggest this, which is that you take a blunt metal probe, whose shape is as follows:
de triangulada extramitat, agut, ficat en fust.	with a triangular tip, sharp, fitted to a handle.
E aprop pren fiel, e lia am aquel la vergua dejos la peyra per so que no retorne a la vesica.	Take some wax, and tie it to the thread below the stone so that it does not return to the bladder.
E aprop entromet le ferr en la vergua, perforant am fecilitat entro que·l perforador vengua ad aquela peyra.	And then insert the needle into the thread, piercing with ease until it reaches the stone.
E revolveys le perforador am la tua ma en aquela peyra petit a petit, e tu perforsa la perforacio de lu entro que fassas aquel del autra part penetrar; quar la urina tantost es absolta.	And rotate the needle with your hand on that small stone little by little, and you will pierce it so that one end can penetrate as the other enters; for the urine is quickly absorbed.
E aprop prem la tua ma sobre aquo que es romas de la peyra de la partida deforo de la vergua, quar aquela es trinquada, e es foro-getada am la urina, e le malaute es sanat.	And then press your hand on what remains of the stone from the side before the thread, for that part is broken and released into the urine, and thus the ailment is healed.
Mays si aquesta curacio no es a tu aparelhada per alcuna causa la qual prohibeys de aquela, lahoras lia un fiel dejos la peyra, e autra fiel desus la peyra.	But if this treatment is not suitable for you due to some reason that prevents it, then tie a wax piece below the stone and another above the stone.
E aprop encideys sobre la peyra en aquela vergua entre doas liaduras.	And then cut into the stone on that thread between the two ties.
E aprop extratz aquela.	And then extract it.
E aprop deslia le liament e mondifica le sanc congilat, le qual es fayt en la plagua.	And then untie the bandage and clean the collected blood, which was caused by the condition.
E no es necessari liament de fiel dejos la peyra, sino per que no retorne a la vesica, e l’autre liament desus sino, quar quan es desliat le fiel aprop la egrecio de la peyra, la codena retorna a son loc e cobra la plagua.	And it is not necessary to tie wax below the stone except to prevent it from returning to the bladder, and the other bandage above unless, because when the wax near the swelling of the stone is untied, the wound will return to its place and the condition will recur.
E per aquo es a tu necessari quan lias le fiel desus, que tu eleves la codena a las partidas desus, o que retorne deves le tieu compliment, e cobra la plagua ayssi co havem dit.	And for this reason, it is necessary for you to raise the wound above the parts when you tie the wax above, or return the effort, and the condition will recur as we have said.
Capitol .lxi.	Chapter LXI.
De extraccio de peyra de las femnas.	On the Removal of Stones from Women.
Peyra en las femnas pauc es engendrada.	Stones in women are rarely formed.
Mays si ve peyra ad alcuna de aquelas, lahoras dificil es la curacio de lu, e es prohibida per tropas manieyras.	If a stone is found in any of these cases, the treatment is difficult and is prohibited by many methods.
La una de lor es quar la femna fort leu es verges.	One of them is that the woman is too weak.
E la segonda es quar tu no trobas femna be scient que descroba si meteyssa al metge quan es casta, o es de las femnas haventz maritz.	And the second is that you do not find a woman who is willing to clearly describe whether she has told the physician when she was chaste, or if she is one of those women who have husbands.
La tersa es quar tu no hatrobas femna be sabent aquesta art, majorment la operacio am ma.	The third is that you do not find a woman who knows this art, especially the operation without a man.
E la quarta es que·l loc de la seccio sobre peyra en las femnas es longinc del loc de la peyra, per que indigeys de seccio preonda, e en aquela es temor.	And the fourth is that the location for the incision to remove a stone in women is far from the location of the stone, thus requiring a distant incision, which is dangerous.
Mays si necessitat provoca a tu ad aquo, lahoras cove que tu prenguas una femna metga be scient, e pauc es atrobada.	However, if necessity compels you to do this, then it is necessary for you to find a competent female assistant, but few are found.
Mays si tu es privat de aquela, lahoras cerca metga quast e subtil, o presenta una femna matrona be esenhada en le feyt de las femnas, o femna que en aquesta art ennueys partida del art.	However, if you lack such an assistant, then seek a man who is cautious and subtle, or present a midwife who is skilled in the matters of women, or a woman who is well-versed in this art.
Donc fay aquela present, e comanda a lu que fassa tot aquo que tu li mandaras, de la enquisicio sobre la peyra al comensament; la qual causa es que reguarde si la femna es verges, lahoras cove que meta lo sieu dit en le cul de lu e quiera la peyra.	Therefore, present that person and command them to do everything you instruct, from the examination of the stone at the beginning; the reason for this is to ensure that the woman is modest, so they should place their finger in her back passage to feel for the stone.
Donc si atroba aquela, coarte aquela dejos le sieu dit, e lahoras comanda a lu que inscida sobre aquela.	Then if you find that one, cut that below the joint, and now order them to incise upon that.
Mays si no es verge, lahoras comanda a la matrona que entrometa lo sieu dit en le conh de la malauta e enquiera sobre la peyra, pus que pausa la sua ma sinistra sobre la vesica, e comprem aquela am bona comprecio.	But if it is not soft, now order the midwife to insert the joint into the patient’s vagina and inquire about the stone, for she should place her left hand on the bladder, and compress that with good pressure.
Donc si atroba aquela, lahoras cove que gradantment maugua aquela de l’orrifici de la vesica a las partidas dejos am somman de la sua vertut entro que pervengua am aquel a la razit de la coyssa.	Then if you find that, now proceed to gradually extract that from the bladder’s orifice towards the parts below as far as the top of its strength until it reaches the root of the matter.
E aprop inscida sobre aquela apposicio de la maytat del conh deves la razit de la coyssa de qualque part sia a lu parada e cent la peyra en aquela partida, e·l dit de lu no sia remaugut de la peyra coartan dejos lu.	And then incise upon that position at the midpoint of the vagina where the root of the matter is, and place the stone in that part, and ensure that the said joint is not separated from the stone when cutting below it.
E la seccio sia pauca al comensament; e aprop entrometa lo ray sobre aquela seccio, e si sent la peyra, lahoras ajuste en seccio segon la quantitat la qual sap que la peyra sira getada de aquela.	And let the section be small at the beginning; then insert the probe into that section, and if you feel the stone, now adjust the section according to the quantity you know the stone will pass through.
E sapias que las specias de peyra son motas: quar de aquelas es pauca e gran, e leon e aspra, e longua e redonda, e havent ramps.	And know that the types of stones are various: some are small and hard, others are sharp and round, and have ridges.
Donc tu sapias quantas specias so de lu per aquo que tu signifiques sobre aquo que vols.	Then you should know the types of stones as you signify regarding what you wish to convey.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, ajusta en le loc vetriol trissat e te aquela per una hora entro que sia abscindit le sanc, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	And if you wish for blood to flow, apply crushed vitriol to that area for one hour until the blood is drawn, and then return to your operation until the stone is expelled.
E fay que prepares am tu dels instrumentz les quals e ditz en la extraccio de peyra en les homes, per so que sias ajudat per aquels en la tua operacio.	And make sure you prepare the instruments that are mentioned in the extraction of stones from men, so that they may assist you in your operation.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, e sabes que la expulcio del sanc es de la arceria que es insciza, lahoras tu pausa polvera sobre le loc e estrenh aquel am pulvils e strictura descent, e no iteras aquo; e layssa la peyra e no extraguas aquela, quar fort leu morira la malauta.	And if you see bleeding, and know that the expulsion of blood is from the artery that was cut, then you sprinkle powder on the wound and bind it with bandages and compression, and do not repeat this; and leave the clot and do not extract it, for the patient will likely die quickly.
E aprop cura la plagua.	And then treat the wound.
Donc cum es cedada la acuitat del sanc aprop alcus jorns, e·l loc se poyreys, lahoras tu retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	When the sharpness of the blood has subsided after some days, and the area has become pale, then you return to your operation until the clot is expelled.
Capitol lxii.	Chapter LXII.
De seccio sobre ernia acoza.	About the section on hernia surgery.
Hernia ayguoza no es sino agregacio de humiditat en le ciphac blanc lo qual es dejos la codena dels genetius contenent le huou, e es nompnat ciphac.	A hernia that protrudes moist tissue is nothing but an aggregation of moisture in the white membrane below the tendon of the groin muscles, which is called a sac.
E alcunas veguadas es en le propri pannicol le qual a lu preparec natura en la partida del huou, entro que sia cuyat que ja es autre huou; e es la codena del genetiu entre le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, e no es aquo sino tart.	And in some cases, it is in the proper fatty layer that nature has prepared near the groin, such that one can see that it is not another tendon; and the tendon of the groin muscle lies between the white membrane we have mentioned, and this is how it appears.
E la generacio de aquest hernia es per debelitat la qual accideys als genetius, per que ad aquels es efundunda aquesta materia, e alcunas vetz accideys per percuscio fayta sobre les genetius.	And the generation of this hernia is due to weakness that occurs in the groin muscles, because this matter accumulates there; and sometimes it happens due to impact on the groin muscles.
E aquesta humiditat es havent motas colors, quar la color de lu o es declinant a citrina o a sanguinent, o rog, o es negra feculenta, o es ayguosa blanqua, e es aquo que es mays.	And this moisture can have various colors, as its color may lean toward yellowish or blood-red, or reddish, or be black and thick, or be watery and white, and these are the most common types.
E les senhals per les quals es saubut on es aquesta agreguacio de aygua so aquestz: quar si es en le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, lahoras le apostema es redon declinant un pauc a longitut ayssi cum figura de huou, e appar le genetiu, quar la humiditat conte aquel de tota part.	And the signs by which you can determine where this accumulation of water is as follows: if it is in the white membrane we mentioned, then the swelling will be round, slightly elongated like a fig shape, and the tendon of the groin will appear, since the moisture surrounds it from all sides.
E si la humiditat es en le propri pannicol, lahoras le apostema es redon am partida del huou e per aysso hom estima que es autre huou.	And if the inflammation is in the proper parotid gland, then at that time the swelling appears round and is part of the jaw, and for this reason it is considered to be another jaw.
E si la humiditat es entre la codena dels genetius e·l ciphac blanc, lahoras catz dejos le centiment.	And if the inflammation is between the tendon of the thigh and the white hip bone, then at that time it is below the navel.
E cum tu vols la cognicio de la color de la humiditat, lahoras tu esproa la color de la humiditat en le apostema am entromes cayrat del qual la forma es precedida; e segon aquo que es eyssit en le vestigi del entromes, jutga de aquo que es dedintz lu.	And when you want to know the color of the inflammation, then you should observe the color of the inflammation in the swelling at its beginning stage; and according to what is seen in the traces of the intermediate stage, judge about what is inside it.
Donc quan nos vinem a la curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que comandem al malaute que sia fleubotomat si aquo es a tu possibla, e vezes le cos de lu ple.	When we come to the treatment of it with iron, then it is necessary that we command the patient to be phlebotomized if that is possible for you, and times the body of the swelling.
E aprop sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos sobre alcuna causa un pauc auta, e pausa dejos lu motz draps.	And let him be laid flat on his back on some raised surface, and place under the swelling some padding.
E aprop setz tu sobre la part sinistra de lu, e comanda al ministra que segua a la dextra de lu, le qual extenda la sua vergua a hun de dos latz a la codena dels genetius e a la partida del mirac del ventre.	And you should stand on the left side of him, and command the assistant to stand on his right side, who should extend his hand from one of the two sides to the tendon of the thigh and to the part near the navel.
E aprop pren spatum lat e scindeys la codena dels genetius del mieg loc per la longitut entro prop le pentenilh.	And then take a broad spatula and cut the tendon of the thigh at a suitable place along its length near the insertion.
E sia fayta la seccio segon rectetut engualment distant de la linha que deveseys la pel dels genetius, entro que pervengua al ciphac blanc comprehendent.	And let the incision be made according to the right distance from the line that you should follow on the skin of the thigh, so that it reaches the white hip bone, including.
E excorja aquel, e observa, e guarda te per aysso que tu no inscidas aquel; e la tua excoriacio am la qual aquel excorjas per partida jassia que sia suspenduda am le huou mays e subtilment escruta am la excoriacio segon la quantitat a tu possibla.	And dissect that area, and observe carefully so that you do not incise it incorrectly; and your dissection should be such that you proceed gently according to the quantity possible, examining the dissection carefully.
E aprop perfora le ciphac ple de aygua am perforacio ampla, e extratz tota l’aygua.	Then pierce the bladder with a wide incision and extract all the water.
E aprop separa entre doas labias de la seccio am uncis, e exten le ciphac a las partidas desus; e no toques la codena les genetius comprehendent, e inscideys le ciphac en aquela manieyra que es a tu possible.	Then separate between the two lips of the section with hooks, and extend the bladder to the upper parts; and do not touch the chain that holds the genitalia together, and incise the bladder in such a way as is possible for you.
E inscideys aquel am la sua totalitat o en pessas, e majorment le sieu latz subtil, quar si tu no perscrutas exquisidament la inscizio de lu, no es fayta segurtat que la aygua no retorne.	Then divide it entirely or into pieces, especially the thin lining, for if you do not examine the incision carefully, there is no assurance that the water will not return.
Mays si le huou procezeys de aquela defora de la sua codena en la ora de la tua operacio, lahoras quan tu auras complida la seccio del ciphac, retorna dedintz aquel, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la codena dels genetius am sutura, e aprop cura aquel ayssi cum las autras plagua, entro que sia sanat.	But if the patient undergoes this procedure outside of the chain that holds the genitalia together during your operation, when you have completed the sectioning of the bladder, return inside, and then adjust the two lips of the chain of the genitalia with sutures, and then treat it as you would other wounds until it is healed.
E si atrobas le huou corromput per autra malautia, lahoras cove que tu lies les vayssels les quals so sore le suspensori, e extrat le huou, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit.	And if you find the patient afflicted by another illness, then it is necessary for you to ligate the vessels that are above the suspensory, remove the organ, and then treat it as we have said.
Mays si l’aygua es agreguada en doas partidas esemps, lahoras sapias que doas son las ernias; donc inscideys aquela partida segon que has feyt en l’autra engualment; e si es a tu vist que sia una opera, lahoras tu la fay.	But if the water is accumulated in two separate parts, then you will know that there are two hernias; therefore, incise that part as you did with the other similarly; and if it is clear to you that an operation is necessary, then you should perform it.
E aprop tu abstergiys le sanc, e entramet en las seccios lana submersa en oli o en oli rozat; e pausa deforo autra lana la qual tu as submersa en vi e oli, e expandeys aquela sobre dos genetius e·l mirac del ventre; e pausa desobre draps doblatz e pulvils, e lia aquels desobre am liament le qual es segon aquesta forma:	Then cleanse the blood, and insert into the sections wool submerged in oil or refined oil; place over that another layer of wool which you have soaked in vinegar and oil, and spread this over the genitalia and the abdomen; then cover with folded cloths and powders, and bind these with a bandage as follows:
e aprop sian preses dos draps e sian humplitz de lana carmenada segon aquesta semblansa; e sian faytas las extremitatz am les quals es premut de coto o de lana humida, e sian agreguatz am strectura en le braguier de las braguas, e la una de las extremitatz prengua del cul entro al dos, e la segonda prengua a la partida del pantenilh, e dos extramitatz sobre dos coyssas dejos e dos extramitatz autras sobre dos angonars, e tota extrictura sia ajustada en le braguier de las braguas.	Take two cloths and fill them with carded wool according to this pattern; make the edges such that cotton or wet wool is pressed on them, and attach them to the structure at the bottom of the breeches, one edge taken from the buttocks into the second, and the second taken to the part of the pantanel, and two edges above two thighs and two other edges above two flanks, and all of the structure should be adjusted to the waistband of the breeches.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta hernia es medicada artificialment am cauteri en loc de seccio am ferr; e es que tu prenguas cauteri cutellar subtil e que inscidas am aquel la codena dels ginitius, e es ignit segon que havem recomtat entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc contenent la aygua, e lahoras tu pren cauteri segon aquesta forma:	In some cases, this hernia is treated artificially with cautery instead of surgery with iron; you take a thin knife-shaped cautery and incise along the ridge of the groin, and it is ignited as we have recommended until the white cicatrix containing the fluid becomes visible, and then you take a cautery in this shape:
e es asemblat a letra greca.	and it is shaped like the Greek letter.
E aprop perfora am aquel ciphac, e es ignit entro que tota la humiditat sia fora-gitada.	And then pierce with that cautery, and it is ignited until all the moisture is expelled.
E aprop exten le ciphac am uncis, e excorja am uncis, e excorja am cauteri subtil ignit; e inscideys aquel segon que es a tu possible entro que eradiques tot lu; e guarda te del huou que·l foc no·l toque.	And then extend the cautery with hooks, and excise with the hooks, and cauterize with a thin ignited cautery; and incise as much as is possible for you until all of it is eradicated; and be careful that your hand does not touch the fire.
E sapias que aquesta operacio es pus salva e pus longinqua de flux de sanc, e milhor que operacio am seccio.	And know that this operation is safer and longer-lasting in terms of blood flow, and better than an operation involving cutting.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat apostema caut en la hora de seccio o en hora de cauteri, o flux de sanc, lahoras cove que tu cures qual contrarietat fa a tu per aquo, am curacio la qual conveneys a lu segon que es dit.	But if any adverse condition such as an abscess occurs during the time of cutting or during cautery, or if there is excessive bleeding, then you should treat whatever adverse condition affects you accordingly, with treatment appropriate to it as mentioned.
Mays si le malaute es pauruc, e no spera la segonda operacio per la sua horribilitat, lahoras administra perforacio segon que yeu recomti aquo; e es quan es certificat deves tu, per aquo que havem dit de las significacios, que aquela hernia es ayguosa.	If the patient is weak and does not hope for a second operation because of its horror, then administer puncture as I recommend; and this is when you are certain, from what we have said about the signs, that the hernia is watery.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute sobre alcuna cezelha elevada, aprop perfora le apostema en la partida pus bassa de lu am spatum lat, e pausa la perforacio segon la longitut del cos.	Now you should have the patient sit on some raised cushion, and then puncture the abscess at its lowest part below the navel, and make the puncture according to the length of the body.
E sia la apercio ampla entro que corro tota l‘aygua.	And let the opening be wide enough so that all the water can flow out.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc coto e lia aquel e layssa aquel, per so que corro le romanent de l’aygua.	And then apply pressure on the spot and ligate it there, so that the rest of the water can come out.
E aprop cura aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And then take care of it until the illness is healed.
Mays si contrarietat es a la egrecio de l’aygua en aquela hora tu perforas aquela: e aquo no es fayt sino per aquo quar le pannicol blanc en le orrifici de la plagua fa contrarietat e prohibeys le eyssiment de l’aygua, lahoras cove que tu metas en la plagua pena o instrument am la qual es extrayta l’aygua dels ydropitz, la forma del qual es precedida; o ajusta en la opprecio de la plagua un petit.	But if there is resistance to the escape of the water at that time, you should puncture it: and this is not done except because the white membrane in the opening of the hernia resists and prevents the exit of the water. Now you should place in the hernia a probe or instrument with which the water from hydrothorax is extracted, as previously described; or apply pressure to the hernia with something small.
E sapias que l’aygua retorna, e es agueguada aprop vi meses o enaviro aquels; e cum es agreguada, lahoras sia perforat segon aquela meteyssa manieyra, quar le malaute ayssi passara les sieus dias.	And know that the water will return, and it should be punctured again after about six months or so; and when it accumulates, then it should be punctured in the same manner, for the patient will thus spend his days.
Capitol .lxiii.	Chapter LXIII.
De seccio sobre hernia carnosa e la curacio de lu.	On the treatment of a fleshly hernia and its cure.
Sapias que en la seccio sobre aquesta hernia es temor perdusent a pernicia en las majors disposicios; per que a mi es vista la dimissio de lu e esser salvat per aquela milhor.	Know that in the section on this hernia there is fear of death in the worse dispositions; therefore, it seems to me better to leave it and be saved by that.
E yeu so rememorant la operacio en aquela e las specias dels apostemas.	And I am recalling the operation on that one and the specifics of the abscesses.
Donc, dic que l‘apostemas natz en les cos dels quals les genetius so conponutz e es fayt aquo per motas causas: o per superfluitat aguda agra, la qual es efundida als genetius, o per percuscio.	Therefore, I say that abscesses occur in those bodies where the kidneys are improperly arranged and this happens for various reasons: either due to acute and sharp excess which is discharged into the kidneys, or due to impact.
E es la color de la apostema segon la color del cos, e no es atrobat en lu dolor, e es apostema greu.	And the color of the abscess is according to the color of the body, and it is not alleviated by pain, and it is a severe abscess.
E fort leu es apostema lapificada, del qual la color es fosca, e no es centiment a lu.	And quickly it becomes a stone-like abscess, the color of which is dark, and there is no remedy for it.
E alcunas veguadas es fayt per nodacio de las arcerias, e per imflacio de aquelas ayssi quo ja es perceubut la rememoracio de lu, o per imflacio de venas.	And sometimes it is caused by the knotting of arteries, and by the swelling of those as has already been perceived in the recall of it, or by the swelling of veins.
Mays aquo que es per imflacio de arcerias es conogut per la dispercio de la apostema quan compremas aquela am les tieus ditz; e no cove que aquel toques.	But what is caused by the swelling of arteries is known by the dispersion of the abscess when you press it with your fingers in that area; and it does not need to be touched.
Mays aquel que es fayt per imflacio de vena no es dispergut de lu alcuna causa deves la compressio am les ditz.	But that which is caused by the swelling of a vein does not disperse because of any cause even with pressure from the fingers.
E ja es possible que sobre aquesta specia sia fayta seccio e sobre les autres carns; e es que tu inscida la codena dels genetius, e aprop esten le huou a las partidas desus, e extratz aquel del ciphac blanc, e deliura le suspensori dels vaysels, e ligua les, e inscideys le suspensori pus que tu deliuras aquel de tota partida de las partidas del huou.	And it is possible to perform a section over this type and on other parts; cut the skin over the kidneys, and nearby stretch the area above the incision, extract the white fat, free the suspensory ligaments of the vessels, tie them off, and then cut the suspensory ligaments after freeing them entirely from all sides.
Donc si l’huou ja es am aquelas carnadas consolida, lahoras cove que tu extraguas le huou e inscidas aquel.	Therefore, if the wound has already healed in those parts that are consolidated, now you should extract the foreign body and incise that area.
E si es adherencia entro alcuna causa del ciphac, o entre aquo que es entre les bayssels, lahoras cove que tu deliures tota aquela adherencia e inscidas aquela per inscizio redonda.	And if there is adhesion between any part of the cavity or between what is between the vessels, now you should release all that adhesion and incise that area with a round incision.
Mays si es nativitat de carn en le loc de la adherencia la qual es detras, lahoras cove que tu inscidas tot aquo que es de lu, e extraguas le huou ayssi cum havem dit.	But if there is a growth of flesh in the location of the adhesion that is behind, now you should incise all that is there, and extract the foreign body as we have said.
Donc cum es complida la tua operacio, lahoras omple la plagua de lana imfuza en oli rozat e vi; e aprop cura aquela am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, when your operation is complete, now fill the wound with wool infused in olive oil and wine; and subsequently treat that wound with the other methods until it is healed.
Capitol .lxiv.	Chapter LXIV.
De la curacio de hernia que es de vitz.	On the treatment of hernias that involve the belly.
Vit es apostema envolut per alcuna envolucio semblant a broto am mollificacio dels testiculs, e es fayt dificil movement exercitiu e deambulacio sobre le malaute.	Vit is an abscess wrapped in some kind of covering similar to the membrane around the testicles, and it makes exercise and walking difficult due to the affliction.
E en la curacio de aquesta malautia es per temor per aquo del qual es precedida rememoracio.	And in the treatment of this illness, it is out of fear of what precedes and what might follow that one must be cautious.
Empero cove que diguam opperacio en aquela segon que fero les primiers.	However, the operation should be performed as was done in the first instance.
E dic que cove que fassas sezer le malaute sobre una cezelha elevada; e aprop enpelleys le suspensori dels testiculs a las partidas dejos; e aprop te la codena dels genetius am les tieus ditz am les baysels que so probdas a la vergua; e tengua aquels autre ministre que tu, e extenda aquels am extencio vehement.	And he says that you should make the patient sit on a raised chair; then apply pressure to the suspensory ligaments of the testicles from below; and then grasp the groin muscles with your hands, along with the vessels that you feel near the penis; and have another assistant do this while you extend them forcefully.
E aprop inscideys am spatum lat agut per seccio traversa en le dreyt dels vaysels entro que sian les vayssels descubertz.	And in this way make an incision about one finger's width across the straight line between the vessels so that the vessels are exposed.
E aprop excorja de tota partida ayssi quo a tu havem dit en extraccio de arceria las quals so en las templas.	And carefully remove it completely as we have said in the extraction of arteries, which are usually found in the tissues.
E aprop fica en aquelas un’agulha en la qual sia fiel doble, e lia aquel en le primier del locs en les quals accideys vit, e lia aquel autra veguada en le derier de lor.	And place a needle with double fine thread in it, and tie one end at the first location where you will act, and tie the other end at the last of those locations.
E aprop inscideys aquels en le mieg loc per seccio dreyta segon la longuesa del cos, e extratz aquo que es agreguat de las humiditatz fetulentas e corruptas.	And then make an incision in the middle of that area with a straight cut along the length of the body, and extract what is aggregated from the foul and corrupted humors.
E aprop cura la plagua am curacio de las autras plaguas en las quals vols sania esser engendrada per so que caian les vaysels les quals noyreysso un de dos genetius, quar no es mal per aquo.	And then treat the wound as you would any other wounds where you want healing to occur, because it is not harmful for one of two vessels to be ligated if they are causing issues.
Mays si accideys vit a totz les bayssels, lahoras cove que·ls testicols sian extragutz o que les testicols per aquo se cequo am les vayssels, per que sia privat de tot nutriment per la inscizio dels vayssels, e que sian estaborits, o que cequo per so que no sia juvament am aquels.	But if you need to act on all the vessels, then it is necessary either to remove the testicles or for the testicles to be affected by this, so that they are deprived of all nourishment due to the incision of the vessels, and become atrophied, or for them to be treated in such a way that they do not receive any benefit from this.
Capitol .lxv.	Chapter LXV.
De la cura de hernia entestinal.	On the treatment of intestinal hernia.
Le adveniment de aquesta hernia es per seccio que endeve en le ciphac extendut sobre le ventre de part dels angunars del mirac del ventre, per que deysendo les budels de aquela ruptura ad alcu dels budels.	The occurrence of this hernia is due to a section that occurs in the cleft extended over the abdomen near the edges of the abdominal wall, so that parts of the bowels protrude through that rupture.
E aquesta ruptura es o del ciphac o de excencio de lu, e accideysso aquestas doas specias per motas causas: o percussio, o per sautz, o per clamor, o per elevacio de alcuna causa greu, o per semblantz.	And this rupture is either of the ciphac or of dislocation of the joint, and it happens in these two species for various causes: by blow, by jump, by shout, by lifting some heavy thing, by similar circumstances.
E·l senhal de aquo, quan es per extencio del ciphac, es que accideys pauc a pauc en lonc temps, e no accideys soptament, e es apostema engual entro ves le preon per so quar le ciphac comprem le budel.	And the sign of this, when it is by extension of the ciphac, is that it happens little by little over a long time, and does not happen suddenly, and it forms an abscess equal within as between the flesh because the ciphac compresses the bowel.
E le senhal de lu es quan es per seccio del ciphac, quar al comensament fa accidir dolor vehement sobtament; e es apostema divers aparent dejos la codena propdana aparent, e aquo es per eyssiment del budel, e·l cos de lu a las partidas deforo del ciphac.	And the sign of it is when it is by section of the ciphac, for at the beginning it causes sudden violent pain; and it forms an abscess different in appearance from the usual one near the joint, and this is because of the displacement of the bowel, and the mass of it is towards the parts outside the ciphac.
E alcunas veguadas es fora-getat am le budel la tela, e es apelada aquesta hernia entestinal zirbal.	And sometimes the membrane is pushed out with the bowel, and this type of hernia is called intestinal zirbal.
E alcunas veguadas es fayta am ventositat, e alcunas veguadas corr en le budel fenda, e aqui es retenguda, e es am aquo gran pernitia3 del malaute, e alcunas veguadas fa endevenir dolor malvada e majorment quan es premut.	And sometimes it is due to gas, and sometimes the bowel enters through a fissure and remains there, causing great pain to the patient, and at times it leads to severe pain, especially when pressed.
E en la curacio de las especias de aquesta malautia am ferr es temor, per que cove que sia esquivat le cazament en aquela.	And in the treatment of the types of this illness with iron there is fear, for it must be avoided that any contact with that occurs.
E la manieyra de la operacio de aquela es que comandes al malaute que redugua le budel am la sua ma a las partidas dedintz de la sua conquavitat si obezeys al sieu retornament, e aprop sia envessat sobre le sieu col entre las tuas mas, e eleva las cambas de lu.	And the method of the operation for this condition is that you instruct the patient to push back the bowel with his hand to the parts inside his abdomen if it obeys its return, and then place him lying on his back between your hands, and lift the affected area.
E aprop sten la codena la qual siec la codena dels testicols a las partidas desus, e inscideys la codena dels testicols tota per le lonc; e aprop fiqua en doas labias de la seccio uncis segon que indigeysses a hubrir la seccio am aquels.	And then join the wound where you cut the scrotum above the testicles, and incise the scrotum completely along its length; and then insert hooks into both sides of the section as it seems necessary to open the section with them.
E si’ la seccio segon la quantitat que a tu sia possible que de aquela le huou sia foro-getat.	And if you make the section according to the amount that it is possible for that part to heal from.
E aprop excorja aquela ciphaqueth les quals so dejos la codena dels testicols, entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc dur de quascuna partida.	And then remove the reddish skin that covers the scrotum until the white hard skin of each part is exposed.
Lahoras tu entromet le tieu dit en aquo que siec le testicol, en aquo que es entre ciphac blanc, le qual es dejos la codena del huou, e entre le ciphac segon, e absolve am aquel’adherencia que es en la partida detras del huou.	Now insert your finger into the cut around the testicle, between the white skin that covers the scrotum and the underlying skin, and release any adhesions that are behind the testicle.
E aprop mau am la ma la codena dels testicols a las partidas deforo, e am aysso exten le ciphac blanc en sus am la ma sinestra, e eleva le huou am le ciphac a la partida de la seccio; e comanda al ministre que extenda le huou ensus e tu dissolveys la adherencia que es detras am solucio complida.	And then pull apart the wound of the scrotum towards the sides, and with this stretch the white skin upwards with your left hand, and lift the testicle with the skin to the area of the incision; and instruct an assistant to raise it above while you dissolve any adhesions behind completely.
E cerqua am les tieus ditz que lay no sia alcuna causa del budel envelopat en le ciphac blanc dur.	And feel with your fingers to ensure that there is no cause for the bowel being wrapped in the white hard skin.
Mays si tu atrobas de lu alcuna causa, lahoras tu enpelleys aquel al ventre dejos.	But if you find any cause for concern, then place that back into the abdomen.
E aprop tu pren una agulha en la qual sia fiel gros fayt de x fiels, e entromet aquel deves le derier del ciphac, le qual es jos la codena dels testicols, la qual siec seccio; e aprop inscideys las extremitatz las quals emineysso del fiel entro que sian quatre fiels, e aprop compausa alcus de lor sobre alcuna figura en manieyra de crotz; e lia am aquel le ciphac del qual havem dit que es dejos la codena dels testicols am fort liament de dos partz.	And then take a needle with a thick thread made of silk, and insert it at the end of the skin that is below the wound where you cut the scrotum; and then make incisions in the parts that protrude, until there are four threads, and then tie them together in the shape of a cross; and bind those threads to the skin which we mentioned that covers the scrotum with a strong knot from both sides.
E aprop envolveys las extremitatz dels fiels e lia aquelas am liament vehement entro que alcu dels vayssels que noyrrisso aquels no puscan trametre alcuna causa per so que de aqui no accida apostema caut.	Here are the extremities of the veins and tie them strongly with a ligature so that none of the vessels through which these may pass cannot transmit any cause from which an abscess might result.
E pausa autra veguada liament segon foro le primier liament, lonh de lu mens tres ditz; e aprop aquestz dos liaments layssa del ciphac le qual es dejos la codena dels testicols la quantitat de la grandeza del dit, e inscideys tot le romanent segon redondeza, e osta de lu le huou.	And tie another ligature three fingers below the first; then between these two ligatures leave a piece of the cord which is above the scrotum, in size equal to that of a finger; and cut off all the rest in a rounded manner, and remove it.
E aprop inscideys en la partida dejos de la codena dels testicols per seccio de la qual corra sanc e sania ayssi cum havem recomtat en aquo que havem dit.	And then cut into the part below the scrotum in such a way that blood and pus flow out as we have recommended regarding what we have said.
E aprop aministra lana submersa en oli, e pausa en la plagua; e aministra le liament le qual havem recomtat (e alcunas veguadas le ciphac blanc es cauterizat, le qual havem dit aprop la inscizio de lu temen de flux de sanc, quar motas veguadas accideys aquels) e leyssa le liament entro que per si caia.	And then apply wool soaked in oil to the wound and place it there; and tie on the ligature that we have recommended (and sometimes the white thread is cauterized, as mentioned regarding the cutting to prevent blood flow, for this happens at times) and leave the ligature on so that it does not fall off.
Mays si le cazement de lu es tardat, lahoras de aygua cauda sia embrocat, e pausa sobre aquel entro que caia segon que havem dit.	But if the operation is delayed, then hot water should be applied, and place it on that so that it does not fall off as we have said.
E aprop cura la plagua am l’autra curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And then treat the wound with the usual treatment for wounds until it is healed.
Capitol .lxvi.	Chapter LXVI.
De hernia ventosa.	On Ventous Hernia.
En aquesta hernia no e vist alcu que sia estat ardit sus la curacio de lu am ferr.	In this type of hernia, it has not been seen that anyone has dared to treat it with surgery.
E les primiers diyssero que es fayta ayssi cum havem recomtat en la hernia que es am vi; la qual es que tu lies les vayssels aprop la seccio sobre aquela am fecilitat de lu; e aprop secca en le mieg loc en enviro le apostema am aquo que obro aquel, entro que caian les vayssels.	And the earlier ones said that it should be treated as we have recommended for the hernia involving a vessel; which is to ligate the vessels near the section with ease; and then dry up in the appropriate place around the abscess caused by this, until the vessels fall off.
E cura la plagua segon que havem dit entro que sia sanada.	Regarding the treatment of wounds as we have said, it enters that it be healed.
Capitol .lxvii.	Chapter LXVII.
De la disropcio que es fayta en les anguonars.	About the incision that is made in the hemorrhoids.
Alcunas veguadas endeve ruptura en les angonars ayssi cum havem dit, e emineys le loc.	In some cases, there is a rupture in the hemorrhoids as we have said, and examine the area.
E no deyssen als genetius alcuna causa dels budels al genetius; e si deyssen, aquo es pauc; e retorna s’en en totas horas.	And they do not assign to the genitals any cause for the bags on the genitals; and if they do assign one, it is rare; and it returns to this in all cases.
Mays si es prolonguat le temps am aquo, es ajustada fissura en le ciphac entro que deysenda le budel en le ciphac; e accideys aquo per la extencio del ciphac le qual es en le angonars ayssi cum havem dit, la qual causa es quar le ciphac es estendut, e aprop es mollificat e·l loc es apostemat e emineys.	But if the time is prolonged with this, there is an adjusted fissure in the rectum through which the bag descends into the rectum; and it happens that because of the extension of the rectum, which is near the hemorrhoids as we have said, the cause being that the rectum is stretched and thus becomes soft and swollen, and it needs to be examined.
E la cura de lu es am cauteri ayssi quo es precedida la narracio de lu.	And the treatment for this is with cautery as has been described in the preceding narrative.
E alcunas veguadas es curada am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: e es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos entre las tuas mas, e aprop secca le loc de la ruptura dels apostemas emineys am seccio per la latitut segon la quantitat de tres ditz.	And in some cases, it is treated with iron according to this method: the patient lies on their back between two chairs, and then the area of the rupture of the abscesses is dried by cutting across its width as needed.
E aprop strenh le ciphac blanc que es jos la codena entro que sia descubert.	And then stretch the white rectum below the cord until it is revealed.
E aprop pren le ray e pausa aquel sobre le loc eminent del ciphac, e prem aquel al preon del ventre.	And then take the cautery and place it on the prominent area of the rectum, and press it against the front of the abdomen.
E aprop cus le dos locs eminentz sobre la extremitat del ray del ciphac, e ajusta am la sutura un de aquels am l’autre.	And then sew the two prominent points on the edges of the rectum together with stitches.
E aprop extratz la extremitat del ray, e no inscidas del ciphac de tot, ni no extenda le huou, ni autra causa ayssi cum yeu te fi saber en la curacio de hernia entestinal.	From this extract the extremity of the vein should be tied off, and you should not incise the circumference completely, nor extend the opening, nor any other such cause as I will make you know in the treatment of an intestinal hernia.
E aprop cura aquela am la curacio de las plaguas, e cum inscideyses les fiels, mundifica aquela e restaura la plagua entro que sia consolidada; quar le ciphac es contrayt e no es ajustada la eminencia de ruptura.	And in the treatment of this condition with the treatment of wounds, when you incise the abscesses, clean that area and restore the wound until it is healed; for the circumference is contracted and the prominence of rupture is not adjusted.
E cauteri es milhor en aquest loc, quar es pus propda a salut.	And cautery is best in this place, for it is closer to health.
Capitol .lxviii.	Chapter LXVIII.
De mollificacio de la codena dels testiculs.	On the softening of the cord of the testicles.
Motas veguadas la codena dels testiculs en alcus homes es mollificada per aysso quar las carns que so entre aquela son mollificadas, e es fedat le reguardament de lu.	In many cases, the cord of the testicles is softened in some men because the flesh that lies within it is softened, and this requires careful attention.
Adonc necessari es ad aquel que es preguat en la curacio de lu que fassa jazer le malaute segon le sieu dos, e enscida tota la codena la qual es mollificada sobre la codena natural; e aprop que ajuste doas labias am la sutura.	Then it is necessary for the one who treats this condition to have the patient lie according to his side, and incise the entire cord that is softened over the natural cord; and then adjust two edges with suturing.
E si vols, cus en le comensament la superfluitat de la codena mollificada am tres cozeduras o quatre e am ferma sutura.	And if you wish, remove the excess of the softened cord at three or four places and with a firm suture.
E aprop inscideys entre las suturas; e aprop cura per curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat e caian les fiels.	And then incise between the sutures; and afterward treat as you would for other wounds until it is healed and the abscesses subside.
Capitol .lxix.	Chapter LXIX.
De castracio.	On Castration.
Sapias que castratio en nostre ley es excomengada, mays per causa es legut a mi que·m remembre de lu en aquest libre; e no es necessaria la rememoracio de lu sino per doas manieyras, de las quals es la una per so que aquo sia en la sciensa del metge quan es enterroguat de aquela, que sapia la curacio de lu al qual accideys; e l’autra manieyra es que nos motas vetz havem necessitat de castracio de autras bestias per les juvamentz nostres per aquelas, ayssi cum de motos, e de bocs, e de porcs, e de semblantz a las bestias.	Know that castration in our law is forbidden, but it is read to me that I must remember it in this book; and the remembrance of it is not necessary except for two ways, one of which is so that when asked about it, the physician may know how to cure those who suffer from it; and the other way is that we have sometimes a need for castration in other animals for our use by them, such as horses, oxen, and pigs, and similar beasts.
E donc dic que castracio es fayta en dos manieyras: o per atrissio, o per fissura a seccio.	And therefore I say that castration is performed in two ways: either by excision or by cutting and division.
Mays en aquela que es fayta per atrissio, la via de la opera es que nos fassam cezer la bestia en aygua cauda entro que·ls genetius de lu sian mollificatz e sian linhitz e que pendan.	But in the one that is performed by excision, the method of the operation is that we should bathe the animal in warm water until the testicles become soft and relaxed and hang down.
E aprop pren aquels am la tua ma entro que sian resols e no apparescan dejos le tocament.	And then take those [testicles] with your hand until they are softened and do not appear to be hurt by the touch.
Mays en castracio fayta per fissura e seccio, cove que tu tenguas la bestia e premas la codena dels testicols de lu am la ma senestra.	But in castration performed by cutting and division, make sure you hold the animal and press the root of the testicles with your left hand.
E aprop lia le suspensori, e inscideys sobre quascun huou am una seccio entro que dos huous proceseysso.	And then grasp the spermatic cords, and make an incision on each side so that two halves are separated.
E aprop inscideys aquels pus que auras quascu excorjat.	And then cut those parts after you have peeled each one away.
E no leysses sobre aquels del ciphac alcuna causa, sino le ciphac subtil le qual es sobre les vazes.	And do not leave any cause for infection on those parts, but make the incision subtle so that it is above the veins.
E aquesta manieyra de castracio es milhor la qual es fayta per atrissio, quar atrissio fort leu layssa alcuna causa dels testicols per que la bestia desira coyt.	And this method of castration, which is performed by excision, is better because it leaves no cause from the testicles for the animal to desire copulation.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	Here is the translation:
Capitol .lxx.	Chapter LXX.
De la cura de hermafrodozia.	On the treatment of hermaphrodism.
Hermafrodozia en les homes es segon dos manieyras: la una es quar o appar en aquo que siec l’espazi en la codena de testiculs, en aquel que es entre dos testiculs figura quar cunh de femna en la qual so pels.	Hermaphrodozia in men is recognized in two ways: the first occurs when there appears a space between the testicles where female characteristics are present, such as hair in that area.
E alcunas veguadas de aquel corr urina le qual es en la codena dels testiculs.	And sometimes in those cases, urine is discharged from the area between the testicles.
Mays en las femnas es una specia: e es que·l conh de la femna sobre le pentenilh es ayssi cum dos testiculs de home un pauc de tot yminiheys a la partida deforo ayssi cum le perpucii de home e dos testicols.	In women, it is recognized in this way: the part of the woman above the pubis appears as if there are two testicles of a man slightly below and forward, like the scrotum of a man, containing two testicles.
E la curacio es de tres specias: de dos dels homes e de una specia de las femnas.	The treatment is of three kinds: two for men and one for women.
E es que cove que tu inscidas aquelas carns ajustadas entro que efuga la emprecio de aquela, e aprop que cures aquelas am curacio de las autras plaguas.	It is necessary that you incise the tightened flesh to allow the discharge of the harmful substance, and then treat it as you would other illnesses.
E en la segonda specia dels homes de la qual yeys urina la qual es en la codena dels testiculs, no es curacio ni opperacio en lu.	And in the second kind for men, where urine is discharged from the area between the testicles, there is no treatment or surgery for it.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI.
De lentinge e de carn eminent per causas de las femnas.	On cutting and raising flesh due to causes in women.
Lentige fort leu es ajustada sobre causas naturals entro que es etressat e es fayt leg le reguardament; e alcunas veguadas es magnificada en alcunas femnas en tant entro que es spandit ayssi cum en les homes e perve entro al coito.	Cutting should be done lightly according to natural causes, ensuring it is done carefully and with proper regard; sometimes in women, it may need to be more extensive, like in men, so that it does not interfere during intercourse.
Adonc cove que tu tenguas la superfluitat de lentinge am la tua ma o am unci e inscidas.	Then you should hold the excess flesh with your hand or with forceps and cut it.
E no ultimes en inscizio, majorment en le preon de la razit, per so que no endevengua flux de sanc.	In making an incision, especially at the root of the nail, so that there is no flow of blood.
E aprop cura aquela am curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanada.	And for the treatment of those wounds until they are healed.
Mays carn nascuda es carn que nays en le horrifici de la mayre entro que umple aquel, e fort leu es eyssit a las partidas deforo segon semblansa de coa (e per aquo alscus primiers appelero aquo “malautia caudada”); donc cove que nos inscidam ayssi cum inscidem lentinge, e curem aquela entro que sia sanada.	Malignant flesh is the flesh that arises from the corruption within the mother before it fills out those parts outside according to the appearance of hair (and for this reason some first called this "tail disease"); therefore we should incise it just as we would incise a tendon, and treat it until it is healed.
Capitol .lxxii.	Chapter LXXII.
De curacio de alratica.	On the Treatment of Ingrown Toenails.
Alratica es que le conh de la femna no sia perforat, o sia le trauc petit.	Ingrown toenail is when the nail of the woman has not pierced through, or the passage is too small.
E es o natural o accidental.	And it is either natural or accidental.
Accidental es per malautia la qual ha precedit, e aquela es fayta o per carn nada ajustada o per ciphac subtil o espes.	It is accidental due to a disease that has preceded it, and that condition is caused either by flesh that is not properly fitted or by thin or thick skin.
E es fayt o en le preon de la mayre, o en les costatz de lu, o en le pus sobira de lu, o en le pus bas de lu, e prohibeys de cuoyt e de enprenguacio e de enfantament, e fort leu prohibeys las mestruas.	And it occurs either at the root of the uterus, or on its sides, or in the upper part of it, or in the lower part, and it prohibits menstruation and conception and pregnancy, and rather lightly also menstrual periods.
E la cognicio de aquela es fayta per reguardament de la metrona, si la oppilacio es apparent, propdana; mays si no es apparent, lahoras tu cerqua aquela am les tieus ditz o am le ray.	And the diagnosis of that condition is made by palpation with a speculum, if the obstruction is apparent; but if it is not apparent, then seek it using your fingers or with a probe.
Mays si oppilacio es per ciphac subtil, e es propda a las doas labias, lahoras tu coyta e disromp aquela.	But if the obstruction is due to thin tissue and is located between the two lips, then you should cut it and disrupt that obstruction.
E es que pauses sobre las doas labias pulvils, e aprop pausa les tieus ditz indicz de amdoas las mas encemps.	And you should apply plasters to both lips, and also place the fingers of both hands on them.
E la femna sia sobre le sieu dos, las sieuas coyssas extendudas, e aprop exten las doas labias am forsa entro que aquel ciphac subtil sia romput e la oppilacio sia uberta.	And the woman should lie on her back, with her thighs spread apart, and then stretch both lips forcefully until that subtle suture is broken and the obstruction is opened.
E aprop pren lana e enbeu le4 en oli e pausa aquela sobre·l loc, e jagua am home le dia per so que·l loc inscis no sia consolidat.	And then take wool and soak it in oil and apply that to the area, and keep a man there for three days so that the cut site does not become consolidated.
Mays si le ciphac es gros e espes, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel am spatum lat o am fuelha de mirta.	But if the suture is thick and dense, now it is necessary for you to cut that with a lancet or with a myrtle leaf.
Mays si la oppilacio es per carnada, lahoras suspen aquela am unci, e inscideys aquela.	But if the obstruction is due to flesh, now suspend that for one inch, and then incise it.
E sian am tu las medicinas que fan cessar flux de sanc ses mordicacio, ayssi cum ahacatia, e sanc de drago, e enses, ajustat am album de huou.	And with you are the medicines that stop blood flow without bleeding, such as hystaceae, dragon's blood, and oak galls, mixed with egg white.
E aprop aministra una canulha de plom ampla per so que la plagua no sia consolidada leugierament.	And then administer a lead tube that is wide so that the wound does not consolidate too quickly.
E tengua aquela per alcus jorns e aministra calgua de li sec.	And keep that for several days and administer dry lint.
E aprop sia curada am l’autra curacio de consolidacio entro que sia sanada.	And then treat it with the other method of consolidation until it is healed.
E alcunas vetz accideys en la mayre nativitat de autres carns, e lahoras cove que inscidas segon aquesta manieyra.	And sometimes accidents occur in the major formation of other tissues, and now it is necessary to incise according to this method.
Mays si aysso es per apostema crancos, a l’apostema crancos le qual es en la mayre no sia fayta contrarietat am ferr en deguna manieyra.	But if this is due to a chronic abscess, then with the chronic abscess that is in the main part, do not cause any opposition or hindrance with iron in any way.
Capitol .lxxiii.	Chapter LXXIII.
De la cura de emorroydas e de tayl e de botor roja que accideysso en le conh de las femnas.	On the treatment of hemorrhoids and tumors that occur in the female genital area.
Emorroydas so apprecio dels orificis de motas venas entro que de aquelas corro mot sanc continuadament; e cum so antiquadas emorroydas e son fayts theyls.	Hemorrhoids are an inflammation of the veins inside the anus, from which blood flows continuously; and when these hemorrhoids become old, they form thrombi.
E ja yeu he dit en la divisio las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e diyre ayssi aquelas que recebo curacio e aquelas que no recebo curacio.	And now I have described the types of these conditions and their symptoms, and I will also describe which of them can be treated and which cannot be treated.
Donc dic que emorroydas e theyls quan so en le preon de la mayre e no apparo al sentiment, lahoras en aquelas no sia fayta curacio am ferr.	Therefore, I say that hemorrhoids and thrombi that occur internally and do not appear to the senses should not be treated with instruments.
Mays aquelas las quals so en le orrifici de la mayre sobre las quals catz sentiment, so aquelas que so curadas.	But those that occur at the opening of the anus and which can be felt by touch are those that can be treated.
E cove que tu metas la femna en mayso frega e aprop exten atheyl am les forfexs, o am drap aspre, e inscideys aquelas am las razitz.	And it is necessary that you place the woman in a comfortable position and then grasp those hemorrhoids with forceps or rough cloth, and cut them with scissors.
E aprop pulveriza sobre aquelas deves le fluxs del sanc de una de las polveras insciscivas ses mordicacio, ayssi cum acassia e semblant ad aquels.	And then powder should be applied to stop the bleeding from one of the hemostatic powders that do not cause irritation, such as acacia and similar substances.
E aprop enpellesca les sieus pes per una hora, e aprop pausa aquela en aygua freja.	And then press the area with cold compresses for one hour, and afterwards apply it to cold water.
E si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras fay aquela sezer en decoccio de sumat e de scorsas de milgranas e de gualas e de semblantz.	And if the bleeding persists, then have the patient sit in a decoction of sumac and lemon rinds and pomegranate peels and similar substances.
E aprop pren farina de ordi e comfiys aquela am miel e vi agre e fay emplastre am aquo sobre le dos de lu.	And then take flour of barley and apply it with honey and sour grape juice to make a plaster on the affected area.
E si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, fay adherir am dos ventozas, e a las mamilhas ses escarificatio.	And if the blood is clotting, that is good; and otherwise, bring together both wound edges, and on the nipples make incisions.
E aprop pren lana e submergeys aquela am suc de coliandre o am suc de arnagloza o am suc de guarravier am vi pentit e fay adherir al loc; e aprop cura le loc am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then take lint and apply it with the juice of cilantro or the juice of coriander or the juice of hyssop mixed with wine to that area, and make it adhere to the place; and afterwards treat the place with ointments until it is healed.
Mays athyl rog le qual es de aspre reguardament, cove que tu inscidas aquo que a tu appar de aquel segon que he dit en theyl engualment.	For those who require it with rough handling, ensure that you apply what is at your disposal according to what I have said about it equally.
E cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And treat it until it is healed.
Capitol .lxxiv.	Chapter LXXIV.
De perforacio de eyssedura accident en la mayre.	On the piercing of the uterus in accidental injury to the abdomen.
Motas specias de apostemas accideysso en la mayre, ayssi cum cranc e apostema lapident e ulceracios e adhubelat e erpetromens e fistulas emorroyas e raguarrias e thyl e autres apostemas.	Various types of abscesses occur in the abdomen, such as boil, stone abscess, ulcerous abscess, matted abscess, scrotal abscess, hemorrhoids, and fistulas, and other abscesses.
E yeu ja he dit aquestas malautias e las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e las curacios de lor en la divisio.	And I have already mentioned these illnesses and the types of them and the signs of them, and their treatments in detail.
E cove que yeu digua en aquest tractat de apostema caut le qual ve en la mayre quan es dels apostemas que collegeysso sania, e si vols saber en qual manieyra se fa la opperacio de lu am ferr.	And when I say in this treatise about abscesses that occur in the abdomen, it is regarding those abscesses that can be treated successfully, and if you want to know how the procedure is performed using tools.
Adonc cove que tu consideres si la dolor de la apostema en le sieu comensament es aguda am percussio e flecma e febre, e vezes aquel enrogezir e si catz sobre aquel le sentiment, lahoras no·t coytes am perforacio de lu, e cura aquel am aquo que ajuda sobre la maturacio entro que cesse la acuitat dels accidentz.	Then you must consider whether the pain of the abscess at its beginning is sharp with percussion and phlegm and fever, and if it appears red and feels hot to the touch, then do not proceed with perforation, and treat it with what helps in maturation until the severity of the symptoms subsides.
E lahoras cove que tu fassas cezer la femna sobre una cezelha que aia doas cezelhas; e recline sobre le sieu dos e ajusta les sieus pes a la partida pus dejos del ventre, e las sieus coyssas sian expandudas, e pausa les sieus brasses dejos les sieus denols, e lia quascus am liament ad aquo convenient.	During the operation, place the woman on a chair that has two arms; and recline her on her side and arrange her legs at the part below the stomach, and spread out her thighs, and let her hands rest above her knees, and bind some of it with bandages as is appropriate.
E aprop la matrona segua del latz dreyt e aministre le instrument am le qual es ubert le orrifici de la mayre, la forma del qual vindra en aquelas causas que·s faran aprop.	And then the midwife should follow from the right side and administer the instrument with which the opening of the birth canal is prepared, the form of which will be described in the relevant cases that will follow.
E cove quan vols ministrar aquest instrument que tu fiques am lo ray le preon de la mayre de la femna, e aquo que del instrument es intrat en la mayre no sia mays que·l preon de la mayre e leda le malaute.	And when you want to administer this instrument, place it along the line of the opening of the birth canal of the woman, and what is inserted into the birth canal from the instrument should not exceed the length of the opening itself, and guide it carefully.
Mays si l’estrument es major que·l preon de la mayre, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils sobre la textura del preon de la mayre per sso que sia prohibit l’intrament de tot instrument en le preon de la mayre.	If the instrument is longer than the opening of the birth canal, then place cushions over the tissue of the birth canal's opening to prevent any instrument from being inserted beyond that length.
E cove que tu pauses le vertitge que corr en le strument del latz pus desus e que le ministre tengua le strument e revolva le vertitge entro que sia ubert le orrifici de la mayre.	And it is necessary to place the spiral that runs along the instrument on the lower side and for the practitioner to hold the instrument and rotate the spiral so that the opening of the birth canal is prepared.
E cum appar la excitura, e es tocada am la ma e es leon e molh, lahoras cove que tu secces aquela deves le cap de lu am spatum lat.	And when the protrusion appears and is touched with the hand and is loose and moist, then it is necessary to dry that part with a dry cloth.
E cum la sania es evacuada, lahoras cove que tu pauses en la plagua una meca submersa en oli rozat o oli vert en le qual sia alcuna stiptisitat; e pausa la calca7 en la seccio en le preon de la mayre.	And when the blood is evacuated, then it is necessary to place on the wound a cloth soaked in rose oil or green oil, which has some astringent properties; and place the poultice in the area around the opening of the birth canal.
E pause deforo la mayre e sobre le pentenilh lana munda submersa en aygua en la qual sian bulidas malvas.	Place the dressing over the wound and apply a clean wool cloth submerged in water in which mallows have been boiled.
E aprop sia curada aprop dos dias am enguent le qual conveneys ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And it should be treated appropriately for two days until the moment comes when it is convenient to do so, until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es lavada la mayre e la plagua enayssi que es cristerisat am aygua e mel, e aprop am aygua en la qual es bulhida razit de liri o de aristologia longua, e aprop retorna al enguent.	And sometimes the wound and the swelling are washed with this so that it is cleansed with water and honey, and then with water in which rue or wormwood has been boiled, and then returned to treatment.
E si la plagua es dedintz en la mayre ameguada, lahoras cove que tu sias prohibit de la curacio de lu am ferr, habantz cura aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio.	And if the swelling is deep in the wounded area, it is now necessary to prohibit treatment with iron, instead treating it as we have described in the division.
Capitol .lxxv.	Chapter LXXV.
A ensenhar las matronas en qual manieyre les enbrios bius sian medicatz quan yeysso segon figura no-natural.	To teach midwives how to properly treat pregnancies when there is an abnormal condition as shown in the figure.
Necessaria causa es que la matrona conogua en le comensament la figura del enfantament natural per senhals de lu, e es que quan tu vezas la femna expremar a las partidas dejos e desira odorar le ayre, e sobre aquo es enleujada per aquo que sobre ela es del part, e festina le eyssiment del enbrio, lahoras sapias que aquest part es segon figura natural, e es l’eyssiment de lu sobre le sieu cap, e la segondina am aquel o suspensa o pendent del ombelic.	It is necessary that the midwife knows at the beginning the figure of normal childbirth by its signs, and it is when you see the woman strain at her lower parts and desire to smell the air, and she is illuminated by what is above her for childbirth, then you know that this birth is according to a natural figure, and it is the delivery over her head, and the second one either suspended or hanging from the navel.
Donc cum tu vezes aquels senhals, lahoras cove que·l ventre de lu sia compremut per so que l’embrio deysenda leugerament quar quan deyssen sobre le sieu cap, deysen a lu la segondina, e es mondada de aquelas superfluitatz am bona mondificacio.	Therefore, when you see those signs, it is necessary to compress the abdomen so that the fetus descends gently, for when it descends over its head, then the second one will descend, and they should be cleaned of those superfluities with proper cleansing.
Mays aquel que es otra aquest part es no-natural e no-lausable, quar quan le enbrio es eyssit sobre sos pes e·l cos de lu es eyssit devant le cap de lu e·ls pes de lu, e la ma de lu una, o al pe de lu i, o es eyssit le cap de lu e la ma de lu, o al ventre de lu, e fort leu es convertit sobre le sieu col, e semblant de las figuras de lu no-lausablas.	He who lies in another position is unnatural and unsuitable, for when the patient is placed on his back, his head is positioned in front of him and his feet behind, or one hand or foot is placed under his head or pelvis, and he is easily converted onto his side, but this resembles the unsuitable positions.
Don necessaria causa es a la matrona que sia savia e subtil en totas aquelas causas, e que·s guarde de error e de decepcio.	It is necessary for the midwife to be wise and subtle in all such matters, and to guard against error and deception.
E yeu so mostrant tota figura de aquelas, e qual engen es en aquelas per so que sia significat per aquo e sia stat sobre aquo.	And showing all the figures of those things, and which organ is in those according to what it signifies by that and stands upon that.
Quan le feyt es eyssit sobre le sieu cap per egrecio natural, e aquel es vehement sobre la femna e es fayt a lu part dificil, e vezes la vertut de lu ja debelitada, lahoras fay aquela sezer , o que las femnas tenguan lu, e evapora le conh de lu am fenugrec coyt e am olis humitz.	When the seed is placed on its side due to natural inclination, and it is vigorous in the woman but difficult at the part, and sometimes the virtue of it has already been weakened, then use that practice, or let women have it, and evaporate the essence with fenugreek juice and aromatic oils.
E aprop entrometa la metrona entre les sieus ditz espatum petit e fenda am aquel la segondina, o secce aquela am la sua ungla entro que corro aquo que es en ela de humiditat.	And then the midwife should insert her little finger and split it with the second one, or dry it with her fingernail until the moisture within it runs out.
E preme le ventre de la femna entro que deyssenda le fet.	And press the woman's abdomen so that the fetus descends.
Mays si no deyssen, lahoras cove que la femna sia cristirizada de mucellage de ptilli e mucellage de fenugrec am cizami.	But if it does not descend, then it is necessary to cleanse the woman with meal of feathers and meal of fenugreek mixed together.
E aprop comanda a lu, aprop le cristeri, que sia compremuda e fay aquela stornudar am condisi; e te la boca de lu e·l nas de lu per huna hora, quar le fet sira foro-getat tantost.	And then command him, after the cleansing, to be sneezed upon with certain conditions; and at his mouth and nose for one hour, because the fetus will be expelled shortly.
E si las doas mas del fet so foro-getadas al comensament, lahoras cove que tu redusiscas aquelas am fecilitat petit a petit.	And if both hands of the patient are tied up at the beginning, then you should gradually bring them to ease little by little.
Mays si no obezeys al intrament, lahoras pausa la femna sobre una cezelha e leva les pes de lu sus, e aprop concuceys la cezelha sobre la terra; e la femna sia tenguda que no caia deves la concussio.	If you do not obey the instrument, then make the woman lie on a cushion and lift her off it, and then lower the cushion to the ground; and hold the woman so that she does not fall from this lowering.
E si las mas no son dedintz tornadas e morr le fet, lahoras inscideys aquelas e extratz le romament del fet o lia le cors a la ma de lu am drap e extratz aquel am equalitat, quar aquel sira foro-getat.	And if the hands are not turned inside and remain tied, then cut them and extract the remains of the patient or tie the body with a cloth and extract it in such a way that it is completely removed.
De eyssiment del embrio sobre les sieus pes.	Remove the embryo from its positions on the legs.
Quan le fet yeys sobre les sieus pes, lahoras cove que tu impelliscas aquels en sus, e aprop convertas le fet petit, e aprop que engualhes aquel, e aprop que prenguas un pe de lu e extendas aquels petit a petit.	When the patient is on their legs, then you should push them upward, and subsequently turn the patient slightly, and then even out that position, and then take hold of one part and extend it little by little.
Mays cum son eyssit entro a las coyssas, lahoras tu comanda a lu que se exprema, e fay aquela extornudar am condizi, quar sira foro-getat si Deus lo vol.	But when it is removed into the things inside, then you command him to expel it, and make that person sneeze as needed, for it will be completely removed if God wills it.
E si no es foro-getat am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras tu retorna le fet petit a petit entro que pauses aquel segon figura natural, quar aquel sira lahoras foro-getat am leugier eyssiment.	And if it is not completely removed as we have recommended, then you return the patient little by little until you place them in their natural position again, for it will be completely removed at that point.
E si es prohibit am tot aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras pren de musellage de altea e de goma dissolvuda, e percuteys tot en le mortier per bona percussio, e aprop linieys am aquo le conh de la femna, el pus bas del ventre de lu.	And if it is prohibited by all that we have recommended, then take musellage of hart's flesh and dissolved gum, and pound it all in the mortar with good pounding, and then apply it to the woman's vagina, at the base of her abdomen.
E aprop fay aquela cezer en aygua tebeza, entro que consegua les ypocondias.	And if you find that the hair is in white water, proceed until you reach the hypochondria.
E cum vezes que las partidas dejos de lu so lenificadas, lahoras fay a lu subfumiguacio de mirta e sub-pausa aquela a lu.	And when the upper parts above it are inflamed, then apply a fumigation of myrtle and let that be applied to it.
E quan te la sub-fumiguacio per una hora, lahoras tu la fay sezer sobre una cezelha, e aprop fay aquela stornudar e extrenh la boca de lu, e levas de aquela, e prem la partida pus bassa del ventre de lu am leugiera compressio, quar le fet sira tantost foro-getat.	And when the sub-fumigation has been applied for an hour, then place it on a cushion, and afterwards let her sniff something to make her sneeze and open her mouth wide, and remove that, and press the part below the belly lightly, because the stool will soon be expelled.
Eyssiment del fet sobre les sieus denols e las suas mas.	Have them hold their breath and clench their muscles.
Quan le fet eyssira segon aquesta forma, lahoras tu engenies en entrometen las suas mas petit a petit; e aprop la femna stia evessada sobre le sieu col, e les pes de lu pengo en jos, e aquelas sia jasent sobre le lieyt, e complegua las suas mas.	When the stool is expelled according to this method, then gradually ease her muscles; and afterwards let the woman lie on her side with her head up, and her feet down, and let them be seated on the bed, and comfort her muscles.
E aprop prem sobre le ventre de lu petit a petit, e aprop extratz aquo que es dejos les pes de lu de las aurelhas entro que sia preparada en la partida pus dejos.	And then gently press on the baby's belly little by little, and afterwards extract what is above the ears near the feet until it is prepared in the part above.
E si le fet no es fora-getat, lahoras pren les pes de lu e mau aquels am movement vehement, e aprop prem aquo que es sobre les ypocondres petit a petit entro que le fet puege a las partidas desus.	And if the stool is not expelled, then take her feet and move them with vigorous motion, and afterwards gently press what is above the hypochondria little by little until the stool can come out from above.
E aprop entrometa las suas mas e engualhe le fet petit a petit, e comanda a la femna que se exprema entro que le fet sia foro-getat.	And then gradually ease her muscles and help the stool come out little by little, and instruct the woman to strain until the stool is expelled.
Eyssiment del fet latutidinalment pendent una de las suas mas.	Have her hold her breath while straining latitudinally with one of her muscles.
Sia engeniat en reduccio de la ma de lu, mays si no podes aquela reduzir, lahoras eleva la femna e fe aquela anar.	Here is the translation:
E si anar no pot, lahoras fay la jazer sobre le lieyt, e concuteys las coyssas de lu am concussio vehement, e aprop aministra liamentz les quals yeu e recomtatz de mucillages.	And if it cannot be removed, then at this time place it on the linen, and crush the substances with strong pounding, and afterwards apply dressings which I have recommended made of mucilages.
E si es vengut le enfantament, lahoras fay aquela sezer sobre cezelha, e aprop studia sobre la reduccio de la ma, e enguala le fet segon figura natural, e fay stornudar la femna e comanda a lu que comprema a si entro que sia foro-getat.	And if childbirth has come, then place the child in that position, and afterwards study the reduction of the hand, and align the delivery according to its natural form, and make the woman sneeze and command her to push so that it is expelled.
Eyssiment del fet sobre·l col expandudas las suas mas e la fassia de lu es al dos de la sua mayre.	Lift the delivery upon the back expanded with its thighs and wrap the bandage around it, two below the larger part.
Cove que la matrona tengua la ma del fet e aprop revolva aquel petit a petit, e eque aquel am facilitat.	Let the midwife hold the hand of the delivery and then gradually turn that child little by little, so that it becomes easier.
E cum es e quant so es engualhat, e lahoras pausa sobre le conh de lu aquo que havem recomtat de oli e de mucellages.	And when it is in place and properly aligned, then pause on the part where we have recommended applying oil and mucilages.
E aprop comandas a lu que·s maugua petit a petit, e quan auras feyt aquo, lahoras fay aquela cezer sobre una cezelha e comanda li que sia inclinada sobre le latz dreyt, e aprop comanda a lu que sia compremuda; e fay aquela stornudar am condizi.	And then command her to bear down little by little, and when you have done this, place the child on a cloth and instruct her to lean on her right side, and then command her to push; and make her sneeze under certain conditions.
Exitus foetus praeparati super latus.	The delivery of the fetus prepared on the side.
Quan deyssen a horrifici de la mayre segon aquesta manieyra, considera, e lahoras tu inscideys la segondina am la tua ungla entro que sia evacuada de la humiditat.	When you lift the larger part according to this method, consider it, and then you incise the second part with your fingernail so that it is evacuated of the humidity.
E si le fet es suspendut sobre la cara e·l col de lu, lahoras tu inscideys aquela del embelic, per so que no sia retengut e mora.	And if the delivery is suspended over the face and neck of it, then you incise that part of the abdomen, so that it is not retained and dies.
E aprop empelleys le fet a las partidas dedintz entro que pauses aquel segon que cove, e manda a la femna que comprema a si alcunas veguadas, e el sira fora-getat am eyssiment leugier, si Dieus o vol.	Here is the translation:
Exitus geminorum aut foetuum multorum.	Outcome of twins or multiple fetuses.
Sapias que gemels motas veguadas so natz, e alcunas vetz naysso tres o quatre , mays aquo es estranh e tart s’endeve; mays v so causas foro natura, e no vivo.	Know that twins are often born at once, but some women give birth to three or four, though this is rare and difficult; however, such occurrences are due to nature, not the mother's condition.
E conte aquelas, ja sia que sian montiplicatz, una segondina, e son seperatz per ciphac, distingen aquels enter le liguament en l’ombilic de cascun de aquels E alcunas veguadas so foro-getatz ayssi cum es un fet per eyssiment natural leugier, e so eysitz alcunas veguadas per eyssiment no-lausabla ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And among those, whether they are few or many, there is a second separation by the navel string, distinguishing them entirely along the ligament at the umbilicus of each. And some women give birth to them as one fetus would be born naturally quickly, while others give birth to them separately in an undesirable manner, as we have recounted.
E si son dificils alcus de lor deves le enfantament e perveno ad aquo que havem dit de las figuras no-naturals, lahoras tu cura aquels ayssi cum havem recontat.	And if some of them make childbirth difficult and they reach the state we have described regarding unnatural figures, then you should care for them as we have recounted.
E si’ la matrona subtil e fassa aquo que fa am facilitat e subtilitat, e am tarditat, e sia ingeniat segon tota figura segon que es a lu preparat de l’engen amenant a salut.	And if the midwife is skilled and does what she should for ease and skillfulness, whether it be promptly or gradually, and acts according to every figure as it is prepared by the birth-giver to ensure health.
Rememoratio eius quod formatur in matrice ex embrionibus et Abortiuntur.	Recollection of what is formed in the womb from embryos and miscarriages.
Alcunas veguadas son formatz en la mayre un, e dos, e tres, e quatre, e v, e vi, e vii, e mays x, e ja es deves mi verificat que una femna abortem ne getet vi, e una autra x totz formatz, la qual causa fo fayta per mensuracio dels glorios savis.	Some women are pregnant with one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, and sometimes ten fetuses, and it has been verified that a woman may miscarry six, while another carries all of them to term, the cause of which has been determined by careful measurement of the wise scholars.
E tot aysso cove que sia en la sciencia de la matrona quar fort leu ad aquela parve semblant de aquo, e donc opause se ad aquo am so que cove.	And all of this must be known by the midwife because it is important to recognize the similarities and differences in such cases, and thus she can act accordingly as needed.
Capitol .lxxvi.	Chapter LXXVI.
De extraccio del fet quan es mort.	On the Extraction of a Dead Fetus.
Quan tu curas le fet mort am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la medicacio e no es defora eyssit, e tu yest forsat usar de opperacio am ma, lahoras cove que consideras si la femna es de sana vertut e no es am alcu dels accidentz per les quals sobre ela es temuda perdicio.	When you are treating a dead fetus as we have said in the division of medication and it does not come out by itself, and you must then use an operation, at this time it is necessary to consider whether the woman is of sound constitution and is not subject to any of those accidents for which her loss is feared.
Lahoras cove que la femna sia envessada sobre le lieyt sobre le sieu dos, e sia le cap de lu enclinat enjos e las coyssas de lu sian elevadas.	At this time the woman should be placed on her back on the bed with her buttocks raised and her head lowered.
E·l ministre tengua aquela de doas partz o sia liada en le lieyt per so que·l cos de lu no se extenda deves la extraccio del fet.	And the minister should hold her by both hands or tie her to the bed so that her body does not extend during the extraction of the fetus.
E aprop tu humecta la boca de la mayre de lu am olis humitz e am mucellage de altea e de fenugrec e de semensa de li.	And then you should moisten the mouth of the mother with oils and honey, and with mucus made from henna, fenugreek, and linseed.
E aprop unte la matrona la sua ma am aquels olis e mucellages, e aprop entrometa la sua ma am fecilitat en la mayre, e aprop cerque am la ma loc en le qual fique les uncis en le fet.	And then the midwife should anoint her hand with those oils and mucus, and then insert it gently into the mother, and then search with her hand for the place where the hooks are in the fetus.
E locs convenient en aquo: adonc tu considera si le fet es preparat que deysenda sobre le sieu cap, e lahoras tu fique les uncis en les huels de lu, o en le col, o en la boca, o en le palat, o dejos la barba, o en la furcula de lu, o en les locs propdas de las costas, o dejos les ypocondres.	And these are the appropriate places: then you should consider whether the fetus is positioned so that it will descend with its head down, and at this time you place the hooks in its hands, or in its neck, or in its mouth, or on its palate, or under its chin, or in its clavicle, or in the proper parts of its sides, or under its armpits.
Mays si le deysendiment es sobre les pes de lu, lahoras en le pentenilh, o en le mieg de las costas.	But if the descent is with its feet down, then in the navel or in the middle of its back.
E cove que tengua le unci am la ma dreyta, e pausa la curvitat de lu en aquel loc le qual es entre les ditz de la ma senestra, e entrometa la ma am facilitat e fique le unci en alcu de aquels locs les quals havem ditz, entro que pervengua a la causa boyda.	Take the needle with the right hand and place its curve at that point which is between the fingers of the left hand, and insert it easily into one of those places we have mentioned until it reaches the diseased area.
E aprop pause e fique en la apposicio de lu un autre unci, o le tertz si es necessitat, per so que sia atraccio engual, e no sia extencio segon la sua rectetut tant solament.	And place and fix it in such a position that another needle, or a third if necessary, can be inserted equally without stretching the straightness of the tissue.
Ans sia maugut a tota partida, per so que l’eyssiment de lu sia alleujat ayssi cum es fayt en dent deves la eradicacio de lu.	And let it be fixed in all parts so that the extraction of it may be eased as is done with the removal of teeth.
E cove en lu aquo que es entre lor que la extencio sia mollificada; e si alcuna partida de lu es retenguda, lahoras cove que la matrona unte alcus sieus ditz am oli e entrometa aquels espertament e revolva am aquels aquo que es retengut.	And it is necessary in that place where the stretching should be softened; and if any part of it is retained, then it is necessary for the midwife to anoint some of those places with oil and insert them carefully and rotate what is retained.
Donc si la partida del fet es fora-getada, lahoras les uncis sian permudatz entra loc le qual sia pus aut; e fay aysso entro que tot le fet sia fora-getat.	Therefore, if a part of the fetus is delivered, then the needles should be moved to a place that is further along; and do this until all of the fetus is delivered.
Mays si la ma es eyssida denant l’autra, e no es possible reduzir aquela per la coartacio de lu, lahoras cove que drap sia envolopat sobre aquela; e aprop extratz aquela entro que tota sia fora-getada, e inscideys aquela o en la junctura de la ma o en le coyde.	But if the hand comes out before the other and it is not possible to reduce it due to the contraction of the tissue, then wrap a cloth around that one; and afterwards extract it until all of it is delivered, and cut it off either at the joint of the hand or at the elbow.
E ayssi cove que fassas en l’autra ma e en les dos pes.	And do the same for the other hand and both feet.
Mays si le cap del fet es gran, o accideys a lu coartacio en le eyssiment, o es en le cap de lu aygua ajustada, lahoras cove que entrometa entre les ditz espatum spinos e fenda le cap e extragua la aygua, o que discroba aquel am un instrument le qual es nompnat “alundat”, la forma del qual vindra am las formas dels autres instruments en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	But if the head of the fetus is large, or if there is contraction during delivery, or if it is in the tight water bag, then insert between the fingers and cut open the head to extract the water, or use an instrument called "alundat," the form of which will be among the shapes of other instruments in the chapter that follows this one.
E semblantment fassa si·l fet es de gran cap per natura: e lahoras cove que inscida aquel am algematu, o que prengua aquel am alunda ayssi cum havem dit; e aprop extra les osses am les forceps.	And it should be done as if it were a large root by nature: and now it is necessary either to cut that which is bound up or to take away that which has grown, as we have said; and then extract them from the bones with the forceps.
E si le cap es eyssit e es coartat deves la furcula, lahoras sia fendut entro que la humiditat la qual es en le pietz sia efunduda.	And if the root is twisted and compressed by the furcula, then it should be split so that the moisture which is in the tissues may be released.
Mays si no es complicat, ni obezeys a eyssiment, lahoras tu inscideys le cap tantost segon que a tu sira possible.	But if it is not complicated and does not twist, then you should cut the root as soon as possible according to what seems best to you.
E si le dejos del ventre es apostemat o es en lu ydropici, lahoras cove que tu perfores aquel entro que corro la humiditat que es en lu.	And if the lower part of the abdomen is abscessed or is in a state of edema, then it is necessary for you to puncture that which contains the moisture that is there.
Mays si le fet es sobre les sieus pes, lahoras la atraccio de lu es leugiera e la direccio de lu a la boca de la mayre es leugiera.	But if the growth is on the upper teeth, then the attraction of it is slight and the direction of it towards the mouth of the mother is also slight.
Mays si es coartat deves le ventre e·l pietz, lahoras cove que tu extraguas aquel am drap le qual auras envolopat sobre la tua ma, e que fendes le ventre e·l pietz entro que corra aquo que es en aquels.	But if it is compressed by the abdomen and the tissues, then it is necessary for you to extract that which you have wrapped in a cloth with your hand, and to cut open the abdomen and the tissues so that the fluid that is there may run out.
Mays si les autres membres so ostatz e torna le cap, lahoras la metrona entrometa la ma senestra; mays si la boca de la mayre es huberta, lahoras intrometa la ma en le preon de layre, e cerque am aquela le cap, e atira aquel am les ditz entro a la boca de la mayre, e aprop entrometa en lu un unci, o dos uncis, e atire lu am aquels.	But if the other parts remain still and only the root returns, then place your left hand between them; but if the mouth of the mother is open, then insert your hand into the pelvis, and search for the root, and pull it along with the others into the mouth of the mother, and then insert one or two fingers, and pull it along with those.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada per apostema caut le qual accideys a l’u, lahoras cove que no sia trebelhat sobre lu; abantz cove lahoras aministrar efusio de causas humidas grassas.	And if the mouth of the mother is compressed by an abscess that occurs on it, then it should not be troubled further; instead, it is necessary to administer moist and fatty applications.
E aministre emplastres; e segua le pacient en ayguas que mollifican e humectan.	Administer plasters; and follow with waters that soften and moisten.
E si le fet es sobre le sieu costat, lahoras si possible es, sia agulat: e sia aministrat aquo que havem dit en le fet viu.	And if the condition is on their side, then immediately if possible puncture it; and administer the liquid that we have mentioned in the case of a live abscess.
E si aquo no es possible, lahoras sia inscidit en pessas, e sia extrayt.	And if that is not possible, then cut it into pieces and extract it.
E cove que non layssas alcuna causa dedintz de la segondina.	And make sure that you do not leave any cause for a second occurrence.
E cum tu auras complida tota la tua opperacio, lahoras aministra aquo que havem dit de la curacio en les apostemas cautz les quals accideysso de la mayre.	And when you have completed your entire operation, then administer what we have mentioned for the treatment of abscesses that are similar to those just discussed.
E si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras deyssendas en ayguas stipticas e aministra l’autra curacio.	And if there is bleeding, then apply styptic waters and administer the other treatment.
E yeu ja e vist una femna en le ventre de la qual era fet mort, e aprop sobre aquel foc autra veguada emprenhada, e aprop foc mort es le fet autre.	And I have seen a woman in whose abdomen there was a dead fetus, and above that focus another pregnancy occurred, and above the other focus the fetus was also dead.
Accidit al u aprop lonc temps apostema en le sieu embelic; e inflat es entro que foc ubert, e comensec a getar brac.	It happened to someone who had an abscess near their navel for a long time; it became internally filled with pus, and began to discharge pus.
E yeu fu appelhat a la cura de lu, e medicat a lu per lonc temps, e la plagua no es consolidada.	And I was called to treat them, and treated them for a long time, but the condition did not heal.
Adonc yeu pausegui sobre lu de alscunas causas emplastra de forta atraccio, e eyssic de lu un os, e aprop passero alcus jorns, e eyssic un autre os; e yeu fu trop meravilhat, cum en le ventre no sia os.	Then I applied to them several causes of strong attraction in the form of plasters, and extracted one bone from them, and after a few days extracted another bone; and I was very surprised, as there were no bones in the abdomen.
E adonc yeu cogitegui que eran dels osses del fet mort.	And then I thought that they were bones from the dead fetus.
Donc yeu enguisigui la plagua, e extrayssi de lu motz osses , la femna existent en las sieuas milhos disposicios, e ja visquec en tal manieyra per lonc temps, correc de lu un petit de brac.	Therefore, when treating the wound, remove the bones that are present in its depths and which have already been exposed for some time, and correct it with a little force.
E yeu no afermegui asso esser stranh, sino quar en aquo es sciensa e ajutori ad aquo que le metge artifec am la ma per curacio aministra.	And do not be surprised if it seems strange, for in this lies the science and assistance to what the surgeon uses his hand to administer in treatment.
De las formas dels instrumentz que so necessaris a extrayre le fet.	Of the forms of the instruments that are necessary for extracting the fetus.
Forma de vertitge am la qual es uberta la mayre:	Form of a spiral in which the main one is used:
Aquesta es la forma de strenhedor en le qual so engualhatz les libres, al qual engualhament sian dos virtitges en doas extremitatz de dos futz.	This is the form of a stretcher on which the leaves are equalized, to this equalization there are two spirals at the two extremities of two rods.
May empero aquesta virtitge cove que sia pus subtil de strictori, e sia fayt o de eba o de fust de boys.	However, this spiral should be finer than the others, and it should be made of wire or the wood of trees.
E sia la latitut de quascun fust quays dos ditz e le marge de quascu amdos quays un dit, e la longitut de quascu es un palm e mig; e en le mieg loc de dos fustz so dos ajustaments de aquel meteys fustz les quals ja son fermatz, dels quals la longitut es la maytat de un palm e un pauc mes, e la latitut de quascu es quay dos ditz, o un pauc mes.	And the width of each rod should be two fingers, and the margin on each side should be one finger, and the length of each is half a palm plus a bit more; and in the middle of the two rods there are two adjustments made of that same wood which are already fixed, whose length is half a palm plus a little more, and the width of each is two fingers or a little more.
E aquestz dos additamentz sian entromeses en la boca de la mayre per que sia uberta am aquels quan tu revolves las doas prescriptas virtigges.	And these two adjustments should be inserted into the mouth of the main one so that it can be opened by them when you revolve the two prescribed spirals.
Forma autra semblant de aquela pus subtil e pus leugiera:	Another similar form that is finer and lighter:
Sia fayta de fustz de eba o de boys segon la semblansa de forceps.	It should be made of wire or wood similar to that of forceps.
Mays empero en la extremitat de lu so dos additament ayssi cum vezes, e la longitut de aquels additament es quays un palm, e la latitut de quascu es dos ditz.	However, at the extremity of the bone to which the addition is made as many times, and the length of each of those additions is one palm, and the width of each is two of the aforementioned.
E cum tu vols am aquels ubrir la mayre, lahoras tu fay cezer la femna sobre le lieyt les pes pendentz, ubert aquo que es entre las coyssas de lu.	And when you want to open one of those, then you should cut the woman on the bed with her feet hanging down, because that is what is between the parts.
E aprop obre la tua ma am le instrument ayssi cum fas am forfexs engualment segon la quantitat que vols de la aprecio de la boca de la mayre entro que la metrona fassa so que vols.	And then open your hand with the instrument as you do with scissors equally according to the quantity that you want of the size of the mouth of the membrane until the metron (measuring tool) does what you want.
La forma de vertitge la qual diysero les antics:	The form of whirlpool which the ancients described:
Forma de impellent am le qual es empellit le fet:	Form of that which propels, with which the deed is propelled:
Forma de amisidat2 am le qual es conterit le cap gran	Form of association in which the great head is contained
E es asemblat a forceps al qual so dentz en la extremitat, ayssi cum vezes, e alcunas veguadas es fayt lonc ayssi cum forceps segon aquesta forma, ayssi cum vezes, al qual so dentz ayssi cum dentz de ressegua am le qual es inscidit e conterit.	And it resembles forceps with teeth at the extremity as many times, and some are made long like forceps according to this form, as many times, with teeth like comb teeth in which is cut and contained.
Forma de amesidat pauc:	Form of association for few:
Forma de unci havent una spina:	Form of one having a spine:
Forma de unci havent doas spinas:	Form of one having two spines:
Forma de forceps a la qual so dentz de cerra am le qual le cap del fet sia conterit:	Form of forceps in which the teeth on the closing side contain the head of the fetus:
Forma de spatum havent dos extremitatz am le qual le cap es abscindit:	Form of a spatum having two extremities in which the head is divided:
Forma de dos espatums latz:	Shape of two flat spatulas:
Totz aquels instrumentz so excersitatz, e quan mes so multiplicadas las specias de aquel e so preparadas deves le artifexs, quant es pus leugier a la sua opperacio e pus aut deves les homes per la sua quantitat.	With those instruments such exercises are performed, and when the various types of them have been multiplied and prepared, the artisans should do so more quickly for their operation and accordingly provide them for people according to their quantity.
E no obres de aquels instrumentz ja sia qua sia deves tu aparalhat, quar la necessitat de aquels no es excusabla.	And you should not work with those instruments whatever they may be without preparing them, for the necessity of those is inexcusable.
De extraccio de la segondina.	Of the extraction of the second [incisor].
Quan la segondina es retenguda deves le enfantament, lahoras cove que tu comandes a la malautae que retengua le sieu ale, e aprop fay aquela stornudar am condizi, e strenh la tua ma sobre la boca de lu e sobre las nars de lu, e si per aysso es defora eyssit, bo es.	When the second [tooth] is retained during childbirth, you should command the woman to hold her breath, and then make her sneeze under certain conditions. Place your hand over her mouth and nose, and if it comes out this way, it is good.
E sino, lahoras tu pren una ola e perfora en la cuberta un trauc e pausa en aquela erbas ubrent la boca de la mayre, ayssi cum calament e ruda e anet e camamilla e scicados arabic e cassia lignea e santaurea.	And if not, then take a cloth and pierce it with a hole, and place it over the mouth of the mother along with herbs such as chamomile, rue, anise, camomilla, Arabic saffron, cinnamon, and sage.
Totas aquestas erbas o alcunas de lor sian submersas en aygua en la ola, e pausa aquela sobre le foc.	All of these herbs or some of them should be submerged in water in the cloth, and place that over the fire.
E aprop pausa una canula de canaviera en la boca de la mayre, e tengua aquela entro que la evapor vengua a la concavitat de la mayre.	And then place a reed tube in the mouth of the mother, and hold it there until the vapor reaches the cavity inside the mother.
E aprop fay aquela stornudar ayssi cum havem dit, e la segondina sira fora-getada am velocitat.	And then make her sneeze as we have said, and the second [tooth] will be quickly expelled.
Mays si roman aprop aquesta curacio e no es eyssida, lahoras tu comanda a la matrona que submerge la sua ma sinistra en oli sizami o en micellage de altea, e aprop entrometa aquela en le conh e queresca am aquela la segondina, e cum aquela auras trobada, lahoras pren la e exten aquela pauc a pauc Mays si es annexsa en le preon de la mayre, lahoras entrometa la sua ma segon que havem recomtat, e quan aura trobat la segondina, extragua aquela petit a petit segon rectetut per so que la mayre no caja deves la atraccio vehement.	But if this treatment is delayed and it does not come out, then command the midwife to immerse her left hand in sesame oil or masticated almonds, and then insert it into the woman's vagina and search for the second [tooth] with it. When you find it, take it out little by little. If it is attached to the mother’s flesh, then proceed as we have recommended, and when you find the second [tooth], extract it gradually so that the mother does not suffer from excessive pulling.
Abantz cove que sia permudada als costatz dreyt e sinestre am facilitat.	Take care that it is turned to the right and left with ease.
E aprop sia ajustat en la quantitat de atraccio, quar ela obedira e evasira de adhirencia.	And it should be adjusted in the amount of attraction, for it will obey and avoid adherence.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada, nos ja havem recomtat la curacio am sturnutacio e am medicacio de la ola am erbas.	And if the mouth of the mother is obstructed, we have already recommended treatment through sneezing and medication of the wound with herbs.
Mays si no es fora-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recomtadas, lahoras guarda te que no fetigues sobre aquela en iteracio de abstracio, mays empero cove que aquo que es eyssit de lu a la boca de la mayre lies a la coyssa de la femna, e aprop cristeriza aquela am enguent e tetrafarmacon; quar aquel fara poyrir aquela aprop alcus dias e sira dissolvuda e sira fora-getada.	But if it is not expelled by all the causes we have recommended, then be careful not to overexert in repetitive attempts at evacuation. Instead, ensure that what has been discharged from inside reaches the mouth of the mother and then apply to the woman a combination of enema and tetrapharmacon; for this will cause it to solidify within her for several days and then it will dissolve and be expelled.
Mays quan se poyreys, es de lu elevada mala audor al cap, e al estomac, e aquo ledeys la malauta; e adonc cove que sian aministradas sub-fumiguacios e convenientz ad aquo.	But when it solidifies, it rises to the head and to the stomach, causing illness; then it is necessary to administer appropriate fumigations and treatments suitable for this condition.
Mays alcus dels Antics ja so esproatz sub-fumigacio de nazitort e de figuas seccas.	But some of the Ancients already recommended fumigation with nard and dried figs.
Forma de instrument am le qual la femna es sub-fumiguada deves la retentio de mestruas e de la segondina:	Form of an instrument with which the woman is fumigated due to the retention of menstruation and for her recovery:
Sia fayta de veyre o de eram.	It should be made of wood or ivory.
E sia pausada la extremitat subtil en le conh e la extremitat ampla sobre le foc, e la sub-fumiguacio sia pausada sobre las brazas del foc.	And the narrow end should be placed in the vagina and the wider end over the fire, and the fumigation should be placed on the coals of the fire.
E tengua aquela entro que sia consumida aquela sub-fumiguacio e itera·n autra.	And keep it inside until the fumigation is consumed and repeat it with another one.
De curacio del cul del enfant no-perforat.	On the treatment of the unopened anus of a child.
Motz enfantz naysso e les culs de lu no so perforatz, les quals ya ciphac subtil e opilat.	Many children are born with their anuses not perforated, which must be carefully and skillfully opened.
Adonc cove a la matrona que perfore am le sieu dit aquel ciphac; e sino, perfora aquel am spatum agut, e guarda se que no toque le lacert.	Then it should be the midwife's task to puncture that said closure with her finger; and if not, she must do so using a sharp probe, taking care not to touch the membrane.
E aprop pause sobre aquel lana enfusa en vi e oli; e aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia senat.	And then apply a poultice made of boiled lint and oil; and subsequently treat that area until it is healed.
Mays si temes que sia opilat, lahoras pausa en le trauc una canula per motz dias, e osta la quan le enfant voldra degerir.	But if you fear that it may close up again, then insert a cannula for several days, and remove it when the child needs to defecate.
E ja accideys oppilacio del cul per consolidacio de plagua o de apostema; adonc cove que aquela consolidacio sia inscidida, e aprop sia curada am aquo que avem dit de la curacio e del plom.	And it often happens that the anus becomes obstructed due to the healing of an injury or abscess; then it must be necessary to cut into that hardening, and afterwards it should be treated as we have said regarding treatment and lead.
De curacio de las fistulas que endeveno dejos.	On the treatment of fistulas that occur below.
Las fistulas que endeveno en la partida dejos pus bassa so nodacio e grossetut las quals endeveno prop del cul defora o en l’espazi de la una partida.	Fistulas that occur in the lower part near the anus are usually hard and thick, which appear close to the anus or in the area nearby.
E es una fistula o motas.	And it is one fistula or multiple.
E cum aquela nodacio es antiquada e corr de la humiditat aygosa blanca o poyridura subtil, e alcunas veguadas so de aquestas fistulas alcunas penetrantz.	And as that hardening becomes old and emits watery white or subtle pus, and sometimes these fistulas penetrate further.
E aquelas penetrantz so conogudas per aquo que es eyssit de aquelas per la egressio e per ventosetat; e alcunas vetz use le malaute de egressio, e fort leu es eyssit de aquelas verm.	And these penetrating ones are known by what is discharged from them during defecation and due to flatulence; and sometimes there is a bad discharge during defecation, which clearly indicates their presence.
E so de aquelas fistulas alcunas veguadas en l’espazi penetrantz entro a la vesica, e entro al meat de la vergua; e so de aquelas penetrantz entro la junctura de la coyssa e entro al notz de la coeta.	And some of those fistulas penetrate into the space entering the bladder, and entering the urethra of the penis; and some of them penetrating into the joint of the buttock and into the root of the thigh.
E aquo en que es conoguda fistula penetrant entro al cul e no-penetrant, es que tu metas le tieu dit endic en le cul, e entrometas tenta subtil de eram o de ferr en la fistula quan no y es turtuositat.	And in that which is known as a penetrating fistula into the anus and a non-penetrating one, it is that you place your finger inside the anus, and insert a fine probe of hair or iron into the fistula when there is no tortuosity.
Mays si en aquela es turtuositat, lahoras entromet en aquela tenta subtil de plom o de pels de caval entro que tu sentas la tenta o le pel en le tieu dit.	But if there is tortuosity in that one, then insert the fine probe of lead or horsehair into it until you feel the probe or hair with your finger.
E si no sentas aquela de tot ni no procezeys del trauc alcuna causa de egestio ni verm ni ventositat, ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras sapias que es no-penetrant, e lahoras coyta te a la curacio.	And if you do not feel any of this nor proceed with the probe to find any cause of evacuation such as pus, worm, or air, as we have said, then you know that it is non-penetrating, and at that time, treat it accordingly.
E quan la fistula es penetrant entro a la vesica o entro al meat de la vergua, lahoras la significacio de lu es eyssiment de urina de aquela e prohibicio de lu ad aysso que·l loc am medicina sia consolidat.	And when the fistula is penetrating into the bladder or into the urethra of the penis, then the significance of that is it discharges urine from there and prohibits it from doing so to allow the affected area to heal.
Mays si es penetrant entro la junctura de la coyssa o entro al os e envencio de dolor en le circuit, lahoras senhal de lu es que la tenta perve entro aqui si en lu no es turtuositat entro al os, e envencio de dolor en le circuit de la partida; e que de lu yeys poyredura tostemps; e que no val en aquela medicacio, ni es consolidada am enguent.	But if it is penetrating into the joint of the buttock or into the bone and there is pain around the area, then the sign of that is that the probe passes through here if in the fistula there is no tortuosity leading to the bone, and there is pain around the affected area; and you will have continuous pus discharge; and medication does not help in that case, nor does it heal easily.
E en totas aquelas fistulas penetrant no es curacio de tot, e la curacio de aquelas es trebalh e vanetat dels folyls metges sobre·l qual so fermatz.	And in all those penetrating fistulas, there is no complete cure, and the treatment of these is laborious and futile for many physicians, upon which such certainty rests.
Mays en aquela que no es penetrant e no antiqua, sanacio am ferr es sperada segon que yeu a tu recomtare, e aquo que ja yeu e proat.	In that which is not penetrating and not ancient, healing by iron is hoped for as I will tell you, and this which I have experienced and proved.
E es que le malaute jagua entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos e eleva las cambas de lu entro sus, las coyssas sian enclinadas al ventre de lu, e aprop entromet tenta de plom, o de eram si es en la fistula turtuositat, entro que sapias le loc on perve la tenta.	And it is that the patient should lie between your thighs with their buttocks raised and their legs bent towards their stomach, and then insert a lead probe, or an iron one if it is in a tortuous fistula, until you know where the probe passes.
E si aquela sent le malaute entorn le cuol, lahora cove que tu entrometas le tieu dit endic en le cuol.	And if you feel the patient's pain around the anus, then it is necessary for you to insert your finger into the anus.
E si sentas en le tieu dit la tenta ja per si meteyssa descuberta penetrar, otra aquo que sentas entre le tieu dit e aquela siphac o carn, lahoras sapias certanament que aquela es penetrant; e adonc no trebalhes en aquela, quar no es en aquela sanacio, ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you feel with your finger that the probe has already penetrated by itself, or what you feel between your finger and that tissue or flesh, then you know certainly that it is penetrating; and at that moment do not work on it, because there is no healing in such cases, as we have said.
Mays empero diyssero alcus que es sana en alcus homes tart.	But perhaps some may say that it heals in some men slowly.
E de la medicacio per la qual es sperat juvament en lu es que tu ignes cauteri subtil segon le ample de la fistula, ayssi cum es precedit, e intrometas aquel ignit en la fistula entro que pervengua entorn le cuol; e aprop itera aquel doas o tres vetz entro que sapias que ja son adhustas totas aquelas carns ajustadas fistuladas que so semblantz a cana de pluma de ausel.	And for the treatment by which help is hoped for in them, you should ignite a cautery subtly according to the size of the fistula, as has been described, and insert that heated instrument into the fistula until it reaches around the anus; and then repeat this two or three times until you know that all those inflamed tissues around the fistula are now constricted like the quill of a bird.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder entro que en yescan totas aquelas carns que so adhustas, e aprop cura aquela am medicinas la carn engendrantz e consolidantz, e si es sanada, bo es; e sino, lahoras no es sana en degun temps per autra curacio.	And then treat that with bandages soaked in butter until all those constricted tissues heal, and afterwards treat it with medicines that generate and consolidate the flesh. If it heals, that is good; but if not, then it will not heal at any time by any other treatment.
E si la tenta intra, e no penetra entro·l tieu dit le qual es en le cul, e entre aquel e la tenta que es velament spes de carn o de ciphac, e vezes la fistula en aquo que siec la superficia de la codena, lahoras secca la codena del comensament de la fistula, e tu ve seccan am la tenta, e sia en la fistula entro que la seccio pervengua al loc en le qual perve la extremitat de la tenta, e per la tenta es liberat e catz.	And if the probe enters and does not penetrate further inside; you say to which is in the anus, and between that and the probe there is a membrane of flesh or skin, and times the fistula is in what appears on the surface of the buttocks, then dries up the area from the beginning of the fistula, and you see drying up both the probe, and it should be inside the fistula until the drying reaches the place where the tip of the probe reaches, and through the probe it is freed and cured.
E aprop mundifiqua aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so asembladas a canula de pena de ausel e no romangua de aquelas alcuna causa.	And then cleanse those fleshy parts affected by the fistula, which are assembled like a quill pen tube and do not tear any of them for lack of cause.
Mays si flux de sanc vezes que vengua entre tu e la tua opperacio quan ensideysses aquelas carns, lahoras le milh que sia e del pus leugier instrument es cauterizar am foc o am medicina acuta, quar cauteri am foc ajusta bonas doas habitutz: so es adhustio de aquelas carns ajustadas, e abscizio del sanc exseccacio de las humiditatz.	But if a flow of blood sometimes comes between you and your operation when dissecting those fleshes, then the moment it happens, quickly use an acute instrument to cauterize with fire or sharp medicine, for cauterizing with fire adjusts two good habits: one is adjusting those flesh parts that are adhered, and the other is stopping the blood by drying out the moisture.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder o en caus trissat entro que·l loc geta brac, e aprop lahoras cura la plagua am enguentz carn dura engendran e consolidan.	And then treat that with poultices wrapped in cloth or soft leaves until the area gets better, and afterwards cure the wound with hard flesh-producing remedies that generate and consolidate.
E so medicinas en las quals so stipticitat e exseccio; quan lahoras es restaurada ja es sanada e no temes iteracio.	And medicines in which there is astringency and drying; when these are restored, it is healed, and you need not fear recurrence.
Mays si la fistula ja perve entro al preon del cul e es elonguada de lu superficia del cos, lahoras entromet le tieu dit en le cul e inquireys am aquel.	But if the fistula already penetrates into the inner part of the anus and is extended from the surface of the body, then insert your finger into the anus and examine it.
E donc si centes la tenta e entre tu e ela es velament de ciphac o de carn, e es propda a la penetracio, lahora no es operacio en lu sino segon via di fiducia e de speransa.	And therefore, if you feel the probe and between it and your finger there is a membrane of skin or flesh, and it is ready for penetration, then at that moment there is no operation to be done but rather proceed by faith and with hope.
La qual causa es aministrar en lu una de tres manieyras: o que cauterize aquela ayssi cum havem dit; o que secces aquela entro que consieguas la conquavitat de lu per que sia a tu possible entrometre las qualcas e la curacio propdana; e no procesiscas mot am seccio per so que no inscidas le lacert contenent le cuol, e que accidisque sobre le malaute eyssiment de la egistio ses voluntat; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit quar fort leu sira sanat; o que elongues aquel velament e mondes aquel pus que seccas aquel entro prop le cul, ayssi cum havem dit, o am tenta o am autre instrument de aguda extremitat, e aprop mondifique aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so en la seccio entro la on podes am percrustacio; e aprop esforsa te a far la restauracio de tota la plagua am seccio, e si le orrifici pus desus no es consolidat, e romangua la fistula uberta en la partida del cul, e sira pus leugier per le malaute.	The cause is to treat it in one of three ways: either cauterize it as we have said; or dry it until you achieve the condition where it is possible for you to introduce certain instruments and the proper treatment; and do not proceed with drying if it might injure the muscle containing the vein, and ensure that this procedure does not cause pain to the patient against their will; then cure it as we have said because it will be easily healed; or lengthen that membrane and clean that pus which you dry inside near the anus, as we have said, either with a tent or another sharp instrument; then purify those ulcerated flesh around where you can proceed with incision; and then strive to perform the restoration of all the wound by drying, and if the upper opening is not consolidated, leave the fistula open in the part of the anus, and it will be easier for the patient.
E alscunas veguadas la fistula es finida segon aquesta manieyra: es quan tu entrometas la tenta en la fistula, e es en le latz del cul entorn la superficia del cos am la codena e en le marge del cul, lahoras pren tenta de perforada extremitat, que es ayssi cum agulha de preparantz les coers segon aquesta forma:	And sometimes the fistula is treated in this way: when you introduce the tent into the fistula, and it is near the left side of the anus around the surface of the body with the cords and at the margin of the anus, then take a perforated tip, which is like a needle prepared according to this form:
e entromet en aquela fiel envolopat de v fiels o entorn aquels; e aprop entromet tenta am fiel en la fistula entro que consiegua la conquavitat de lu.	and introduce it wrapped in three fibers or around them; then insert the tent with the fiber into the fistula until you achieve the condition where it is possible for you to proceed.
Mays si es penetrant en le marge del cul prop dedintz, lahoras tu extratz le fiel de aquel trauc ayssi que tu intrometas le tieu dit en le cul; e extraguas la extremitat del fiel e ajustes las duas extremitatz essemps, e estrenh cascuna, e leyssa aquo per un dia o per dos, e quan mays inscideys le fiel en la carn, estrenh be aquel entro que aquelas carns sian inscididas las quals so entre doas extremitatz del fiel e que cajan.	But if it penetrates the margin of the anus towards the inside, then you extract the fiber from that tract as though you were introducing your finger into the anus; and pull out the tip of the fiber and tie both ends securely, and leave it like this for one or two days, and when you incise the fiber in the flesh, tighten it well so that those parts of the flesh between the two ends of the fiber may heal.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia consolidada e sanada.	Regarding the treatment of the internal injury until it is healed and consolidated.
Mays si le orrifici de la fistula no es penetrant, lahoras fay aquel penetrar, en qualque manieyre sia a tu preparat, sino que sia mot en le preon, quar no es a tu que fassas aquo per que no inscidas le lacert; e aprop fay am aquela entro que sia sanada.	If the openings of the fistula are not penetrable, now make them penetrable in whatever way you have prepared, but do not force it into the front, for it is not up to you to do this so as not to injure the rectum; and then proceed with that until it is healed.
La forma de spatum spinos am lo qual es fenduda la fistula: la curvitat del qual es mot aguda e l’autra partida es no-aguda, per so que no inscidas aquo que no es necessari, ayssi cum vezes.	The shape of the spatum with spines with which the fistula is incised: its curvature should be sharp and the other part not sharp, so that you do not injure what is unnecessary, as often happens.
De sutura de emorroydas en las quals corra sanc en la inscizio de aquelas.	Regarding the suturing of hemorrhoids in which pus flows during the incision of those hemorrhoids.
Emorroydas so segon dos manieyras, quar o so entre le cul semblantz aysi que es de carbos, o quays aquelas sian cum a gras de rasim.	Hemorrhoids occur in two ways: either they appear around the anus resembling coal lumps, or they are like grape clusters.
E de aquelas so petitas e grans, e que le sanc corr de aquelas tostemps e es una, e so motas, e so fora·l cul, e en las extremitatz de lu.	And they can be small and large, and the pus flows from them continuously and is constant, and they are multiple, and some are near the anus, and at its extremities.
Mays empero aquelas que so foro le cul so segon las mes de pauca humiditat, de las quals corr aygua citrina o un petit de sanc am cos continuabla, e so segon la color del cos.	However, those that are outside the anus are due to less humidity, from which yellowish water or a little blood mixed continuously flows, and their appearance depends on the color of the skin.
E la curacio de aquela que es dedintz le cuol es que comandes al malaute que se assela e que se exprema entro que le cuol yesca e las emoroydas apparescan a tu.	And the treatment for those that are inside the anus is to instruct the patient to sit down and apply pressure until the anus opens and the hemorrhoids become visible to you.
Adonc tu te coyte e suspen am uncis o que tenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, e aprop incideys aquelas deves las suas razitz.	Then you proceed carefully and use hooks or what you have to grasp them with your fingernail, and then incise those along their roots.
Mays si les uncis no so tengutz en aquelas per la humiditat de lor e mollificacio de aquelas, lahoras pren aquelas am drap aspre o am coto o am flassada de lana, e extratz aquelas am les tieus ditz, e aprop inscideys aquelas e polveriza sobre lor alcunas polveras caudas aprop la inscizio, per que sian ad aquelas en loc de cauteri; o cauteriza aquelas segon que es precedit en le capitol de cauterizar.	If the hooks do not hold in them because of their humidity and softness, then take a rough cloth or basket or wool flax, and extract them with these tools mentioned. Then cut them open and sprinkle some powder appropriate to the incision on them, as a substitute for cauterization; or cauterize them as previously described in the chapter on cauterizing.
E aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And afterwards, treat them with other treatments until they are healed.
E si le cul no obezeys a egressio, lahoras cristerisa le malaute am cristeri en le qual sia mordicacio petita, e sia lavat am aquel aquo que es en le cuol e que obezesca a egressio leugierament quan le malaute s’esprem.	And if the pus does not yield to evacuation, then incise the abscess with an incision that is small and wash it with the water in which it has been soaking until the pus evacuates quickly when pressed.
Mays si las emorroydas so defora le cul, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiera, e es que tu prenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, o que prenguas aquelas am unci, e inscidas aquelas, e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit entro que sian sanadas.	But if the hemorrhoids are outside the anus, then their cause is easily treated. You should take them with your finger or hook, and incise them, and afterwards treat them as we have said until they are healed.
E aquel que avoreys inscizio, cove que aministres sutura de lor segon aquesta manieyra: pren fiel envolopat e entromet aquel en agulha e aprop extratz las emorroydas a las partidas dessus, e fay aquel penetrar am la agulha en la razit del autra part, e envolveys las doas extramitatz del fiel en la partida pus dejos de la agulha, e so latitudinalment; e estrenh la emorroyda am strectura fort, e aprop noza le fiel e extratz la agulha.	And for one who requires an incision, you should administer suturing according to this method: take silk wrapped around a needle and then extract the hemorrhoids at the top part, and make it penetrate with the needle into the opposite side opening, and tie both ends of the thread below the needle horizontally; tighten the hemorrhoid firmly with the structure, and then knot the silk and withdraw the needle.
E fay aquo a totas, e layssa de aquelas una e no la cozes, per so que la superfluitat del sanc corra de aquela.	And do this for all of them, leaving one unstitched so that the excess blood can flow from it.
E aprop pausa sobre le cul drap enfus en oli rozat o en cerot; e pausa aquel sobre·l cuol e comanda al malaute que·s repause.	And afterwards, place on the anus a cloth infused in rose oil or wax; and place that over it and instruct the patient to rest.
E aprop layssa aquela entro que caja; e quan es casuda, cura aquelas am enguentz o am autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	This is from inside that which enters the cavity; and when it is enclosed, treat those things with whatever cure is within so that it may be healed.
De curacio de fistulas.	On the Treatment of Fistulas.
Motas veguadas accideys per exseccacio de fenda o per costriccio de natura.	Fistulas often occur due to the excessive length of a fissure or constriction of nature.
E cum so antiquadas e no val en aquela medicina, lahoras cove que tu razas aquelas am la puncta de spatum o am la tua ungla entro que sian faytas humidas e sia hostada de aquelas la escorsa pus desus, la qual prohibeys aquelas de consolidacio; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian consolidadas.	And when they become old and do not respond to that medicine, now you should shave those parts with the edge of a spatula or with your nail so that they become moist and are covered by the scab pus above, which prevents their consolidation; and then treat them so that they may consolidate.
Lahoras tu osta aquelas am razio pus vehement que la primieyra entro que mot sancno e sian excoriadas; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	Now you should scrape away the pus more vigorously than at first until blood appears and the area is excoriated; and then treat them so that they may heal.
De curacio de almesamir, so es clau.	On the Treatment of Almesamir, which is a key method.
Sapias que alamermar, so es clau, e no es si no notz redon segon la color del cors semblant a cap de claviel, e es fayt en tot le cors e majorment en las partidas dejos les pes e als ditz, e endeve per aquels dolor deves le anament.	Know that alamermar, which is a key ingredient, and it is nothing but red spots similar to the head of a nail in color on the body, and it is found throughout the body but more so below the waist and in the said areas, and from these pains you should treat the ailment.
E adonc cove que sia inscidit aquo que es en le circuit del clau, e sia tengut am les forfexs o am unci, e sia eradicat de la sua razit; e aprop cura aquel.	Then you should incise what is around the key area, and hold it with forceps or tweezers, and eradicate it from its root; and then treat that area.
E si vols, cauteriza le segont que es precedit en le sieu capitol.	And if you wish, cauterize the following area as described in its chapter.
Mays de veruca es eminencia petita aspre fistulada redonda sobre la superficia del cos, e motas veguadas veno en las mas dels enfantz.	A wart is a small, rough, fistulated round elevation on the surface of the body, and they often appear in most children.
E curacio de lu es que estendas e inscidas aquela, o que estrenhas aquela am fiel o am pel entro que caja.	Of the treatment of wounds that are extended and incised, one should clean them thoroughly with fine or animal hair that lies flat.
E si vols, cauteriza aquo, segon que havem dit, am foc o am medicina acuta.	And if you wish, cauterize it as we have said, with fire or with acute medicine.
E ja so eradicadas enversas e no-enversas am le instrument le qual yeu diyre.	And now the opposites and non-opposites are eradicated with the instrument of which I shall speak.
Mays formica es eminencia petita feutrada o fistulada grossa sobre la superficia del cos anant mot en le preon, e quan le freg atroba aquela es centit en lu semblant de mordificacio de formigua, e es fayta entorn le cos.	A boil is a small fluffy or large hollow swelling on the surface of the body that hurts to touch, and when it becomes hard like an ant bite, it forms around the body.
E curacio de lu es que prenguas una canula de pena de auca o de pena de voltor, e sia fort, e pausa aquela sobre la formigua entro que la contengua le cercle de la canula de las partidas de lu; e aprop revolveys la tua ma am la canula entro que inscidas aquo que es en le circuit de la formigua, e pauses aquela en le preon de la carn, e que eradiques la formigua de la sua razit.	The treatment for this is to take a needle of eagle feather or vulture feather, and let it be strong, and place that on the boil so that it contains the circle of the needle around the parts of it; and then revolve your hand with the needle so that you incise what is in the circuit of the boil, and place it in the pain of the flesh, and ensure that you eradicate the boil from its root.
E si vols, fay aquo am canula de eram o de ferr segon aquesta forma:	And if you wish, do this with a needle of wood or iron according to this method:
Sia la partida desus de la canulha trahent a subtilitat, sorda (so es no-perforada), envolopada per so que sobre le dit la aprencio de lu sia ablaviada e la revolucio de aquela.	Let the tip above the needle be sharp, smooth (that is, unperforated), wrapped in such a way that when held by the finger it feels blunt and the rotation of it is smooth.
E si vols cauteriza la formiga segon que es denant dit en la cauterizacio de atheyl en le capitol de cauteri.	And if you wish to cauterize the boil as mentioned before in the chapter on cauterization.
De forma dels instrumentz que so aministratz a dar cristeri.	Of the forms of the instruments that you administer to patients.
Alcunas veguadas es fayt cristeri de argent o de lato o de eram fondut o malleat; e alcunas veguadas es fayt de aquels instrumentz petit e gran segon aquels als quals so aministratz, quar aquel que es aministrat en la curacio dels petitz enfants sia petit; e de aquel dels quals los culs son freuls o doloyrozes, les cristeris de aquels sian petitz.	Some cups are made of silver or lead or soft and malleable metal; and some cups are made of those instruments small and large according to those to whom they are administered, for the one who is treated in the cure of little children should be small; and of those whose anus is narrow or painful, the cups of those should be small.
La forma de cristeri gran e pauc:	The form of the large and few cup:
Le cap de la canula de lu desus en le qual es liada la borsa sia ampla segon aquesta manieyra; e sia a lu distinacio la on la borsa es liada ayssi cum vezes.	The top of the cannula of leather above which the bag is tied should be wide according to this method; and it should be at the place where the bag is tied as you see.
E la extremitat de lu pus dejus, la qual es entromesa en le cul, sia sorda (so es no-uberta) mot leon, atrasent a subtilita; e en la un del latz de lu sian dos traucs, e en l’autre costat un trauc, e sia la amplesa del trauc segon la groseza dels rays e pus gros un petit.	And the extremity of the tube below, which is inserted into the anus, should be blunt (that is, not open) like a lion, with subtlety; and on one side of it there are two flanges, and on the other side one flange, and the width of the flange should be according to the thickness of the rays and slightly thicker.
E sia la borsa en la qual sian pausadas las medicinas de vesica de bestia o de pel de ovelha, e la razit de lu sia un palm.	And the bag in which the medicines are placed should be made of animal bladder or sheep's wool, and the size of it should be one palm.
E sia perforada per motz traucs ayssi cum es revolvuda; e si l’espazi le qual es entre les traucs la grossetut del dit.	And it should be perforated with threads as it is twisted; and if the space between the threads is as thick as a finger.
E aprop entromet en aquels traucs fiel fort de fiel cru le qual sia de detz fiels, o enviro aquels; e ajusta am aquel la borsa; e quan es pausada en lu la borsa, sia streyt en le cap del cristeri entre dos distingentz am fort costriccio, e aprop cristeriza am aquel quascun trauc: Mays la qualitat de cristerizar am aquel es que tu omples la borsa de la medicina, que sia escalfada segon la quantitat de la tolleransa del malaute; e guarda te que no sia trop cauda ni trop freja.	And then insert into those threads strong thread of raw honey, or around them; and adjust the bag accordingly; and when the bag is placed on it, it should be tight at the top of the cup between two distinct strong constrictions, and immediately apply the cup to each thread. However, the quality of applying the cup in this manner is that you fill the bag with medicine, which should be heated according to the quantity tolerated by the patient; and be careful not to make it too hot or too cold.
E aprop le malaute sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos, e eleva las suas cambas en sus e pausa dejos lu un cuer sobre le qual ja so les homes o un lansol; e aprop unta la extramitat del cauteri am oli o am album de huou o am mucellage de fenugrec o de semblantz; e aprop entromet aquel en le cul am facilitat, e aprop le ministre prengua la borsa e exprema aquel am doas mas e essemps am vehemencia entro que sia evacuat en le budelh tot aquo que es en le cristeri; e aprop extra le cristeri e le malaute leva las suas cambas a la paret.	Let the patient lie on their back, and raise his buttocks with something under them, such as a cushion or a small pillow; then anoint the end of the cautery with oil or egg white or fenugreek mucilage or similar; then gently insert it into the anus with ease; and let the assistant take the bag and squeeze it vigorously inside until everything in the rectum is evacuated; then remove the catheter from the rectum, and the patient lowers his buttocks to the bed.
E si la medicina forsa aquel a eyssiment, tengua le tant quant poyra; e si dorm am aquel per tota una nueyt, es mays derier en juvament.	And if the medicine causes him to vomit, let it do so as much as possible; and if he sleeps with it all night, it is better for his recovery.
Mays si tu cristerizas aquel en las malautias de solucio de ventre e l’eyssiment de lu le coyta, lahoras tu itera le cauteri entro que sia sanat.	But if you treat him for diarrhea and vomiting due to abdominal issues with the cathartic, then continue using the catheter until he is healed.
E si en le cul so emorroydas o apostemas ledens, lahoras sia le cristeri mot subtil e leon, dels cristeris am les quals les enfantz so criterisatz.	And if there are hemorrhoids or abscesses in the anus, then use a catheter that is fine and soft, like those used for children's enemas.
De curacio de las plaguas.	On the treatment of plagues.
Yeu ja e dit en la divisio de la curacio de las plaguas aquo que convenia al libre, e yeu dic assi la curacio de aquelas am ma e am medicinas segon le conpliment.	I have already stated in the division of the treatment of plagues what was appropriate for the book, and I will now describe the treatment of those with plague using medicines according to the regimen.
Donc dic que las plaguas son diversificadas segon aquo en que son faytas las plaguas e segon le loc sobre le qual cazo las plaquas.	Therefore, I say that plagues are diverse depending on how the plagues are caused and depending on the location where the plague occurs.
E las causas per que motas vetz son faytas las plaguas so ayssi cum getament de peyra, o inscisio d’espaza o de cotel, o percussio am lansa, o am fustz, o am sageta, o semblantz ad aquels de motas causas.	And the causes by which such plagues are caused are things like the penetration of a stone, or the cutting by a sword or knife, or the striking with a lance, or a staff, or an arrow, or similar to those from various causes.
Mays las plaguas que so en les locz del cos so ayssi cum plagua la qual catz sobre le cap, o·l col, o·l pietz, o·l ventre, o·l fitge, e semblantz ad aquels dels membres.	Here are the plagues that occur in the parts of the body such as the plague which affects the head, the neck, the feet, the belly, the back, and similar ones affecting the limbs.
E yeu so recomtant la curacio de alcunas plaguas per que pauses aquela ratiocinacio e regla sobre las autras plaguas.	And I recommend the treatment of certain plagues, so that you pause that reasoning and rule regarding other plagues.
E yeu comensare de las plaguas del cap simplas, quar la rememoracio de las compostas vindra al comensament del tertz capitol.	And I will begin with the simple plagues of the head, for the memory of the compound ones will come at the beginning of the third chapter.
Donc dic que quan accideys en le cap plagua simpla e no es fractura, lahoras considera: si es per getament de peyra o de semblant, e ja ha trinquada la codena tant solament e es gran plagla e temes sobre aquel malaute havinement de apostema caut, lahoras tu te coyta e fleubotoma la cephalica tantost, e no tardas aquo; e extrats ad aquel del sanc segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu si no mes alcuna causa prohibent de fleubotomia, majorment si·l sanc que es eyssit de la plagua es pauc.	Therefore, I say that when you encounter a simple plague in the head and it is not a fracture, at this moment consider: if it is due to an impact from a stone or similar object, and if the bone has only been cracked but it is a large wound and you fear there might be a dangerous abscess, then immediately treat yourself and perform trepanation on the cephalic area without delay; do not postpone this unless there is some prohibitive cause for avoiding trepanation, especially if the blood that flows from the wound is minimal.
E sia la flaubotomia del contrari de la partida plaguada; e guardase le malaute de replecio e de vi e de viandas grossas.	And let the trepanation be on the opposite side of the affected area; and protect the patient from swelling and rich foods and heavy meals.
Mays si de la minuicio prohibeys alcuna causa, lahoras sia aminorat de la vianda e no apropinque a carn ni a vi.	But if some minor cause prohibits it, then reduce the amount of food and do not approach meat or rich foods.
E pausa sobre la plagua, si a lu accideys apostema caut, coto enfus en oli rozat solet o en vi en le qual es stipticat.	And pause concerning the plague, if an abscess forms, and then apply it only to rose oil or in a mixture that is styptic.
Mays si est segur de apostema caut, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua, si es recent am le sieu sanc e le ayre no ha mudat aquela la polvera la qual yeu recomtare aprop petit.	But if you are sure of a dangerous abscess, then pause concerning the wound, if it is fresh and the blood has not yet clotted and the air has not changed the powder that I recommend to apply slightly.
E si le ayre ja ha mudada aquela, lahoras pausa sobre alscus enguentz entro que sia sanada.	And if the air has already changed that, then wait until it is healed.
Mays si la plagua es gran o es per inscizio d’espaza e de semblantz, e no so ajustadas las labias de lu per puvils, lahoras ajusta aquelas am sutura segon que yeu recomtare de la sutura de lor.	And if the wound is large or caused by a sword cut and the lips of it are not suitable to be stitched together, then stitch those as I will describe regarding the stitching of such wounds.
Mays si la plagua ja es discuberta del os e pen, e no es retencio de lu sino un petit suspensori, lahoras inscideys aquela e aprop cura la plagua am medicinas e restaura la carn aprop en loc de codena, e comanda al malaute que sia pescut de viandas en las quals es groceza: caps e formen coyt e semblantz a lor, entro que sia compost.	And if the wound is already exposed to the bone and sinew, and there is no need for it to be held back but only a small suspensorium, then cut that and promptly treat the wound with medicines and restore the flesh in place of the sutures, and instruct the patient to eat foods that are easy to digest: broth and similar liquids, until they recover.
E si atrobas en la codena putrefaccio e no adhereys al os, lahoras tu inscideys tot aquo poyrit e geta aquo, e aprop cura aquo.	And if you find that the sutures are putrefied and do not adhere to the bone, then cut away all of it and remove it, and subsequently treat the area.
Mays si en aquestas plaguas es arteria o vena de la qual fluxs de sanc pot evenir, e no es abscindida per medicinas, lahoras tu inquier sobre la arteria, e si atrobas aquela no-inscidida, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am spatum, o lia aquela; e si necessitat te provoca que aquo que havem dit no comfereys, lahoras tu cauteriza entro que·l sanc sia abscidit.	And if in these wounds there is an artery or vein from which blood flow can occur and it cannot be stopped with medicines, then press on the artery. If you find that it has not been cut, then cut it with a scalpel or ligate it; and if necessity compels you to do what we have said does not suffice, then cauterize until the bleeding stops.
E si aquestas plaguas son simplas e petitas, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiere; enayssi que tu polverizas sobre aquelas aquesta polvera, quar consolidada aquela denant que l’ayre mude aquelas.	And if these wounds are simple and small, then the cause of them is minor. Therefore, you can powder them with this powder, as it will consolidate them before the air changes them.
E la manieyra de la polvera es aquesta: recipe oli de enses partida una, de sanc de drago partida doas, de caus no-extincta partidas tres; sia tot mot trissat e crivellat, e de lu sia la plagua omplida, e sia constrengida per bona constriccio entro que be sobre aquela aderesca, e sia coagulada am le sanc.	And the method for the powder is as follows: take oil of sesame one part, dragon's blood two parts, and burnt frankincense three parts; mix them all together thoroughly and sieve it. Use this to fill the wound, and bind it tightly with good bandaging so that it adheres well to the wound, and let it coagulate with the blood.
E aprop strengeys aquela desus am pulvils e leyssa aquela, e no la deslias mentre esta ayssi que no es apostemada, quar no es eredicada de lu la medicina entro que sia sanada.	And apply bandages tightly over the poultices and leave them on without removing them while it is still such that it has not become an abscess, for medicine does not reach it to heal it until it becomes healthy.
E alcuna vetz fa aquo sola cautz, quan no es a tu en present enses e sanc de drago.	And sometimes this cure is used alone when it is not at hand to use the gall and blood of a dragon.
E ja fa aquesta meteyssa operacio en las grans plaguas quan conveneys que sia pausada sobre aquelas e sian streytas, e so plaguas recentz am le lor sanc, las quals le ayre no ha alteradas.	And this method of operation is used for large wounds when it is necessary to place them open and make them narrow, and for fresh wounds with their blood, which the air has not altered.
E si le ayre las ha alteradas, e majorment quan es en temps d’estiu, lahoras no es entencio a la posicio de aquesta polvera, mays adonc cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit, enayssi que tu pauses sobre aquelas alcus enguents degistius, o que pauses sobre aquelas pols de la farina del ordi am aygua e mel entro que getan poyredura; e aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And if the air has altered them, especially when it is in summer time, then there is no intention to apply this powder, but then treat those with what we have said, namely placing over them some cold digestive drinks, or placing over them flour of barley with water and honey until they begin to rot; and afterward treat those with the other cure until they are healed.
Mays si accideys am la plagua fractura en os, e es petita, lahoras tu extratz aquo am gesti.	But if it happens that the wound is a fracture in the bone and it is small, then you extract that with a probe.
E yeu diyre la cura de las fracturas del cap en aquo que es envenidor.	And I shall speak about the treatment of fractures of the head in what is poisonous.
De las plaguas del col.	Of wounds to the neck.
Mays si la plagua accideys en le col, lahoras no es en lu differencia en medicacio, e entre la plagua del cap quan es simpla.	But if the wound happens on the neck, then there is no difference in treatment, and between the wound of the head when it is simple.
Mays si ja le nervi del col es inscis o arteria, lahoras si es nervi, no es en lu engen sino que sia evitada curacio de lu am aquo que fa vehement stipticitat, ayssi cum ziniar e zegi que es vetriol e semblantz a lor quar nozo als nervis e contrazo aquel.	But if the nerve of the neck is cut or an artery, then if it is a nerve, there should be no wet treatment but rather avoid treatment with what has strong styptic properties, such as zinc oxide and similar substances that do not adhere to the nerves and contract it.
E no pauses sobre la plagua alcuna causa de tot freja, quar la sustancia dels nervis es freja e la continuacio de lu es am le cervel, le qual es le pus aut de totz les membres.	Do not pause on any cause of trembling, for the substance of the nerves is affected and their continuity extends to the brain, which is the source of all members.
E si’ aquo am que es curat de medicinas leugieras, ayssi cum es caus lavada am aygua dousa, alcuna veguada enfusa en oli rozat o no-rozat, e thucia quan es lavada am aygua dousa e las autras peyras minarantz segon aquesta manieyra, e enguentz humitz.	And if this is the case where one is treated with gentle medicines, such as being washed with warm water, sometimes infused in rosin or non-resin oil, and then rubbed with water after washing and other mineral stones are used according to this method, and humidity is found.
Mays si la plagua es gran, lahoras aministra sutura, o coarta las labias de lu, e aprop cura aquela am pulvils entro que sia sanada.	But if the wound is severe, then administer stitches, or bind its edges tightly, and subsequently treat it with powders until it heals.
Mays si a la plagua es profunditat o accideys en lu a la pus bassa partida poyredura, lahoras perfora aquela en le loc mays depremegut.	But if the wound is deep or reaches to its lowest part with decay, then pierce it at the deepest location.
Mays si en la plagua ja es inscisa arteria e es conseguit flux de sanc, lahoras separa o secca aquela, o lia aquela, o cauteriza aquela si necessitat te provoca ad aquo.	But if an artery is already cut in the wound and bleeding occurs, then tie off or clamp it, or ligate it, or cauterize it if necessity demands it.
Mays si ja ha insciditz les spondils del golayro o tot, e so salvadas las venas del col, lahoras tu ajusta las labias de la codena am sutura sobre la cana del golayro e no toques aquel; abantz egala aquel e reduzeys aquel sobre la sua figura natural, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent, e leyssa aquela per alcus jorns; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz en les quals es stipticitat e excitacio entro que sia sanat.	But if the vertebrae of the neck or entire spine have already been cut, and only the veins of the neck remain intact, then adjust the edges of the wound with sutures over the bone of the neck without touching it; instead, equalize it and reduce it to its natural position, and subsequently strengthen it with proper structure, and leave it for several days; then treat it with powders that have astringent and excitatory properties until it is healed.
Mays si la plagua ja en le os a fayta enprecio, lahoras percuireys aquela, e lahoras si en lu ha fragmentz de hos, extratz totz aquels que podes de lor; e aquo que a tu no es apparelhat, leyssa aquo entro que la plagua se poyrisca, e sia separat e la egrecio de lu sia alleujada.	But if the wound has already caused inflammation in the bone, then percuss it, and if there are fragments of bone in it, remove all that you can; and what is not appropriate for you to do, leave until the wound decays and separates, and the swelling subsides.
E si la plagua es recent lahoras polveriza sobre aquela polvera la qual t’e recomtada.	And if the wound is recent, sprinkle over it the powder which has been recommended.
Mays si en la plagua es fayta fistula, lahoras cura aquela am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra aprop en le sieu capitol.	And if a fistula has formed in the wound, then treat it with the liquid whose description will be found later in its chapter.
De las plaguas del col o de semblantz quan fayta entre las spallas e es fayta am spaza o am cotel o am lansa o am semblantz.	Of wounds to the neck or similar that are made between the shoulders, whether by a sword, dagger, lance, or similar weapon.
Si es percussio de lansa o de cotel, e vezes de lu la profunditat, lahoras considera mays si de la plagua yeys ventositat quan le malaute elena; lahoras sapias que la plagua es mortal.	If it is a thrust wound from a lance or dagger, and if you feel the depth of the wound, then consider whether there is swelling when the injured person inhales; now you will know that the wound is fatal.
E si en lu no es profunditat e la plagua es recent am le sieu sanc, lahoras tu pauses en lu de la primieyra horo polvera, e no strenhas aquel per que no sia le sanc retengut en la profunditat de lu e que retorne al cor e que aucigua le malaute, mays pausa en lu enguent atractiu, e deslia aquela doas veguadas le dia.	And if there is no depth to it and the wound is recent with fresh blood, then in the first hour apply powder to it, but do not press it so that the blood does not remain trapped within its depth and return to the heart and injure the patient; rather, use a drawing agent on it twice a day.
E si l’enguent no es a tu present, lahoras tu pausa en le orrifici de la plagua coto viel per que sucque aquo que yeys de las humiditatz; e fay que le malaute dorma sobre la plagua per que corra aquo que es en lu ajustat.	And if the drawing agent is not available to you, then place a cloth on the wound opening so that it absorbs any moisture; and have the patient lie down with the wound lower to allow the fluid collected there to drain.
Mays si ja de la plagua son passatz tres dias o mays e no accideys al malaute spasme ni tremor de cor mal ni strictura de ale, e vezes las autras dispozicios bonas de lu, lahoras sapias que plagua es salva; e adonc cura aquela am calguas e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanada.	But if three days or more have passed since the wound was sustained and no spasms, trembling of the heart, or tightness in the breath has occurred to the patient, and you see other good signs from it, then you will know that the wound is safe; and thus treat it with dressings and other treatments until it is healed.
Mays si la sanacio de lu es excusada, e ja tot temps es uberta, lahoras sapias que ja es fayta fistula; cura donc aquela per le sieu capitol.	But if the healing of it is prevented and a long time has passed, then you will know that a fistula has formed; treat it therefore according to its chapter.
E si la plagua es per inscisio de spaza o de cotel, e es simpla en la superficia del pietz o del dos, lahoras cura aquela am aquo que es precedit de sutura, si es gran, o am polvera, si es petita.	And if the wound is from a sword or knife and is simple on the surface of the skin or flesh, then treat it as with sutures if it is large, or with powder if it is small.
Mays si ja ha fayta enprecio en le os, e so ja de lu inscizas pessas, lahoras tu torqua la plagua e coyta ad extrayre aquelas pessas, si so separadas.	But if it has already penetrated to the bone and some of the cut pieces are in it, then you should twist the wound and try to extract those pieces, if they are separate.
Mays si no so separadas, lahoras leyssa las entro que se poyresca la plagua, que la extraccio de lor es alleujada.	But if they are not separate, then leave them inside until the wound heals, because their removal is difficult.
E de las autras plaguas accidentz en les autres membres le juvament en curacio es le juvament de aquo que havem dit.	And for other wounds in the other limbs, the treatment in healing is as we have said.
De las plaguas del ventre.	Of the wounds of the abdomen.
L’indisposicio la qual accideys en le ventre es o gran, o pauc, o migiera.	The condition that occurs in the abdomen is either severe, slight, or moderate.
De la gran alcunas veguadas yeys le budel o nervi del budel, per que es fayta intromissio de lor e la sutura de lor esser pus vehement e pus subtil.	In severe cases, you may injure the bowel or its nerve, because there is more intrusion and the suturing must be more forceful and more precise.
E disrupcio petita es fayta dificil per autra manieyra, e siec se que la reduccio de lor es pus dificil, si no te coytes de la intromissio de lor al sieu loc tantost, quar se ubre e es engrossat per que le intrament de lu es fayt difficil.	And a small disruption is difficult to fix by another method, and it should be noted that reducing them is more difficult if you do not return them to their proper place immediately, as they will swell and become enlarged, making the instrument difficult to use.
E donc la milhor disrupcio es migiera, quar en aquela no es dificil la reduccio del budel, ayssi cum es dificil en las doas specias denant ditas.	And therefore, the best disruption is moderate, for in that case it is not difficult to reduce the bowel, unlike in the two previous cases mentioned.
E sapias que sutura del ventre es segon quatre manieyras, mays doas suturas son comunas que conveneysso en suturas de las autras plaguas del cors.	And you should know that suturing of the abdomen is done in four methods, but two of these sutures are common and suitable for suturing other wounds of the body.
E duas autras suturas proprias comunican a las autras plaguas, mays empero so mays proprias en la sutura del ventre.	Of two other sutures proper communicate with other wounds, but however more in the suture of the belly.  
E yeu recomti a tu quascuna am exposicio e declaracio.	Here is the translation:
Donc dic que quan la plagua es petita e es eyssit alcuna causa del budel per aquela, e es fayt dificil a reduzir aquel, lahoras aquo es en una de doas manieyras: o per parvitat de la disrupcio ayssi cum havem dit, o quan al budel es venguda inflacio per la frigiditat de l’ayre.	Therefore, I say that when the swelling is small and it has been caused by some reason in the intestine for that purpose, and it is difficult to reduce it, then there are two ways: either because of the smallness of the rupture as we have said, or when inflammation has come upon the intestine due to the coldness of the air.
E donc quan aquo es ayssi, lahora cove que tu scalfes aquel enayssi que tu submerges una sponga ho drap humit en aygua tebeza sola, o que coguas en aygua squinant, e cyperum, e spic, e embroques am aquela le budel entro que la imflacio sia resolvuda.	And therefore when that is so, then it is necessary to warm it in such a way that you submerge a sponge or cloth soaked in lukewarm water alone, or steeped in hot water with cyperus and spica, and apply this to the intestine until the inflammation is resolved.
E alcunas veguadas fa aquo vi en le qual ha stipticitat, e es milhor que la aygua sola en resolucio de la imflacio.	And sometimes you will do this with something that has styptic properties, and it is better than water alone for resolving the inflammation.
E donc cum tu vezes la imflacio esser resolvuda, lahoras tu humecta le budel am aygua en la qual es coyta altea e malvas, quar per aquo es alleujat le intrament de lu am pauca causa.	And when you see the inflammation resolved, then you moisten the intestine with water in which chamomile and mallows have been steeped, for by this the instrument is soothed for a short time.
Mays si es escusat le intrament de lu aprop aquesta curacio, lahoras scindeys la disrupcio un petit am strument am le qual so inscididas emorroydas.	But if the instrument is spared near this treatment, then you should divide the rupture slightly with an instrument with which hemorrhoids are excised.
E la curacio primieyra es milhor, quan es propriada que no es seccio, e no sia occupacio a seccar aprop necessitat e defaliment.	And the first treatment is better, when it is appropriate that there be no cutting, and there is no need to dry out due to necessity and deficiency.
Del instrument, sec se la forma de lu:	Regarding the instrument, this is its form:
La una partida de lu torta aguda, e l’autra partida no-acuta, e la extremitat subtil, e no sia am la subtilitat de spatum, abantz sia obtusa un pauc.	One part of it is sharp-edged, and the other part is not sharp, with a delicate tip, but not as fine as a spatula; rather, it should be slightly blunted.
E donc cum la plagua es amplificada e yeys fora le budel, lahoras cove que la sua reduccio sia segon la forma de lu natural, en le sieu loc propri, si es possible sobre aquo, quar milhor es.	Therefore, when the plague has spread and is outside the abdomen, it now must be that its reduction should follow the form of nature, in its proper place, if possible over that, for better is.
Mays quan la disrupcio es ampla, e es en la partida pu bassa del ventre, lahoras cove que tu fassas jazer le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa las suas cambas pus autas que·l sieu cap; e si es en la partida pus desus del ventre, lahoras tu pause le cap de lu e·l pietz pus autz que las partidas dejos.	But when the disruption is wide and is in the lower part of the abdomen, then it must be that you make the patient lie on their back, and place their arms further away from their head; and if it is in the upper part of the abdomen, then you place their head and feet further apart than the middle parts.
E semblantment si la disrupcio es en una de las doas partz del ventre, lahoras pausa la tua entencio e la tua consideracio tostemps en aysso per que la partida en la qual es la plagua sia pus auta que l’autra.	And similarly, if the disruption is in one of the two sides of the abdomen, then direct your attention and consideration constantly so that the part where the plague is shall be further away than the other.
E ayssi cove que tu aministres aquo en las plaguas grans e en las plaguas migieras.	And so you must administer this in both large and medium-sized ailments.
E en las plaguas petitas, pausa aquo que es a tu preparat, e aprop fay que·l ministre sia entre las tuas mas pyatados, le qual tengua la disrupcio tota am la sua ma e ajusta las labias de lu, e aprop descuebre de aquela ad aquel que siec la sutura alcuna causa aprop autra.	And in small ailments, prepare what is needed, and then have the most skilled minister do it, who holds the disruption entirely with their hand and adjusts the lips of it, and then disclose that to whoever will perform the suture at an appropriate time.
E aquesta es la manieyra de sutura comuna: una que prenguas la agula, o comte de agula segon la cantitat de la amplitut de la plagua; e aprop layssa de la extremitat de la disrupcio del dit anular, e strenh la agula una, otre que tu no metas fiel en las doas extremitatz de la codena, am doas extremitatz del ciphac que es dejos la codena de las partidas dedintz, entro que fassas aquela penetrar de aquela partida; e tu ja has agreguadas doas extremitatz de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, e so faytas quatre ordes.	And this is the common method of suturing: take a needle, or a quantity of needles according to the extent of the wound; then hold from the end of the disrupted area with your ring finger, and pull the needle once, making sure not to place thread at both ends of the suture, between both ends of the tissue that is inside the edges of the wound, until you make it penetrate that part; and when you have attached both ends of the suture and both ends of the tissue, this makes four stitches.
E aprop strenh am fiel doble en le circuit de la agula, e alcunas veguadas de doas partz ensemps, e aprop agregua las doas labias e la plagua per agreguacio decent; e aprop layssa la grossitut del dit e fiqua una autra agulha en aquela, e aprop lia aquela am fiel ayssi cum fiest am la primieyra agulha; e no cesses far aquo si es necessitat am las agulhas entro que ajas complida tota la contriccio de la plagua.	Take a needle with double thread and pass it through the wound from both sides, then bring together the two lips of the wound by sewing them properly; then lay the thickness of your finger on top and put another needle there, and tie that thread as you did with the first needle; and do not stop doing this until you have completely sewn up the entire length of the wound.
E sian las agulhas migieras entre groceza e subtilitat, quar las agulhas subtils mot leugierament insciden la carn; e las grossas so de dificil intrament en la codena, e donc per aquo cove que sian migieras en subtilitat e grosseza.	And the needles should be medium-sized between coarseness and subtlety, for fine needles penetrate the flesh quickly; but thick ones have difficulty entering the tissue, and thus it is convenient that they be medium in both subtlety and size.
E no cove que la agulha sia ficada en doas extremitatz de la codena propdana mot, per so que la carn no sia inscidida leugierament e que la plagua se huebra devant la sua consolidacio.	And it is not convenient for the needle to be placed at both ends of the wound simultaneously, so that the flesh is not cut quickly and the wound does not heal before proper consolidation.
E no sian prolonguadas de sutura per que la plagua no sia prohibida de consolidacio.	And do not extend the stitches too much so that the wound is not hindered from proper consolidation.
E aprop inscideys las extremitatz de las agulhas per so que no ledescan le malaute deves le sieu dormier; e pausaras sobre la sutura pulvils expanduts de tota partida, les quals tenguan las extremitatz de las agulhas; e layssa aquelas entro que sapias que la plagua ja es consolidada.	And then cut the ends of the needles so that they do not bother the patient during sleep; and place powdered substances around the sutures, which will hold the ends of the needles; and leave them in place until you know that the wound has consolidated.
E aquestas specias de sutura am agulhas en cal manieyra es pus convenient en las plaguas petitas, quar habasta en la sutura de lor una agulha o doas o entorn aquelas.	And this type of suture using needles is most convenient for small wounds, as it often suffices to use one or two needles or around that number.
Mays la segonda sutura es cominal: e es que tu aministres am sutura las quatre extremitatz, de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, en una veguada, am agulha en la qual sia fiel envolopat engual en subtilitat e grosseza.	But the second type of suture is common: it involves passing the needle through four points—the edges of the wound and both ends of the tissue—once, with a thread that is appropriately sized in subtlety and thickness.
E aprop quan am la agulha auras penetrat aquestas quatre extremitatz, reduzeys la agulha de aquela meteyssa partida de la qual comensest, per so que le fiel retrayt caja de la pus subirana partida a la plagua, per so que la sutura sia segon sutura de drap am la qual les draps so strengutz.	When you have penetrated these four extremities with the needle, withdraw the needle from that part where you began, so that the thread can be drawn out from the most prominent part of the wound, so that the suture may be a taut suture like the one on cloth in which the threads are tight.
E pausa entre quascuna sutura la quantitat del gros del dit mendre.	And pause between each suture by the amount of the thickness of the little finger.
E aquesta sutura sabo les homes.	And this suture is for the abdomen.
E am tal sutura yeu cozegui la plagua la qual era accidida a un home en le sieu ventre le qual era stat plaguat am un cotel, e era la disrrumpcio de la plagua major de un palm, e era eyssit dels budels entorn dos palms del budel del mieg loc e era la disrupcio en le mieg del membre; e adonc yeu reduzegui aquel depus que le budel havia stat foro la plagua per xxiiii horas.	And in such a suture, I closed the wound that had injured a man's abdomen with a knife, and the disruption of the wound was larger than one palm, and it was situated around two palms from the middle gut and the disruption was in the middle part; then I reduced it after the gut had been outside the wound for twenty-four hours.
E la plagua fo consolidada en le spazi de xv dias o entorn, e curegui aquel e es sanat; e aprop aquo visquec per motz ans, e es conversat en las suas disposicios.	And the wound healed in the space of fifteen days or so, and he was cured and became well; afterward he spoke with difficulty for some words, and then returned to his normal state.
E les autres metges havian jutgat que no fora sanat; e per miracle foc, quar yeu no curegui aquel am enguent, quar era en loc en le qual enguent no era atrobat ni deguna medicina, mays pausegui sobre la plagua coto viel dos veguadas lo dia e ablucio assiduo am aygua de mel entro que foc sanat.	And the other doctors had judged that he could not be cured; but by a miracle of fire, for I did not treat him with any medicine, since it was in a place where no remedy or medicine was available, I merely placed a knife twice daily on the wound and washed it continuously with honeyed water until it healed.
Mays yeu diyre dos specias de sutura proprias segon narracio de Paraula.	But I will describe two types of suture according to the narration of the Text.
E es que tu comenses am sutura de la codena, e entrometas agulha de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz.	And it is that you begin the suture from the outside part and then insert the needle from the outer part to the inner part.
E donc cum la agulha penetra en la codena e en aquel meteys lacertz segon rectetut e en longetut de tot le cos, e layssa la extremita del ciphac en le qual has entromesa la agulha; e fay penetrar en la autra extremitat la agulha de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo en l’autra extremitat del mihat.	And thus when the needle penetrates into the bone and in that place tie knots according to straightness and length of the entire body, and leave the extremity of the suture in which you have inserted the needle; and make it penetrate at the other end from the inside part to the outside part at the other end of the wound.
E don cum tu auras fayta aquela penetrar, lahoras tu fay aquela penetrar autra veguada en aquela meteyssa extremitat del mihat de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz; e leyssa la extramitat del ciphac que es en aquest latz, e fay penetrar la agulha en l’autra extremitat de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo.	And when you have made that penetration, then make another penetration in that same end of the wound from the outside part to the inside part; and leave the extremity of the suture that is in this place, and make the needle penetrate at the other end from the inside part to the outside part.
E fay penetrar am aquela la tua penetracio am la qual fas aquela penetrar en le ciphac en la extremitat del mirat la qual es en la partida de lu entro que tot aquel penetre.	And make that penetration such that when you penetrate it into the suture at the end of the incision, which is in the part inside, all of it penetrates.
E aprop comensa de aquest meteys costat e cus aquel am la extremitat que es del ciphac en l’autra latz, e extratz la agulha de la codena la qual penetrec, e aprop redutz aquela en aquela codena e cos la extremitat del ciphac que es en l’autra costat am aquesta extramitat del mirat; e extratz aquela de la codena la qual es de part de lu.	And then start from this side and bring it to the other side at the end where the suture is, and withdraw the needle from the bone that it penetrates, and then return it to that bone and attach the end of the suture that is on the other side to this end of the incision; and withdraw it from the bone that is on this side.
E fay aquo una veguada e autra, e fay aquo una veguada aprop autre veguada entro que tu cozes tot aquo que es deforo segon aquel eysemple.	And do this one side and then the other, and do this alternately until you sew up everything that is outside according to that example.
E la suma de aquesta manieyra de sutura es que tu cozes am sutura de pellicies am la qual cozo las pels, enayssi que tu cozes le ciphac una veguada de la part de la extremitat de la codena, e que leysses aquela autra veguada entro que la ajas complida.	And the purpose of this suture method is that you sew with a suture of membranes as if you were sewing skins; thus, you sew the suture once from the side of the bone end, and leave it on the other side until it is complete.
Mays la segonda specia de sutura propria la qual dieys eyssament Gualia , e aquest es de sermo de lu e per lu recomtat, es que tu cozas aquela segon semilitut am la qual alcus medicantz cozo aquela, enayssi que agreguan tota partida a la sua compar partida a lu convenient per natura; e aplican la extremitat de autre de lu e la extremitat del mirat al autra extremitat de lu, e aquo es fayt segon que yeu a tu recomti.	Here is the translation:
Cove que tu fiques la agulha en la extremitat del mirat a tu propdana de la partida deforo, e fassas aquela penetrar a la partida dedintz en aquel sol, e leysses dos extremitatz del ciphac; e aprop revolveys la agulha e fay aquela penetrar de foro a la dedintz en dos extremitatz del ciphac.	Place the needle at the end of the opening on your side, and make it penetrate inside to the opposite part in one motion, and cut off both ends of the suture; then turn the needle and make it exit from the inside to the outside at both ends of the suture.
E aprop revolveys aquelas cascunas, e fay penetrar quascunas de la partida dededintz entro a la partida deforo en dos extremitatz del mirat autras que so en le latz contrari.	Then turn those sutures and make each one penetrate from the inner part to the outer part at both ends of another opening on the opposite side.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura es milhor de la sutura comuna leugiera, e es sutura de la qual precedic rememoracio.	And this method of suture is better than the common quick suture, and it is the type of suture about which I have previously mentioned.
Aquest es le sermo de Gualia	This is the speech of Gualia
E mays le diyssero alcus, sutura del ventre es rectificada am dos agulhas, so es que tu entrometas en aquestas a quascunas un fiel, e comensa am intromiccio de agulha de aquo que es deves tu, e fay aquela penetrar entro al autra latz segon sutura de aquels les quals cozo les cuers engualment.	And if someone were to say that the suture of the abdomen is corrected with two needles, it means that you insert a thread into each needle, and begin by interweaving one needle as you should, and make it penetrate into the opposite side according to the suturing technique used for sewing cloth.
E sapias que quan disrupcio es en le mieg loc del ventre, lahoras la sutura de lu es pus difficil que dels autres locs del ventre.	And you should know that when the rupture is in the middle of the abdomen, then the suture of it is more difficult than for other parts of the abdomen.
Mays le juguament de medicacio de plagua es jutgament de las autras plaguas.	But the judgment in the treatment of wounds is the same as for other wounds.
La qual causa es quar quan tu consieguas la plagua recent am le sieu sanc denant que l’ayre altera aquela, e reduses le budel e cozes aquela e aptas aquela decentment, lahoras pausa sobre aquela polvera encarnativa.	The reason is that when you manage to treat the fresh wound with its own blood before the air alters it, and reduce the swelling and clean it properly, then apply powder for healing.
E si le ayre ja ha alterada la plagua, lahoras pausa sobre aquela alcus enguentz les quals so a tu presens entro que fassan peyra dura e cajan les fiels, e sian consolidatz ciphac e mirat; e aprop cura aquela ayssi cum es la curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And if the air has already altered the wound, then apply some ingredients that harden and close the wound, and ensure that the sutures are strong and secure; and afterward treat it as you would other wounds until it is healed.
Mays si a tu no so presens las medicinas, lahoras pausa sobre aquela tantost, pus que comensa a getar brac, coto viel, e permuta aquel dos veguadas le dia, ayssi cum a tu e ensenhat, entro que sia sanat, quar tu no indigeysses de autra medicacio en motas disposicios quan las plaguas so simplas.	If you do not have the medicines at hand, wait for them a little while, because it begins to soften and discharges pus after two days, as you have been taught, until it is healed, so that you may not need other medication in most cases when the wounds are simple.
Mays si tu temes que la plagua comunique en lesio als membres principals, lahoras cove que tu submergas lana leon en oli de trempada qualiditat, o en oli rozat, e pausa aquela en le circuit dels locs que so entre les angonas e dejos las aysselas.	If you fear that the wound may communicate to the principal members, then wrap a piece of linen in oil of good quality, or in rose oil, and place it around the area between the joints, and apply it to them.
E si sent dolor o putrefaccio en les sieus budels, quar motas veguadas aquo s’endeve, lahoras cristeriza aquel am vi stiptic negre tebe, e majorment si la poyredura es pervenguda en le budel e es fayta exitura penetrant entro la conquavitat de lu.	And if there is pain or putrefaction in the bowels, as often happens in such cases, then use black styptic tebra root, and especially if the putridity has reached the bowel and an incision has been made penetrating into the cavity of it.
E sapias que aquela que es del budel gros es de pus leugiera sanacio que aquela que es en les budels subtils.	And know that what affects the large bowel heals more slowly than what affects the small bowels.
E es de dificil sanacio quar le budel le qual es apelat “gegunu” no recep sanacio de plagua que caja en lu de tot; e aquo es per la gran multitut de venas que so en lu e per la magnitut de lu que so en aquelas, e per subtilitat del cos de aquel, e per propinquitat de aquel a natura de nervis.	And it is difficult to heal what is called the "gegunu" bowel from any wound that affects it completely; and this is because of the great number of veins in it, its large size, the subtlety of its tissue, and its proximity to the nature of nerves.
Mays si aquo que procezeys de la plagua es la tela, e conseguas aquela recent, redutz aquela segon la tua rectetut am la qual reduzes les budels engualment.	But if what proceeds from the wound is the membrane, and you obtain it fresh, reduce it according to your judgment in the same way that you would reduce the bowels.
Mays si es passat a lu spazi e ja es feyt vert o negre, lahoras que tu strenguas aquela am fiel sobre le loc que es denigrat de lu, per so que vengua fluxs de sanc, quar en la tela so venas e arterias.	But if it has passed the space and is already turned green or black, then when you apply it over the area that is discolored, to cause a flow of blood, because in the membrane there are veins and arteries.
E aprop inscideys aquo que es otra aquel liament, e pausa dos extremitatz del fiel pendentz de la partida dejos de la plagua foro lu, per que sobre tu sia alleujada la atraccio de lu deves le cazement de la tela e emissio del brac de la plagua.	From this incision take another piece of cloth, and place the two ends of it hanging from below the part affected by the wound so that above you is alleviated the attraction to it; therefore, you should apply the placement of the fabric and emission of the pus from the wound.
Rememoracio de las plaguas quan accideysso en le budel.	Reminder of the wounds that occur in the bowel.
Quan accideys disrupcio en le budel e es petita, lahoras es possibla que sia resteurada en alcus homes, per aysso quar yeu vi aquel le qual era stat plaguat en le sieu ventre am percussio de lansa et era la plagua de la part dreyta del stomac, e la plagua era antiquada e fayta fistula, e eyssic de lu gestio e ventositat.	When disruption occurs in the bowel and is small, it is possible that it can be restored in some people; for this reason, I saw one who had been wounded in his belly by a lance thrust, and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and the wound was old and had formed a fistula, with discharge from it and gas.
Adonc yeu pansegui la curacio de lu ja sia que no era confizat en la sanacio de lu, mays cessegui subtiliar aquel entro que foc sanat e le loc es consolidat.	Then I proceeded with the treatment of it, even though I was not confident in its healing, but rather sought to carefully identify which part would heal and where the area would become firm.
E yeu pus que vi le loc ja consolidat, timegui sobre le malaute que endevengues sobre lu accident de mal en le sieu ventre; e no endevenc alcu per aquo mal accident e romas en las suas milhos disposicios mangant e bevent, e aprop entrec en banh e es exercitat en sos ditz.	And when I saw the area already consolidated, I watched for any illness that might arise from the unfortunate event in his belly; and no one gets better immediately after such a serious accident without changing their usual food habits by eating and drinking properly, and then taking baths and exercising as advised.
E ja diysero alcus experimentados que quan endeve plagua en le budel, e es petita, lahoras cove que sia liada segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas fromiguas de grans caps; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua e pausa una fromigua de aquelas que aja la boca uberta sobre las doas labias de la plagua; donc quan pren sobre aquelas e strenh la sua boca, abscindeys le cap de lu, quar adhereys e no es dissolvut.	And some experienced individuals have said that when a small wound occurs in the bowel, it should be treated as follows: take ants with large heads; then bring together the two edges of the wound and place one of those ants, which has an open mouth, on the two edges of the wound; thus, when it grasps onto them and tightens its mouth, cut off its head because it adheres and does not dissolve.
E aprop pausa autra formigua prop la primieyra, e no cesses aquo a far am formiguas una aprop autra segon la quantitat de tota la plagua.	And make another stripe beside the first one, and do not stop until you have made stripes next to each other according to the quantity of the entire wound.
E aprop reduzeys aquela e cos la plagua; e romanguan aquels caps annexces en le budel entro que·l budel sia sanat; e no accideys al malaute degun nocument.	And then reduce it and attach it to the wound; let those pieces remain attached until the bandage is healed, and do no harm to the patient.
E ja es possible que·l budel sia liat am fiel subtil lo qual es fayt del budel de bestia annexs am lu, pus que es mes en agulha; e es que tu prenguas la extremitat de aquestz fiels de budel, e sia mot descarnat, e aprop lia la extremitat de lu am fiel de li, envolopat, e aprop entromet aquel fiel en agulhas e cos am aquel le budel, e areduzeys aquel en la disrupcio.	And it is possible that the bandage be sewn with fine thread made from animal sinew, which is finer than a needle; take one end of this bandage thread, make it smooth and then tie the end to the thread used for sewing, wrapped around it. Then insert the thread through needles and attach it to the bandage, and reduce it at the point of attachment.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura am formiguas no es sino segon via de fiducia e d’esperansa.	And this method of suturing with stripes is nothing but a matter of trust and hope.
Mays si la plagua es gran e ampla, majorment si es en un dels budels subtils, quar lahoras no es engen sino subtiliacio, e no es sanacio de lu de tot.	But if the wound is large and wide, especially if it is in one of the fine sinews, then there is only careful treatment, and not complete healing.
De curacio de zuchem e fistula.	On the treatment of boils and fistulas.
Sapias que tota plagua e apostema quan se envilheseys e se Antiqua, e es fayt ulcus, e no es consolidat e geta braç tot temps e no es abscindit, lahoras, en qualque membre sia, universalment es nompnada fistula e nos la apelam aquela azukem.	Know that every wound and abscess when it becomes chronic and old, and turns into an ulcer, and is not consolidated and stops discharging over time without being cut out, whether in any part of the body, is universally named a fistula, and we call this a boil.
E fistula segon veritat es nodacio feutrada, dura, blanqua am la qual no es dolor e a la qual es conquavitat ayssi cum es conquavitat de pena de ausel; e per aysso nompnat aquela alcus rizatz, id est pena.	And truly, a fistula is a feathered, hard, white node at which there is no pain but rather a sensation like the pricking of a bird's spur; and for this reason it is called a pierced boil, that is, a painful condition.
E es en alcus homes humida, la qual geta brac; e fort leu la humiditat es abscidida en alcunas horas.	In some people who are of a moist nature, this phlegm is discharged from the arm; and in certain hours the moisture is completely removed.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta humiditat es mota, e es pauca, e es grossa, e es subtil.	At certain times this moisture is moved, and it is little, and it is thick, and it is subtle.
E yeu ja he denant dit en la divisio, lahoras cum yeu diyssi las plaguas, que tot ulcus que no es sanat ni no es en lu nuda carn, no es aquo sino per una de ix causas: de las quals la una es o per pauquesa de sanc en le cos; o per malicia de lu; o quar entre lu e las labias es carn dura prohibent nativitat de carn; o quar es de mota legesa; o quar aquel ulcus en si meteys es poyrit e la materia que es a lu tramesa es de mala qualitat; o quar la medicina es enconvenient en la curacio de lu; o quan corrupcio catz en la regio, e es pestilencia; o per proprietat de regio ayssi cum endeve a Saragossa , en la qual es fayta difficil degestio de las malautias, e es tardada en aquela sanacio de apostema per natura; o quar en lu es os un, o motz osses.	And I have already mentioned in the division, the hours when I discuss the ulcers, that every ulcer which is not healed and does not occur on bare flesh, is due to one of these causes: among which one is either because there is little healing power in the body; or because it is malicious; or because between it and the lips there is hard flesh preventing the generation of flesh; or because it moves lightly; or because that ulcer itself is putrid and the matter passing through it is of poor quality; or because the medicine used for its cure is inappropriate; or when corruption settles in the region, and it becomes pestilential; or due to the nature of the place, such as Saragossa, where diseases are difficult to digest, and recovery from abscesses is delayed by nature; or because there is bone within it, or several bones.
Ja e mostrat totas aquelas causas, e·ls senhals de aquelas e la curacio de lor am medicinas en la divisio.	I have shown all those causes, and the signs of them and their cure with medicines in the division.
E cove assi que yeu fassa a tu saber la curacio de fistula la qual es fayta per via de operacio am ma.	And it is necessary for me to tell you about the treatment of fistulas, which are performed through surgical means.
E sapias que fistula accideys en totz les membres del cos; quar de aquelas son fistulas que perveno a las venas grantz e arterias, o als nervis, o al ciphac, o al budel, o a la vesica, o ad alcuna de las costas, o ad alcu dels spondils del dos, o ad alcuna de las juncturas compostas per composicio ayssi quo de la ma e del pe; e de aquelas so que dan a lu propinquitat del membre principal e de semblantz.	And you should know that fistulas can occur in all the members of the body; among which there are fistulas that affect the large veins and arteries, or the nerves, or the ciphac (likely referring to the spinal canal), or the bowels, or the bladder, or one of the ribs, or one of the vertebrae of the back, or one of the complex joints such as those of the hand and foot; and some of these affect the vicinity of the principal member and are similar.
E donc aquela de aquestas fistulas que es segon aquesta manieyra es de las malautias de dificil sanacio, e no recep curacio, e occupacio am aquela es trebalh e ignorancia.	Therefore, of those abscesses which follow this method, it is one of the diseases difficult to heal, and does not receive a cure, and occupies both labor and ignorance.
E si es de las fistulas alcuna la profunditat de la qual no perve ad aquestz locs que e dit, e esperas e confizas en la curacio de lu, e vols pervenir a cognicio de lu, lahoras pren tenta de eram o de ferr, e si la fistula va segon rectetut, e perquireys aquela am lu.	And if there is any abscess whose depth does not reach the places mentioned above, and you hope for and trust in its cure, and wish to gain knowledge of it, then take a probe or a needle and if the abscess follows the right direction, proceed with it.
Mays si la fistula es tortuissitat, lahoras investigua aquela am tenta de plom subtil, quar plom am la levitat del sieu cors es alleujat e curvat deves la tortuositat.	But if the abscess is tortuous, then investigate it with a probe of thin lead, for lead, due to the lightness of its body, is easily shaped and curved according to the tortuosity.
E si la fistula es havent motz horrificis, no es a tu possible que signifiques sobre lu am tenta.	And if the abscess has openings that are frightening, it is not within your power to signify upon them with a probe.
Adonc cristeriza le orrifici per sos orrificis, quar la humiditat per la qual clisterizas aquela va deves las autras orrificis e corr de lor.	Then irrigate the openings through those openings, for the moisture with which you irrigate will go from that one to the other openings and flow out.
E aprop inquier exquisitament, segon qual manieyra a tu es possible que conoguas si aqui has os o nervi, e es la conquavitat de la fistula longinqua o propdana, o es una fistula a la qual so motz orrificis e esta sobre aquo tot am la suma de la tua fortaleza, am la tua enterroguacio, am la qual enterroguas le malaute, e la invencio de la dolor deves la tua compressio am la ma sobre le loc, e semblantz de las significacios e de las causas accidentz al apostema.	And then inquire carefully according to the method by which you can know if there is bone or nerve here, and whether the depth of the abscess is far or near, or if it is an abscess whose openings are over all this within your strength, within your thorough examination, with which you thoroughly examine the disease, and the invention of the pain according to your compression on the place, and similar signs and accidental causes to the swelling.
E cum tu auras stat sobre totas aquelas causas am stacio veraya, lahoras ve a la curacio segon confidencia: e es que tu consideras lahoras si es fistula apparent propinqua o en loc sal, longinqua de junctura, o de nervi, o de arteria, o de vena, o de un dels locs les quals yeu a tu e ditz.	And when you have stood on all those causes with true understanding, then proceed to the cure with confidence: that is, consider now whether it is an abscess that is apparent and near or in a salt place, far from a joint, or of a nerve, or of an artery, or of a vein, or of one of the places I have told you about.
Lahoras tu secca la fistula segon que denant es dit de la naracio de lu, e osta aquo que es en aquela filtracio e de carns corrumpudas, e aquo que es nascut en le orrifici de la carn, o de theil e de semblantz, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	Now you dry the fistula as was said about its narration, and remove what is in that filtration and of corrupted flesh, and what has grown in the opening of the flesh, or of tissue and of appearance, and treat inside until it is healed.
Mays si la fistula es de longinqua profunditat, e es segon rectetut, lahoras cove que inscidas aquela en le preon atant quant a tu sira possible, e aprop mondifica aquela de totas las suas carns corrompudas; e aprop administra calguas envolopadas en medicinas acutas, e intromet aquelas entro a la conquavitat de la fistula, la qual has conprenduda am ferr.	If the fistula is of great depth and follows the rectum, now you should incise it as deeply as possible to reach the preon, and then clean it of all its corrupted flesh; afterwards, apply hot poultices wrapped in sharp medicines, and insert them into the cavity of the fistula, which you have understood with a probe.
E fay aquo am aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la medicina acuta corroda tot aquo que es romas en la conquavitat de la fistula de la corrupcio.	And do this several times until the sharp medicine has dissolved all that remains in the cavity of the fistula from corruption.
E aprop restaura aquela am enguentz les quals engendran carn sana entro que sia sanada.	And then restore it with applications that generate healthy flesh until it is healed.
Mays si no es sanada per aquo, lahoras tu cauteriza aquela segon que havem recomtat.	But if it does not heal with this treatment, now you should cauterize it as we have recommended.
Mays si la causa de fistula es os e es deves tu certificat aquo, lahoras tu inquireys aquela e secca aquela segon que havem recomtat, si tu no prohibeys alcuna causa de vena o de nervi o de membre principal ayssi cum havem dit.	But if the cause of the fistula is bone and you must determine this, now you should examine it and dry it as we have recommended, unless you find any cause to spare a vein or nerve or major limb as we have said.
Mays si le os es a tu descubert e es en lu alcuna corrupcio e negror, lahoras tu ratz aquel entro que la corrupcio sia hostada tota; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que lu encarne entro que sia sanat.	But if the bone is exposed to you and there is corruption or blackness in it, now you should excise that until all the corruption is removed; then treat it with what will make flesh grow until it is healed.
E si no es sana e gieta brac ayssi cum fazia, lahoras sapias que tu no est pervengut a la eradicacio tota de la corrupcio; e adonc tu descuebre sobre lu segondanament e exquisitament fay la razio de lu e la mundificacio de lu am la deriera fortalasa tieua, e aprop restaura aquel.	And if it does not heal and pus continues to discharge as before, then you will know that you have not completely eradicated the corruption; at that point, uncover it again and carefully examine and clean it thoroughly with your last effort, and then restore it.
E donc si es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras sapias que aquela corrupcio es en la profunditat longinqua del cors, la qual no ha conseguida, e adonc a tu en aquel no es engen sino laysar aquela.	And so if you are healed, that is good; and if not, then know that that corruption is in the depth of the body, which has not been reached, and thus in that there is nothing to do but to treat that.
E si le os corromput es petit, o es a tu possible atirar aquel, lahora tu le atira am forceps subtils las quals conveno ad aquo.	And if the corrupted part is small, or it is possible for you to remove that, then at that time you should remove it with fine forceps, which are suitable for this purpose.
E si so motz osses, lahoras exquisitament fay la extraccio de totz aquels, e de aquels no laysses denguna causa am la tua fortaleza.	And if some bones are involved, then carefully perform the extraction of all of them, and do not leave any of them due to your strength.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat alcuna causa de las humiditatz, e en lor inscizio no ha temor ni error, lahoras inscideys aquelas liaments o carns si so aqui, e deliura les osses.	But if any cause of the humidity opposes you, and in their incision there is no fear or error, then incise those tissues or flesh where necessary, and expose the bones.
Mays si a tu no es preparacio de ostar les osses de la tua hora, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua aquo que poyresca la plagua aquela, e layssa aquela entro que aquo es al enviro de aquels osses de carns e de liamentz, e guarda la plagua que no sia consolidada, e sia constrengida la seccio la qual tu has inscidida en la tua operacio.	But if it is not possible for you to remove the bones at this time, then apply something that can alleviate the condition on the wound, and leave it be until such a time when there is flesh and tissue around those bones, and guard against the wound becoming consolidated, and ensure that the section you incised during your operation does not become constricted.
Habantz, si temes, pausa sobre lu coto submers en sopre trissat am oli, o coto submers en anguent egipciac, o en alcu dels enguentz vertz, quar quan poyriran aquelas liaments, e les osses son de lor seperatz la ablacio, e de aquels atraccio es alleujada.	Having said that, if you are concerned, apply a cloth submerged in warm oil, or a cloth soaked in Egyptian ointment, or one of the green ointments, because when these plasters will be applied, and the tissues and bones are separated by their removal, and from those the attraction is alleviated.
Mays si es un gran os ayssi cum le os de camba o de coyssa o semblantz ad aquels, e aquo que de lu es corromput es la facia de lu tant solament, lahoras ratz aquela am resio tant solament derriera entro que sia ostada aquela negror e corrupcio, e aprop restaura la plagua.	But if it is a large bone such as the bone of a camel or cow or similar, and what is corrupted on it is only its surface, then scrape that with a scraper only from behind until that blackness and corruption is removed, and then repair the wound.
Mays si aquo que de lu es corrumpyt es gran partida, e la corrupcio ja ha conseguida la medulla del os, lahoras es causa necessaria cerrar aquel e aquel tot inscidir entro al loc on es pervenguda la corrupcio, e lahoras cura aquel entro que sia consolidada.	If what is from the bone has become corrupted and a large part of it is decayed, and the corruption has already reached the marrow of the bone, then it is necessary to close that area and entirely cut within the place where the corruption has spread, and then treat it until it becomes consolidated.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc ad un home en la sua coyssa per que pausez aquela a eyssempli e adjutori sobre la tua operacio.	And I recommend to you what happens to a person in his condition, so that you use this as an example and assistance for your operation.
Foc un home jove per etat entorn xxx ans, al qual accideys dolor en la sua cueyssa, e de las partidas dedintz mauguda es sobre la materia dedintz le cors entro que la materia es pervenguda a la cueyssa, e es materia de apostema am gran apostema, e no foc a lu causa extrinseca.	A young man around xxx years old experienced pain in his body, and the part affected inside is near the internal matter of the body that has reached the cavity, and this matter has become a large abscess, and it is not due to an external cause.
E adonc foc extendut le temps am aquela per la error dels metges entro que l’apostema es hubert, e acorrero de lu materias motas, e la sua curacio foc aprop pausada entro que la camba foc fistulada, e faytz son en lu motz orrificis les quals totz getavan poyredura e las humiditatz del cos.	And then the condition extended over time due to the error of the physicians when the abscess was not properly treated, and it became filled with pus, and his recovery was delayed until the cavity became fistulated, and there were multiple openings through which they discharged pus and the moisture of the body.
E adonc le curec multitut de metges entorn dos ans, e no foc en aquels savia ma en la art, entro que yeu fu appelat.	And then many doctors treated him for about two years, and none of them had the knowledge or skill in the art until I was called.
E vi la camba de lu e las materias que corrian de lu aquels orrificis per gran cors; e ja le cos de aquel home era tot stabozit e la color de lu era citrina.	And I saw the cavity and the matter that was flowing from those openings in large quantities; and already the body of that man was completely emaciated, and his complexion was yellowish.
E adonc yeu intromesi la tenta ad un de aquels orrificis e pervenguec la tenta al os.	And then I inserted a probe into one of those openings and the probe reached the bone.
E aprop yeu e perscrutat tostz les orrificis e trobegui aquels pervenir a lor de totas partidas de la camba.	And then I quickly examined all the openings and found that they reached all parts of the cavity.
E adonc yeu me coytegui e inscidegui sobre un dels orrificis aquels entro que descrobegui una partida del os, e atrobegui aquel corromput, e ja era terros e corrumput e denigrat; e era ja corrumpuda una partida de la camba entro que havia penetrat entro a la mezola.	Then I cut open and incised around one of the openings through which I could see a part of the bone, and found that portion corrupted; it was already earthy and decayed and blackened, and also a part of the marrow cavity into which it had penetrated was corrupt.
E adon yeu serregui aquo que a mi era discubert e preparat del os descubert.	Then I tied up what was revealed to me and prepared the exposed bone.
E yeu cujegui que no fos en le os sino aquela corrupcio la qual abscidigui e serregui, e yeu ja havia derraziguada.	And I cut out that corruption from the bone without harming it, which I had previously exposed and tied up.
E aprop pausegui la restauracio de la plagua am medicina consolidativas per lonc temps, e no es consolidada.	And subsequently, I treated the wound with restorative medicine for a long time, but it did not heal.
E aprop yeu iteregui e descubregui sobre le os segondament sobre le descubriment primier, e atrobegui continua corrupcio am le os.	And then I repeated the procedure and discovered further corruption on the bone beyond the initial exposure.
E serregui aquo que a mi apares de aquela corrupcio, e aprop yeu fo perforsat fayre la curacio de lu e restauracio, e no es restaurat.	And I tied up what appeared to me from that corruption, and then I attempted to perform the cure and restoration, but it was not restored.
E adonc yeu descubri sobre lu autra veguada e no cessegui inscidir le os petit a petit particuladament e perforsa la restauracio de lu, e no es restaurat entro que inscidigui entorn un palm de lu, e aquel extraxi am la medula sua, e aprop restauregui aquel am medicinas, e es consolidat leugierament e sanat.	Then I discovered another area and did not stop incising the bone little by little specifically to perform its restoration, and it was not restored until I incised around one palm's width of it, including that part with the marrow, and then I treated it with medicines, and it healed quickly and became healthy.
E no es necessaria iteracio en la operacio de lu e seccio de lu sino per la disposicio de la freulesa de lu e per la paucitat de la tollerancia de lu e paor de lu de mort, quar a lu accidia en totas horas per superfluitat de evacuacio sincopi mala.	And it was not necessary to repeat the operation and section of it except due to the condition of its fever and for its poor tolerance and fear of death, because it suffered at all times from excessive syncope and malaise.
E donc sanat es per sanacio entiera, e nada es en loc de os carn dura; e es fayta bona la disposicio de lu en le sieu cors e retornec la vertut de lu; e es conversat en las suas disposicios e no fec a lu contrarietat en ambulacio ni nocument en denguna causa.	And thus, he was completely healed, and there is no soft flesh in place of the bone; his condition improved within his body, and his strength returned; he recovered his disposition and did not experience contrary effects during movement or from any cause.
Mays si es os eminent en loc del cors ja trauquat, lahoras cove que tu secces aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas liament e strenh aquel en la extremitat de aquel os eminent, e comanda ad alcu que extenda aquel en sus; e pausa aquel liament de lana pus gros del primier liament; e aprop lia aquel sobre la carn que es dejos le os, e exten la extramitat de lu per que atires la carn a las partidas dejos, e tu descuebras la carn sobre le loc le qual voles serrar per que la serra no leda la carn.	If there is a protruding bone in the injured area of the body, then you should proceed as follows: take some bandages and secure them at the end of that prominent bone; and order someone to extend it straight; and place another bandage made of thicker wool on top of the first one; and apply this over the flesh below the bone, extending its ends so that you can pull the skin towards the sides; then you will uncover the skin in the area where you want to make a suture so that the needle does not injure the skin.
E pausa fust o taula dejos le os decentment, quar quan tu fas aquo no es prohibida la serra que no secce la carn corrumpuda.	And place a stick or board under the bone appropriately, for when you do this, it is not forbidden for the needle to cut through the corrupted flesh.
E cove que sia la serradura sobre le loc corrumput petit a petit, quar si es en la concavitat del os corrupcio e no appar en la sua apparicio al sentiment, e forssa a serratura de lu autra veguada.	And it is necessary that the suture be placed over the corrupted area little by little, for if corruption occurs in the concavity of the bone and does not appear in its appearance to the touch, forcing the suture from the other side.
E si le os es corrumput e no-eminent, abantz es la una partida continuada am la autra, e la corrupcio es al mieg loc o en partida de lu, lahoras tu descuebre la carn de totas partz tota; e aprop pausa fust dejos, e aprop serra aquel de la primiera partida la on es la corrupcio entro que sia continuada la serratura del autra partida.	And if the bone is corrupted but not prominent, and one part continues to the other, with the corruption in the middle or some part of it, then you must uncover the skin entirely from all sides; and place a stick underneath, and then suture the first part where the corruption is until the suture continues from the other side.
E sia la serradura segon le loc de la corrupcio un petit, segon que havem dit.	And let the suture be placed according to the location of the corruption, as we have said.
E si la corrupcio es en la junctura, inscideys aquela junctura corrumpuda, e serra le os la on es continuat del autra part.	And if the corruption is in the joint, incise that corrupted joint, and suture the bone where it continues from the other side.
E si de la corrupcio es en la continuacio de doas juncturas, lahoras no es en lu razio sino engen.	And if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then it is not within reason but is abnormal.
E si la corrupcio es en le pecte de la ma o del pe, es mot dificil; empero cove que tu inquieras la corrupcio en qual manieyra appareys a tu, e que abradas aquela, e mondes aquela segon quascuna disposicio la qual es a tu possibla, e am cascum engen sia rectificat a tu, quan no fa a tu contrarietat vena o nervi.	And if the corruption is in the palm of the hand or foot, it is difficult; however, you must investigate the corruption according to how it appears to you, and you should excise that part, and cleanse that part in whatever manner is possible for you, and each joint should be corrected by you, so long as no veins or nerves are harmed.
E sapias qual es inscididors e las serras a inscidir aquestz osses son motz segon le situament dels osses, e la preparacio de aquels, e la grosseza de aquels, e la subtilitat e la grandeza e la parvitat de aquels, e la duricia e la lor raritat; per que cove que tu prepares a tota specia de operacio estrument convenient ad aquela opperacio.	And you should know which saws and chisels are suitable for cutting these bones according to the situation of the bones, their preparation, their thickness, their fineness and size, their hardness and rarity; therefore, it is necessary that you prepare every kind of instrument appropriate for each operation.
E sapias que aquela operacio significa a tu sobre la specia del strument del qual indigeysses; quan am tu es gran studi e lonc e conoyssensa de las manieyras de aquesta art, e testimoni de manieyras de malautias, quar lahoras ja tu las avias per tu meteys aquo que es convenient a lu dels sturmentz a tota malautia.	And you should know that this operation implies the kind of instrument which you need; when you have great study and long experience in the methods of this art, and knowledge of ways to treat illnesses, then you will already possess yourself what is appropriate for each tool for every illness.
E yeu so a tu formant en la fi de aquest capitol le nombre dels instrumentz les quals pausaras cum eyssimples am les quals proceziras a la tua prohibicio la qual experimentaras sobre las autras.	And I inform you at the end of this chapter the number of instruments which you will need as basics, among which you will proceed with your restrictions that you will test on others.
Forma de serra:	Form of saw:
Forma de autra serra:	Form of another saw:
Forma de autra serra:	Form of another saw: 
Forma de autra serra gran:	Form of another large saw:
Forma de ray:	Form of a rod:
Sia le cap de aquest ray segon la forma de cap de clau stellat, e les puntz de lu sian segon la forma dels puntz alstefegi.	Let the head of this rod be shaped like the head of a star-shaped key, and let its points be in the form of crescent points.
E no conveneys sino que am aquel sian confricadatz les caps de las juncturas quan so corrumpudas, o es la boca gran ampla.	And it is not sufficient unless the heads of the joints are rubbed with them when they are corrupted, or if the mouth is large and wide.
Forma de razori major dels autres:	Form of a larger razor than the others:
Forma de razori menor:	Form of a smaller razor:
Forma de razori lat:	Form of a broad razor:
Forma de serra autra decentment fayta: sia fayt arc de lu pus sobira e la acuitat de lu de ferr, e le membre de lu de boys punhal descentment fayt.	Form of another saw made properly: let it be made with the strongest part as the bow, and the sharpness from iron, and the handle part like a decently made knife.
Forma de lu:	Form of it:
Forma de razori en la qual ha concavitat:	Form of a razor which has a concavity:
Forma de razori autra subtil:	Form of another subtle razor:
Forma de autra razori de curvada extremitat:	Form of another razor with a curved tip:
Forma de rasori petit semblant a tenta:	Form of a small razor resembling a tentacle:
Forma de incisori am le qual so inscidit les osses:	Form of forceps with which bones are cut:
Forma de inscisori autra minor:	Form of another smaller cutter:
Forma de un autra inscissori; aquest semblant a ray, e la extremitat de lu es cum serra, e es exhibit en motz locs en la razio dels osses:	Form of another cutter; this resembles a rod, and its tip is like a saw, and it is displayed in suitable words according to the ratio of the bones:
Forma de ray lo qual conveneys a rasio de aquel que es perforat dels osses:	Form of the probe which is suitable for probing through the bones:
E la extremitat de lu es triangulada e de aguda extremitat.	And the tip of it is triangular and has a sharp point.
E es fayt de ferr de India , e semblantment cove que totas las causas que havem ditas de rasoris e de inscissoris e de serras.	And it is made of Indian steel, and apparently it suits all the causes we have mentioned regarding knives, scissors, and saws.
De inscizio extremitatz e de la serratura dels osses.	About the cutting of extremities and the sawing of bones.
Las extremitatz se poyresso o per causa intrinseca o per causa extrinseca, o cum tu auras medicat aquela corrupcio per curacio de aquelas medicinas e la curacio no comfereys, o vezes la corrupcio anar deves le membre la qual no percuteys denguna causa, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel membre entro aquo la hon acossec la corrupcio, per que le malaute evasesca per aquo de mort o de malicia que es major defeliment del membre.	Extremities may need to be amputated either due to intrinsic or extrinsic causes; or when you have treated that corruption with the cure of those medicines and the treatment does not succeed, or sometimes the corruption spreads from the limb without any cause being perceived, then it is necessary for you to cut off that limb up to where the corruption reaches, so that the patient may escape either by this lesser death or by malice which is a more severe punishment of the body.
E le senhal de aquel al qual accideys, es que·l membre es fayt negre entro que sia cujat que foc la ja comburit, o se poyreys aprop la negror entro que la poyredura aquela ane entro aquel membre que siec lu e que prengua tot le cors; e donc coyta te am inscizio de aquel.	And the sign of the one to whom this happens is that the limb turns black as if it were burnt by fire, or you may see the blackness spreading before the putrefaction reaches that member which is dry and causes the entire body to seize up; therefore, cut off that part for amputation.
E semblantment si es causa de la corrupcio percussio de alcunas causas venenosas ayssi cum de scorpio mari o de vupera o de rutela e de semblantz.	And similarly, if the corruption is caused by the bite of certain venomous creatures such as a scorpion, viper, or rattlesnake and similar ones.
E si la corrupcio o la percussio es en la extremitat del dit, lahoras tu inscideys le dit e no dones spazi a la corrupcio per que ane entro a la ma.	And if the corruption or bite is on the tip of a finger, then you should amputate the finger and not give space for the corruption to spread into the hand.
E semblantment si accedeys a la ma, lahoras tu inscideys aquela de la razit del focil, e no dones spazi a la corrupcio entro que prengua en le focil del bras.	And similarly, if it affects the hand, then you should amputate at the wrist joint, and do not give space for the corruption to spread into the elbow of the arm.
E si envezeys aquel, lahoras inscideys le bras entro al coyde en la junctura.	And if you encounter that, then cut the arm at the joint in the collarbone.
E si passa otra la corrupcio e la vezes enviro le coyde, lahoras en aquel es la mort del malaute; e aministrar autra causa otra aquo en curacio es quantitat de vertut.	And if corruption spreads around the collarbone and the condition worsens there, then death is imminent for the patient; and applying another treatment in this case requires an appropriate amount of efficacy.
E semblantment fay del pe quan corrupcio envezeys le dit del pe, lahoras tu inscideys aquel entro ad un dels nozes.	And similarly, when corruption spreads to the foot, then you should cut it at one of the joints.
E si pren en la pente del pe, lahoras tu inscideys tot le pe.	And if it affects the entire foot, then you should amputate the whole foot.
Mays si pueja entro al denol, lahoras tu inscideys la camba entro a la junctura del denol.	But if it spreads to the toe, then you should cut the joint at the base of the toe.
E si la corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denol, lahoras en lu no es engen sino dimissio, e layssar le malaute a la mort.	And if the corruption has already spread to the toe, then there is no remedy but dismissal, and letting the patient die.
E la manieyra de inscidir le membre o de serrar lu es que tu strenhas le liament en la partida pus dejos la qual voles inscidir, e strenh autre liament sobre le loc; e extenda le ministre un liament a las partidas dejos, e extenda le ministra autra liament en sus; e tu separa la carn la qual es entre dos liamentz ain spatum lat entro que sia descuberta tota la carn; e aprop sia inscidit o serrat.	And the method of cutting off a limb or binding it is that you tie a ligature above the part where you wish to cut, and place another ligature over the area; extend one ligature below the part, and have another extended by an assistant above; then separate the flesh which lies between two ligatures with a spatula until all the flesh is exposed; after this it can be either cut or bound.
E cove que sia pausat drap de li de totas partidas per so que no toque le loc sa, e que vengua al malaute lesio ajustada e apostema caut.	And it is necessary to cover the area with a cloth from all sides so that it does not touch the affected site, and to ensure that the patient receives appropriate care and treatment for abscesses.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc quan obras, lahoras tu cauteriza le loc coytadament, o pausa sus lu alcunas polveras restrenhentz le sanc; e aprop retorna a la tua medicacio entro que sia complida.	But if bleeding occurs while you are working, then you should immediately cauterize the area, or apply some powder to staunch the blood; and then return to your treatment until it is complete.
E aprop lia le membre plaguat am liament al u convenient, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Apply bandages to the affected limb appropriately, and take care of it until it is healed.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc a un home en le sieu pe, aquest meteys accident le qual yeu e a tu recomtat, le qual es quar accidic a lu negror en le sieu pe am adustio que era asemblada a combustio de foc.	And I recommend to you what happened to a man in his house, this year an accident which I and to you recommend, the one that was inflicted on him by burning, similar to combustion from fire.
E aquela corrupcio accidic primierament en le sieu dit entro que tendec tot le pe.	And that corruption spread initially on his hand and then tended to affect the entire body.
E adonc aquel home preparec per si meteys pus que vic la curacio anar al membre am la vehemencia de lu que atrobec de dolor e de adustrio de lu, e el inscidic aquel pe entro a la junctura, e foc sanat.	And then that man prepared himself for death because he feared that the limb would not recover due to the intensity of the pain and burning, and he allowed that foot to be amputated at the joint, and it healed with fire.
Lonc temps accidic a lu aquela meteyssa corrupcio en le dit de la ma indic.	For a long time, that same corruption affected his finger on the hand.
E adonc venc a mi, e so me perforsat repercutir aquela superfluitat am aquo que pausegui sobre la ma de las medicinas, aprop la mundificacio del cos de lu; e no es repercussa la superfluitat e comensec anar al autra dit entro que comensec en la ma.	And then he came to me, and I instructed him to purge that excess with the medicines I prescribed, focusing on cleansing his body from it; but the excess was not purged and began to spread to another finger starting from the hand.
E el apelec me a inscidir la ma de lu, e yeu no volgui far aquo sperant sobre la repercussio de aquela superfluitat, e mays que temegui deves la inscizio de la ma de lu mort, quar la vertut del malaute era sobre cazement.	And he asked me to amputate his hand, but I refused to do so, hoping for the purging of that excess, and fearing that the amputation of his hand might lead to death, as the power of the infection was very strong.
E pus que el se desperec de mi, es retornat en la sua terra e pervenguec a mi que aquel home preparec e inscidic la sua ma tota, e es sanat.	And after he left me, he returned to his hometown and it was reported to me that the man prepared himself and amputated his entire hand, and he healed.
E no he adhuzida aquesta narracio sino per que sia adjutori sobre aquo que catz de aquesta malautia, e que sia significacio per la qual sia significada e segon la qual sia obrat.	And I have included this narrative only to assist with understanding this illness and to serve as an example for how such cases should be handled.
De cura sinuum et qualitate clisterizationis cum medicinis.	On the treatment of hemorrhoids and the quality of enemas with medicines.
Quan accideys apostema en alcus membres carnozes e·l spazi de l’apostema es prolonguat entro que fa colleccio de sania, e aprop es romput e perforat, e es eyssida de lu la sania, e roman le loc vuoyt quays cum si era vayssel, e la codena que es desobre lu ayssi cum drap subtiliat, e no es pervengut a deriera corrupcio, e no inprimeys en le os o en nervi ni en liament, es apelat sinu, e no es nompnat fistula.	When an abscess occurs in any fleshy member and the space of the abscess is extended inward so as to form a collection of pus, and it bursts and becomes perforated, and the pus is discharged from there, leaving the place empty like a vessel, and the skin that covers it remains thin like cloth, and has not reached such an extent of corruption as to affect the bone or nerves or ligaments, it is called a sinus, and is not named a fistula.
Mays empero si le spazi es prolonguat entro que la corrupcio enprema en alcun membre, lahoras es appelada fistula e no zukem.	However, if the space extends inward so that the corruption affects some member, it is then called a fistula and not a sinus.
E la cura de lu es que inscidas aquela codena tota ayssi cum es revolvut, e majorment quan es subtiliada e es fayta cum drap, e comfizas que no adhereys al loc per la sua corrupcio.	The treatment for it is to incise that skin completely as it is swollen, and especially when it becomes thin like cloth, and ensure that you do not adhere to the place because of its corruption.
Mays si tu speras que la codena adheresca e que aquela corrupcio no aja conseguit per deriera consecucio, e en la codena ha spassitut de cara, lahoras tu cura aquel am clisteri.	However, if you hope that the skin will adhere and that the corruption has not reached an advanced stage, and there is a passage in the skin, then you should treat it with enemas.
E es que consideras al sinu, e lahoras si es gran, e·l brac que yeys es de fetent odor, lahoras clisteriza aquel am medicament egipciac le qual es de oli e vi agre e ziniar recebent partidas enguals, e sian ajustadas en un vayssel, e sian coytas sobre le foc entro que’l medicament se fassa rog e pervengua a specitut de mel.	And when you consider the sinus, if it is large and the arm with which you are treating it has a foul odor, then treat it with an Egyptian medication consisting of oil, vinegar, and raisin in equal parts, and mix them in a vessel over the fire until the medicine becomes thick like honey.
E aprop tu pren de lu aquo que es necessari e dissolveys lu am aygua e mel; e clisteriza am aquel le sinu, e strenh le orrifici de lu, e layssa la medicina en lu per la quantitat de doas horas.	Then take the amount that is necessary and dissolve it in water and honey; use this to treat the sinus with an enema, plug the opening of the sinus, and leave the medicine inside for the duration of two hours.
E aprop extratz aquela am sprecio; e fay aquo per tantz dias entro que sia mundificat le sinu e sia remauguda la pudor.	Take out that which is held in disdain; and do this for so many days until the sinus is cleansed and the pus is evacuated.
E alcunas veguadas es clisterizat am aygua de cendre, quan no es a tu prezent aquest medicament; e es que tu prenguas la cendra de vitz, e met sobre lu aygua; e aprop cola aquela e clisteriza aquel am ela entro que te confizes que·l sinu lahoras es ostat.	And sometimes it is given as an enema with water of ashes, when that medicine is not at hand; and you should take the ash of wheat, put it over the water; and then strain that, and give that as an enema until you are confident that the sinus is now closed.
E si le malaute no ha tollerancia sobre le medicament egipciac ni l’aygua de la cendre, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aygua e mel e quays sia mesclat ziniar trissat, e clisteriza aquel am vi e mel mesclat, quar de proprietat de mel es que mondifique e lave, e le vi fa adherir le sinu, e majorment quan en le vi ha superfluitat de stipticitat e de siccitat.	And if the patient cannot tolerate the Egyptian medicine or the water of ashes, then give an enema with water and honey mixed thoroughly three times, and give another enema with vinegar and honey mixed, for the property of honey is to cleanse and wash, and the vinegar causes the sinus to adhere, especially when the vinegar has a preponderance of astringency and dryness.
E cum tu fas aquo alcunas veguadas e te comfizes que·l sinu ja es remaugut, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aquo que fa naysser la carn en lu.	And when you do this for several times and are confident that the sinus is now cleansed, then give an enema with water that promotes flesh growth.
E es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e dissolveys aquel am oli rozat e vi stiptic; o que clisterizas aquel am alcunas medicinas e enguentz autres que hajan las proprietatz les quals ja he yeu scritz en le tractat dels enguents.	And you should take of the decoction of dyafinicon and dissolve it with rose oil and astringent vinegar; or give an enema with several medicines and other decoctions that have the properties which I have already written about in the chapter on decoctions.
E si le orrifici del sinu es streyt en le qual no es recebuda la canula del clisteri, lahoras tu le amplifique aquel am ferr petit a petit, e pausa en lu calgua envolopada en enguent egipciac o en enguent basilicon entro que sia amplificat.	And if the orifice of the sinus is narrow such that the enema tube cannot be received, then you should gradually enlarge it with a small instrument, and pause in the dilation wrapped in Egyptian medicine or basilicon decoction until it is enlarged.
E semblantment si le orrifici es ample, lahoras tu agregua las labias de lu am sutura e layssa de lu quantitat en la qual intre le clisteri ses addicio.	And similarly, if the orifice is too large, then you should sew together the edges with a suture and leave it in such a quantity that the enema can be introduced without additional addition.
E si le orrifici de lu del qual corr le brac es elevat a las partidas desus, lahoras secca aquel en le pus bas loc que es en lu per que le brac corra entro dejos, quar quan le brac es coartat en la preondeza de sinu la carn esser en lu engendrada.	And if the orifice of the one through which the arm drains is raised to the upper parts, then dry that in the pus-filled place that is there where the arm passes underneath, for when the arm is compressed at the depth of the bend the flesh will be generated there.
E si no es a tu possible seccar le sinu entro al enviro del os pus bas segon que voles, lahoras te perforssa que prepares le membre am preparacio per la qual corr de lu le brac leugierament segon que es a tu apparelhat e que no sia en lu retengut alcuna causa del brac.	And if it is not possible to dry the sinus underneath in the vicinity of the pus as you wish, then perforate so that you prepare the member with preparation by which the arm drains lightly as you are equipped and so that nothing in it impedes the arm.
E pren medicinas consolidativas que sian pausadas sobre le sinu convenientz ad aquo que vols exxten aquelas sobre drap de li.	And take consolidating medicines that are applied to the sinus appropriately so that you can extend them over linen.
E le drap sia de tan gran quantitat cum fa la comunicacio de tot le sinu; e aprop inscidey am las forfexs en le dreyt del orrifici del sinu un trauc pus ample un pauc que l’orrifici del sinu; e aprop exten sobre autre drap de li dels enguentz leons segon la quantitat del trauc, e pausa le sobre aquel per posicio longinqua del orrifici del sinu per que sia aleujat le eyssiment del brac de lu e no ostes le drap gran sino aprop alcus dyas una veguada.	And the linen should be of such quantity as covers all of the sinus; and then incise with scissors along the edge of the sinus opening a strip somewhat larger than the sinus opening; and then extend over another piece of linen the ointment according to the length of the strip, and place it over that in position distant from the sinus opening so that the movement of the arm is not hindered by the large piece of linen but only after some days.
Mays aquel que es sobre le orrifici del sinu, le qual remauguas en tota hora per so que yesca aquo que es ajust en lu del brac.	But that which is over the sinus opening, which you must change at all times so that it dries what is adhering to the arm.
E per que sapias si aquo que corr de lu del brac es mot o pauc, o es digest, o es no-digest.	And so that you may know whether what drains from the arm is much or little, or is digested, or is undigested.
E am aysso tu considera le loc de aquel sinu, si en lu sent le pacient dolor o no, e si es en lu apostema.	And with this, you should consider the location of that sinus, whether the patient feels pain there or not, and whether there is an abscess there.
E cum la tua medicacio es prolonguada en la tal manieyra, e vesas la matiera que es gitada sobre le orrifici del sinu ja adhereys, o se apropria adherencia, lahoras le mayti tu le deslia o le tertz dia, e quan deslias la plagua, lahoras muda le drap per autre e renova le enguent.	And when your treatment is prolonged in this manner, and you see that the material which is placed over the sinus opening has adhered or is about to adhere, then on the third day you loosen it, and when you loosen the dressing, then change the cloth and renew the application.
Mays si del sinu aprop lon spazi yeys virus subtil, lahoras no te desperes de la adherencia de li, quar la sanacio de lu se apropria, quar so alcus homes en les quals tarda generacio de carn en las lors plaguas, e de aquels so en les quals es fayt le contrari de lu.	But if the sinus has become empty of subtle pus, then do not despair of its adherence, for its healing is imminent, since some people take a long time to generate flesh in their dressings, and others are the opposite.
E si del sinu aprop motz dias es yssit brac indigest, lahoras sapias que·l sinu no adhereys; e si es tardada la adherencia del sinu e es la causa prolonguada, lahoras tu ajusta en exsiccacio de las medicinas, e si las medicinas so humidas en lor substancia e en la sua vertut, son seccas ayssi cum enguent dyafinicon, quan es en lu ajustada superfluitat de addicio de zegi.	And if from the sinus there has been evacuated for many days thick undigested matter, then you know that the sinus will not adhere; and if the adherence of the sinus is delayed and becomes prolonged, then adjust to the drying properties of the medicines, and if the medicines are moist in their substance and in their virtue, they should be dried as well when applied, adjusting for any excess addition of grease.
E le mays derier am le qual es curat, es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e sia dissout en oli rozat, e sia sobre lu vojat vi antic engual en la sua substancia, e aprop comfeys aquel am lu, e usa de aquel.	And the best medicine for curing it is to take a finely ground powder and dissolve it in rose oil, and apply it with something clean that has been used before for this purpose, and use that.
E ja fa semblant en aquela accio, quan no y a brac, enguent dyafinicon, mel quan es coyt entro que sia engrossat, e usa de lu; o que prenguas mirra e aloen e enses, e trissa tot e polveriza sobre le mel quan es sus le foc, e aprop lineys aquo sobre drap e strenh aquel sobre le sinu; e lineys aquel am le mel le qual has cuoyt entro que es engrossat, e polveriza sobre drap e strenh aquel.	And it appears in this action, when there is no thick matter, to take fine powder and honey that has been cooked until it thickens, and use it; or take myrrh, aloes, and fenugreek, mix them all together, and sprinkle over the honey which is on the fire, and then apply this over a cloth and strengthen it onto the sinus; or line with the honey you have cooked to thicken, sprinkle over a cloth, and apply that.
E alcunas veguadas so administratz am lu aristologia longua e razitz de lili celesti (e es lili celesti) e farina de errs e centaurea, e usa de aquels simples o ajustatz, trissa aquels e cribela e polveriza sobre le mel le qual he recomtat; e husa de lu.	For some wounds, administer the long and sharp-pointed lily (and it is the celestial lily) and flour of oats and centaury, and use these simples or mixtures, triturate them and sieve, then powder over the honey which is recommended; and thus use it.
E si es prolonguat le sinu, e no es sanat per aquesta curacio, lahoras sapias que la corrupcio es en le preon de lu, e ja fa enquisicio en les osses o en les autres membres durs o als liaments; lahoras tu le cura am curacio fistular, ayssi cum desus es dit.	And if the sinew is prolonged and does not heal with this treatment, then you will know that the corruption is in its root, and it has spread to the bones or other hard members or to the ligaments; now treat it with fistula treatment as mentioned above.
De curacio de panarici et unguis attritae et incisione digiti additi et sectione.	On the treatment of paronychia and worn nails, and on cutting an added finger joint and sectioning.
Panarici es apostema le qual nays dejos la ungla del dit pous de la ma o del pe, e fort leu nays en les autres ditz, e cum es prolonguat e la sua curacio es mens prezada, o es apostemat de apostema caut, o es corrumput, e gieta brac entro que corrodeys la razitz de la ungla, e fort leu corromp aquela tota, e fort leu perve la sua corrupcio al os entro que es a lu odor fetent, e es fayta la extremitat del dit lada, e la color de lu es fayta fusca.	Paronychia is an abscess that arises from under the nail of a toe or finger of the hand or foot, and it can also occur in other fingers. When it becomes prolonged and its treatment is delayed, it can become an abscess of an already inflamed area, or it may corrupt, causing pus to ooze inside which corrodes the root of the nail. It often corrupts the entire nail, and sometimes spreads to the bone inside, producing a foul odor, and the extremity of the finger or toe becomes blackened, and its color turns dark.
E donc quan tu auras aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas am ferr tota la superfluitat que es romasa de la ungla e aprop cauteriza la plagla aprop aquo, quar cauteri mot es juvatiu en aysso.	And when you have done what we have said in the division and do not see improvement in your treatment, then it is necessary that you incise with a scalpel all the superfluous tissue that is rotten from the nail and promptly cauterize the wound thereafter, for prompt cautery is helpful in such cases.
Mays si le os es sa e la ungla es sana, e las addicios de la ungla vuoydas ja compremen las carns a las partidas dedintz, e comensan lu punger e ledeysso aquela, lahoras cove que tu pauses ray subtil dejos le angle de la ungla que pungeys la carn, e impelleys aquela sus e inscideys aquela carn am facilitat, e pausa sobre aquo que roman de la carn de las medicinas comburentz corrosivas entro que sia tot remaugut; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	But if the bone is sound and the nail is healthy, and the addictions of the nail have already compressed the flesh inwardly, causing pain, then it is necessary that you apply a fine probe under the angle of the nail where the flesh hurts, and push it up and incise that flesh with ease, and place over what remains of the flesh corrosive medicines until it is completely removed; and thereafter treat it with ointments until it is healed.
Mays si la corrupcio ja enprem en le os, lahoras cove que tu inscidas le os aquel e le extraguas, car nul temps no es sanat que sia en lu le os corrumput.	If the corruption has already penetrated the bone, now is the time for you to incise the bone and extract it, because there is never a cure when the bone is corrupted.
E si vezes la corrozio e la corupcio anar en le dit, lahoras tu inscideys aquel en un dels nozes segons que es premesa la sua rememoracio, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if the corrosion and corruption spread to the finger, now you should incise it at one of the joints as is prescribed in its treatment, and then cure it until it is healed.
Mays si a la ungla endeve percussio o atricio, e endeve en aquela dolor vehement, lahoras cove que tu al comensament fleubotomes le malaute, e aprop secca la ungla am spatum agut am seccio transversa desus en jus, e guarda te que la seccio no pervengua entro a la carn que es dejos la ungla, quar tu faras accidir al malaute dolor vehement, e sira causa a nativitat de la carn ajustada superflua en le loc; e aprop cura aquel loc am aquo que ceda dolor.	However, if there is an injury such as a puncture or bruise to the nail, and there is severe pain in that area, you should initially bleed the patient at the beginning, and then dry the nail with a sharp instrument in a transverse section from above downward, but be careful not to cut into the flesh below the nail, for this would cause the patient severe pain and lead to the formation of excess scar tissue in that location; then treat that area with something that relieves pain.
Mays dit ajustat, le qual es nat en las mas de alcus homes, fort leu es carnos tot, e fort leu so en lu osses, o fort leu es en lu ungla.	However, in the case of a finger that is swollen, which often occurs in many people, it is mostly filled with flesh, and there is little bone or nail within.
E alcus de lu son natz en la razit de la junctura, o es la nativitat de lu en alcus nozes dels ditz.	And some of them arise at the root of the joint, or the swelling is in some joints of the fingers.
Mays aquel que es nat en alcus nozes del dit no se mau, e aquest que es nat en las juncturas fort leu es maugut.	However, what arises in some joints of the finger is not serious, whereas what arises at the joints is more serious.
E de aquels que son natz carnoses, la seccio es leugiera, e es que tu inscidas aquel deves la sua razitz am spatum lat.	And for those that are fleshly swellings, the incision is shallow, and you should cut it behind its root with a broad instrument.
Mays de aquel que es nat en la razitz de la junctura, la curacio es dificil; e donc guarda te de la abscizio de lu.	However, for what arises at the root of the joint, treatment is difficult; therefore, be careful not to amputate it.
Mays en aquel que es nat en dit deves les nozes, cove que tu inscidas al comensament la carn de lu am inscizio redonda entro al os, e aprop serra am una de aquelas serras convenientz ad aquo, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	In that which is called the cutting of the navel string, you should incise the flesh at the beginning with a round incision into the bone, and then use one of those saws suitable for this purpose, and thereafter treat that so that it may heal.
Mays consolidacio la qual accideys als ditz entre lor motas veguadas o per nativitat del home que nays enayssi, o per consolidacio de plagua o per combustio de foc, o per semblantz, adonc cove que secces aquela consolidacio entro que les ditz retorno a la sua forma natural.	In the consolidation which occurs between their moving bones or due to the birth of a person who is born in this manner, or due to the healing of an injury or burning by fire, or similarly, then you should treat that consolidation until the said bones return to their natural form.
E aprop pausa entre lor draps de li enfuzes en oli rozat per que no sian consolidatz leugierament, e separa entre aquels, o pausa entre aquels una lamina de plom subtil entro que sia consolidat segon que cove.	And then place between their edges in rose oil so that they do not consolidate too quickly, and separate them, or place between them a thin sheet of lead until they are consolidated as needed.
E semblantment si accideys consolidacio en alcus ditz am la palma, lahoras tu secca aquela consolidacio segon que es preparada e conveneys a la figura del membre.	And similarly, if consolidation occurs in some of those at the palm, then you should treat that consolidation according to how it is prepared and fit for the shape of the limb.
De inscizio de vices, so son varicas.	Regarding the incision of veins, these are varicose veins.
Vices so son varicas, e so venas envolutas grossas plenas de superfluitatz melencolicas las quals veno en motz dels membres del cors, e le major adveniment de lor en las cambas, e majorment en las cambas dels itinerantz e dels laborantz e dels portantz.	Veins that are varicose, and veins wrapped thickly filled with melancholic superfluities which flow into the joints of the body, and their primary occurrence is in the legs, especially in the legs of travelers, workers, and those who carry loads.
Adonc cove que tu administres purguacio del cors de colera negra alcunas veguadas am expulcio fort, e aprop sangna le pacient de la vena basilica.	Then you should administer purgation of the body with black hellebore several times for strong expulsion, and thereafter let blood from the patient from the basilic vein.
Mays la curacio de lor am ferr es segon dos manieyras: la una es que sia inscizas e sia atirat aquel sanc negre, e l’autra manieyra es que sia elevada la vena e sia extrayta tota.	The treatment of these with iron is according to two methods: one is that they are incised and the black blood drawn out, and the other method is that the vein is raised and entirely extracted.
La seccio de lu es segon aquesta manieyra: embroca al comensament la camba am aygua cauda mot entro que le sanc gros sia resolvut, que es feculent de la camba, e aprop strenh la camba del malaute a la partida pus sobirana de la coyssa entro a la partida dejos del denol am una benda, e aprop secca la vena en un loc, o en dos, o en tres am seccio ampla, e aprop eleva le sanc negra am la tieua ma de la partida dejos de la camba entro en sus, e desus en jus, entro que del sanc sia yssida la quantitat que voles e que vezes habastar, e la qual tollera la vertut del malaute.	The section on this is as follows: at the beginning, pour in warm water so that the thick blood is dissolved, which appears cloudy in the basin, and then lift the patient's limb to the most pus-filled part of the wound below the joint with a bandage, and then cauterize the vein in one place or two, or three with extensive cautery, and then elevate the black blood under the hand at the lower part of the wound upwards, until as much blood is released as you wish and as often as suffices, and which the strength of the patient tolerates.
E aprop lia aquela, e comanda a lu que abstengua de las viandas colera negra engendrantz.	And then give him that, and order him to abstain from foods that generate black bile.
E itera la curacio per fleubotomia quan las venas so umplidas e aquo notz al malaute.	And iterate the treatment by phlebotomy when the veins are full and inform the patient about this.
Mays la elevacio de lor es segon aquesta manieyra: tu que razas la camba del malaute, si en lu so motz pels, e aprop met le en banh e embroca la camba de lu am aygua cauda entro que s’enrogesesca e las venas sian exuberadas; o que sia exercitat per exercici fort, si banh no es a tu present, entro que·l membre sia scalfat.	But the elevation is done in this manner: if you see that the patient's skin is covered with hair, then bathe him and pour warm water on his basin so that it reddens and the veins become prominent; or exercise him vigorously if a bath is not available, until the limb becomes heated.
E aprop secsa la codena en le dreyt de la vena per seccio en le lonc o en le derier de lu deves le denol, o en le pus bas de lu deves lo talo.	And then cauterize the area on the right side of the vein with cautery either above the joint if necessary, or lower down near the heel if needed.
E aprop uobre la codena am uncis e excorja la vena de tota part entro que appara al sentiment, e es deves la appericio de lu que vezes aquela roga declinant a negror.	And then pierce the area with hooks and strip the vein from all sides until it becomes apparent, and do this according to how much you need, declining towards blackness.
E donc cum evazeys e de la codena tu vezes aquela blanca quays sia corda.	And thus when you expose it, take the white part that seems like a cord.
E aprop tu met dejos aquela le ray entro que sia elevada e sia gitada de la codena, e sospen aquela am onci orp leon.	And place the patient lying down with their thigh raised and bent at the hip, and suspend it with a cloth sling.
E aprop secsa autra seccio aprop aquela seccio per tres ditz, e aprop excorja la codena de la partida desus de la vena entro que apparia.	And then cut another section near that one for three reasons, and then expose the thigh above the vein that appears.
E aprop eleva aquela e inscideys aquela en deriera seccio deves le talo, e aprop extratz aquela e eleva aquela entro que sia yssida per la seccio segonda, e aprop extratz aquela de la seccio que es sobre aquela.	And then raise it and incise that in the rear section towards the heel, and then extract it and elevate it until it exits through the second section, and then extract it from the section above it.
E fay aquo entro que extraguas aquela de la seccio que es pus sobirana o pus auta de totas las seccios, entro que tota es yssida; e lahoras inscideys aquela.	And do this until you extract it from the section that is highest or farthest from all the sections, until it has completely exited; and now incise it.
E si no obezeys a tu ad extrayre e elevar, lahoras intromet una agulha am fiel fort doble e ligua aquela e extratz la, o intromet dejos lu le ray e revolveys la tua ma a tota part entro qu’en sia getada.	And if you do not follow the method of extracting and elevating it, now insert a strong double-threaded needle and ligate it to extract it, or insert it below the thigh and rotate your hand in all directions until it is dislodged.
E guarda te que no sia inscidida; quar si es trencada, es fayt a tu dificil elevar aquela mot e es vengut sobre le malaute per aquela nocument.	And be careful not to cut it; for if it is severed, it will become difficult to elevate it, and the patient will suffer harm from that injury.
E cum aquela tota auras fora-gitada, lahoras pausa sobre le loc de la plagua lana submerssa en vi e oli rozat e oli no-rozat, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And when you have completely brought it out, now place on the wound wool submerged in wine and rose oil and unrose oil, and treat it until it is healed.
E si la vit es contrayta havent tortuositat a la qual sia envolucio a las partidas, e no es segon rectitut segon que havem dit, lahoras cove que tu fendas sobre aquela a tota partida de tortuositat de lu e als locs de envolucio de lu, e aprop suspen aquela am uncis entro que eleves aquela tota.	And if the vessel is contracted with twists for which there is wrapping in the parts, and it is not straight as we have said, then you must cut along those twists and at the places where it is wrapped, and then suspend it with hooks until you raise it completely.
E guarda te deves la tua seccio que no inscidas la vena e que no plagues aquela, quar dificil sira a tu elevar aquela; e serva la tua prudencia en aquela.	And guard yourself in your section that you do not incise the vein and that you do not obstruct it, for it will be difficult for you to elevate it; and serve your prudence in this.
Forma del inscident am le qual es seccada vit:	Form of the incident by which the operation is performed:
Forma de unci orp:	Form of applying poultice:
No es a lu accuitat ayssi cum als uncis ni es de aguda extremitat per so que no plague la vena; e es de grossa flexibilitat leon, quar si era subtil, inscidira la vena per la sua subtilitat; habantz es en lu superflua grosseza ayssi cum havem dit.	It should not be as sharp as the edges of a poultice nor have a pointed end so that it does not obstruct the vein; and it should be of great flexibility, for if it were thin, it would cut the vein because of its thinness; however, it should not be overly thick either, as we have said.
De extraccio venae cruris.	On the extraction of the vein of the leg.
Aquesta vena es engendrada en las cambas en terras caudas ayssi cum al- Ategi en terra de Arabics e en las terras de India caudas e aridas de pauca teneritat e en las quals no nays erba ni aybre.	This vein is generated in the thighs in warm lands such as Al-Ategi in the land of Arabia and in hot, dry lands of India where no grass or crops grow.
E fort leu es engendrada en autres locs del cors otra las cambas.	And this vein is generated in other parts of the body besides the thighs.
E la gestacio de lu es de putrefaccio que ve dejos la codena ayssi cum venen dedintz le cors serpentz e vermps e scarides e verms engendrantz entre la codena e la carn.	And its formation is from putrefaction that occurs below the skin, just as worms and vermin come from within the body, generating between the skin and the flesh.
E senhal de la suscepcio de l’adveniment de lu es de aquesta vena que accideys en la camba enflammacio vehement; e aprop le loc es vesicat; e aprop comensa la vena yssir del loc de aquela vesicacio quays sembla razit de planta.	And the sign of the occurrence of this vein is that inflammation happens suddenly in the thigh; and near the area, blisters appear; and soon the vein begins to emerge from the place of those blisters, resembling a plant sprout.
E adonc cum appar de lu la extremitat, lahoras cove que tu envolvas sobre aquela una pessa de plom del qual sia le pes de una drac. entro a ii drac., e noza aquela e layssa le plom suspendut de la camba.	And when the end of it appears, you should then wrap around it a piece of lead weighing one dram to two drams, and attach that area and let the lead hang from the thigh.
E tantas veguadas cum yeys de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, envolveys aquo em plom e noza aquel.	And so many times when you find some cause in the parts outside, wrap that with lead and wool.
E si mot es prolonguat, lahoras tu inscideys una partida de lu e envolopa le romanent; e no inscidas aquela de razit entro que sia fora yssida, quar si inscideys aquela es contrayta e intra en la carn e fa accidir apostema e poyredura en le loc e ulceracio mala.	And if a wound is long, then you cut one part of it and wrap the remainder; and do not cut that part too deeply until it has healed outwardly, for if you cut too deeply, it contracts inwardly into the flesh and causes an abscess and putrefaction in the place and a bad ulceration.
Per que cove que sia tractada suaument e sia extrayta petit a petit, entro que sia fora-gitada del derier de lu e no remangua de lu alcuna causa en le cors.	For it must be treated gently and extracted little by little until it is completely removed from the rear of it and there remains no cause for it in the body.
E de aquesta vena es yssit en alcus homes que es en la sua longitut de v palms e de detz e ja es pervengut a mi que yssic un de xx palms.	And this vein is found in some people extending to a length of five palms and I have heard that it has reached up to twenty palms in length.
E si es inscidida en la hora de la sua medicacio, lahoras intromet lo ray en le trauc de lu e perfora aquela am lonc trauc am le cors, entro que sia evacuat tot aquo que es en la materia, e administra putrefaccio del loc per alcus dias am medicinas; e aprop cura aquela per la curacio de apostemas.	And if it is cut during the time of its treatment, then insert the reed into the tract of it and pierce that one along the length of the body until everything that is in the matter has been evacuated, and treat the area with putrefaction for several days with medicines; and subsequently cure that one according to the treatment of abscesses.
E aquesta vena alcunas veguadas ha motz ramps, e majorment quan apar a la junctura del pe o en le pe, e veno a lu motz orrificis, e es yssit de quascu orrifici ram.	And this vein sometimes has multiple openings, especially when it appears at the junction of the foot or on the foot, and it comes out through multiple openings, and is branched from each opening.
E donc cura aquela ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio e am aquo que es desus dit.	And therefore treat that one as we have said in the division and according to what has been mentioned above.
De sectione super vermes generatos sub cute et dicitur aegritudo bovina.	Regarding the section on worms generated under the skin and it is called bovine illness.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en alcuna terra deves nos malautia bovina per so quar motas veguadas endeve als bious e es verm pauc un le qual es nat entre la codena e la carn, e va en tot le cos pujan e devalan, e es mostrat al sentiment deves le sieu anament de membre en membre entro que disromp la codena e yeys fora.	This illness is called in some lands bovine illness because often among them there is a worm of which one is born between the skin and the flesh, and it moves throughout the body up and down, and it is shown by sensation beneath the skin from member to member until it breaks through the skin and comes out.
E la generacio de lu es per putrefaccio de alcunas humors ayssi cum accideysso verms e serpentz e lombrics e ascaridas en le ventre.	Regarding the generation of worms is through the putrefaction of certain humors, just as it happens with worms and serpents and worms and grubs in the belly.
E es temut per la malicia de lu, quar quan el va en le cors e es elevat al cap, e es pervengut al huel, lahoras fort leu uebre en lu e intra e destruzeys le huel, e aquo endeve motas veguadas.	It is feared because of its malice, for when it enters the body and rises to the head, and reaches the heart, immediately it burns strongly within and penetrates and destroys the heart, causing multiple dangers.
E donc quan tu voles curar aquel e extraire lu, lahoras no se fa si no deves la sieua ambulacio e apparacio de lu al sentiment, e adonc cove que tu strenhas aquo que es sobre lu e aquo que es dejos lu am liament e constriccio fort, e aprop secca sobre lu e extratz aquel.	And therefore when you want to cure that and extract it, then it is not done except by observing the movement and appearance of it to the sensation, and then you should press what is above it and what is below it tightly with bandages and constriction, and soon it dries up and extracts that.
E si es preondat en la carn e no le atrobes, lahoras tu pausa cauteri am foc sobre le loc entro que mora, e la major causa que es temuda es corrupcio de lu am la qual corrump le loc ayssi cum havem dit.	And if it penetrates into the flesh and you do not find it, then you should pause to cauterize with fire over the area where it resides, and the main cause that is feared is corruption of it by which it corrupts the area as we have said.
May si tu vezes aquel esser pervengut al cap prop del huel, lahoras strenh sobre le sobrecil am fort strictura, e aprop secsa sobre lu, e extratz aquel; e cove que·l malaute use de mondificacio del sieu cors am medicinas evacuantz humors putridas malas, e guarda se de viandas generantz putrefaccio.	And if you see that it has reached the head near the heart, then press above the eyebrows with strong constriction, and soon dry up over it, and extract that; and it is necessary for the patient to use purification of his body with medicines evacuating bad putrid humors, and guard against foods generating putrefaction.
De sectione super aegritudinem nafir.	On the treatment of nasal afflictions.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en nostra terra nafir, e es dolor la qual ve en alcus membres, e aprop es permudada de membre en membre.	This illness is called "nafir" in our land, and it is a pain that occurs in certain members of the body, and soon changes from one member to another.
E yeu ja e vista aquela segon que yeu te recomtare.	And I have already seen that as I will now recount to you.
Yeu fu apelat a una femna malauta ad una vila, e descubric le sieu bras e vi una imflacio petita en la vena funis del bras, e pus que fu romas per una hora, vi aquela imflacio anar ayssi cum va verm pujan ad aquest, mays pus leugierament que esser por, ayssi cum si fos argent viu quan corr de loc en loc.	I went to visit a sick woman in a village and uncovered her arm, where I found a small inflammation in the vena cephalica of the arm. After rinsing it for about an hour, I saw that this inflammation was moving just as a worm moves upwards, but more quickly than one would expect, like live silver flowing from place to place.
E adonc anet s’en la dolor de aquel loc e fiquet se en le muscle, e aprop aqui stec per una hora.	Then the pain moved from that location to the muscle, and it stayed there for about an hour.
E aprop correc en l’autre cors entro que pervenc al autre bras.	And then it moved to the other side of her body until it reached the other arm.
E aprop recomtec a mi que revolvia se per tot le cors sieu segon que yeu vi; e fo trop meravelat de la permutacio de lu e de la velocitat de membre en membre.	And then she told me that it was moving throughout her entire body as I observed; and I was very amazed by its movement and the speed with which it moved from one limb to another.
E yeu ja havia vist denant aquo en les mieus huels segon aquela manieyra, empero yeu he vistz motz les quals atroban dolor esser permutada de membra a membre.	And I had seen something like this before in my own patients in that manner, but I have never seen pain being transferred from one limb to another so distinctly.
Mays no vi aquo am les huels ayssi cum en la femna.	But I did not see this in my patients as I did in the woman.
E yeu no cogiti esser aquo sino que es per aquo quar la femna era de viela, on so de secs cors e de venas descubertas, e en aquesta apparec al sentiment aquela ventositat permutada.	And I did not think this was possible except that the woman was of an elderly age, with weak limbs and exposed veins, and in her condition, this airiness or lightness could be perceived to move.
E es necessari que no apparesca segon aquesta retro-curacio en aquels que son delicioses e am cors humitz de venas ameguadas.	And it is necessary that this does not appear according to this retrograde movement in those who are robust and have healthy limbs with veins preserved.
E cum tu voles la curacio de lu, e le pacient sent aquela dolor, lahoras no es a tu aparent al huel ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras tu strenh sobre aquel e dejos lu leugierament e secse sobre aquel entro que sia yssida aquela ventositat coartada, e cauterize le loc.	And when you want to treat it and the patient feels that pain, immediately apply pressure on that area and let it move quickly until that restricted airiness has passed, and then cauterize the location.
Mays si tu no la vezes am los tieus huels, alhoras tu cura aquel am excussio del cors e am aquo que expelleys ventositatz, e carmina aquelas am pillulas fetidas e am pillulas de serapi e semblantz.	If you do not use it to wash your hands, then treat that with an excursion of the body and with what expels windiness, and apply those against stinking pills and against pills of serape and similar.
De extraccio de sagetas.	Of the extraction of splinters.
Sagetas son diversificadas segon las specias, e segon les locs dels cors en les quals cazo, quar la lor diversitat es que de aquellas so que han grans puntas, e petitas, e concavas, e sordas, so es solidas; e de lor so que han tres angles, e de aquelas a las quals so que han lenguas; e de aquelas a las quals so astelas.	Splinters are varied according to their types and the parts of the body where they lodge, for their variety is such that some have large points, others small ones, concave or blunt tips; some are solid. There are those with three angles, and there are those that resemble tongues; and there are those that are like slender sticks.
E aquela que es segon les membres e las pessas en las quals cazo es segon dos manieyras: quar les membres o so membres principals concaus, ayssi cum le cervel, le cor, e·l fitge, e le pulmo, e les ronhos, e les budels, e la vezica, e a lor semblantz; e donc quan catz en alcu de aquestz membres e aparo a tu senhals de mort, la qual causa yeu recomtare aprop, lahoras cove que tu evites extraccio de aquela sageta en aquels quar la mort siec aquel en le qual en las majors disposicios, e quan a tu no appareysso aquestz mals senhals, e la sageta no es amaguada en la profunditat del membre, lahoras tu extratz aquela e cura la plagua.	And those that are according to the members and places where they lodge are in two ways: for the main members such as concavities, like the brain, heart, spine, lungs, ribs, bowels, bladder, and similar; therefore, when you find a splinter in any of these members and signs of death appear to you, which I will explain shortly, then it is necessary that you avoid extracting that splinter from those where death could occur due to major complications. And if such bad signs do not appear to you and the splinter is not hidden deep within the member, then you extract it and treat the wound.
E dels senhals del servel es quan catz en lu sageta, e trespassa le os, e es yssit del cyphac le qual es sobre le cervel, quar accideys per lu soda vehement, e scotomia, e vertige, e rogor en les huels, e imflamacio e rogor de la lengua, e spasme e permixtio de entendament e vomi de colera, e fort leu es abscindida la paraula e es destruida la votz, e es yssit del loc de la plagua humiditat blanca semblant a pols, e yeys de lu semblant ad aquositat de la carn.	And the signs of a splinter in the brain are when it lodges in such a way that it penetrates the bone and emerges on the cephalic side, which is above the brain, caused by violent cold, scotoma, vertigo, rigidity in the hands, inflammation and burning of the tongue, spasms, confusion of understanding, vomiting of bile, and often speech is lost and the voice destroyed. Humid white matter similar to powder exits from the affected area, and the appearance shows swelling of the flesh.
E donc si appareyso a tu aquestz senhals, lahoras tu abste de la curacio e de la extraccio de la sageta, si non es fora.	Therefore, if I show you these signs, then you should refrain from treatment and the extraction of the arrow, unless it is outside.
Mays les senhals de la sageta quan catz en le cor, so que ela es prop de la mamila senestra, e sent am aquela quays sia ficada en causa dura, e no es causa vueda; e fort leu le movement de la sageta es semblant a movement del pols, e corr de la plagua sanc negra, e siec aquel fregiditat de las extremitatz, e suzor freja, e sincopi; e donc sapias que la mort descen ses tot dopte.	Mark the signs of the arrow when it hits the heart, so that it is near the left nipple, and feel there whether it is fixed in hard tissue, not soft; and light the movement of the arrow resembles the pulse movement, and causes black blood to flow, and chills those parts, and cold sweat breaks out, and fainting occurs; therefore you will know that death descends soon.
E les senhals quan la sageta ha plaglat le pulmo so eyssiment de sanc spumos de la plagua, e les vayssels que so prop del col so apostematz, e es mudada la color del malaute, e expira sperit gran aut, e demanda atraccio de ayre freg.	And the signs when the arrow has struck the lung are frothy blood from the wound, and the veins near the neck are swollen, and the complexion of the patient changes, and he breathes out great sighs, and seeks to draw in cold air.
E si catz la sageta en le velament le qual es en le pietz, e la dolor lahoras es prop de las costas petitas, e es fayt le ale gran am vehement dolor e am sospir, e no so maugutz totz les membres dels muscles.	And if the arrow hits the membrane that is in the thighs, and the pain then is near the small ribs, and it causes great and violent pain and sighing, and there is no strength left in all the limbs of the muscles.
E si catz la sageta en le stomac, lahoras fort leu yeys de la plagua vianda alcuna indigesta.	And if the arrow hits the stomach, then very little of the food in the wound is digested.
E si catz la sageta en le ventre, e es ficada en lu, yeys alcuna fenda de la plagua, o la tela, o budel le qual es disromput, e no es speransa en la curacio de lu extraccio de la sageta.	And if the arrow hits the abdomen, and it is lodged there, with some part of the wound torn, whether it be muscle, membrane, or bowel, which is ruptured, then there is no hope for recovery from the extraction of the arrow.
E si la sageta catz en la vesica, e es yssida defora urina, e procesesca de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, e fort leu es dolor sobre le malaute, lahoras sapias que es mortal.	And if the arrow hits the bladder, and urine comes out from it, and some part of it extends outward, and there is pain over the patient, then you will know that it is fatal.
Mays les autres membres ayssi cum es la cara, le col, e·l golayro, e las spallas e le adjutori, e les spondils del dos, e la furcula, e la coysa, e la camba e a lor semblantz dels membres, son salvatz segon las majors disposicios quan la sageta no atroba vena ni arteria e no es sageta venenosa.	Like other members also as in the face, the neck, and the throat, and the shoulders and the helpers, and the vertebrae of the back, and the collarbone, and the rib and things similar to these members, they are saved according to the major dispositions when the arrow does not find a vein or artery and is not a venomous arrow.
E yeu recomtare aquo a tu que he vist del esser de aquestas sagetas, per que signifiques per aquo sobre la curacio tieua.	And I will recount this to you about the nature of these arrows, so that you may understand thereby about their treatment.
La qual causa es, quar en un home cazec sageta en le lacrimal del huel de lu en la razitz del nas, e yeu extrayssi aquela a lu del autra partida, dejos le grays de l’aurelha de lu, e es sanat, e no accidic en le huel de lu nocument.	The reason for this is that when an arrow was embedded in the lacrimal bone of his eye at the root of the nose, I extracted it from him on the other side, left the granules behind in the ear canal, and he healed without any harm coming to his eye.
E extrayssi autra sageta a un Juzeu la qual cazec en lu en lo grays del sieu huel, dejos la palpebra pus dejos, e la sageta ja era occultada e no so conseguit de aquela sino una petita extremitat am la qual adhereys al sieu fust, e era gran sageta de las sagetas agudas dels Turcs , am ferr leon en la qual no havia aurelhas.	And I extracted another arrow from a Jew, which had embedded in his eye within the canal, leaving the eyelid intact. The arrow was already concealed and only a small part of it could be reached to which the shaft adhered. It was a large sharp arrow of those used by Turkish warriors, with barbs but no grooves.
E senat es le Juzieu , e no accidic en le sieu huel mal accident.	And the Jew recovered, and no harmful incident occurred to his eye.
E extrayssi una autra sageta a un home Crestia la qual era cazuta en le golayro, e era sageta arabica, e es aquela a la qual so aurelhas; e adonc yeu inscidegui sobre aquela entre doas guidegi, e ja era submersa en le golayro de lu; e adonc yeu so subtiliat am aquela, e aprop extraxi aquela, e es sanat le Crestia .	And I extracted another arrow from a Christian man who had it embedded in his throat, and it was an Arabic arrow, which had barbs; then I incised around that between two guidelines, and it was already submerged in his throat; then I carefully removed it, and the Christian man recovered.
E extraxi autra sageta a un home la qual era cazuta en le sieu ventre, e cogitegui que moris per aquela; e donc, pus que foro passatz xxx dias e no es mudat sobre lu alcuna causa de las suas disposicios, inscidegui sobre la sageta e engenagui sobre aquela, e es sanat, e no accidic a lu accident mal.	And I extracted another arrow from a man who had it embedded in his abdomen, and he was thought to die because of it; but after thirty days had passed and there was no change in his condition, I incised around the arrow and removed it, and he recovered without any harmful incident.
E vi mays un home en le qual cazec una sageta en le dos de lu, e consolidada es la plagua sobre lu, e pus que foc aprop set ans, yssic la sageta en la razitz de la coyssa.	And there was a man in whom an arrow had been embedded at the base of his neck, and the injury had healed around it, but after seven years the arrow came out from the root of the collarbone.
E vi una femna a la qual cazec sageta en le sieu ventre, e la plagua es consolidada dedintz lu, e no es mudada en las suas disposicios en re, e la femna no atrobec nocument en alcunas de las suas opperacios naturals.	And there was a woman in whom an arrow had struck her abdomen, and the injury had healed internally around it, and she did not experience any change in her condition, nor did she suffer any difficulties with her natural functions.
E vi un autre home al qual cazec sageta en la sua cara e consolidada es la plagua e romas la sageta, no atrobant aqui mota dolor, e motz semblantz ad aquestz.	And there was another man in whom an arrow struck his face, and the injury healed, but the arrow remained embedded without causing any pain, and similar cases are known.
E extrayssi la sageta del home dels princeps del rey que era cazuda en le mieg loc del nas sieu e ja havia declinat a la partida dreyta un petit, e occultada era tota la sageta.	And the arrow was extracted from the man who was the prince of the king; it had struck near the midpoint of his nose and had slightly deviated to the right, and the entire arrow was hidden inside.
E yeu fu appelat a la curacio de lu aprop le cazement de la sageta entro a tres dias.	And I was called to treat him after the arrow had been embedded in him for about three days.
E adonc yeu atrobegui la plagua de la sageta mot streyta; e adonc yeu inquirigui aquela am tenta subtil, e no sentigui aquela; mays el la sentia puncio dejos la aurelha dreyta, e adonc speregui que aquela punccio era per la extremitat de la sageta.	And then I found the wound of the arrow quite narrow; and then I examined it carefully, but did not feel any sensation there; however, he felt a pain below his right ear, and thus I suspected that this pain was due to the tip of the arrow.
E amplastregui le loc am emplaustre en le qual es vertut atrectiva e digestiva, confizant de mi que·l loc se apostemes per que appares a mi le loc de la sageta, per que secces sobre aquela.	And I applied a plaster to the area that had drawing and digestive properties, believing that it would cause the area to swell so that the location of the arrowhead would become apparent.
E no accidic en le loc accident significant que la sageta hagues conseguit aquel loc; e yeu continuegui am le emplaustre sobre lu per motz dias e no accidic accident; e consolidada es la plagua entretant, e romas le malaute de la extreccio de lu per spazi de motz dias entro que un jorn sentic la sageta dintz le sieu nas e recontec aquo a mi.	And no significant reaction occurred in the area where I believed the arrowhead to be; and I continued to apply the plaster for several days without any incident; meanwhile, the wound began to heal, and after about three days, he felt the arrow inside his nose and informed me of this.
E adonc yeu pausegui sobre la plagua medicina acuta corrosiva per motz dias entro que foc ubert, e am la tenta yeu assagegui aquel, e atrobegui la extremitat de la sageta subtil, la qual adhereys al fust.	Then I applied an acute corrosive medicine for several days until it penetrated the sore, and when I tried to test this, I found the tip of the arrowhead fine, which adheres to the shaft.
E aprop yeu ajustegui en la apersio de la plagua per aquela medicina acuta entro que apparec a mi visiblament la extremitat de la sageta, e passec a mi temps am aquo per le spazi de temps entro quatre meses.	Then I adjusted the opening of the sore with that acute medicine until the tip of the arrowhead became visible to me, and it took me time for this over a period of four months.
E aprop pus que la plagua foc amplificada, e foc a mi possible entrometre las forfexs en lu, e remaure aquela, e no obezic ad eyssiment, lahoras yeu no cessegui subtiliar e ingeniar sobre aquela am manieyras de engen, entro que comensegui un dia sobre aquela am manieyras de engens pendre lu am forceps descentment faytas, segon que vindra la forma de aquelas en la fi del capitol, entro que extraxi aquela; e aprop restauregui aquela plagua.	And when the sore had become enlarged and I was able to introduce forceps into it, and removed that [foreign object], without any harm occurring, then I ceased trying other methods of removal, until one day I used those specific instruments designed for this purpose, as will be shown in their form at the end of the chapter, to extract that [object]; and afterward I treated that sore.
E alcus metges jutgavan que la cartillage del nas no es restaurada, e yeu restauregui aquela e la plagua es consolidada, e sanat es le malaute per sanetat entiera, e no noguec en lu en deguna causa.	And some doctors judged that the cartilage of the nose could not be restored, but I did restore it, and the sore healed, and the patient was completely healthy without any further cause for concern.
E yeu recomti a tu la qualitat de extraccio de alcunas sagetas per que pauses aquo regla e significacio sobre aquo que no he dit, quar las partidas de aquesta art e las difinicios de aquela no so conprehendudas am narracio ni no comprehen aquelas le libre.	And I advise you regarding the quality of extracting some arrows so that you may apply this rule and its significance to what I have not mentioned, for the parts of this art and the definitions of these matters are not comprehensible in narration nor understood from the book.
E le artifexs savi compara am pauc sobre mot; e am aquo que es present sobre aquo que es absent; e atroba operacio novela e instrument novel deves le descendement de las causas extranhas del art quan accideysso.	And skilled artisans compare with few words; and with what is present regarding what is absent; and they discover new operations and new instruments from the descent of causes external to the art when such occasions arise.
E donc yeu dic que sagetas no son fora-gitadas dels membres en les quals son ficadas sino segon dos manieyras: o per atraccio del loc en le qual intrec; o per le contrari de la autra partida.	And therefore I say that arrows are not expelled from the members in which they are embedded except in two ways: either by attraction to the place where they enter; or by the opposite part.
E aquela que es gitada per le loc don es intrada, o es sageta procedent en loc carnos, e es atirada e fora-gitada.	Of that which is pierced by the place where it entered, or is a dart proceeding in a fleshy place, and is pulled out and extracted.
E si no obezeys a eyssiment de la hora en la qual catz, lahoras cove que tu la laysses per alcus dias entro que poyresca la carn que es al enviro de lu, e sia alleujada l‘atraccio de lu e la sua egressio.	And if he does not obey the order to vomit at the hour when you catch it, wait some days until the flesh around it heals, and then ease its attraction to it and its exit.
E semblantment si es ficada en os e no obezeys a tu a eyssiment, lahoras layssa aquela per alcus dias e itera aquela am atraccio e mocio en quascun dia, e ja es fora-gitada.	And similarly, if it is embedded in bone and he does not obey to vomit, then wait some days and gradually ease its attraction and motion each day, and it will be extracted.
E si no obezeys a tu eyssiment aprop alcus dias, lahoras cove que tu perforas en le circuit de la sageta en aquel os de tota partida am taravel subtil entro que·l loc sia amplificat de la sageta, e aprop extratz aquela.	And if he does not obey to vomit even after some days, then you should drill around the arrow in that bone with a fine awl until the place is enlarged enough for the arrow, and then extract it.
E si la sageta es ficada en le os del cap e ja ha procezit en un dels ventres del cervel, e apparo en le malaute alcus de aquels accidentz les quals yeu e ditz, lahoras abste de la extraccio de la sageta e layssa aquela entro que·l sieu esser sia equat aprop alcus dias; quar si la sageta perve al ciphac, lahoras la mort no es a lu prolonguada.	And if the arrow is embedded in the bone of the head and has penetrated one of the ventricles of the brain, and if any of those symptoms that I have mentioned appear in the illness, then abstain from extracting the arrow and leave it until his condition stabilizes after some days; for if the arrow reaches the cerebrum, death is not prolonged.
E si la sageta no es ficada sino en le cors del os tant solament e no passa entro al ciphac, e roman le malaute per alcus dias, e no accideys a lu denguna causa de aquels accidentz, lahoras tu engenia en la atraccio de la sageta e en la atraccio de lu.	And if the arrow is embedded only in the body of the bone and does not pass into the cerebrum, and the illness remains for some days without any cause of those symptoms occurring, then you should devise a way to ease the attraction of the arrow and his condition.
Mays si es mot ficada e no obezeys a tu a extraccio, lahoras tu aministra taravels en le circuit de la sageta ayssi cum havem recomtat, e aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	But if it is firmly embedded and he does not obey your extraction order, then you should administer drills around the arrow as we have recommended, and afterwards treat the area until it heals.
Mays si la sageta ja es amaguada en le loc del cors, e es amaguada del sentiment, lahoras tu inquireys aquela am tenta, e si tu sentas aquela, lahoras atira aquela am alcus sturmentz les quals so convenientz a la atraccio de lu.	If the artery is hidden in the body and is concealed from feeling, then you inquire by touching that area, and if you feel it there, then direct that to some instruments which are suitable for attracting it.
E si no podes sobre lu per la constriccio de la plagua e per la longitut del preon, e aqui no es os ni nervi ni vena, lahoras tu fen sobre la plagua entro que sia amplificada e que sia possible extrayre la sageta.	And if you cannot reach it due to the constriction of the wound and the length of the artery, and here there is neither bone nor vein, then you operate on the wound until it is enlarged and it is possible to extract the artery.
E si so a lu aurelhas am las quals sia tenguda, lahoras tu deliura la carn en la qual es ficada de tota partida am tot le engen que poyras far; e ingenia sobre aquo, si no podes sobre la evasio de la carn en la fractura de las aurelhas e en torssio de aquelas entro que obezesca.	And if it is adhered to the ears with those parts, then you remove the flesh in which it is embedded entirely as much as you can; and work on that, if you cannot do so by separating the flesh from the fractures of the ears and twisting them until it loosens.
E quan tu administras la extraccio de la sageta en quascun loc on sia, lahoras tu usa am torcio de la tua ma am forceps a totas partidas entro que fassa aquela obezir; e subtilia am deriera subtilitat que la sageta no sia trencada e que sia fayta a tu dificil atraccio de lu e de aquela extraccio.	And when you administer the extraction of the arrow in whatever place it is, then you use twisting with your hand and forceps in all ways until it obeys; and do so carefully with the utmost care that the arrow does not break and that it is made easier to attract it and extract it.
E si no podes sobre aquela de la tua hora, lahoras tu layssa per alcus dias entro que se poyrescan las partidas que so en le circuit de lu, e aprop itera aquela quar lahoras es alleujada.	And if you cannot do this at that time, then you leave it for several days until the parts around it heal, and later attempt it when it is more convenient.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat flux de sanc, lahoras tu administra aquo que havem dit de curacio en le sieu capitol.	But if there is an adverse flow of blood, then you administer what we have said about treatment in the relevant chapter.
E guarda la tua vertut de inscizio de vena o de nervi, o de corda, e aministra engen en tota manieyra a tu possibla de la evasio de la sageta; e fay aquo am facilitat e tranquillitat e tarditat e fermetat ayssi cum yeu e a tu recomtat.	And guard against injuring the vein, nerve, or tendon, and administer treatment in every possible way to avoid disturbing these structures; do this with ease, tranquility, deliberation, and firmness as I advise.
E donc que fassas contrayre la sageta per so que·l malaute sia segon la figura segon la qual foc deves le cazement de la sageta en lu, quar es mays juvatiu.	Therefore, you should make the splint curved so that the patient lies according to the figure according to which you should place the splint in it, for it is more helpful.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible, lahoras tu aministra aquo que es a tu possible per las figuras.	If that is not possible for you, now administer what is possible for you according to the figures.
Mays las sagetas que son fora-gitadas per le contrari del autra partida, o que ja de lu procezeys alcuna partida a las partidas de fora, o fa gilbositat la extramitat de la sageta per sentiment de la partida pus desus de la codena propdana e vezes aquela eminent; adonc tu secsa sobre aquela; e sia la seccio segon la quantitat en la qual prenguan las forceps; e aprop atira aquela, quar ela es fayta leugiera a eyssiment.	However, for splints that are removed from the opposite side or where you have already processed some part outwardly, if there is stiffness at the extremity of the splint due to the part beneath the shoulder propelling it up and making it prominent; then you should cut above that; and let the cutting be according to the amount in which the forceps take hold; and immediately pull out that part, for it has been made light enough by this method.
Mays si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu tortz lama segon contrarietat entro que la sageta enprema en le os, e amplifique a si meteys, e aprop extratz aquela.	However, if it is retained in the bone, now you should twist the lamina in the opposite direction to which the splint presses against the bone, and enlarge it as you insert, and then extract that part.
E sino, layssa aquela per alcus dias, e aprop itera aquela entro qu’en yesca.	And if not, leave that for several days, and then try again when the time is right.
E si le fust de la sageta es en aquela, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am lu.	And if the splint shaft is in that position, now you should push it out from there.
Mays si le fust es cazut e voles aministrar inpulsio, lahoras tu intromet e aquela, si es sorda, sturment concau per so que intre la concavitat de lu en la coa de la sageta e aprop impelleys aquela am lu.	However, if the shaft is embedded and you want to administer pressure, now insert and use it; if it is dull, use a concave instrument so that it fits into the cavity of the splint at its base and then push it out from there.
Mays si la sageta es concava, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am sturment fort intrant en aquela, quar la sageta es alleujada per aquela.	However, if the splint is concave, now you should push it out using a strong instrument by inserting it, for the splint is lightened by this method.
E si la sageta es entoxiguada, lahoras cove que tu concaves tota la carn en la qual es le vere, si es a tu possible aquo, e aprop cura aquela am aquo que si conveneys.	And if the bandage is poisoned, now you must hollow out all the flesh in which the poison lies, as much as it is possible for you to do so, and then treat that with what is appropriate.
E si la sageta catz en le pietz, o en le ventre, o en la vesica, o en le costat, e es propinqua per so que tu tocas aquela am la tenta, e es a tu possible secsar sobre aquela, lahoras secsa sobre aquela e guarda te de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e extratz aquela, e aprop cos la plagua si indigeys, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the bandage sticks to the feet, or to the belly, or to the bladder, or to the side, and it is close so that you touch it with the probe, and it is possible for you to cut over it, now cut over it and guard against injuring a vein or nerve, and extract it, and then treat the wound as seems necessary, and cure it until it is healed.
Forma de forceps am las quals so atiradas las sagetas:	Form of forceps with which bandages are removed:
Sian las extremitatz de lor cum a bec de ausel que son faytas cum serra quan prendon sobre la sageta per so que no la layssen.	Let the extremities of these be shaped like the beak of a bird, which is made like a clamp when they grasp the bandage so that they do not let it go.
E de aquelas son faytas motas specias, grans, paucas e migieras, segon la quantitat de la grandeza de la sageta e de la sieua pauqueza, e de la amplitud de la plagua, e de la constriccio de lu.	And from these are made various special hooks, large, few and medium-sized, according to the quantity of the bandage's size and its narrowness, and the width of the wound, and the constriction of it.
Forma de impellent concau de aquesta extremitat conquava ayssi cum pena de ausel per so que sia alleujat le intrament de la sageta en lu, e impulcio de aquela sorda:	Form of an impelling concave on this extremity that is curved like the claw of a bird so that it may ease the instrument for removing the bandage, and the force with which it pushes:
Forma de impellent de sorda extremitat:	Form of an impelling hook-shaped extremity:
ayssi cum ray per so que sia alleujat le intrament de lu en la sageta concava e es impellida am aquel.	Like a rod so that it may ease the instrument into the concave bandage and is pushed with it.
De fleubotomia de las venas.	On phlebotomy of the veins.
Las venas de fleubotomia de las quals corr costuma de fleubotomar so xxx, de las quals so en le cap xvi, so es doas venas pulsatils las quals so aprop las aurelhas, dic alhasisain; doas herbas que so en les dos templars apparentz; e doas venas que so en dos lacrimals de dos huels que son appeladas aspicientz; e la vena preparada en le mieg loc del front, e la vena que es en la extremitat del nas; e doas guidegi que so al col; e doas venas que so en la labia desus; e doas venas que so en la labia dejos; e — aquestas so las venas que so appeladas algelic —; e so doas venas que so dejos la lengua.	The veins for phlebotomy of which one usually performs bloodletting, there are thirty, of which sixteen are in the head. Of these, two pulsating veins, which are near the ears, called alhasisain; two branches that appear on each temple; and two veins that are in the two tear ducts by the eyes, which are called aspicientz; and the vein prepared in the middle of the forehead, and the vein at the tip of the nose; and two tendons which are near the neck; and two veins that are in the upper lip; and two veins that are in the lower lip; and these are the veins that are called algelic; and there are two veins below the tongue.
Mays las venas que so fleubotomadas en les brasses so v; quar de aquelas es una cephalica, e es deves le latz silvestre; e le poble appela “la vena del cap”, e sorda, e es vena migiera, e es composta de un ram de la basilica, e de autre ram de la cephalica; e nomna aquela le poble “vena de tot le cors”, e basilica es vena la qual es pausada en le latz domestic, e es nomnada “citillar”, e nompnan aquela les vulguars “vena del ventre”; e funis del bras, e es pausada sobre le focil, e es aquela en la qual es fleubotomat, e es aquela que appar sobre le poutz per apparicio manifesta; e salvatella, e es la vena que es entre lo dit auricular e·l pus petit dit, e so en lu dos ramps.	The veins that are phlebotomized in the arms are five. Of these, one is called cephalic, and it resembles the wild thyme; and people call it "the vein of the head," and it is also called sorda, and it is a median vein, composed of a branch from the basilic vein, and another branch from the cephalic vein; and they call this one among the common people "vein of the whole body"; and basilica is the vein that lies on the domestic side, and it is called "little finger," and the common people name this "abdominal vein." And there are tendons in the arm, and it lies over the humerus, and this is where bloodletting is performed, and it appears prominently on the forearm; and salvatella is the vein that lies between the thumb and the little finger, and these are in both sides.
E en le pe e la camba so tres venas; la una de aquelas es que es dejos la curvatura del denolh del latz silvestre; e la segonda es sophena, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz domestic; e la vena sciatica, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz silvestre; e en la camba son autras venas semblantz ad aquelas.	And in the leg and the thigh there are three veins. One of these is behind the curvature of the wild thyme side; and the second is sophena, and its location is behind the domestic thigh; and the sciatic vein, and its location is behind the wild thigh; and in the thigh there are other veins similar to those.
Le juvament de las venas que so aprop las aurelhas es a cataris antics e emigranea e sahafati e ulceracios del cap malas antiquas.	The treatment of veins near the ears is for catarrhs, emigrations, and old ulcers of the head.
E la qualitat de sagnar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: es que sia ras le cap del malaute, e sia freguat le cap del malaute en le occipiti en le loc de amdoas las venas am drap ample am bona fricacio; aprop strenha le malaute le sieu col am una benda entro que apparan las doas e les locs de lor so aprop las aurelhas en dos locs depremegutz del cap; e quereys aquela am le tieu dit, e si tu sentes le pols de aquelas am le dit tieu, aqui senha am tenta.	And the quality of opening those veins is as I recommend to you: shave the patient's head and rub it well at the occipital region where the two veins are; press down on the patient’s neck with a bandage so that the two veins appear near each ear in two locations lower on the head; and feel for them with your finger, and if you can sense the pulse of those veins with your finger, here is when to proceed.
Aprop tu pren la lancea cutellar, e es aquela que es inscident, e aprop tu intromet aquel dejos la vena en la codena entro que·l fleubotomi vengua al os.	Then take the lancet, and use that which is sharp, and then insert it below the vein along the groove until the blood reaches the bone.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am la vena e la codena a las partidas desus e inscideys la vena am inscizio inscident.	And then raise your hand with the vein and its groove upwards and cut the vein with a sharp incision.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio la quantitat de dos ditz ajustatz o entorn de aquo; e fay yssir del sanc atant quant voles.	And the length of the incision should be about two fingers' width or slightly more; and let as much blood out as you wish.
E aprop strenh am pulvils e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	And then apply pressure with a pad and leave it there until it is healed.
E ja e precedit en le comensament del libre la inscizio de aquelas e de lor la cauterizacio.	And already at the beginning of the book, I have described the incision and cauterization of those veins.
Mays de las doas venas arterias que so als templars le juvament de la fleubotomia es a emigranea antiqua e sode malvada e obtalmia assidua e cors de superfluitatz acutas effusas als huels.	But for the two arteries near the temples, the treatment of phlebotomy is for old and persistent migraines, acute suppurating conditions in the eyes, and severe accumulations of excess fluids around the eyes.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: constrengua le malaute le sieu col mot entro que apparan las doas venas al sentiment per appericio manifesta e sia demonstrat le pols de lor dejos le tieu dit; e lahoras tu senha am tenta.	And the quality of phlebotomy of those arteries is as I recommend to you: have the patient press their neck with force until the two veins become visible clearly, and demonstrate the pulse of those veins with your finger; then you may proceed.
E aprop tu eleva la codena desobre la vena a las partidas desus am le tieu dit indic, e intromet le fleubotomi inscident dejos, e eleva la vena en sus; e inscidey aquela ayssi cum has fayt en las doas venas autras; e fay correr del sanc segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	Raise the vein above the ligature to the parts above with your finger, and insert the phlebotomy knife below, raising the vein up; and cut it as you did for the two other veins; let the blood flow according to the quantity of your need.
E aprop deslia la coartacio del malaute, e pausa le tieu dit sobre la vena per una hora, e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto e pulvils e strenh aquela desus am fort constriccio, e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	Then loosen the compression on the patient, and place your finger on the vein for one hour, then place it over that cut and apply pressure with the palm and fingers firmly around it, and leave it until it is healed.
E ja es precedida la rememoracio de lor, e de aquelas la inscizio, e la atraccio en le comensament del libre.	And the reminder of them has been mentioned before, and their incision and attraction have been described at the beginning of the book.
E donc le juvament de fleubotomia de la vena del front es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a las malautias antiquas de la cara e a emigranea e rogor e ulceracios fetidas.	And thus, the procedure of phlebotomy of the frontal vein is similar to the cephalic vein phlebotomy for ancient illnesses of the face and for migraines, rigors, and foul-smelling ulcers.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es segon que yeu recomti a tu; so es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col am una benda entro que apparesca la vena; e aprop pren le insturment le qual es nompnat fossori del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the quality of the phlebotomy is as I recommend to you; that is, the patient should hold their arm with a cloth until the vein appears; then take the instrument called a trocar, which has this shape:
Pausa la puncta eminent la qual es al cap del fossori sobre aquela vena e percuteys sobre lu am penche o am autre causa en la manieyra de lu, e layssa lo sanc correr segon la quantitat la qual voles; e aprop deslia la perforacio del malaute e strenh aquela entro que sia sanada.	Place the sharp point of the trocar at the head of the instrument over that vein and press it down on it either tilted or for some other reason as described, and let the blood flow according to the quantity you desire; then loosen the puncture of the patient and hold it until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es uberta am fleubotomi lat, empero no cove que·l fleubotomi sia de acuta extremitat ayssi cum les autres fleubotomis, abantz sia de lada extremitat, e fleubotoma aquela segon le tranvers, quar le os es propda e fort leu trencaria en lu le fleubotomi quan es subtil.	And in some cases, phlebotomy of the lat (a vein) is performed, but it is not necessary for the phlebotomy to be sharp like other phlebotomies; rather, it should be blunt. Perform this phlebotomy transversely, as the bone is close and strong, and the phlebotomy might easily break it if it were fine.
Mays le juvament de las duas venas que so als lacrimals de dos huels per scabia del huels per rogor e sebol en les huels, e a las malautias de la cara.	Here is the English translation:
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia es que·l malaute strenha le col sieu am una benda, e aprop fleubotoma aquelas, e tu sias stant sobre le cap de lu.	Of the quality of phlebotomy is that the patient strains his neck with a bandage, and then you perform phlebotomy on those areas, and you should stand above his head.
E sia fayta la fleubotomia segon le transvers a longitut un pauc am fleubotomi pauc, quar en le loc no es carn; e si le fleubotomi es subtil, fort leu la extremitat de lu es trencada.	And phlebotomy should be performed across the length a bit apart from each phlebotomy, because in that place there is no flesh; and if the phlebotomy is delicate, then the extremity of it is easily broken.
E aprop fay correr del sanc atant quant es a tu necessari, e pausa sobre aquelas coto, e strenh aquelas per una nueyt, e aprop deslia aquelas.	And then let the blood flow as much as is necessary for you, and pause on those cuts, and strain those for one night, and then remove them.
Mays le fleubotomi de la vena del nas es conferent a febre acuta e a soda vehement, e a las malautias de la cara e emigranea e rogor que accideys en la cara, e majorment quan es antiqua.	But phlebotomy of the nasal vein is appropriate for acute fever and violent sweating, and for illnesses of the face and migraines and pain that occur in the face, especially when they are chronic.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col e aprop te le sieu nas am la tua ma sinistra, e pren le fleubotomi subtil lonc e fica aquela en le mieg loc del cap del nas segon rectitut, quar la vena no appar al sentiment aqui, e quar le sanc comensa a fluir tantost.	And the quality of this phlebotomy is that the patient strains his own neck and then with your left hand hold his nose, take a delicate lancet long and place it in the middle part of the nose cap straight, because the vein does not appear by touch here, and because the blood begins to flow immediately.
Cove que tu ultimes la tua ma am le fleubotomi petit a petit e fassas correr del sanc segon la tua necessitat; e aprop lia aquela per una nuoyt, quar aquela es restaurada leugierament.	Make sure you end your hand with the small phlebotomy gradually and let the blood flow according to your necessity; and then bind it for one night, because that area is quickly restored.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de las doas guidegui a constriccio de ale e a comensament de lepra e a motas malautias e inpetige e malas ulceracios corrosivas ayssi cum herpotromeno.	But the harm of phlebotomy of the two veins leads to constriction of breath and the beginning of leprosy and many illnesses and impetigo and severe corrosive ulcers as well as herpes.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que el malaute strenha dejos quascuna en le sieu col am liament; e estia le artifexs sobre le cap del malaute, e le malaute sia sezent sobre una sezela.	And the quality of phlebotomy of those veins is that the patient strains each one in his neck with a bandage; and the practitioner should stand above the patient's head, and the patient should sit on a chair.
E aprop fleubotoma la vena al lonc am fleubotomi ample petit a petit; e aprop extratz de sanc segon temprada quantitat o segon aquo que vezes de necessitat que es ad aquo; e aprop fay semblant del autra vena.	For in phlebotomy, when opening the long vein, do it gradually with small cuts; and then extract blood according to the season or quantity needed as required by necessity; and afterward make an appearance like the other veins.
E aprop deslia le liament e strenh las doas venas am strictura migiera per so que·l malaute no sia prefocat, e laysa entro al mati quar la plagua es sanada.	And then loosen the bandage and gently stretch the two veins where there is constriction so that the patient is not overstrained, and wait until the ailment is healed.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de las venas algerich, comfereys a petitas apostemas e pustulas de la boca e corrupcio de las gengivas e malas ulceracios e fissuras, e a malas ulceracios que so en le nas e en le circuit de lu.	And for the benefit of phlebotomy of the larger veins, it is also useful for small abscesses and pus-filled boils in the mouth, corruption of the gums, bad ulcers, and cracks, as well as for bad ulcers that occur on the nose and around it.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que fases cezer le malaute denant tu, e strenh le col de lu am una benda, e aprop revolveys las labias de lu e reguarda a doas venas de las quals la una es de la dextra de la labia e la segonda de la senestra; e la demonstracio de quascuna es per la negror de quascuna de amdos, e aquo mays es quar en le circuit de aquelas so venas menudas negras; e adonc inscideys cascuna per inscizio inscident.	And the quality of phlebotomy from these veins is that you should have the patient facing you, and tie a bandage around their neck, and then spread out their lips and observe the two veins, one on the right side of the lip and the second on the left; and the demonstration of each is by the darkness of each, and this is more evident because in the area around these there are small black veins; and then incise each with a cutting incision.
Mays si dubitacio es dejos tu, e no sabes qual es de aquelas, lahoras tu enten a inscisio de la major de aquelas, e de la pus manifesta de aquelas.	But if you are in doubt and do not know which one it is, then incise the larger of these veins, and from those that show pus.
E fay le semblant de las doas venas que so en las labias desus.	And make the appearance of the two veins that are above the lips.
Mays costuma corr mays a inscidir las doas venas que so en la labia dejos.	But it is more common to cut the two veins that are on the lower lip.
Mays de doas venas que so dejos la lengua le juvament es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a prefocacios que so en le guolayro, a la malautia de la uvula, e a malautias de la boca.	But for the two veins that are below the tongue, the benefit is in phlebotomy of the cephalic vein for fainting that occurs in the throat, for diseases of the uvula, and for illnesses of the mouth.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es que segue le malaute entre las tuas mas denant le solel, e eleva la lengua de lu, e reguarda dejos la lengua, de la un latz de lu vena e del autre latz vena, e la color de quascuna es declinant a negror.	Of the quality of phlebotomy it is that follow the patient among thy more before the sun, and raise the tongue of him, and regard below the tongue, from one side of the vein and from the other side vein, and the color of each is declining to blackness.
E adonc fleubotoma quascuna; e guarda te que no ultimes la tua ma en fleubotoman aquelas, quar dejos aquelas so arterias.	Then phlebotomize each one; and be careful that you do not use your hand in phlebotomy below those, for below those are arteries.
E las tuas venas que so fleubotomadas en le coyde so en las quals corr costuma en totz les homes, e la fleubotomia de lor es fayta segon dos manieyras, o pongen am le fleubotomi mirtilat o olivar a subtilitat declinant; o secsar am fleubotomi cutellar, e apelha si alnessil, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the veins that are phlebotomized in the bend where it runs customarily throughout all men, and the phlebotomy of them is done according to two methods, either place next to the phlebotomy a small mirror or an olive pit with subtle gradations; or hold the phlebotomy knife steadily, and feel if it is steady, and this is the form of it:
E aquest alnessil es que conveneys a seccio e de aquels so specias latz e subtils segon la amplitut de las venas e segon la strictura de aquelas.	And this steadiness is what befits the section and of those their special side and subtle according to the width of the veins and according to the tightness of them.
Forma de fleubotomi mirti:	Form of phlebotomy with a mirror:
sia le latz de lu ayssi cum vezes, e conveneys a obrir las venas concavas plenas procedentz apparentz grossas, e ad aquelas que conteno sanc gros torbat.	Let the side of it be as such when times, and befits to open veins that are concave and full proceeding from visible thick vessels, and for those which contain thick coagulated blood.
E aquesta es la forma de fleubotomi olivar:	And this is the form of phlebotomy with an olive pit:
E aquest fleubotomi es de menor latitut e de pus subtil extremitat, e conveneys a fleubotomia de venas subtils que conteno sanc subtil citri.	And this phlebotomy is of lesser width and more subtle extremity, and befits the phlebotomy of fine veins which contain thin quick blood.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena basilica la qual es una de tres venas: quar extratz le sanc de las malautias que so dejos le guolayro e·l col, e de aquo que siec le pietz e·l ventre.	But the benefit of phlebotomy of the basilica vein, which is one of three veins: for it extracts blood from diseases that are below the jaw and neck, and from what dries the legs and abdomen.
E conveneys al fleubotomador, quan fleubotomia aquela, que guarde be aquela e sia sobre-temor en aquela, quar dejos lu ha arteria, e si erra e ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi, inscidira aquela arteria e accidira fluxs de sanc, per so que cove que no fleubotomes aquela am fleubotomi pungent, abantz sia sectant cum alnessil.	And when performing a venesection, one should be very careful and have great fear of hitting an artery, for if the vein is punctured incorrectly and the incision is made in the artery instead, it will cut that artery and cause a surge of blood to flow out, so it is necessary not to use a sharp instrument for venesection but rather one that is blunt like an onion.
E si no appar la basilica per apparicio manifesta, lahoras cove que tu laysses aquela e que tu mudes a la autre, o que cerques alcun ram sieu; o que fleubotomes en loc de lu finis del bras, quar aquela es manifesta; e secsa aquela am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the basilica vein does not appear clearly, then it is necessary to leave that one and switch to another; or to look for some branch vein; or to perform venesection at the end of the arm where it is clear; and make that venesection with a blunt instrument as we have said.
Mays si tu voles la fleubotomia de lu meteyssa, lahoras cove denant la strictura del bras que toques le loc entro que conogues le loc dels pols, e aprop senha sobre lu am tencha; e aprop lia le bras e secsa la vena am seccio concava am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit; e guarda te que caja la percussio per alcu spazi del loc de la arteria.	But if you want the venesection of the median vein, then before the constriction of the arm, touch the place between where you know the location of the wrists, and slightly above where it is thin; and lift the arm and make the incision on the concave side with a blunt instrument as we have said; and be careful not to hit the artery in that area.
E quan tu vezes, cum strenhes le liament, imflacio en le loc que has senhat am tencha, lahoras aquela inflacio es inflacio de la arteria, e donc squiva aquela.	And when you press, as you tighten the ligature, if there is swelling in the place that you marked as thin, then that swelling is arterial swelling, and therefore avoid that area.
E si vezes le sanc fluir en la fleubotomia ayssi cum aurina de enfant, e·l sanc es subtil rog, lahoras sapias que es del sanc de la arteria; e lahoras tu coyta e pausa le tieu dit sobre aquel per lonc spazi; e aprop osta le tieu dit, e si lo sanc es abscindit, quar motas veguadas es abscindit, lahoras tu strenh le bras e layssa aquel.	And if the blood flows from the venesection as it does in a child’s urination, and the blood is fine and red, then you know that it is arterial blood; and at that moment, hold your finger on that spot for a long period; and after remove your finger, and if the bleeding stops, because several times it has stopped, then tighten the arm and leave that area.
E guardes le malaute de la moccio de lu, e sia sobre-temor de lu e no maugua aquel per alcus dias entro que sia sanat.	Guard the patient from the blowing of air, and let them be overcautious about it and do not touch that for any days until they are healed.
Mays si le sanc no es abscindit, e vezes que deves tu no es present medicina ad aquo, lahoras tu inscideys la arteria, si appar a tu; quar la extremitat de lu es contrayta, e es abscindit le sanc; o que prenguas scorsa de fistic, e fen aquela, e pren la una maytat e strenh aquela sobre le loc de la vena am strictura descent am liament e am pulvils entro al autra dia.	If the blood does not clot, and if you do not have appropriate medicine available at that time, then incise the artery, if it appears to you; for the extremity of it is contracted, and the blood is severed; or take silk thread and place it there, and take half of it and tightly bind it over the site of the vein with descent and powders inside on the other day.
E lahoras si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, lahoras cura aquel am aquo del qual es precedit a la rememoracio del loc de las polveras abscindentz flux de sanc.	And if the blood is clotted, that is good; but if not, then treat it with what precedes regarding the memory of the location of the powders to stop the flow of blood.
E la abscizio del sanc de lu es dificil en motas disposicios per le loc petit de la plagua e la possibilitat del liament del bras.	And the clotting of the blood from it is difficult in many positions due to the small location of the wound and the possibility of binding the arm.
Mays de la vena fusca la fleubotomia es juvament que extratz lo sanc de la partida subirana del cap e a la partida dejos del cors; per aquo quar es composta de ram de la basilica e de ram de cephalica, ayssi cum havem dit.	But for the dark vein, phlebotomy is helpful to extract blood from the upper part of the head and from below the chest; by this means, which is composed of branches of the basilica and of the cephalic vein, as we have said.
E cove al fleubotomant aquela que sia sobre-temor en la fleubotomia de lu, quar dejos aquela es un nervi; e adonc si ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi e atroba le nervi, accidira a lu stupor, e es difficil la sanacio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot, E aquest nervi motas veguadas apar al sentiment; e si es ocultat ad alcus homes e es subtil e no es monstrat, lahoras cove que tu pauses le fleubotomi am le qual tu fleubotomas am seccio de alnessil, e evita le nervi am la tua fortalesa.	And it is important for the phlebotomist to be extremely cautious during the phlebotomy of that area, as below it lies a nerve; and then if there is an error in the puncture of the phlebotomy and the nerve is hit, it will cause numbness, and healing from this is difficult, and rarely can one recover completely. And this nerve appears to many people through sensation; and if it is hidden from some individuals and is subtle and not shown, then it is important that you pause the phlebotomy where you perform it in the region of weakness, and avoid the nerve with your strength.
E si la vena es entre dos nervis, lahoras tu fen la vena en la longitut.	And if the vein is between two nerves, then you should divide the vein along its length.
Le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena cephalica es que atratz le sanc del cap e comfereys a las malautias dels huels.	The benefit of the phlebotomy of the cephalic vein is that it attracts blood from the head and relieves eye diseases.
E cove en aquest propriament, si vols que la fleubotomes pungen am fleubotomi olivar o am fleubotomi mirti; quar es la pus salva de totas las venas, quar no es dejos lu arteria ni nervi.	And here it is appropriate, if you want the phlebotomist to puncture either an olive vein or a myrtle vein; for it is the safest of all veins, as it is neither close to arteries nor nerves.
Mays empero conveneys a tu deves la fleubotomia que guardes que am le fleubotomi no punguas le cap del lacert tant solament, e cerques le loc pus leugier, e no notz a lu, si no es atrobat am la percussio primieyra que sia sobre aquela am fleubotomia alcunas veguadas.	However, it is necessary for you to ensure that when performing phlebotomy, you do not puncture the head of the lizard vein alone, but seek a place farther away and do not mark it unless after the first percussion it is evident that there are no veins nearby.
Mays empero fort leu es apostemat en alcus homes, quan no es fleubotomat en la primieyra percussio, mays no notz en re aquel apostema.	However, it is often the case that an abscess appears in some people when they are not phlebotomized on the first attempt, so do not mark that abscess.
Mays la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquela e les accidentz de lu so motz, en les quals te cove cogitar en lor rectificacio.	However, the quality of the phlebotomy of that vein and its consequences should be carefully considered for their correction.
Le primier de lu es del qual cove que sapias que fleubotomia no es aministrada sino en conservacio de sanetat e per speransa de lu e cautela de aveniment de malautias, e que sia fayta fleubotomia en la una de las venas que so en le coyde, so es: cephalica, fusca e basilica; e que sia fayta fleubotomia al comensament de primaveyra, sobre dejun en primaviera e autunppne, e en invern aprop la comestio, quan apparo significacios de replecio.	The first of these is about knowing that phlebotomy should be administered only for the preservation of health and with hope and caution against the onset of diseases. It should be performed on one of the veins located in the arm, which are: cephalic, basilic, and fusca; and it should be done at the beginning of spring, after breakfast in spring and autumn, and in winter near mealtime when signs of fullness appear.
E sia fayta fleubotomia e le tertz dia o al primier pus que del jorn siran passadas tres horas.	And let phlebotomy be performed when the third hour has passed since the first pus appeared.
Mays fleubotomia que es aministrada, mays quan provoca convenencia e necessitat ad aquo, o de nuoyt o de dia, en tota hora e en tot temps.	And let phlebotomy be administered whenever there is convenience and necessity for it, whether by night or day, at any hour and at any time.
E cove que efant no sia fleubotomat entro que aja xiiii ans, e femna que sia prenhs no sia fleubotomada sino del quart mes entro al sete, e les viels no sian fleubotomatz les quals ja han passatz lx ans.	And it is not proper to perform phlebotomy on a child until they are fourteen years old, and do not perform phlebotomy on a woman who is pregnant unless it is during the fourth month and before the seventh, and do not perform phlebotomy on women who have passed sixty years.
E cum alcu vol esser fleubotomat per qualque manieyra sia, cove que mondifique les sieus budels denant la fleubotomia am clisteri leon, si en aquels ha mota fenda retenguda, per so que las venas no atiro las superfluitatz en la fleubotomia dels budels, que son puridas, e que no noguan als membres principals.	And when someone wishes to undergo phlebotomy by any method, it is necessary for them to clean their bowels before the phlebotomy with a laxative enema if there is retained fecal matter in them, so that the veins do not carry superfluous substances during the phlebotomy of the purified bowels, and so they do not affect the principal limbs.
E no sian fleubotomatz les pascientz naucea sacertiva e crapula, ni evasent de malautia ni de ebretat entro que aquo sia remaugut aquo de lor, ni malaute de ydropici, e mays que fleubotomia sia temuda aprop colica passio e aprop vomit, e aprop cos de ventre, e aprop multiplicacio de coyt e de trebal e de exercici de dejunis o de vigilias e de tota causa que dissolveys la vertut, o sia corpore28 o animal.	And do not perform phlebotomy on patients who are suffering from severe nausea and drunkenness, or who are recovering from illness or intoxication until these effects have subsided, nor on those with dropsy. Also, be cautious about performing phlebotomy near the onset of colic pain and vomiting, and after abdominal issues, and during times of excessive sexual activity, work, exercise, fasting, or wakefulness, and any cause that weakens the body's strength, whether physical or mental.
E aprop considera en subtiliacio de humos denant aquo si le sanc es gros, am viandas e beures, e am medicinas si aquo es a lu possible ad aquo.	And before considering phlebotomy, carefully observe the subtlety of the humors, especially if the blood is thick, through food and drinks, and with medicines if that is possible.
E aprop intre en banh si alcuna causa no prohibeys, o sia excersitat per alcun exercici per so que·l sanc sia subtiliat.	And before phlebotomy, take a bath if there is no cause prohibiting it, or exercise for some time to make the blood thinner.
E pausa la fleubotomia de lu en le pietz del dia, so es enviro la hora de tercia, ayssi cum havem dit.	And the phlebotomy of that day is performed at about the hour of tierce, as we have said.
E perforsa te que·l pietz de aquel sia guardat en aquel dia de totz mals accidentz animals, ayssi cum es angustia, ira, temor, e de totz accidentz corporals, ayssi cum es trebal e pena superflua e coyt e semblantz a lor.	And you should perform it when the day is free from all bad animal accidents, such as anguish, anger, fear, and from all excessive bodily activities, such as hard work, unnecessary pain, grief, and similar things.
E a la sua sezelha fassa esser presentz las causas en le us de la qual corr costuma dels homes am aromaticitat e odorament e am bals e semblantz ad aquels segon la cantitat de possibilitat.	And at his side, have present the causes in the use of which people usually find pleasant aromatics and odors and balms and similar things according to the quantity of possibility.
E segua le fleubotomador sobre un coyssi que sia pus aut que·l coyssi de aquel que deu esser fleubotomat.	And the phlebotomist should sit on a chair that is higher than the chair of the person who needs to be phlebotomized.
E aprop extragua le sieu bras, e fregue aquel am la sua ma le fleubotomador doas o tres veguadas; e aprop strenha le liament am correia e involva aquel doas veguadas.	And nearby, draw out their arm, and wash it with his hand by the phlebotomist two or three times; and then bind the ligature with a cord and wrap it around twice.
E sia la strictura temprada, quar la strictura quant no es engual, o la strictura es am superfluitat, lahoras prohibeys de fluxs del sanc; o es am mollificacio, e lahoras prohibeys le cors del sanc eyssament.	And the ligature should be applied promptly, for if it is not done at the right time or if it is too tight, it prevents the flow of blood; or if it is too loose, it also fails to control the blood properly.
E aprop la strictura, cove que aquel que deu esser fleubotomat fregue las suas mas ensemps entre lor entro que las venas sian imfladas, e sian declaradas al sentiment.	And after the ligature is applied, have the person who needs to be phlebotomized wash their hands together until the veins become swollen and are clearly visible.
E aprop le fleubotomador unte le sieu fleubotomi am un pauc de oli antic propriament; e aprop pausa le sieu di indic de la ma senestra sobre aquela vena, dejos le loc del qual vol la fleubotomia, per que la vena fuja un pauc, e la percussio sia sessada quar de las venas es la qual atrobas ayssi cum corda fugent deves la fleubotomia, e de aquelas es que es plena de ventositat e quan pauses le fleubotomi sobre aquela es contrayta deves le fleubotomi, e es desceubut le fleubotomador; e le fleubotomi no uobre la vena, e si uobre, aquela es streyta.	And then the phlebotomist anoints their phlebotomy needle with a little proper olive oil; and then places his left hand index finger on that vein, just below the place where the phlebotomy is to be performed, so that the vein withdraws slightly, and the percussion is steady because among the veins is one that feels like a fleeing cord for phlebotomy, and in this one there is air; when you apply the phlebotomy, it does not puncture the vein, and if it does puncture, then that vein is narrow.
E donc, per aquo cove que·l fleubotomador sia fermat e sia sollicit en totas aquestas causas.	Therefore, let the phlebotomist be fixed in place and attentive to all these causes.
E aprop depause le fleubotomi, mays si la vena es huberta en una veguada, lahoras bo es; e sino, tu itera aquo autra vaguada dejos aquel loc un pauc, o sobre lu am festinacio, si le loc no es apostemat.	And immediately after the phlebotomy, if the vein is open in one place, then that is sufficient; and if not, repeat this at another place, leaving that location for a while, or apply some heat to it, if the area is not inflamed.
Et si le loc es apostemat, o le malaute se spauresca, lahoras tu le layssa per un dia o per dos, e no strenha le liament, quar fort leu atirara apostema caut, ni no intre en banh.	And if the area is inflamed or the patient becomes worse, then you should leave it for one day or two, and do not tighten the bandage, for it will surely cause inflammation, nor should you enter a bath.
E aprop itera la fleubotomia si la ama.	And immediately repeat the phlebotomy if necessary.
E si la apercio es petita e corr sanc subtilment, e temes que non yesca sanc la cantitat que voles, lahoras tu itera le fleubotomi en aquel trauc segon rectitut e ajusta en la appercio un pauc, e fay aquo am festinacio denant que·l loc sia apostemat, quar le loc es apostemat en motz homes deves pauca apercio.	And if the incision is small and blood flows slightly, and you fear that not enough blood will flow as desired, then repeat the phlebotomy at that spot carefully and adjust the incision slightly, and apply some heat before the area becomes inflamed, for the area tends to become inflamed with even a slight incision in most people.
Mays si vezes aquel ja apostemat, lahoras no iteres sobre lu, quar no escusa a tu alcuna causa; e pausa sobre aquel alcuna partida de la fenda de oli, quar alleuja le cors del sanc.	But if you see that the area is already inflamed, then do not repeat it there, for it will not help in any way; and apply some part of the incision with oil, for it aids the flow of blood.
E es milhor en aquest loc que oli e que les autres olis.	And in this case, oil is better than other oils.
E semblantment aministra fenda de oli en tota fleubotomia am la qual fleubotomes las venas deves la prohibicio de cors de sanc, e fan aquo tyriaca alfadoc e sagzenea quan es pausat de la una de aquelas sobre le loc, quar le sanc es subtiliat e es revolvut quan es gros.	And similarly, administer oil on the incision in every phlebotomy where you open veins that are prohibited by the constitution of the blood, and use either theriac or Syrian wine when paused from one of these, for the blood becomes thinner and less congested.
E si en le loc de la fleubotomia es engendrat gran apostema, quar motas veguadas accideys, e majorment ad aquel que no es stat sangnat sino aquela veguada, o en la apercio de la vena pauca, e lahoras tu coyta, e pausa sobre le loc sponja infuza en aygua e sal, un pauc scalfada, e strenh aquela per una hora, quar es dissolvut.	And if in the place of phlebotomy a large abscess is generated, which happens often, especially to those who have not been bled recently or only slightly upon the vein's opening, then you should treat it, and apply over the area a sponge infused with water and salt, somewhat heated, and hold that there for one hour, because it dissolves.
E cove que fassa aquo aprop le yssiment del sanc de aquela vena am compliment de lu o de autra vena.	And do this near the exit of the blood from that vein or from another vein, with caution.
E si roman en le loc per alcus dias alcuna negror o viriditat, no notz aquo; e si voles, pausa sobre aquel alcuna causa de aloen e de mirra dissolvut, o alcuna causa de suc de mentastre o de calament o semblant de lu.	And if after some days a black or greenish discoloration remains in the area, do not be concerned about it; and if you wish, apply to that area a preparation of aloes and myrrh dissolved, or a preparation of mint juice or collyrium or something similar.
E motas veguadas accideysso apostemas e eminencias deves fleubotomia de la basilica.	And often there occur abscesses and swellings that require phlebotomy from the basilic vein.
E donc pausa la tua ma sobre aquela, e si lahoras tu atrobas mollicia deves la tua compressio sobre aquela, lahoras aquela eminencia es malvada e mala; e adonc guarda te que pauses sobre aquela alcuna causa de aquo que havem dit, quar fort leu fluira de la arteria sanc.	And therefore place your hand on that area, and if you find softness upon compression there, then that swelling is bad; and then be careful not to apply any of the substances we have mentioned over it, for the blood will easily flow from an artery.
E fay emplaustre am aquo en que es stipticitat, per que le loc sia endurat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And apply a plaster that has astringent properties to harden the area, and then treat it with other remedies until it is healed.
E cove que extraguas del sanc a tot hom segon la quantitat de la sua vertut e segon la color vencent sobrc le sanc segon que appar.	And it is necessary to extract blood from a person according to the quantity of their vitality and according to the appearance and color of the blood as it appears.
Quar si le sanc es negre, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia rog; e semblantment si tu le vezes gros, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia subtiliat; e semblantment si es agut, entro que sia ostada la acuitat de lu.	For if the blood is black, then let it flow until it becomes red; and similarly, if you see it thick, then let it flow until it becomes thin; and similarly, if it is acute, until its sharpness is moderated.
E cove ad aquel que es ple e fort e ha necessitat de extraccio de sanc en una veguada, que sia amplificada la fleubotomia de la vena e le fleubotomi sia lat.	For those who are full and strong and have a need for bloodletting at one time, the phlebotomy of the vein should be enlarged and let the bleeding be slow.
E en aquel que es freul, sia fayt le contrari de aquel, e cove que extragua aquel en tropas veguadas, e que le trauc sia streyt.	And for those who are weak, do the opposite of that, and let it be done in small amounts at different times, and let the incision be shallow.
E le milhor que es administrat en fleubotomia de vena es que sia la seccio transversa, no punctura.	And the best to be used in venous phlebotomy is a transverse section, not a puncture.
E aquesta manieyra de fleubotomia es salva de flux de sanc e de inscizio de nervi, e es pus lausabla e pus salva que fleubotomia segon latitut e longitut.	And this method of phlebotomy is safe from blood flow and nerve injury, and it is more beneficial and safer than phlebotomy according to latitude and longitude.
E a la qual es acostumat sobrevenir sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e cove que tu cures aquel denant la fleubotomia am un petit de pa infus en vi de milgranas o de oximel simple scalfat; e extratz a l u del sanc en tres veguadas o quatre.	And for those who are accustomed to fainting due to phlebotomy, you should treat them before the phlebotomy with a small amount of bread infused in vinegar made from millet or simple oxymel heated; and extract the blood in three or four sessions.
E si es enfregiditat de compleccio, lahoras prengua denant la fleubotomia pa infus en eyssarop de mirra o en eyssarop de mel aromatizat am specias ayssi cum am pebre, canela, gingiebre e semblantz, o en eyssarop aromatizat e mot odorant.	And if it is applied as a plaster before phlebotomy, then take bread infused in syrup of myrrh or in aromatic honey mixed with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and similar, or in an aromatic syrup with good fragrance.
E si accideys sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e es causa de lu issiment de mot sanc, lahoras cove que prengua en beure aygua de carn e eyssarop mot odorant subtil; e use de aromaticitat am algualea, e sia linit le sieu pietz am aquela.	And if fainting occurs due to phlebotomy and is caused by the loss of vital blood, then it is necessary to drink water and a subtle fragrant syrup; and use aromatics with rose water, and apply them to their pulse points.
E usa de las autras causas que havem ditas en la divisio en le capitol de sincopi per evacuacio.	And use the other causes that we have mentioned in the division in the chapter on fainting due to evacuation.
E qui vol eventar le sieu bras e dissolver le sieu sanc segonda veguada, cove a lu del qual la fleubotomia es per mota evacuacio, e la vertut de lu es freol, que evacue le sanc petit a petit, so es segon la quantitat de la vertut en les dias continuables.	And for one who wishes to open the vein and dissolve the blood for a second time, it is appropriate to use the feather whose virtue is that of iron, which gradually evacuates the blood little by little, according to the quantity of its virtue over continuous days.
Mays qui vol eventar le sieu bras, e gitar lo sieu sanc segonda vetz, e le sieu cors es fort, lahoras fassa aquo aprop vii horas o ix de la primieyra fleubotomia.	And for one who wishes to open the vein and remove their blood for a second time, and whose body is strong, he should do this about seven or nine hours after the first phlebotomy.
Mays qui vol atirar le sanc del cors sieu al contrari de la partida a la qual declina, cove que sia eventat en le segon dia o le tertz.	And for one who wishes to draw the blood from their body contrary to the side towards which it inclines, they should be bled on the second or third day.
Mays aquel cors en le qual es mot sanc ja scalfat e es acuit e fa accidir febre, cove que sia gitat de lu sanc en una veguada e sia de lu gitada gran cantitat e sia amplificada la apercio entro que accidesca sincopi, pus que tu auras conservadas totas las condicios de fleubotomia; e que pauses la tua ma sobre le pols de lu deves le cors del sanc, per que no endevengua mort en loc de sincopi, quar motas veguadas endeve aquo quan le fleubotomador es ignorant e negligent.	And for a body in which there is already heated and thickened blood causing fever, it should be drawn out once, and a large quantity of blood should be taken, until fainting occurs, while maintaining all the conditions of phlebotomy; and place your hand on the pulse to stop when the blood has been sufficiently removed, so that death does not occur instead of fainting, as this often happens when the phlebotomist is ignorant and negligent.
E no cove quan tu voles desliar le bras e evacua le sanc segonda veguada, cum ja sia claus le orrifici de la vena e sia fayt difficil issiment del sanc, que tu premas subre aquel am vehemencia e encurvat sia extendut leugierament, quar aquo es trop mal.	And when you wish to open the vein and evacuate the blood for a second time, since the orifices of the vein are already closed and it is difficult for the blood to flow out, do not press too forcefully or bend it suddenly, as this is harmful.
Habantz le layssa entro que sia fleubotomat segondament; o remau aquo am la acuitat del fleubotomi que es coagulat del sanc en le orrifici de la vena; o pausa sobre aquel de tyriaca alfarach, o de sagzenea, e comprem aquel am compressio leugiera entro que·l sanc sia fora yssit.	Handle the area gently until you are ready for a second phlebotomy; or move this side when the sharpness of the phlebotomy has caused coagulation in the vein's orifice; or pause and apply something of thyraca alfarach, or sage, and compress it lightly until the blood flows out.
E si la vena es apostemada, lahoras layssa aquela e no la toques entro que·l apostema sia sedat.	And if the vein is inflamed, do not touch it then, but wait until the inflammation subsides.
E si necessitat te provoca a evacuar le sanc segondament, e no es excusacio, lahoras tu sagna aquel sobre aquel loc o en l’autre bras en autra vena.	And if necessity compels you to evacuate the blood secondarily, and there is no excuse, then bleed that person at that site or in another vein on the other arm.
E la vena apelada “funis del bras” es fleubotomada en loc de la fusca o de la basilica, quan no so atrobadas o so amaguadas, quar es composta de aquelas.	And when the vein called "the cord of the arm" is phlebotomized in place of the fusca or the basilica, which are not obscured or hidden, because it is composed of these.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intrometa la sua ma en aygua cauda entro que·l focil se enrogezesca e que la vena apparia manifestament.	And the quality of the phlebotomy is that the patient immerse his hand in cold water until it turns red and the vein becomes clearly apparent.
E aprop sia strengut sobre aquel am liament am strictura migana; e aprop fleubotoma segon le tranvers petit, no latitudinalment ni segon la longitut.	And then tightly apply a ligature over that vein at the midpoint of its course; and then perform phlebotomy transversely along the small crosswise line, not latitudinally or longitudinally.
E sia la apercio ampla e sia la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas aquela sobre la junctura de la ma un petit.	And make the incision wide, and perform your phlebotomy on that vein near the joint of the hand a little.
E si es prohibit le fluxs del sanc, lahoras tu itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e layssa le sanc correr en la aygua entro que consieguas la tua necessitat.	And if the flow of blood is restricted, then immerse the hand in cold water and let the blood run into the water until you achieve your purpose.
Mays si tu eras en les dias d’estiu, lahoras tu yest excusat de la iteracio de la ma en l’aygua cauda, e le mes es pausat le cors del sanc en aygua cauda en temps de yvern.	But if you are during the days of summer, then you are exempt from immersing your hand in cold water, and similarly, in winter, pause the process of cooling the body with water.
E la fleubotomia de aquesta vena es pus salva que de totas las autras venas, quar dejos lu no ha vena pulsatil, ni nervi.	And the phlebotomy of this vein is safer than that of all other veins, because there are no pulsating vessels or nerves nearby.
E la fleubotomia de la savatella de la ma dreyta es conferent a las malautias del fetge.	And the phlebotomy of the vein on the right hand is appropriate for diseases of the liver.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que tu strenguas la ma am liament o am la tua ma, pus que tu l’as mesa en ayga cauda, entro que la vena sia imflada e sia be demostrada al vezement; e aprop fleubotoma aquela transversan; e si inscidas aquela de tot no nozera aquo en re.	And the quality of the phlebotomy is that you tighten your hand or another person's hand, after placing it in hot water until the vein becomes swollen and is clearly visible to the onlooker; then cut across that vein transversely; and if you do not incise it entirely, nothing will come of this.
E conserve que no ultimes la tua ma am la fleubotomi, quar dejos lu so les nervis dels ditz denudatz de carn.	And do not hold onto the hand during the phlebotomy, for afterwards you must treat the exposed nerves of the aforementioned area.
E aprop itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e laysse correr le sanc en aquela, quar si tu no iteras aquela en l’aygua cauda, le sanc sira coagulat en lo orrifici de la vena, e es prohibit de flux.	And then immerse the hand in hot water and let the blood flow there, for if you do not immerse it in hot water, the blood will coagulate at the venous opening, hindering the flow.
E cum es extrayt le sanc segon la quantitat de necessitat, lahoras tu pausa sobre la vena oli e sal, per que no sia consolidada coytadament; e semblantment cove que tu fassas en tot ram streyt.	And when the blood is extracted in the required quantity, then press on the vein with oil and salt so that it does not close too quickly; similarly, ensure you do this properly throughout the procedure.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de aquela de la ma senestra, es que es conferent a las malautias de la melsa.	And the use of phlebotomy from the vein on the left hand is appropriate for diseases of the spleen.
E fay semblantment en la fleubotomia de lu ayssi cum has fayt en l’autra.	And perform the phlebotomy in the same manner as you did with the other.
E le juvament de la vena sephena de la fleubotomia es a las malautias que so en la partida dejos del cos, ayssi cum so malautias de la mayre, e a retencio de mestruas, et a las malautias dels ronhos e ulceracios de coyssas e de cambas antiquas, e a lor semblantz de las malautias.	And the use of the cephalic vein in phlebotomy is for diseases that affect the lower part of the body, such as disorders of the uterus, and for retention of menstruation, and for diseases of the joints and ulcers of old wounds, and similar conditions.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute entrometa lo sieu pe en aygua cauda e fassa sobre aquel fricacio entro que be apparen las venas; e lia sobre la junctura del pe am correia; e le loc de la vena le talo apparent deves le dit pous, e de aquela so ramificatz en la facia del pe motz ramps.	Of the quality of phlebotomy it is that the patient plunges his arm into hot water and performs friction thereon until the veins become visible; and he places a cord over the joint of the arm, and the place of the vein appears above the said joints, and from which those branches extend across the face of the arm in various directions.
E donc fleubotoma le pus ample ram o dejos la camba deves le talo deves la agreguacio de lu, quar es milhor e pus sal.	And so the phlebotomy should be performed on the largest branch below the elbow near the wrist, for it is better and more effective.
E si fleubotomas aquela en la facia del pe, lahoras tu te guarda dels nervis que so dejos aquela sobre la facia del pe, e pausa la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas per le travers, quays cum si tu la volias inscidir.	And if you perform phlebotomy on that area of the arm's surface, then be careful of the nerves which are below it on the arm's surface, and stop your phlebotomy when you reach a point where you would otherwise cut across, as if you were trying to divide it.
E sia le fleubotomi vosil.	And so the phlebotomy is finished.
Mays si es prohibit le issiment del sanc; lahoras tu itera le pe de lu en l’aygua cauda e layssa correr le sanc en aquela entro que sia evacuat.	But if the letting of blood is prohibited; then you should immerse the arm in hot water again and allow the blood to flow in that area until it is evacuated.
E si le fleubotomador erra en la primieyra veguada, lahoras itera am le fleubotomi en sus un pauc, quar le loc es sal; e no temes de lu malician, mays que te guardes dels nervis ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the phlebotomist errs on the first attempt, then repeat the phlebotomy above it slightly, for that location is effective; and do not fear this mistake, but be careful of the nerves as we have said.
E semblantment fay de la sophena del autre pe engualment.	And similarly do the phlebotomy of the other arm in the same manner.
E de la vena sciatica, le loc ayssi cum havem dit es deves le talo dejos la cavilha de la partida silvestra.	And for the sciatic vein, the location is as we have said, below the thigh behind the knee.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de lu es a dolo de anca quan es per sanc caut.	And the benefit of phlebotomy is to alleviate pain in the side when one is suffering from excessive blood.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intre en banh, e festine e strenha la cueyssa de lu del latz de la ancha entro desus le talo desus quatre ditz an una benda longua subtil, quar no appar sino per aquo.	Of the quality of the phlebotomy is that the patient enter into a bath, and hasten and strain the body from the width between the thighs up to above the heel in four places with a long slender bandage, for it appears only by this.
E donc quan appar, lahoras tu fleubotoma aquela segon cascun engen que es a tu possible e segon le tranvers, e es milhor; o inscidas aquela per inscizio o secces aquela per seccio, quar le loc de lu es sal.	And when it appears, then you phlebotomize that according to each angle as is possible and according to the transverse, which is better; or incise that by incision or section it by cutting, for the place of it is salt.
E ela es en motz homes mot ameguada; e si atrobas aquela, e no appar al sentiment de tot, lahoras fleubotoma alcun ram de lu, e es aquel que appar en le dos del pe enves le dit auricular e le anular.	And it is in the words of a man slightly weakened; and if you find that, and it does not appear to the sense of all, then phlebotomize some branch of it, and that is the one which appears between the two of the hand behind the ring finger and the little finger.
E guarda te dels nervis, e fay correr del sanc la quantitat que voles.	And be careful of the nerves, and let the amount of blood flow that you wish.
E aprop deslia la strictura e pausa sobre le loc de la fleubotomia coto e strenh le loc, quar leugierament es sanat.	And then loosen the bandage and pause over the place of the phlebotomy to strain the place, for it is quickly healed.
De ventozacio e de las qualitatz de uzar de aquelas.	Of venotomy and of the qualities of using those.
Ventozas so de corns, o de eram, o de veyre.	Venotomies are usually from horns, or arteries, or veins.
E ventozacio es fayta segon doas manieyras: la una de lor es am scarificacio e extracio de sanc, e l’autra es ventozacio ses scarificacio.	And venotomy is done in two ways: one of them is as incision and extraction of blood, and the other is venotomy without incision.
E aquesta ventozacio que es ses scarificacio es segon doas manieyras, quar o es am foc o ses foc.	And this venotomy that is without incision is in two ways, for it can be with fire or without fire.
E a las ventozas que so administradas am scarificacio e extraccio de sanc son xiiii locs del cors, dels quals la un en lo qual so pausadas ventozas es alnocrati, e es la deriera partida del cap; e le mieg loc d’el de doas partz del col ensemp; e ventozas del mento dejos la mandibula pus dejos de la boca; e ventozas de doas spatulas; e ventozas de alohoster, e es sobre la fi de la coeta; e ventozas de dos focils, e so de dos brasses; e ventozas de doas cavilhas; e ventozas de doas cuoyssas.	And for the venotomies that are administered with incision and extraction of blood there are fourteen locations on the body, of which one is where a venotomy is usually paused at the back of the head; and another middle location is at both sides of the neck; and venotomies of the chin below the jaw beside the mouth; and venotomies of the two cheeks; and venotomies of alohoster, which is above the earlobe; and venotomies of the two forearms; and venotomies of the two thighs; and venotomies of the two feet.
E ventozacio no extratz le sanc sino de las venas menudas sparssas en la carn, e per aquo no catz la vertut per aquelas, ayssi cum es cazement per fleubotomia; ni no cove que ventozacio sia fayta am foc o ses foc en alcuna malautia fayta per replecio entro que le cors tot sia evacuat.	Of bloodletting we take the blood not from the small veins scattered in the flesh, and thereby we do not capture the virtue through those, just as it happens with phlebotomy; nor is it necessary for bloodletting to be done near a fire or without a fire in any disease caused by retention until the entire body is evacuated.
Mays si necessitat provoca a ventozacio per malautia o per continua, aministrem aquela en tota hora al comensament del mes e en la fi de lu, e en le mieg loc de lu e en qualque temps sia.	If necessity prompts bloodletting due to illness or continuously, administer that at any time at the beginning of the month and at the end of it, and in the middle of it and at whatever interval may be appropriate.
La qual causa es quar dels homes es en les quals es sanc multiplicat entro que indigeys de extraccio de lu per ventozacio e atroba en le sieu cap graveza e soda; e de aquels es que atroba replecio e rogor en la sua cara e en le sieu cap, e en le sieu col; e de aquels es que atroba pruziment en la sua cara e en le sieu front e tenebrositat e hebetut en les sieus huels; e de aquels que gieta le loc de la sua ventozacio; e de aquels es que le lor ris es multiplicat; e de aquels es que atroba gustament de sanc en la sua boca, o que la lengua es apostemada e escup sanc; e de aquels es que lor dormir es multiplicat, e de aquels que vetz sanc en lo dormir rogor e antics e plaguas e autras causas a lor semblantz.	The reason for this is that in certain individuals, blood is multiplied within them to such an extent that they require its extraction through bloodletting and find relief in their head and temples; and among these are those who experience congestion and hardness in their face and head, and in their neck; and among these are those who show puffiness in their face and forehead, darkness and dullness in their eyes; and among these is the location for bloodletting apparent; and among these is an increase in laughter observed; and among these is a taste of blood in their mouth, or their tongue becomes coated with phlegm and they spit out blood; and among these is excessive sleep noticed, and those who see blood during sleep along with hardness, tremors, plagues, and other similar causes.
E donc quan vezes en alcuna causa de aquelas, e propriament si es en le tertz o miga del mes, lahoras comandam ventozacio esser fayta pus que so passadas del dia dos o tres horas.	And when you encounter any of those causes, and especially if it is in the third or middle of the month, I command that bloodletting be performed after two or three hours have passed from midday.
E juvament de ventozacio de la nuca es que quan aquela confereys a gravitat en le cap e ad aquo que es efondit als huels; mays cove que aquo sia aprop evacuacio de tot le cors.	And the benefit of bloodletting from the neck is that when it relieves heaviness in the head and also what has settled in the eyes; but it should be done after the evacuation of the entire body.
E aquesta ventoza es en le loc de fleubotomia de la cephalica.	And this vein is in the place of phlebotomy of the cephalic region.
E no es legut que use de lu aquel que es de frega complecio, o en le qual es catarr, quar dona ad aquel gran nocument.	And it is not good to use that which is of full friction, or in which there is a cold, because it gives great harm to the patient.
E per aquo no cove que uso de aquela les vielhs, e en les caps dels quals so malautias frejas.	And for this reason, it is not advisable to use those veins, and in the heads of which there are usually fresh illnesses.
Mays ad aquel que sobre aquela es continuant sobre lu es fayta oblivio; e per aquo cove que tu comandes al ventozador que depause la sua ma un petit am la ventosa a las partidas dejos, temen de la generacio de oblivio.	But for the one who continues above that, forgetfulness is caused by it; and for this reason, you should command the vein-bleeder to pause his hand a little bit behind, fearing the generation of forgetfulness.
Mays ventozacio de alkehel es en loc de fleubotomia de la vena fusca e de la basilica: e per aquo confereys a asma, e a la constriccio de ale e a la scissura del sturment de ale, e a tos, e a replecio.	But phlebotomy of the temporal region is in the place of venesection of the dark vein and of the basilic vein: and for this it is beneficial for asthma, and for constriction of breath, and for rupture of the breathing organ, and for coughs, and for excess.
E cove que sia enpellida la ventoza alkehel un petit, quar si es pausada dejos, engendra debilitat en le cors e en le stomac.	And it is necessary to raise the temporal vein a little, for if it is lowered too much, it generates weakness in the body and in the stomach.
E la ventozacio de alhagdahan confereys a las dolors accident en le cap e a obtalmia, e emigranea, e prefocacio, e a dolors en las razitz de las dentz; e es en loc de fleubotomia de la basiliqua.	And the phlebotomy of the occipital region is beneficial for accidental pains in the head and for ophthalmia, headache, coryza, and pains in the roots of the teeth; and it is in the place of venesection of the basilic vein.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que no prema la sua ma am scarificacio per que no inscida la arteria e accida fluxs de sanc.	And it is necessary to command the vein-bleeder not to press his hand near the incision so that he does not injure the artery and cause a flow of blood.
E ventozacio dejos le mento comfereys a alcola en la boca, e a corrupcio de la gingiva, e a semblantz a lor de las malautias que so en la boca, e stan en loc de fleubotomia de aliheric que so en las doas labias.	And phlebotomy below the chin is beneficial for alcohol in the mouth, and for corruption of the gums, and for symptoms similar to those illnesses that are in the mouth, and it is in the place of venesection of the alheric vein which is on both lips.
Mays la ventozacio que es fayta sobre las doas spatulas confereys a caphatan, le qual es fayt per replecio de caliditat.	Avoid the windiness that is made between the two spatulas by applying a bandage, which is made by filling it with heat.
E la ventosacio de las doas partidas dedintz dels focils confereys juvament de la fleubotomia de tres venas, so es de la basilica, fusca e cephalica, quar aquela atratz le sanc de totas aquelas venas pus manudas que so en la carn, e aquelas venas menudas de las autras venas pus grossas entro que pervengua la atraccio a las tres venas.	And for the windiness between the two parts inside the armpits, apply forcefully the phlebotomy of three veins, which are the basilic, fusca, and cephalic, because they attract blood from all the smaller veins that are in the flesh, and these small veins from the other larger veins until the attraction reaches those three veins.
E comanda al ventozador que trop no procezesca en scarificacio, quar le loc es denudat de carn, e dejos lu so nervis e arterias.	And command the wind operator not to proceed with incisions, because the area is bare of flesh, and leave it as it is with nerves and arteries.
E es una ventoza am la qual es ventozat sobre alshosses e confereys a las emorroydas del cul e a las ulceracios pus dejos.	And it is a windlass with which you apply suction over the hemorrhoids of the anus and to ulcers while leaving them exposed.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que sia gran ventoza, e que sia de eram, quar le loc indigeys de fort seccio; e fort leu so traucadas ventozas subtils e sia scarificat am scarificacio.	And you should command the wind operator to use a large windlass and make it of leather, because the area you are treating requires strong drying; and for severe cases, use gentle suction with subtle windlasses and apply incisions carefully.
Mays ventozas de las cambas minueysso per minuicio manifesta, quar atiran le sanc de tot le cors, e comfereysso a dolors antiquas dels ronhos e de la mayre, e de la vesica; e provocan las mestruas, e comfereysso a bothor e ademil; e stan en loc de fleubotomia de doas sophenas, e alahorcoben, e de doas cavilhas.	Avoid windlasses on minor areas carefully and distinctly, for they draw blood from the entire body, and apply them to old pains in the loins and back, and to the bladder; and they induce menstruation, and apply them to boils and abscesses; and they serve as a substitute for phlebotomy of two saphenas, the alahorcoben, and two cavilhas.
Enpero mot debelitan tot le cors e fan accidir sincopi en motz homes.	However, they weaken the entire body and can cause fainting in some people.
E de las ventozas alahorcoben le juvament es propda al juvament a las ventozas de doas cambas.	And for the windlasses on the alahorcoben, the force should be proportionate to the force used in windlasses on two cheeks.
E la qualitat de la posicio de las ventozas es que pauses la ventoza al comensament vueda e sucguas per succio temprada, e no prolongues la posicio de las ventozas, mays pausa aquelas leugierament, e reman aquelas coytadament, e que las humors venguan al loc per adveniment engual.	Of the quality of the position of the cupping vessels is that you place the vessel at the beginning empty and suck it moderately, and do not prolong the position of the cupping vessels, but pause them gently, and remove them cautiously, so that the humors come to the place by occurrence equal.
E no cesses iterar aquo e continuar entro que veja le loc ja enrojezir e inflar e que appara la rogor del sanc.	And do not cease to repeat this and continue until you see the place already red and swollen, and the hardness of the blood appears.
E lahoras tu scarifiqua e itera la succio pauc a pauc, e aprop considera en la dispozicio dels cors.	And now you should incise and repeat the suction gradually, and then observe the disposition of the body.
Quar aquel home que es de tendra carn de rars pors, cove que tu le scarifiques una veguada e no pus, per que le loc no sia ulcerat.	For the person who has tender flesh with few pores should be incised once and not pressed, so that the area is not ulcerated.
E comanda al ventozador que amplifique la scarificacio e pronde un pauc, e atempre la succio am facilitat.	And instruct the cupper to enlarge the incision slightly and to prolong it a bit, and to moderate the suction with ease.
E si en le sanc es grossitut, lahoras cove que scarifiques doas veguadas, quar en la primieyra veguada es uberta la via de subtiliacio al sanc e a la aquositat de lu.	And if the blood is thick, now you should incise twice, for in the first incision the way of subtlety to the blood and to its moisture is opened.
Mays en la segunda a la perscrutacio aquisida de la extraccio del sanc gros.	But in the second for the acquired scrutiny of extracting the thick blood.
E si le sanc es mot feculent, lahoras sia fayta scarificacio la tersa veguada per que consiegua le derier.	And if the blood is muddy, now make a third incision so that it achieves the desired effect.
E derierament, quan volem extrayre le sanc pauc a pauc o un petit, abasta a nos una scarificacio.	And finally, when we want to extract the blood gradually or in small amounts, one incision is sufficient.
E si volem extraccio de mot sanc, scarificam am mota scarificacio; e si nos conoyssem que·l sanc es gros, lahoras cove que scarifiquem per scarificacio preonda.	And if we want to extract a large amount of blood, we make a larger incision; and if we know that the blood is thick, now you should make a prolonged incision.
E le terme de scarificacio en la qual es la profunditat de la codena tant solament.	Regarding the term of incision, in which the depth of the wound is concerned alone.
E si aquel del qual la codena es grossa, dura, fusca, e les sieus pors so streytz, cove que les locs de las ventosas sian untatz lenitius, apertius resolutius; si es en temps d’estiu, ayssi cum es oli de aloen o oli de violat, o oli de amellas dossas, o oli de cemensa de coja; e si es en temps ivern, lahoras oli narci, o oli de liri, o oli de camamilla, o de sanc, e ad aquels semblantz.	And if the one whose wound is thick, hard, dark, and has narrow pores, it is necessary that the places for cupping be anointed with soothing, opening, and resolving oils; if it is in summer time, such as oil of aloes or oil of violets, or oil of rose petals, or oil of chicken grease; and if it is in winter time, then oil of narcissus, or oil of lilies, or oil of chamomile, or blood, and similar things.
E si la superfluitat es grossa, freja, lahoras le oli sia amaranti, o oli de balsamita, o oli de aloen, o oli aneti, e a lor semblantz.	And if the excrement is thick and foul, then the oil should be of henna, or balsam oil, or aloes oil, or anise oil, and similar things.
Mays si le ventozador es de amples pors de tendra carn, lahoras cove que sia prohibit de oli, e cove que ad aquest les locs de ventozas de lor aprop la ventozacio sian lavatz am ayguaros o am aygua freja de solatrum, o am aygua de coja, o am aygua de bordolaguas, e semblantz ad aquelas.	But if the cupping instrument has wide pores and is used on tender flesh, then it should be prohibited from oil, and for these, the places of cupping near the application should be washed with rose water or fresh cold water of solatrum, or chicken water, or water of borragan, and similar things.
E aquel del qual le sanc es de mota humiditat, lava las suas ventozas am vi agre, o am aygua de mirt e sumac e semblant ad aquels.	And for the one whose blood is of thick humidity, wash their cupping sites with vinegar water, or with water of myrtle and sumac, and similar things.
E de aquel del qual las superfluitatz son grossas, lava las suas ventozas am vi antic, o am aygua de sansuc, que es majorana, o de decoccio de anet, o de camamilla, e a lor semblantz.	And for the one whose excretions are thick, wash their cupping sites with aged vinegar, or with water of savory, which is marjoram, or of anise decoction, or chamomile, and similar things.
E cove que la ventozacio sia guardada denant de banh; habantz cove que sia aministrada aprop issiment del banh per una hora o per doas, e cove que dorma aprop la ventozacio.	And it is necessary that cupping be administered before bathing; after which it should be given immediately after the bath by an hour or two, and it is necessary for them to rest near the location of the cupping.
Quid est quo oportet ut regatur ventosandus aus phlebotomatus ante ventosationem.	What is needed so that bleeding may be regulated either by cupping or phlebotomy before bleeding.
Cove que consideras al comensament: lahoras si le ventozador o aquel que·s deu fleubotomar es coleric e ventz sobre lu sanc agut e imflamacio, lahoras cove que prengua causas infrigidantz, ayssi cum milgranas acetosas, e endivia an vi agre e laytuguas, e secanabin, e julep, e a lor semblantz.	Consider this at the beginning: if the cupper or he who is to be phlebotomized is choleric and bleeding occurs on sharp blood and inflammation, then it should be that he takes cooling causes, such as sour millet, endive with vinegar, lettuce, saffron, and julep, and things similar to these.
E pausa a lor viandas ayssi cum poletz, e carns de auzels serbiges, e viandas conditas am agras, e a lu semblantz.	And pause on their foods such as poultry, and meat of suitable birds, and foods seasoned with acids, and things similar to these.
E de aquel del qual la compleccio es freja, cove que prengua en beure eyssarop almiva, o eyssarop de alsecanabin de semensas, e sumac, e vi mot odorant migier entre viel et noel; e que a lu sia comendat que use de paucitat de beure e de mangar, e pausa las viandas de lu poletz e canabir e pissers e petitz auzels e colombat.	And for him whose constitution is cold, he should take to drinking syrup of amber, or syrup of saffron seeds, and sumac, and a mixture of odorant herbs between day and night; and it should be recommended that he use little drink and food, and pause on foods such as poultry and birds and fish and small birds and dove.
E cove que en lo dia de ventozacio e de fleubotomia le beure sia major que la vianda.	And it should be that on the day of cupping and phlebotomy, drink should be more than food.
E cove que sia donat en beure en alcunas horas ad alcus homes tyriaca alpharac, o medicamentz de musc, so es muscada, o alcelita denant la ventozacio o denant fleubotomia o aprop, per so que·ls membres principals sian confortatz e que·l sanc sia subtiliat; e no cove que prenguan aquela scalfatz.	And it should be given to drink at certain times to some people theriac alpharach, or medicine of musk, which is muscardine, before cupping or phlebotomy or nearby, so that the principal members are comforted and that the blood be refined; and they should not take those heating ones.
Mays las ventozas que so ses scarificacio sian ventozas que so pausadas sus le fetge, e sobre la melsa e podagra, e sobre le umbelic, en les locs dels jonolhs, e la pixida del ancha, quar aquestz membres no suffertan scarificacio sobre si.	But let the bleedings that require incision be done by bleeding while pausing over the groin, and on the thigh and gout area, and on the navel, in the places of the hypochondria, and at the side of the abdomen, for these members cannot tolerate incisions upon them.
E no es querit per aquelas sino atraccio de sanc de membre, ayssi cum pausam ventosa sobre mamilha en malautia de flux de sanc del sanc de las nars; e usam de aquela per que sia dissolvuda ventositat freja inviscade del membre, ayssi cum pausam sobre le ventre e l’umbelic; quar aquela rarifique le membre e scalfa lu e ramau la dolor quar resolveys ventositat.	And this is sought not for any other reason but for the attraction of blood from a limb, just as we apply a cupping vessel to the breast in the disease of excessive flow of blood from the nose; and they use it so that the coagulated inflammation of the limb may be dissolved, just as when applied to the abdomen and navel; for this rarefies the part and heats it, thereby alleviating pain by resolving the flatulence.
E ja es pausada sobre les ronhos quan accideys en lor opilacio o poyra, quar per vertut de atraccio fort leu huobre opilacio e erradica le poyra de son loc.	And it is applied to the sinuses when they are blocked or weak, for by the power of attraction it raises up obstructions and eradicates weakness from its place.
E semblantment fa quan es pausada sobre le fetge e la melsa deves ventositat en aquels enclausa.	And similarly when it is applied to the liver and spleen to expel flatulence, for in these it confines the air.
E aquestas ventozas so administradas vuedas amb succio tant solament; e alcunas veguadas so administradas am foc.	And these cupping vessels are administered only after they have been heated with suction; and some are applied over fire.
E alcunas veguadas so administradas plenas de aygua tebeza en las malautias de la melsa.	And some are administered filled with hot water in diseases of the spleen.
E aquo es per que la ventoza sia umplida e sia pus gran, so es aygua cauda sola o aygua en la qual sian cuytas herbas ad aquo convenientz.	And this is so that the cupping vessel may be full and larger; it is either hot water alone or water in which suitable herbs have been boiled.
Forma de ventoza aministrada am foc: sia la amplitud del orrifici de dos ditz, segon que nos la havem formada; e la quantitat del preon sia la maytat de un palm; e sia en lo latz de lu, en le loc que es en le circuit, la maytat de lu, le trauc sia petit segon la quantitat que intre en lu una agulha.	Form of the cupping vessel administered over fire: the diameter of its opening should be two fingers wide, as we have formed it; and the quantity of the pre-on should be half a palm; and at its center, in the place that is in the circuit, there should be half of it, the thickness should be small according to the amount that fits inside, like a needle.
Sia fayta de eram rog o citri, de grosses marges, leon, enguals e terses per so que no leda le membre deves la sua posicio sobre lu.	It should be made of earthenware or citrus wood, with thick edges, leather, cushions, and smooth so that it does not hurt the limb due to its position on it.
E sia al mieg de lu vergua transversa de eram o de ferr, on es pausada candela am lo foc.	And let a thread be passed across the bone or iron, upon which a candle is placed near the fire.
E ja sia aquesta ventoza gran major de aquela la qual havem recomtat; e la pauca mendre de aquela segon las malautias e la etat de aquel que usa de aquela.	And this large suction cup should be larger than the one we have recommended; and its size should be adjusted according to the illness and the condition of the person using it.
E las ventosas dels efantz e extenuatz so autres que las ventozas dels joves e de grosses corssas.	And the suction cups for children and those who are weak should be different from those used by young and robust individuals.
E la qualitat de pausar aquesta ventoza am foc sobre le membre es que extenda la meca am foc de lenha decentment denant una pauca candela de cera, e pausa aquela sobre le mieg de la vergua transversa en le mieg loc de la ventoza, per que le foc sia accendut enviro la partida dejos per que no sia comburit le cors del malaute.	And the quality of placing this suction cup over the fire on the limb is that it should extend above the fire made with proper wood for a little while, and place it at the middle of the crossbar in the same location as the suction cup, so that the fire may be kindled around the lower part to prevent the patient's body from being burned.
E aprop sia pausada sobre le membre del malaute, e le dit sia sobre le trauc que havem dit, entro que quan tenem las ventozas e non indigem que osten le dit e que yesca la vapor sobre aquel trauc, lahoras la ventoza sira tantost dissolvuda.	And when it is placed on the patient's limb, and the hand is on the area we have mentioned, then when we have the suction cups and do not need to hold the hand so that the vapor rises over that area, the suction cup will dissolve immediately.
E prop igneys la meca segon la sua manieyra, e itera aquela si indigeyssas de aquela.	And apply the fire according to its method, and repeat it if you need to use it again.
Mays en ventosa que es aministrada en la malautia de plauressi, am aygua, en la qual no ha vergua transversa ni trauc, e no es aministrada sino que sia umplida de aygua, e es pausada sobre le membre tant solament.	But in the case of a suction cup used for treating pleurisy, it is filled with water, in which there is no crossbar or frame, and it is administered only when it is filled with water and placed on the limb.
E aquesta es la forma de lu: E aquesta ventoza quant plus es gran, tant es milhor, per que puya recebre gran quantitat de aygua.	And this is the form of it: And the larger this suction cup is, the better, so that it can hold a greater quantity of water.
Capitol .xcvii.	Chapter xcviij.
Sanguissuguas no so administradas en motz membres sino en les membres en les quals non es possible posicio de ventosas, per la parvitat de aquels, ayssi cum le pot e gingiva e semblantz a lor; o en membre denudat de carn, ayssi cum le dit e·l nas e lors semblantz.	Bloodletting should not be administered in movable parts but in those members where it is impossible to apply cupping due to their small size, such as the gums and palate and similar areas; or in bare flesh, such as the fingers and nose and similar areas.
E la qualitat de usar de aquelas que si has trobadas sanguisugas que so en las ayguas dossas de poyredura mundas.	And the quality of using those leeches that you have found in the clear waters near decaying matter.
E aprop sian layssadas le dia e la nueyt en aygua dossa entro que sian famolentas, e que no romangua alcuna causa en le ventre de aquelas; e aprop sia evacuat le cors en le comensament am fleubotomia e am ventozas; e aprop fregua le membre del malaute entro que s’enrojezesca; e aprop sian pausadas sobre lu.	And then they should be left in clear water day and night until they are hungry, so that no remaining food stays in their stomachs. And then evacuate the body at the beginning of bloodletting and cupping. And then rub the patient's limb until it reddens. And then place them on the affected area.
E cum son umplidas e caso.	And when they are full and satisfied.
E si es possible succio del loc am ventoza, es mays derier en juvament.	And if suction with cupping is possible in the area, it is better to proceed with it.
E sino, lahoras lava le loc am vi agre e aprop am mota aygua; e sia freguat e expremut.	And if not, then wash the area with cold water and then with lukewarm water; and it should be rubbed and pressed.
E si es prolonguat le cors del sanc aprop le cazement de las sanguissuguas, e es aquo resudan, lahoras tu enfon un drap de li en aygua freja, e pausa aquel de sobre entro que sia abdida la resudacio.	And if the blood extends beyond the bite marks of the leeches and there is excess bleeding, then place a cloth in cold water and apply it until the bleeding stops.
E si le sanc es multiplicat, lahoras polveriza sobre lu vitriol trissat, o guallas e semblantz a lor de las causas stipticas, entro que·l sanc sia abscidit; o sian pausadas sobre le loc las maytatz de favas excocicadas, e sian layssadas entro que las favas aderescan al loc, e es le sanc abscidit.	And if the bleeding continues, then sprinkle powdered vitriol or other astringent powders on it until the bleeding stops; or apply crushed parched fava beans to the area and leave them until they adhere to the skin, at which point the bleeding will stop.
E cove, si es necessaria, iteracio de sanguissuguas, quan es possible mudar aquelas.	In case it is necessary, repeat the application of leeches, when it is possible to change those.
E si las sanguissuguas son prohibidas de suspenssio, lahoras sia freguat le loc am sanc recent o fique una agulha en les locs entro que yesca sanc; e aprop sian pausadas, quar aquelas quan sento alcun sanc tantost adarysso.	And if the leeches are prohibited from attaching, then at that time wash the area with fresh blood or place a needle in the spots to let blood flow; and afterwards they should be paused, because those when feeling any blood will immediately attach.
E quan voles que cajan, polveriza sobre aquelas un pauc de aloen trissat, o sal, o cendre, e cazo tantost.	And when you want them to stop, sprinkle a little powdered aloes, or salt, or ash on them, and they will cease immediately.
Ayssi comensa lo prolec de la tersa partida: de restauracio.	Thus begins the chapter of the third part: on restoration.
Aquest capitol es motas veguadas necessari en la art de medicina; e es restauracio de fractura e de dislocacio accident en les osses.	This chapter is particularly necessary in the art of medicine; it is the restoration of fractures and dislocations of bones.
O, filh, sapiatz que jactan se de aquest capitol les fols metges e les vulguars e aquels que degun temps no reguardero les libres dels Antics ni legiro de aquels una letra.	Oh, son, be aware that the foolish doctors and the common folk boast about this chapter, as well as those who for any length of time have not regarded the books of the Ancients nor read a single letter from them.
E per aquesta causa es fayt que aquesta manieyra dels scients in terra nostra es privat; e yeu no ho e obliat en aquo degun temps be de tot; e no he adhibit aquo que apres, sino per longitut de lectio dels libres dels Antics e studi sobre le entendement de aquels, entro que extrayssi la sciencia de aquels.	And for this reason it is done that this method of the scientists in our land is private; and I have not forgotten any of it even for a moment; and I have not adopted what follows, except through the length of reading the books of the Ancients and studying to understand them, from which I extracted the science.
E aprop adirigui a experiment e studi en la longitut de la mieua vida.	And then I directed myself to experimentation and study throughout the duration of my life.
E yeu ja he de aquo descrit en aquest capitol tot aquo que conte la mieua sciencia e sobre le qual es passat lo mieu experiment; pus que agui abreujat aquo a vos autres e deliuregui aquo de occupacio de elonguacio; e abreujegui aquo en la fi de abreujacio; et e monstrat aquo en la fi de declaracio; e formegui en aquo motas formas dels sturmentz que so administratz en aquel, cum es fayt per addicio de declaracio, ayssi cum he fayt en dos capitols precedentz.	And I have already described in this chapter all that my science contains and on which my experience is based; now I condense it for you and release it from the burden of lengthiness; I abbreviate it to the point of brevity; I demonstrate it at the end of clarity; and I present many forms of instruments used therein, as added by explanation, just as I did in the two preceding chapters.
Capitol primier.	First chapter.
Summae et collectiones ex esse fracturae ossium, ex eis quarum praemissio necessaria est, antequam incipiamus rememorationem membrorum fraftorum et diversorum si uniuscuiusque.	A summary and collection of fractures of the bones, from which a preface is necessary before we begin the recollection of the parts of fractured members and their various treatments.
Cove donc que diguam en le prohemi de aquest capitol las summas del sermo; e les capitols al entendament dels quals en le comensament es forsat le artifexs e a stacio sobre la veritat de aquels; so es vos e aquels que so promptz que sapian o aprenguan aquesta art nobla autres de vos.	Therefore, let us proceed with the prologue of this chapter to summarize the discourse; and let the chapters be such that at the beginning they force the artisans and practitioners to stand on the truth of these matters; so that you and those like you who wish to know or learn this noble art may do so quickly.
E donc dic que quan accideys a alcu fractura o dislocacio o torcio o cazement, lahoras cove que tu te coytes al comensament am fleubotomia o aleyar aquel, o quascu ensemps, si no prohibeys alcuna causa, ayssi cum debelitat de vertut, o es aquel al qual accideys effant, o viel en decrepitat, o es temps de vehement calor, o de vehement freg.	And therefore I say that when it happens to someone that they suffer a fracture, dislocation, torsion, or fall, at that moment it is necessary for you to consider whether to perform phlebotomy or to bandage them, or both together, if no cause prohibits this, such as weakness of constitution, or the person who has been affected being an infant, elderly and decrepit, or during times of extreme heat or cold.
E aprop sia content en vianda sieua de erbas frejas e de carns de auzels e de crabotz; e prohibem carns grossas e umplir si de viandas e de tota vianda que umple las venas de sanc, entro que siras segurat de apostema caut, e si no temes efusio de materia al membre.	And let him be content with food that is light, such as fresh herbs and the meat of birds and small animals; we prohibit fatty meats and filling foods, including any food that fills the veins with blood, until he is assured of a safe resolution of abscesses, and unless he fears an effusion of matter into the limb.
E lahoras retorne le malaute al sieu regiment primier am le qual corr costuma de lu.	And now return the patient to his original regimen, which he was accustomed to before the injury.
E donc cum le os trencat comensa esser restaurat, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia pascut de viandas nutritivas de nutriment mot e gros e greu en les quals sia viscositat, ayssi cum so viandas faytas de froment cueyt am aygua, e ris, e caps, e pes, e ventres de vacas, e huous, e peys fresc, e vi gros e semblants ad aquels, e am aquest regiment es fayta coagulacio de fractura pus leugierament e miels.	And when the broken bone begins to be restored, at this point it is necessary for the patient to be fed with nutritious foods that are moist and heavy, in which there is viscosity, such as foods made from boiled wheat with water, rice, peas, beef stomachs, eggs, fresh meat, and similar items. With this regimen, coagulation of the fracture occurs more easily and better.
E sapias que les osses trinquatz quan so en les homes que so en la primiera vilura e en los decrepitz, no es possible que sian continuatz e sian consolidatz segon lur natura per la exsiccacio dels membres de lor.	And know that bones broken in adults, as well as in infants and the elderly, cannot be set or consolidated according to their nature by drying of the limbs.
E son consolidatz e continuatz segon lor natura tot temps per la exsiccacio de aquels membres, e so continuatz e consolidatz aquels que so de lor en la fi de la lenitat, ayssi cum les osses dels petitz effantz.	And they are consolidated and set according to their nature throughout the drying period of those limbs, and similarly set and consolidated are those that are in the end of their softness, just as the bones of young infants.
Mays empero natura ajusta e amnecteys sobre le os trencat de tota partida alcuna causa semblant a glut en le qual es grossitut que adhereys e strenh aquel entro que so ensemps conglutinatz e liatz ensemps, entro que venen la fi de fortitut e de fermesa, ayssi cum foc al comensament, entro que denguna causa no prohibeys aquel de las suas obres.	But nature adjusts and allows you to place on the broken bone from every part some cause similar to glue, in which there is thickness that adheres and strengthens it as they are conjoined together, until they come to an end of strength and firmness, just as fire at the beginning, from no cause prohibiting it from its works.
E per aquesta causa es necessari que pauses las viandas del malaute, viandas en las quals so gravitat e viscozitat e grosseza, ayssi cum havem dit.	And for this reason it is necessary that the patient abstains from foods that are heavy and viscous and coarse, as we have said.
Mota diversitat de fractura segon diversitat del membre.	The variety of fracture depends on the variety of the member.  
E sapias que las specias de fractura son diversas segon la diversitat dels membres, quar fractura del os de la camba es diversa de la fractura del os del cap; e la fractura del os del pietz es divers de la fractura del os del dos; e semblantment totz les autres membres son diverses entre lor.	And know that the types of fractures are diverse according to the diversity of the limbs, for a fracture of the bone of the thigh is different from a fracture of the bone of the head; and a fracture of the bone of the foot is different from a fracture of the bone of the arm; and similarly all the other limbs are different among themselves.
E yeu venc am rememoracio de tota specia de fractura, expausada en le sieu capitol distincta del autre.	And you will find a description of every kind of fracture, explained in its own separate chapter.
Mota diversitat de fractura en si meteyssa.	Describe the diversity of fractures within themselves.
E son diversificadas las specias de fractura del os en lor meteyssas; quar es fayta fractura arcuada otra aquo que accidan en lu stellas; e alcunas veguadas es fayta fractura segon la longitut del os: e so las fracturas de lu satagia e astelhas e addicios procedentz e no-procedentz, ayssi cum es fayt en la pena quan es preparada a escriure, e es fractura am plagua e disrupcio en le cap, e es fractura fissura petita.	And the types of bone fractures are diverse in themselves; for one type of arch-shaped fracture is different from those that occur in the stars; and some fractures depend on the length of the bone: thus there are fractures of the shaft, splinters, and complete and incomplete fractures, just as when a pen is prepared to write, there is a fracture due to pressure and disruption in the head, and there is a small fissure fracture.
E a tota specia es engen o turment propri en restauracio de lu segon que vindra rememoracio de lu distincta en les sieus locs.	And each type has its own proper treatment in the restoration of it, which will be recalled separately in their respective places.
Mota senhal de fractura del os.	Describe the signs of a bone fracture.
E per aquo es conoguda fractura del os: es tortuositat de lu, e de aquel eminencia e appericio de lu al sentiment, e so de lu quan compremes aquel am la tua ma.	And by this a bone fracture is known: there is a deformity of the limb, and an abnormal prominence and appearance of it to the touch, as well as pain when you press on it with your hand.
E donc quan no es en le loc tortuositat apparent ni so no es feyt deves le tieu tocament quan toques le os am agitacio e le malaute no atroba gran dolor, lahoras no es aqui fractura.	And therefore when there is no apparent deformity or pain in the area where you touch the bone and move it, and the patient does not feel much pain, then there is no fracture here.
Habantz es possible que sia tortuositat o petita fissura, adon no cove que tu mauguas aquel am la tua ma e am compressio de tot; habantz pausa sobre lu de las medicinas de las quals ve rememoracio aprop aquel moment le qual conveneys al loc; e aprop sia streyt per strictura subtil.	However, it is possible that there may be a deformity or small fissure. Therefore, do not neglect to press on it with your hand and by compressing it entirely; wait for the medicine from among those which will be recalled shortly, which is appropriate at the moment when you consider it necessary for the location; and it may be tight due to slight constriction.
E sapias que·l loc quan es arcuat e no es scindit en dos o otra aquo que no accidan en lu satagie, cum es remauguda tota partida de la sua compar, lahoras cove que comenses de la tua hora a rectificacio de lu habantz que a lu accida apostema caut.	And know that when the place is arched and not divided into two or another part from where it did not occur in the swelling, you must begin your work on the correction of the affected area where the abscess has occurred.
E si a lu accida apostema caut, lahoras layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que cesse le apostema; e aprop engualha aquel segon quascuna manieyra que podes de levitat e de engen.	And if an abscess occurs there, then leave it for some days until the abscess subsides; and afterward bandage it according to each method that you can by lightness and ingenuity.
E sapias que restauracio de lu e agulacio de lu es pus leugiera que del os en le qual accideysso sathagie.	And know that the restoration of it and the alignment of it is easier than with the bone in which the swelling has occurred.
E aprop strenh aquel segon que vindra la rememoracio de lu.	And afterward strengthen it according to what will come to mind regarding it.
Mays si en le os so satagias, lahoras es necessaria extencio de aquest membre trencat de doas partz, si es la ma o le pe; o am la tua ma si le membre es petit; o am doas cordas o am una corda e la ma.	But if the swelling is in the bone, then it is necessary to extend this broken limb from two parts, whether it is the hand or the foot; or use your hand if the member is small; or use two cords or one cord and your hand.
E sia la tua posicio am la qual pauses le membre loc engual segon la sua figura natural, mentre que las partidas so extandudas del membre trenquat, lahoras te perforsa que fassas retornar aquelas addicios am engen e segon quascuna manieyra que poyras en lor locs.	And place yourself in such a position that you can put the limb in a natural and proper position, while the parts of the broken member are extended, then it is necessary for you to return those addictions with skill and according to each method that you can back to their places.
E guarda te segon la tua forssa que no accida sobre le malaute per la tua operacio delor ni lesio; e perforsa te segon le tieu poder que tu appliques la un os am l’autre son companho segon lors milhors formas.	And be careful according to your strength that no harm comes from your operation either by mistake or injury; and strive according to your ability that you apply one bone to its companion bone according to their best forms.
E cove que en aquela hora aprofitablament tu toques am la tua ma aquel, e si vezes aqui alcuna causa diversa, rectifiqua aquel e enguala aquel per la quantitat de la tua vertut.	And it is necessary that at that opportune moment you touch with your hand that which needs attention, and if you see any differing cause, correct it and bandage it according to the extent of your skill.
E exquiva vehement extenssio e compressio, ayssi cum fan mots fols metges que motas veguadas fan accidir apostema caut per la sua operacio, o fan accidir contraccio en le membre ayssi cum havem vist aquo per la operacio de lor motas veguadas.	And from the improper stretching and compression, just as false doctors do with their repeated manipulations, they cause an abscess to occur because of their operation, or they cause contraction in the limb just as we have seen this happen due to their repeated manipulations.
E aprop annecteys, aprop equacio e decent operacio e strictura de aquel membre, e repaus e tranquilitat; amoneste le malaute sobre aquo e fay le squivar que no maugua aquel en la hora de las suas vigilias e del sieu dormir, e ves la sua revolucio e agitacio, e deves la sua egestio, e deves totz les sieus movementz am tota la sua vertut; e aguarda se que la posicio del membre sia posicio am la qual sia asegurada la dolor, la qual causa es quar quan sent en la disposicio de la posicio del membre delor o lesio; lahoras cove que permutes aquel ad autra disposicio de aquela am la qual non senta dolor; e guarda am aquo que la posicio de lu aquela sia dreyta e engual, per so que al membre non accida tortuositat quan es restaurat.	And in connection with this, appropriate positioning and proper treatment and restriction of that limb; rest and tranquility. Warn the patient about this and have them avoid aggravating it during their waking hours and while sleeping, observe their movements and agitation, and carefully monitor all their actions with full attention; wait until the position of the limb is such that it ensures no pain, which often results from the improper disposition of the limb causing discomfort or injury. Then it becomes necessary to change its position to one where there is no pain; ensure that this new position is straight and equal so that the limb does not become twisted when restored.
E la qualitat de la strictura del membre tranquat es aquela que yeu recomti; per que sapias que·ls membres trencatz so diversificatz en lor parvitat e en lor grandeza e en la forma de aquels.	And the quality of the restriction of the tranquil limb is what I recommend; for you should know that broken limbs vary in their smallness and magnitude and in the form of those fractures.
E de aquels que son petits ayssi cum le bras e·l dit e·l focil e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras cove que la envolucio sia de drap mol subtil.	And for those that are small, such as the arm and the fingers and similar parts, then the wrapping should be of soft, thin cloth.
Mays aquels que so grosses ayssi cum la cuoyssa o la camba, cove que en aquels sia envolucio lada e dura, quar la liadura lada connecteys le membre gran e strenh aquel de tota part am strictura engual, enayssi que en lu no intre macula.	But for those that are large, such as the thigh or the chest, it is necessary to use a firm bandage, because the tough wrapping connects and secures the large limb evenly in place, thereby preventing any injury.
E aprop comensa, aprop la tua evacuacio de equacio, pausar liament convenient ad aquo, sobre le loc de aquela fractura am tres envolucios o quatre segon que·l membre mereys; e strenh la tua ma un petit am le liament.	And after beginning, after your initial treatment for the fracture, pause conveniently for this, over the place of the fracture with three or four bandages as the limb requires; and apply your hand gently to the bandage.
E aprop ve am aquel a la partida pus sobirana del loc de la fractura, e strenh mens que no foc la tua strictura am la qual has strengut le loc de la fractura.	And apply to it the best-placed poultice at the part above the place of the fracture, and tie a bandage so as not to hinder the swelling with which you have bound the place of the fracture.
E aprop elongua te am envolucio del loc de la fractura un pauc, e mollifiqua la strictura petit a petit, entro que prenguas del loc sa una gran partida.	And then extend the wrapping around the place of the fracture a little, and gradually loosen the bandage until you have removed most of it.
E aprop pren una autra benda e envolveys aquela autra veguada sobre le loc trenquat am envolucio, e aprop ve am las envolucios a la partida pus dejos de la fractura; e sia la tua operacio en la strictura de la envolucio e en mollificacio de aquela segon que havem dit en la envolucio primieyra desus.	And then take another bandage and wrap it around the fractured area with the previous wrapping, and then apply the poultices below the fracture; and let your operation be in tightening the bandages and loosening them as we have said about the first wrapping above.
E aprop pausa entre las volucios de stopa leon o drap am le qual sia engualada la tortuositat de la fractura, si en lu es tortuositat; e sino, no pauses en lu alcuna causa.	And then pause between the wrappings with a piece of linen or cloth on which the curvature of the fracture is evened out, if there is any curvature; and if not, do not pause for any reason.
E aprop pausa sobre lu autra benda, e aprop enguala sobre aquestas envolucios stelhas decentment faytas tantost, si en le loc no es imflacio o apostema caut, e lahoras pausa sobre lu aquo que sede le apostema aquel e que oste la imflacio; e layssa aquela per alcus jorns; e lahoras tu strenh sobre lu las stelhas.	And then pause on the other bandage, and then apply plasters properly made immediately if there is no inflammation or abscess in the area, and at that time place on what causes the abscess and removes the inflammation; and leave this for some days; and then you tie on the plasters.
E sian las stelhas de la maytat de canna lada raza, e be formada saviament; o sian de fust de pi; o de ramps de palma ; e sia le ample de quascuna stelha segon aquesta forma e aquesta figura:	And let the plasters be about half a cubit wide and well made; or they may be of willow bark; or of palm leaves; and let the width of each plaster be according to this form and this figure:
Empero cove que la astelha que es pausada sobre aquela fractura sia pus grossa e pus lada un petit que las autras astelhas, e la longitut de la stela segon qu’es legut al membre en magnitut e parvitat; e aprop strenh sobre las astelhas am autra benda segon la tua primieyra strictura; e aprop lia desus am fiel decentment segon que havem dit de strictura, e es que sia la tua strictura segon le loc de la fractura mes, e quant mes es alonguat de la fractura, es mendre la strictura.	However, the plaster that is placed over the fracture should be a bit thicker and wider than the others, and the length of the plaster according to how it fits the limb in size; then bind over the plasters with another bandage as per your first binding; and tie above this with fine linen as we have said about binding, and it should be that your binding is tighter near the location of the fracture, and the further away from the fracture, the looser the binding.
E cove que les fils sian migiers en grossesa e subtilitat, e sian de li mol; e si les fils so grosses, ayssi cum yeu he vist per la operacio de alcus fols pausantz les lors fils de cordas de li tort, e es error gran, quan catz la strictura fora equalitat.	And let the threads be medium in thickness and fineness, and let them be soft; and if the threads are thick, as I have seen some foolish people use ropes made of animal intestines for their sutures, it is a great mistake, when you see that the tension is unequal.
E eyssament fils subtils no so convenientz, quar tu no consaguiras per strictura am aquels aquo que voles, e no cove que entre astela e astela haja mens de un dit.	And similarly, fine threads are not suitable either, for you will not achieve the desired tension with them, and it is necessary that there be more than a finger's width between stitch and stitch.
E si le malaute es ledit per las extremitatz de las stelas aprop la strictura en les locs sas, lahoras pausa dejos aquelas de stopa leon o lana carmenada entro que aquo no li fassa lesio.	And if the patient is in pain at the ends of the threads near the sutures in those places, then pause and use silk or carded wool between them so that it does not cause harm.
Alcunas veguadas fractura es am plagua, e accideys disrupcio en la codena, e yeu vindre am rememoracio en aquela en le capitol segon singularitat.	In some cases, a fracture is caused by trauma, and disruption occurs in the bone, and I will come to the memory of this in the second chapter dedicated to such particularities.
E sapias que ges tot membre trencat no es streyt am stelhas al primier dia; la qual causa es quar le membre, quan es gran, no cove que pauses sobre lu stelhas sino aprop v dias o vii o mays, segon la tua seguratat de adveniment de apostema caut.	And know that not all broken limbs should be set with sutures on the first day; the reason for this is that when the limb is large, it does not need to be placed in bandages immediately but after about five or seven days or more, according to your certainty of the onset of inflammation.
E aquesta es la manieyra dels emplaustres am les quals les Antics restauravan, les quals so pausatz sobre fractura e dislocacio e torcio.	And this is the method of plasters used by the Ancients to treat fractures, dislocations, and twists, which were applied over such injuries.
Manieyra de emplaustra comu abruejat de restaurament de fractura, convenient a motas compleccios e majorment a las femnas e als efantz, quar es de aquo sobre le qual no ventz calor ni freg: e es que prenguas de polvera de moli, e es la medula de la farina que pen deves le movement de la mola en las paretz del moli.	Method of making a plaster for the rapid restoration of fractures, suitable for various conditions and especially for women and children, as it does not cause heat or irritation: take powdered flour, which is the fine powder that settles on the walls of the mill from the movement of the millstones.
E comfeys aquel ayssi cum es, sino que cribelles aquel am album de huou, e pausa la comfeccio de lu no-spessa ni subtil; e aprop usa de aquela.	And confine it as it is, but sift it with white wool, and pause the compounding of it not thin nor subtle; and then use it.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre restaurant fractura e dislocacio e torcio: recipe de assafetida, de lapdanum, de acacia, de enula, e migrach, que es razit de milgraner salvage, de totz ana drac. x; de mirra e aloen ana drac. v; alochil ana drac. xx; totz sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian mesclatz am aygua alichil o am album de huou si la compleccio del malaute es scalfada; e aprop usa de aquest emplaustre, quar es de bona composicio e restaura les osses trencatz leugierament, e confereys a motz homes.	Another method for plasters to heal fractures, dislocations, and twists: recipe of asafetida, of litharge, of acacia, of eryngo root, and migraach, which is the rind of wild millet, of each one drachm; of myrrh and aloes one half drachm each; colocynth two drachms; all should be thrice sifted and mixed with water or with white wool if the composition is heated; and then use this plaster, for it is well composed and quickly restores broken bones, and applies to many men.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre le qual comfereys a fractura e torcio: recipe migrach e met de altea blanca ana drac. x; de mirra e de aloen ana drac v; de acacia drac. vi; de bol armenic drac. .xx.	Another method for a plaster to treat fractures and twists: recipe of migraach and the bark of white nettle one drachm each; of myrrh and aloes one half drachm each; of acacia six drachms; of Armenian bole two drachms.
Totz sian trissatz en mortier am mota contricio, e sian cribellatz, e sian comfitz am aygua o am album de huou e sia administrat.	All should be thrice triturated in a mortar with a crushing motion, and then sieved, and compounded with water or white wool, and it should be administered.
Manieyra de emplaustre a juncturas e osses separatz de lors locs, e seda dolor accident en aquels e a fissuras e fractaduras: sia presa lana sutza e sia submersa en vi agre e oli cuyt e sia pausat sobre le loc.	Method for a plaster for joints and bones that have come out of their places, and for accidental pain in those areas and for fissures and fractures: take pure wool and immerse it in sour wine and warm oil and apply it to the location.
Mays en aquest emplastre no es vertut de restauracio, de apostema caut e expelleys dolors propriament.	In this plaster, there is no virtue of restoration, but it is good for mature abscesses and properly expels pains.
Autra manieyra de emplastre que restaura os trancat: pren fuelas de figuier sort e fuelas de papaver salvatge; contereys tot e fay emplastre de lor.	Another method for a plaster that restores a broken bone: take leaves of the wild fig tree and leaves of wild poppy; crush them all and make a plaster from them.
Manieyra de emplastre abreujat aministrat deves la restauracio de fractura de os e quan tu voles resolucio del romanent de apostema: recipe razitz de altea, de camamilla e flors de violes, de farina de ers, de totz ana partida i; sian totz trissatz e sian cofitz am vi, si·l membre no es scalfat.	Method of applying a paste for the treatment during the restoration of a bone fracture and when you wish to resolve the remnant of an abscess: take equal parts of plantain, chamomile flowers, violets, and spelt flour; mix all together and apply with water if the limb is not inflamed.
Mays si es scalfat, lahoras comfeys aquel am aygua de coliandre humit o am aygua e usa de lu.	If the limb is inflamed, now prepare it with colander water that has been moistened or with water and use it.
Autra manieyra de emplastra pus fort en resolucio que aquest primier, quan accideys apostema dur deves la restauracio del membre: recipe de razitz de altea e de semensa de li, e de balaustia, e mellilot, majorana, flors de viol, de camamilla, de totz ana partida i engual; totz sian trissatz e sian cofitz am aygua de sauze o am aygua dousa o am vi, tot aquo segon la qualitat del membre e le repaus de la color de lu.	Another method of making a stronger paste for resolving an abscess that is harder than the first one, which occurs during the restoration of a limb: take equal parts of plantain leaves and linseed seeds, hawthorn, clover, marjoram, violet flowers, and chamomile; mix all together and apply with sage water or warm water or with vinegar, depending on the condition of the limb and according to its color.
Mays Ypocras no diyssec en le sieu libre que sia pausat sobre le membre trenquat deves la restauracio de lu sino cerot fayt de cera e de oli e no autre causa; e recomtec que sia migier entre grossitut e subtilitat.	However, Hippocrates does not mention in his book that a paste should be applied to the broken limb during its restoration but rather wax made of beeswax and oil, and no other cause; he recommends that it should be midway between thickness and fineness.
Mays a Gualia es vist que sian pausatz sobre le membre trencat deves la restauracio de lu e las causas en las quals es exsiccacio am petit de caliditat so ayssi cum mirra, enses e semblantz a lor de aquelas causas que havem recomtadas.	However, Galen is seen to have applied pastes to the broken limb during its restoration and for causes such as slight drying with heat, such as myrrh, onions, and similar to those causes that we have mentioned.
Manieyra de emplastre que comfereys a lesio e dolor: recipe migat, de cezes, de pels de home inscizes o pena de auzel, e de altea, e sal, partidas enguals; sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian cofitz, e sia fayt emplastre.	Method of making a paste to apply for injury and pain: take equal parts of egg whites, linseed, human hair cut or bird feathers, plantain, and salt; mix all together and sieve them, then make into a paste.
Mays la quantitat segon la qual cove que romangua la liadura e aprop sia disliada, es que consideres si no es accidit dolor ni pruziment ni le os es trencat no es maugut de son loc, lahoras tu no deslies de motz jorns.	The amount according to which it is necessary that the bandage remain on and when it should be loosened, is such that you consider whether pain does not occur or improvement does not take place nor is the bone dislocated from its place; therefore, do not loosen it for several days.
E si accideys al loc dolor vehement o prusiment o imflacio, lahoras tu te coyte o deslie aquel en la hora, e osta le emplastre de lu.	And if severe pain or improvement or inflammation occurs at the site, then you should be cautious or loosen that bandage immediately, and remove the plaster.
E pren drap de li e spongia marina leon humida, e submergeys aquela en aygua tebeza, e am aquela lava le loc entro que cesse aquel pruziment e la dolor sia sedada; e aprop layssa repausar le membre per una hora; e aprop pausa sobre lu lana sutza submersa en vi agre e oli o oli rozat, e lia sobre lu per una nuoyt entro que sias segur de apostema caut, e que repause la imflacio del membre, e sia remauguda la dolor de lu.	And take a piece of linen and a sponge soaked in seawater, and immerse it in cold water; with this wash the area until the inflammation subsides and the pain is alleviated; then let the limb rest for an hour; afterwards, place it on wool saturated in vinegar and oil or rose oil, and bandage it for one night until you are sure that no abscess has formed, and to allow the swelling of the limb to subside, and to ensure that the pain is reduced.
E aprop itera aquela strictura subtil e emplastre petit e no·l strenhas per la tua constriccio primieyra, e subtilia am aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then apply that gentle bandaging and small plasters without tightening it as much as the first time, and gently do this until it is healed.
E si vezes que le apostema e la rogor e la dolor e la imflacio e tots les accidentz ja so remaugutz de tot, e indigeysses de emplastre e de strictura, lahoras tu itera aquel ayssi cum has fayt al comensant engualment.	And if you see that the abscess and hardness and pain and swelling and all other symptoms have subsided completely, and you need a plaster and bandaging, then repeat this as you did at the beginning in the same manner.
E si no accideys al membre alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no deslies aquel sino aprop tres dias o quatre o v o vii; e alcunas veguadas tot aquo es layssat per xx dias segon que a tu appar per la desliadura del membre, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que la fractura adhereys, e se acosta a la coagulacio de la carn sobre aquel.	And if no cause occurs to the limb of those we have mentioned, then do not loosen it until after three days or four or ten or seven; and in some cases all this is left for twenty days according to what appears suitable for the bandaging of the limb, as we have said, until the fracture adheres, and the flesh coagulates over it.
E lahoras ajusta en la strictura mays que en la tua strictura primieyra tota, e ayusta en la engrossacio de la vianda del malaute, segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu.	In the hours adjust more tightly than in your first stricture altogether, and adjust according to the swelling of the patient's flesh, as was preceded by memory.
Mays si tu vezes le loc de la fractura ja desiccar e extenuar mays que no cove, lahoras sapias que·l nutriment es prohibit pervenir ad aquel; e donc embroca aquel am aygua tebeza deves tota veguada que delias aquel; e sia aquo en totz tres dias; e alleuja la strictura un petit, e per aquesta operacio corr al membre le nutriment, e es sanat leugierament.	But if you see the site of the fracture already drying and withering more than is necessary, then you will know that nutrition cannot reach it; therefore, poultice that area with warm water every day until three days have passed; and loosen the bandage a little, and through this operation lead nourishment to the limb, and it will be healed quickly.
Mays aquo que fan les fols restauradors de la fractura del membre autra veguada quan no es restaurat al comensament, segon que cove, e es restaurat segon tortuositat, es error segon la operacio de lor, e temor gran, e si fos dreyturier aquo agrandit les Antics en lors libres e agueran am aquo obrat.	But what unskilled restorers of a fractured limb do otherwise when it is not set at the beginning as needed and is set according to its curvature, is an error in their procedure and great fear, and if this were correct, the Ancients would have enlarged on this in their books and practiced it accordingly.
E yeu no he vist ad alcu de lor aquo far, per que es pus razonable que aquo no fassa.	And I have not seen any of them do that, which is why it is more reasonable to think that they should not do so.
Capitol segon: De fractura quan accideys en le cap.	Chapter Second: On fractures when they occur in the head.
Las specias de fracturas son motas, e las figuras de lor son diversas, e las causas son distinctas, quar de fracturas alcuna es fayta per percussio de spaza, e la percussio osta tot le os entro al ciphac, le qual es dejos le os, ayssi cum fay ayssa en le fust, e per aquo aquesta specia es nompnada ascial; o la spaza inscideys alcuna partida del os, e inscideys la carn de lu e no passa la inscizio entro al derier de lu; e aquesta specia de fractura es nompnada levatio absoluta.	The types of fractures are many, and their figures are diverse, and the causes are distinct. Some fractures are caused by impact with a hard object, where the impact removes all the bone within the circumference, which is behind the bone, just as it happens in wood; thus, this type is called a chisel fracture. Or the object may cut some part of the bone and also cut through the flesh without passing the incision to the back side; and this type of fracture is called absolute elevation.
E la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca, e de fractura que es contricio o atricio; e causa de lu es percussio am poyra o cazement sobre peyra, e a lor semblantz.	And the severity of these two fractures can be great or slight, and there is also a fracture that is comminuted or crushed; the cause of this is impact with something weak or falling on a stone, and similar circumstances.
E aquesta fractura o es penetrant que ja apropinqua al pannicol le qual es dejos le os; o es en la facia del os, e la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca.	And this fracture is either penetrating that approaches the panniculus which is below the bone; or it is in the face of the bone, and the harm of these two fractures is great or little.
E de fractura es que es ameguada en le os, en la subtilitat del cabel petita, e per aquo es nompnada aquesta specia fractura capillar.	And of the fracture that is weakened in the bone, in the subtlety of the small hair-like parts, and for this reason this particular type of fracture is named capillary.
E es fractura que es fayta o per cazement o per percussio de peyra e a lu semblantz, que fa intrar alcuna lamina del os a las partidas dedintz, e es fayta en le loc concavitat ayssi cum accideys als payroles de eram quan accideys a lor percussio e es partida de lor intrada a las partidas dedintz.	And it is a fracture that is made either by falling or by the impact of a stone and similar objects, which causes some plate of bone to enter into its parts, and it is made in the place of concavity just as it happens with the bones of the arm when they occur due to their impact and are broken upon entering into their parts.
E majorment es fayt aquo en les cors de osses humitz, ayssi cum so caps de efantz.	And this is mostly made in the bones of children's bodies, just as it happens with the heads of infants.
E so a totas aquestas specias fracturas satagias, so son pessas ayssi cum stelhas separadas.	And for all these kinds of fractures, treatments are used, which are remedies applied separately.
E yeu vindre am reremoracio de tot aquo en son loc.	And I will return to the reminder of all this in its place.
E conoyssem totas aquestas specias de fractura per deteccio sobre aquelas e per inquisicio de lor am tentas e ostament de carn corrumpuda que es sobre lor.	And you should recognize all these kinds of fractures by detection over them and by inquiry into their attempts and the appearance of corrupted flesh that is upon them.
E specia capillar es conoguda per aysso que es descubert sobre le os, e es abstergit, e linit sobre lu am tentha, quar la fractura appar negra.	And the capillary fracture is recognized by this: it is revealed on the bone, and when it is wiped clean, it appears as a black mark on the surface of the bone.
Mays en la curacio de fractura considera al comensament les accidentz del malaute, e lahoras si tu vezes per los accidentz que signifique per significacio manifesta sobre paor, ayssi cum es vomit de colera, e extencio, e perdement de entendament, e abscizio de votz, e sincopi, e febre acuta, e eyssiment dels huels e rogor de aquels, e semblantz a lor dels accidentz en las majors disposicios, ses dopte no es sanat.	But in the treatment of fractures, consider at the beginning the symptoms of the patient, and if you see by these symptoms that there is significant danger, such as vomiting with anger, extension, loss of understanding, hoarseness of voice, fainting, acute fever, and similar severe conditions, and they appear in their most serious manifestations, then doubt whether healing will occur.
E si vezes accidentz no-correntz tu speras salut, lahoras tu comensa la curacio de lu.	And if for unusual accidents you hope for safety, then you begin the treatment of them.
La qual causa es quar si es vengut a tu le plaguat en le comensament cum es plaguat e aquo es en les dias de ivern, lahoras cove que tu studias en le ostament del os denant le dia xiiii segon tota disposicio.	Which cause is that if it comes to you the plague at the beginning as it is plague and this is in the days of winter, then it is fitting that you study in the condition of the bone before the day xiiii according to all disposition.
E si es en les dias d’estiu, lahoras cove que te coytes ostar le os denant le vii dia, habantz que aquo que es dejos le os sia corromput del pannicol, e que accidescan les accidentz que havem recomtatz.	And if it is in the days of summer, then it is fitting that you wait to remove the bone before the seventh day, since what is above the bone may become corrupted by inflammation, and that accidents which we have recounted may occur.
E si la fractura ja es pervenguda al pannicol cubrent le cervel, e es am partidas menudas e atricio, lahoras cove que inscidas la partida conminuta e atrita, segon que yeu recomtare a tu.	And if the fracture has already reached the membrane covering the brain and is in small pieces and inflamed, then it is fitting that you incise the injured and inflamed part, as I shall recount to you.
E es que tu razas le cap del malaute plaguat, e descuebres sobre le os segon costuma e manieyra a tu possible segon la figura de la plagua, e que sia leugier sobre le malaute.	And it is that you shave the head of the patient who is afflicted, and uncover the bone according to custom and method as best you can according to the figure of the injury, so that it is clear on the patient.
E si accideys a tu deves la deteccio del os, fluxs de sanc o apostema caut, lahora tu te oppausa a lu am aquo que cove, e es que huemplas le loc de draps infuzes en vi e oli rozat, e fassa repausar la plagua entro que sia sedat le apostema, e sies segur de fluxs del sanc; e aprop comensa en la circuicio del os e en la ablatio de lu.	And if it happens to you that you need the detection of the bone, bleeding or a cauterized abscess, then you must proceed with what is necessary, and this is that you cover the area with cloths infused in wine and rose oil, and allow the injury to rest until the abscess is calmed, and you are sure there will be no more bleeding; then begin the circumvention of the bone and its removal.
E aquo sia segon una de dos manieyras de operacio.	And this should be done according to one of two methods of operation.
E la una manieyra es que tu inscidas le os am inscisori de streyt tal, e aquesta es la forma de lu: E aprop administra un autre inscissori aquest, un pauc pus lat que aquel; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And one method is that you incise the bone with an incisor of narrow form, and this is the shape of it: And then administer another incisor, slightly wider than the first; and this is the shape of it:
E aprop administra mays le inscissori pus lat que·l segon.	And thus apply the poultice of the incision until the second day.
E cove que sia deves tu nombre de inscissoris diverses, dels quals alcus so pus latz que alcus autres; e alcus de lor so pus breus que·ls autres e sian en le derier de acuitat de las suas extremitatz, e sian de ferr indi o felod.	And it is necessary for you to know about various incisions, some of which are applied for longer periods than others; and some are applied more quickly than the others, and they vary in sharpness at their ends, and they are made of iron or flayed leather.
E usa de lor am facilitat en percussio sobre le inscissori per so que no concutesca le cap e leda aquel.	And use them with ease in tapping on the incisions so that you do not damage the head and cause harm to it.
E si le os es fort, dur, lahoras cove que perfores en le circuit de lu denant que tu administres los inscissoris am les taravels, les quals so nomnatz taravels no-profundantz.	And if the bone is hard and strong, it is necessary to perforate around it beforehand when you apply the incisions with the chisels, which are called non-deep chisels.
E no so nomnatz ayssi sino quar aquels no pausan le terme de l’os del test ad aquo que es aprop lu, per so quar al taravel es redonda extremitat o marge sobre aquel que es dejos le cap de lu agut semblant a marge o a cercle petit, le qual prohibeys esser submergit e passar la spissitut del os.	And they are not called thus only because these do not reach the thickness of the skull bone nearby, for the chisel has a rounded end or margin above it that is near the head like a border or small circle, which prevents it from being submerged and passing through the thickness of the bone.
E es convenient que tu prenguas de aquestz taravels gran nombre dels quals quascu convenesca a la spicitut de quascun os, entro que sia a tu present en tottz testz del cervel la extremitat del qual sia aguda, la quantitat en longitut e brevitat sia segon la quantitat de spicitut de aquest test.	It is convenient for you to take many of these chisels, each of which suits the thickness of each bone, so that in all parts of the skull the tip of which is sharp, the quantity in length and brevity should be according to the thickness of this part.
E aquesta es la forma de tres specias de teravels: La qualitat de perforar en le circuit del os trencat es que pauses le teravel sobre le os e revolvas aquel am les tieus ditz entro que sapias que l’os ja es penetrat; e aprop permuda le terevel ad autre loc, e pausa aquo que es entre tot trauc la quantitat de la grosseza del ray o enviro aquo.	And this is the form of three types of chisels: The quality of perforating around the broken bone is that you place the chisel on the bone and rotate it with your fingers until you know that the bone has been penetrated; then move the chisel to another location, and proceed in this manner throughout the entire length according to the thickness of the ray or about so.
E aprop inscideys am inscissoris aquo que es entre quascun trauc del os, e fay aquel pus subtil que podes sobre aquo en fi de levitat, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que erradiques le os, o am la tua ma, o am alcuna autra causa per alcus sturmentz les quals auras apparelhatz ad aquo, ayssi cum tanalhas e forceps subtils.	Here is the translation:
E cove que tu guardes am tota cautela que l’inscissori no toque alcuna causa del ciphac.	And see that you keep all caution so that the incisor does not touch any part of the hip joint.
E donc cum auras circuit le os perforan, e sira separat del ciphac si es continuat am lu, e auras aquel extrayt, cove que razas e enguales aquel en la asperitat de lu de aquo que es en le os am autra sturment semblant a inscissori, mays empero cove que sia pus teon e pus subtil que les autres inscissoris.	And thus when you have circled the bone to perforate it, and if it is continuous with the hip joint, you will extract it, so that you rasp and equalize its roughness to match that of the one in the bone using a tool similar to an incisor, but make sure it is finer and more delicate than other incisors.
E si roman alcuna partida dels osses petitz e satagias, lahoras pren aquela am facilitat am aquo que es deves tu dels sturmentz; e aprop aquo cura la plagua am lichinis e enguentz les quals havem ditz.	And if any part of the small and delicate bones breaks, now take that with ease using what is appropriate among your tools; and then treat the wound with lint and herbs which we have mentioned.
E l’autra manieyra de operacio es leugiera, longinqua de paor, la qual diyssec Gualia e la lauzec per gran lausor; e aquest es le sermo de lu: necessari es a tu en le comensament que comenses descobrir la partida del os del loc en le qual es la fractura pus vehement e pus manifesta, entro que quan auras descubert aquela partida e auras pausat dejos lu la extremitat de aquest inscissori lent e alegre del qual aquesta es la forma:	And the other method of operation is light, distant from fear, which Guillia describes and which she praises highly; and this is what she says: It is necessary for you at the beginning to start uncovering the part of the bone in the place where the fracture is most severe and obvious, until when you have uncovered that part and paused with the tip of this slow and cheerful incisor whose form is as follows:
E es que la partida lenticular es leon e no inscideys alcuna causa, e la partida aguda es de lu en dos latz avantz en longitut, ayssi cum vezes; que la partida lenticular sia ajustada al ciphac am la facia de lu inscident aguda en le os.	And it is that the lens-shaped part is left intact and no incision is made to it, while the sharp-edged part is divided into two sides along its length, as you see; so that the lens-shaped part fits against the hip joint with the sharp edge of the bone.
E aprop percuteys sobre le inscissori de una partida am un petit malhet entro que inscidas tot le os am facilitat ayssi cum es revolvut, e tu sias segur del pannicol que no accida en lu accident que temas en denguna manieyra, e si le medicant14 era le pus fol de totz les homes e le mays ignorant de lor; certament, e si era dorment.	And then strike the incisor of one part with a small hammer until you have cut through all the bone with ease as it is revolved, and be sure to protect the panniculus so that no accident happens in any way that you fear might occur; and even if the physician were the most careless of all men and the least knowledgeable among them, or even asleep.
Lahoras si romania alcuna causa annexa al os del pannicol en alcus locs de os, inscidira aquel de lu am la extremitat del inscissori aquel lenticular, e deliuraria aquel de lu am facilitat, quar es deliurat de lu ses nocument e ses paor.	In such a case if any cause is attached to the bone of the abdomen in some places of bone, incise that from where the tip of the scalpel reaches, and deliver it from there where it is easier, for it is delivered without harm or fear.
E si fractura del os no penetra entro al pannicol, e aquo que es abscidit o es ostat del os es la facia de lu, e roman en lu asperitat e satagias subtils, lahoras cove que razas aquela asperitat e erradiques aquelas satagias am razoris subtils per les quals tu has preparat le nombre, de diversas quantitatz per que sia a tu possible administrar de aquels en tot loc les pus convenientz de lor e le pus dreyt de aquels segon aquo en que te perduzeys la tua operacio aquel os trencat e la figura de lu.	And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate into the abdomen, and that which is abraded or remains of the bone is its surface, and it lies in roughness and small projections, then you should scrape off that roughness and eradicate those projections with fine razors which you have prepared in various quantities so that it may be possible for you to apply them where they are most appropriate and use them correctly according to how your operation on the broken bone and its figure proceeds.
E cove que administres en la tua razio am la qual razes le os al comensament le pus lat de aquels razoris, e aprop usa aprop lu del pus subtil de lu, e no cesses far aquo segon continuitat entro que pervenguas ad aministrar le pus teon e·l pus subtil de totz aquels.	And you should apply in your ratio with which you scrape the bone at first the roughest of those razors, and gradually use one finer than the other, and do not cease doing this continuously until you reach applying the thinnest and finest of all of them.
Mays en quascuna de las autras fracturas petitas capillars e fractura subtil, cove que administres cura segon aquo que perduseys ad rectificacio de lu.	In each of the other small and fine fractures and subtle fracture, you should administer care according to what is needed for their correction.
E es causa que no es ameguada sobre totz les quals han studi en aquela art.	And it is the cause that it is not feared by all those who have studied in that art.
E stec sobre aquo que nos scriut havem mostrat en grans fracturas.	And regarding what we have written about has been shown in major fractures.
E si le pannicol es retangut quan tu erradiques le os, lahoras cove que prenguas drap de li segon la quantitat de la plagua, e submergeys aquel en oli rozat, e pausa aquel sobre le orrifici de la plagua; e aprop pren autre drap doblat o triplicat e submergeys lu en vi e oli rozat e pausa aquel sobre drap prim e fay aquo al pus leugierament que podes sobre aquel, que no graves le ciphac; e aprop administra sobre aquel liament lat, e no strenhas aquel sino per quantitat que tengua la plagua tant solament.	And if the abdomen is rectangular when you remove the bone, then take cloth according to the size of the wound, and soak it in warm oil, and place it over the wound opening; then take another folded or triple-layered cloth and soak it in wine and warm oil, and place it on top of the first cloth as lightly as possible so that you do not press on the surrounding tissue; then apply a thick bandage over it, but bind it only enough to cover the wound itself.
E layssa aquel am aquesta cura per un dia o per dos entro que sias segur de apostema caut; e aprop deslia aquel e aprop aministra medicinas am las quals es superflua siccitat, ayssi cum razitz de lin e farina de errs, e polvera de enses e de aristologia, e de semblantz ad aquels.	If you are certain of this cure within one or two days that there is no danger of an abscess forming; and then loosen that [dressing] and promptly administer medicines with which excessive dryness is harmful, such as lint pads and flour poultices, and powders of endive and arsene, and similar to those.
E es que tu fassas de aquestas medicinas polvera que sia pulverizada sobre la plagua, ayssi cum son secas; e universalment, administra en aquel tota medicina de proprietat de la qual es que abstergesca e no mordique.	And it is that you should make these medicines into powder which is finely ground over the wound, just as they are dry; and generally, administer to it any medicine whose property is to cleanse without irritating.
E guarda te segon la tua vertut que la plagua en la tua curacio sia neta; e no sia en lu surdicia de enguent ni autra; ni no layssas agreguar virulencia en lu; quar quan es ajustada sobre le pannicol del cervel, corromp aquel e poyreys aquel, e accideys sobre le malaute aprop aquo malicia maligna.	And guard according to your virtue that the wound in your treatment be clean; and let it not become infected or worse; nor allow its virulence to increase. For when it is situated on the panniculus cerebri, it corrupts that area, and you will have to treat it promptly due to this malicious condition.
E accideys en le ciphac del cap, cum de lu es mondificat le os e majorment quan es menspresada la cura de lu, e es negror en la superficia de lu; e donc considera lahoras si accideys al malaute les accidentz que havem ditz, sapias que es parnicios ses tot dopte.	And if it affects the scalp, when the bone is cleansed and especially when pressure is applied to treat it, and there is blackness on its surface; and therefore consider at such times if you encounter the accidents we have mentioned, know that it is perilous with all caution.
E si no accideys negror sino de la medicina que es pausada desus, e es en vertut de aquela medicina que fassa aquela negror, lahoras cove que tu prenguas de mel una partida e de oli rozat partidas iii, e am aquels linieys un drap, e aprop pausa aquel sobre le ciphac; e aprop cura aquel am las specias de curacio que conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if it is not blackness but the medicine that was applied above which causes this discoloration, then take one part of honey and three parts of olive oil, and use these to moisten a piece of cloth, and then apply it to the scalp; and promptly treat it with the spices suitable for healing until it is healed.
Capitol .iii.	Chapter III.
De restauracio del nas quan es trincat.	On the restoration of the nose when it is cut.
Sapias que no es trencat del nas sino doas partidas ensemps pus sobiranas, o una de aquelas alcunas veguadas, per so quar en lu has dos osses, quar la partida dejos es cartillaginosa, e no es trencada e no accideys a lu sino atricio e tortuositat e sinuitat.	Know that the nose is not broken except in two main places, or one of those lesser places, because there you have two bones, since the lower part is cartilaginous, and it is not broken, but only inflamed, twisted, and swollen.
Mays si es trencada la una de las doas partidas de lu, lahoras cove que tu intrometas le dit petit en le sieu nas, e que engualhas aquela fractura dedintz am le tieu dit indic, e am le dit pous defora, entro que retorne le nas segon la sua figura natural.	If one of the two main parts is broken, then you should insert your little finger into the side of the nose, and adjust that fracture from within with your index finger, and with your thumb outside, until the nose returns to its natural shape.
E sia fayt aquo per tu am facilitat, e guarda te que no caja per aquela tua operacio sobre le malaute delor.	And do this with ease, and be careful that your operation does not cause excessive pain to the patient.
E si la fractura es en la pus sobirana partida del nas, e le dit no perve ad aquela, lahoras cove que sia equat am la extremitat del ray en le qual sia petita grossitut.	And if the fracture is in the uppermost part of the nose, and your finger cannot reach it, then you should use the end of a probe with some thickness.
E si la fractura es en doas partidas, lahoras tu fay le semblant de aquo.	And if the fracture is in two parts, then you should proceed as described.
E coyta te am restauracio de lu en le primier dia de la fractura, si es possible; e sino, lahoras aprop le vii o·l x deves le repaus del apostema caut.	And attempt to restore it on the first day of the fracture if possible; otherwise, wait until the seventh or tenth day when the swelling has subsided.
E aprop entromet en la extremitat del nas una meca de drap de li, si la fractura es en una partida, o metz doas calguas, si la fractura es en doas partidas, e sia en la calgua grossitut de tanta quantitat que umpla le trauc del nas.	And insert into the end of the nose a pad of linen cloth if the fracture is in one place, or two pads if the fracture is in two places, and let the pad be thick enough to fill the cavity of the nose.
E diysso alcus dels antics restauradors que las calguas sian enfundudas en boder, e sian permudadas en tot dia, mays no es vist a mi; habantz cove que la meca sia enfunduda en album de huou comfit am polvera de moli; e aprop layssa la qualgua entro que l’os sia fermat e sia endurazida la cartillage.	And some of the ancient restorers say that the pads should be soaked in butter, and changed daily, but I have not seen this done; rather, it is best to soak the pad in albumen of egg mixed with powdered sugar, and then leave it in place until the bone is set and the cartilage has hardened.
E alcunas veguadas sia entromes en le nas, en loc de calgua, pena de auca pus que es envolopada de drap de li leon; e sia que ja te la fractura del nas pus vehement e que le malaute no sia prohibit de inspiracio.	In some cases, insert in the nose, instead of a sponge, a piece of cotton wrapped in lion's skin; and let it be that the fracture of the nose is so severe that the patient is not prevented from breathing.
E aquesta causa no es a tu necessaria; e si voles, fay aquo, e si voles, fay calguas.	And this cause is not necessary for you; and if you wish, do that, and if you wish, use sponges.
E si accideys autra veguada apostema caut, emplastra le nas am cerot o am coto enfus en vi agre e oli rozat, o am diaquilon.	And if another swelling occurs that needs to be cauterized, apply a plaster to the nose made of pitch or honey mixed with vinegar and rose oil, or use myrrh.
Mays si no accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que emplaustres aquel defora am farina de sizami e am polvera de enses cofitz am album de huou; e aprop pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e no lies le nas am alcuna causa.	But if it does not require cauterization, now you should apply plasters to that area with sesame flour and powdered herbs mixed with egg white; and afterwards place them over the lion's skin, and do not cover the nose with anything.
Mays si so trencats les osses del nas am fractura petita o so conminuitz, lahoras cove que scindas sobre aquels, e extraguas aquels am insturmentz que conveno ad aquels; e aprop cos la scissura, e cura aquela am aquo que encarna e consolida, e am emplastres ad aquo convenientz.	But if the bones of the nose are broken with a small fracture or comminuted, now you should cut around them, and extract them with instruments that are suitable for this; and then close the gap, and treat it with substances that promote healing and consolidation, and with appropriate plasters.
E si accideys plagua dedintz le nas, lahoras cove que cures aquela am calguas e administra canulas de plom entro que sia de tot sanat.	And if there is an abscess inside the nose, now you should treat it with sponges and administer lead cannulas until it is completely healed.
Capitol .iiii.	Chapter IV.
De restauracio de la mandibula quan es trincada.	On the restoration of the jaw when it is dislocated.
Quan la mandibula dejos es rompuda e la fractura de lu no es am plagua, reguarda lahoras si la fractura es deforas tant solament, e no es trencada en dos e es curvada a las partidas dedintz, lahoras la sua cognicio es leugiera.	When the lower jaw is broken and there is no abscess at the fracture site, now observe if the fracture is only outward and not split into two parts and curved inward, then its diagnosis is straightforward.
E cove donc, si la fractura es en la part dreyta, que tu intrometas le tieu indic senestre en la boca del malaute; e semblantment si la fractura es an la mandibula senestra, lahoras intromet le dit indic de la ma dreyta; e impelleys am aquel la gilbositat de la fractura dedintz am facilitat a las partidas defora, am la tua autra ma de la partida defora del os; am aquel decentment equa aquelam.	Therefore, if the fracture is on the right side, you should insert your left finger into the mouth of the patient; and similarly, if the fracture is on the left side, then use your right finger; and push in such a way that you bring the bone fragments together from within with ease to the outside parts, using your other hand from the outside part of the bone; act appropriately in this manner.
E si la fractura de la mandibula ja es separada en doas, lahoras cove que administres extensio de doas partz segon rectitut entro que sia possibla la equacio de lu.	And if the jaw fracture has already separated into two parts, then you should administer extension from both sides as much as possible to achieve proper alignment.
E si accideys conmocio de dentz a disrupcio, lahoras strenh aquelas de las quals speras que romandran am fil de aur o de argent o de ceda; e aprop pausa sobre la mandibula trencada cerot, e aprop pausa sobre lu drap duplicat, e pausa sobre le drap gran stelha decentment fayta, o una pessa de sola engual a la longitut de la mandibula; e aprop lia aquela desus segon que a tu es apparelhada la liadura de lu e que conveneys la applicacio, entro que no es destruida.	And if there is a concussion of the teeth with disruption, then strengthen those that you expect will break with a thread of gold or silver or silk; and immediately apply wax over the fractured jaw, and then apply a double cloth pad, and place a properly made bandage or a piece of cloth equal in length to the jaw; and then bind it above as is appropriate for your binding material and for the application, so that it is not destroyed.
E comanda al malaute que use de repaus e tranquilitat, e pausa la vianda de lu sorbicios leons.	And command the patient to use rest and tranquility, and give him food in the form of thick soups.
E si extimas que ja es alterada la figura en alcuna manieyra, lahoras tu te coyta e deslia aquel al tertz dia; e aprop rectifica aquo que ja es alterat de lu e emplaustra aquel am polvera de moli, am album de huou, o am farina de cisami, pus que tu auras ostat le cerot de lu, e pausa sobre le emplastra lana leon.	And if you determine that the figure has already been altered in any way, then you should examine and release it on the third day; and then correct what has already been altered of it and apply a plaster with powdered linseed, egg white, or ground sesame, after you have removed the wax from it, and place a thick wool bandage over the plaster.
E adonc cum sta annex e ajustat aquel emplastre sobre lu, e la disposicio del os no es alterada, layssa aquel, que no le deslies entro que sia sanat e strenh la fractura; quar motas veguadas aquesta fractura es streyta en tres sempmanas.	And then as you place and adjust the plaster on it, if the position of the bone is not altered, leave it without releasing it until it is healed and the fracture is strengthened; for this fracture typically strengthens in about three weeks.
E si autra veguada accida apostema caut, lahoras administra aquo que havem dit motas veguadas en la sedacio de lu entro que sia sanat, e sia remaugut aquel apostema.	And if another abscess should occur after cautery, then administer what we have mentioned for other cases in the treatment of the interior until it is healed, and let that abscess be brought to a head.
E si la fractura es am plagua, lahoras considera si es pessa del os separada o satagias, lahoras tu te subtilia que ostes aquelas satagias am aquo que conveneys ad aquo en la remocio de aquelas dels sturmentz.	And if the fracture is a splinter, now consider whether it is a piece of bone separated or shattered, now you must use subtlety to extract those fragments with what is convenient for their removal.
E si le orrifici de la plagua es streyt, lahoras tu le amplifique am le fleubotomi segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And if the opening of the wound is narrow, now enlarge it with a scalpel according to the quantity needed.
E aprop quan tu auras ostat aquelas satagias, e de aquelas no sira remaugut re, lahoras tu cos le orrifici de la plagua si es ampla; e sino, pausa sobre aquela un dels emplaustres que conveneysso ad aquo e encarnan aquela, entro que sia sanada.	And when you have extracted those fragments, and if they do not come to a head by themselves, now close the opening of the wound if it is wide; and if not, apply one of the plasters that are suitable for this purpose until it becomes inflamed, until it is healed.
Capitol .v.	Chapter 5.
De restauracio de la furcula quan es trinquada.	On the restoration of the collarbone when it is broken.
Motas veguadas es trencada la furcula de la partida denant deves le muscle, e aquela fractura es fayta en una de tres manieyras.	There are various ways the collarbone can be broken at the front part beyond the muscle, and this fracture occurs in one of three manners.
Quar o es trencada, o seperada, o es seperada en doas partz otra que no accidan satagias; e es leugier a la restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que accideysso en lu satagias, e es dificil a restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que la fractura es am plagua.	For it may be broken, or separated, or separated into two parts without fragments; and this is easy for restoration. Or it happens that fragments occur, making its restoration difficult. Or it is such that the fracture involves a splinter.
E la operacio en aquela, quan la fractura es ses plagua, es que tu fassas esser present dos ministres, per so que la un tengua le adjutori e siegua la furcula trencada, e l’autre extenda le col ves aquela partida.	And the procedure in such a case, when the fracture involves a splinter, is that you have two assistants present; one to hold the splintered collarbone and guide it, and the other to extend the neck towards that part.
E aprop enguala la fractura am les tieus ditz entro que sia fayta la forma de lu segon que cove, e no sia en lu eminencia pauca ni concavitat.	For adjusting the fracture with the said instruments, ensure that the shape is made according to what is needed, and not in a slight prominence or depression.
E si indigeysses mes de extencio, lahoras cove que pauses dejos le titillic del malaute spera de drap o de lana, e sia la grandesa de lu segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat; e exten e eleva la furcula e coarta la spera am la tua ma entro que enguales la frectura segon que cove.	And if you need more extension, now it is necessary to place beneath the tilt of the malaligned bone a pad made of cloth or wool, and its size should be according to the quantity needed; extend and elevate the clavicle and compress the pad with your hand so that you adjust the fracture as required.
E si no podes atirar la extremitat de la furcula a las partidas defora, per so quar es pervenguda al preon, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e pauses sobre le muscle de lu un coyssi migier en grandeza.	And if you cannot pull the clavicle's extremity to the outer parts, so that it reaches its proper position, now it is necessary for the patient to be reclined on their neck, and place a pad over the muscle on one side, about half in size.
E le ministre prema le muscle de lu a las partidas dejos entro que l’os de la furcula sia elevat que es en le preon en sus, e lahoras tu rectifique la fractura e enguala aquela am les tieus ditz.	And the assistant presses the muscle on the lower parts so that the bone of the clavicle is elevated to its proper position, and now you should correct the fracture and adjust it with the said instruments.
Mays si sentes satagias de la furcula e so maugudas, lahoras cove que fendes sobre aquela e extraguas aquelas satagias am facilitat.	But if you feel protrusions of the clavicle and roughness, now it is necessary to cut into those areas and remove those protrusions with ease.
E si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu ingenia inscisio de lu am un dels inscissoris les quals has apparelhatz ad aquo, pus que havias pausat dejos la furcula le sturment que serve le ciphac; e es sturment de fust o de ferr del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if it is held in the bone, now you must devise an incision with one of the scalpel blades that you have prepared for this purpose, after placing beneath the clavicle the tool used for drilling; and this tool is made of wood or metal, having the following form:
E es semblant a culier del qual aquesta es la concavitat; e sia la sua latitut segon aquo que has necessitat de lu, segon la grandeza del os o la pauqueza de lu.	And it resembles the bottom of a bowl, with this being its concavity; and its width should be according to what you need from it, depending on the size of the bone or its smallness.
Mays la longitut de lu sia segon que es a tu possible a la operacio; que haja doas extremitatz ayssi cum vezes, e la una extremitat sia ample e l’autre streyta.	Make it as long as seems suitable to you for the operation; let it have two ends, just as times require, and one end be wide and the other narrow.
E si la disrupcio de la plagua la qual has inscidida quan has extraytas la satagia del os es ampla, e yest segur de apostema caut, lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura.	And if the disruption of the wound which you have incised when you extracted the splinter from the bone is wide, and you are sure it will form an abscess, then you now adjust the two lips of the wound with a suture.
E si la disrupcio es pauca, o temes apostema caut, lahoras tu uemple la plagua am draps e pulvils segon la quantitat de la scissura de la plagua.	And if the disruption is small, or you fear it will form an abscess too soon, then now employ the wound with patches and powders according to the quantity of the wound's cleft.
E si accideys apostema caut, lahoras infon drap en vi agre e oli rozat e vi, e pausa sobre aquel.	And if an abscess forms soon, then now apply a patch in fresh oil and rose water, and place it over that.
Mays la strictura del os quan es ses plagua e ses seccio, es que pauses emplastre fayt de farina de moli am album de huou, e pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e aprop pausa la spera dejos le titillic de lu, si indigeyssas de aquela, e aprop pren humemate, so es torca la qual teno les Sarrazis , que sia mot longua, e sia latitut de lu de un palm o entorn aquel; e aprop pausa pulvils duplicatz sobre la stopa e l’emplastre; e aprop pren una stela de taula subtil de la qual la latitut d’ela sia de tres ditz e en longitut semblantment; e aprop envolopa aquela en drap, e aprop envolopa aquel drap am la stela en lo loc sobre le loc de la fractura; e aprop pausa humemati ayssi cum es revout, e revol aquela sobre le col de lu e dejos le titillic de lu sa e dejos le titillic de lu malaute, e reduzeys aquela sobre tota partida, e quan vezes que la strictura de la fractura am strictura descent, e es aquo que no es occultat sobre tu.	And when the stricture of the bone occurs during the wound and its section, you should apply a plaster made from flour paste with egg white, and place it over the wound. If needed, place a sphere below the joint, and then take linen cloth, which should be about one palm wide and similarly long; then put double powders on both the wound and the plaster; and then take a thin wooden board whose width is three fingers and its length similar; then wrap that in a cloth and apply it to the location above the fractured area; then place melted material as described, and roll that around the neck of it and below the joint of it and under the joint of the other side, reducing it over all parts until the stricture of the fracture aligns properly, and this is what you should not hide from yourself.
E tot, que no sia mauguda la stelha desobre le os trencat; e per so cove que tu vejas le malaute quascun dia, que quan le liament es mollificat o vezas la stela ja esser remauguda, lahoras tu rectifica aquo e strenh la liadura.	And do not let the splint be loose above the broken bone; and therefore it is necessary that you see the patient every day, so that when the bandaging is soft or you see the splint already loosened, then you must correct this and tighten the binding.
E aprop pausa le dormir del malaute sobre le col de lu, e pausa dejos le titillic de lu deves le dormir de lu en la nueyt un petit coyssi; per so que am aquel sia elevat le adjutori de lu del latz de aquel, e donc es elevada la la fractura de la furcula a elevacio del muscle; o sia le bras de lu liat al col de aquel.	And place the patient's pillow at the back of his neck, and place underneath it a small cushion to raise his head during sleep; therefore lift the support under his armpits, so that the shoulder blade fracture is raised according to the muscle elevation; or bind his arm to his neck.
E no deslies le liament si no accideys en le loc prusiment o apostema, entro a xii dias.	And do not remove the bandage unless it is necessary due to an abscess or swelling, within twelve days.
E aprop renovelha le emplastre si has vista la facia de lu ad aquo, e ajusta en la strictura e restaura aquel e layssa entro que sia restaurat e sia coagulat la fractura de la furcula.	And then change the plaster if you have seen the face of it, and adjust it in the joint and restore it, and leave it until it is set and the shoulder blade fracture is healed.
E es strenguda e comfortada segon le mes en xxviii dias, e alcunas veguadas en alcus homes es fayt en mens de temps de aquel.	And it is strengthened and comforted according to the method in twenty-eight days, and sometimes in some people it is done in less time.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter VI.
De restauracio de fractura de la spalla.	On the restoration of a shoulder fracture.
Spatula tart es trencada en le loc lat de lu e no so trencatz de lu sino les marges.	The scapula is broken in the middle part and not at its edges.
E donc quan es trencat le loc de lu — e es trencat en le mieg loc de lu — e no es conogut sino per tocament, lahoras segon que es la figura de la fractura sforsa te la preparacio de lu e reduzir aquela segon la figura natural en tota manieyra de engen la qual es a tu possible.	And when it is broken in that place — and it is broken in the middle part — and it is known only by palpation, then according to the shape of the fracture prepare yourself and reduce it according to its natural figure in every way that is possible for you.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc polvera de moli am album de huou e stopa leon; e aprop pausa pulvil de drap duplicat; e aprop pausa sobre lu stela lada de taula subtil segon la quantitat de la spatula tota o mays un pauc.	And then apply powdered alum of hauv and lion's fat; and then apply powder made from doubled cloth; and then apply over the plate a thin layer of ladanum according to the quantity of the spoon, all or at least a little.
Mays si dejos la stela es concavitat en alcu dels locs de la spatula, lahoras tu enguala aquela concavitat am stopa leon, e aprop pueja la stela segon equalitat.	And if the plate is concave in some places of the spoon, then you fill that concavity with lion's fat, and then spread the plate according to equality.
E aprop strenh desus am humemati longua ab constriccio decent e am fermesa de la stela entro que no sia remauguda del sieu loc.	And then apply strips of linen soaked in hot liquid with proper constriction and with firmness to the plate so that it is not displaced from its place.
E considera le liament en quascun dia; e totas veguadas que sia mollificat, lia autra veguada e stren le e equa la stela si es remauguda del sieu loc.	And consider the bandaging each day; and every time it is softened, change it another day and tighten the plate if it has been displaced from its place.
E jagua le malaute sobre le sieu latz sa.	And place the dressing on its side as appropriate.
E la spatula es restaurada en xx dias o en .xxv.	And the spoon is restored in xx days or in .xxv. 
E donc quan es complit aquest nombre, lahoras tu dissolveys le liament, e que tu scias ensegurat quar aquela es dels osses dels quals la cominicio no es temuda ni lor dissolucio.	When this number is complete, then you loosen the bandage, and ensure that you know which of these are bones for which the beginning is not feared nor their dissolution.
E si procezeys del loc del os pessa e pongeys dejos la codena, lahoras tu scindeys sobre lu, e osta le, e fay segon que havem dit en la fractura de la furcula de sadacio de apostema caut si accideys aqui.	And if you proceed to the place of the bone piece and place the bandage below it, then you cut above it, remove it, and do as we have said regarding the fracture of the furcula or suppuration or cauterization should that occur.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter VII.
De restauracio de la fractura del pietz.	On the restoration of a fractured foot.
Le pietz alcunas veguadas es romput en le mieg loc de lu e aquo tart endeve; mays las extremitatz de lu mot endeve que so ciccadas e comminuidas.	The foot sometimes is broken in the middle and remains there; but the ends move apart like the legs of a cicada, becoming separated and comminuted.
E dels accidentz de lu quan es trencat le mieg de lu es que declina a las partidas dedintz e accideys a lu gran dolor, e dificultat en lo hale, e tos, e fort leu e vomeys sanc; e es declarada en lu cavitat en le os trencat e no es occulta al sentiment.	And the effects when the middle of it is broken are that it inclines towards the internal parts and causes great pain, difficulty in movement, coughing, fever, and vomiting blood; and a cavity is formed in the broken bone and this is not hidden from sensation.
E la restauracio de lu es que sia resupinat le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa entre las spallas de lu un coyssi; e aprop prem als muscles de lu, e ajusta las costas de lu am las mas de dos costatz, e subtilia te en la operacio de lu e en la equacio segon tota manieyra que es ad aquo possibla e que conveneys ad aquo, entro que retorne la figura del os segon que cove.	And the restoration of it is that the patient lies supine on their back, and a pillow is placed between the shoulders; then gently press the muscles, and align the ribs with more than two rib pieces, and carefully perform the operation and adjustment in every possible way that suits this case until the figure of the bone returns as needed.
E aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e estopa e pausa desobre astela de taula subtil de sauze o de caligi e de a lor semblantz en levitat, pus que tu envolopas aquela en drap; e aprop subtilia te en lian aquela sobre le os trencat que no sia maugut; e vay am liadura segon retonditat al dors alcunas veguadas, e strenh aquel am strictura decent; e aprop considera la liadura en tota hora, e quan es mollificada strenh aquela.	And then place on it a plaster and cotton, and lay thin strips of wood or reeds or similar light materials over them, wrapping all in cloth; then gently bind that around the broken bone without pressing too hard; and apply bandages to the back several times, tightening them appropriately; and afterward, consider the bandage at all times, and when it has loosened, tighten it again.
E si necessitat provoca a desliament de aquela deves corrossio o pruziment, o dolor, o apostema que accideysso en le loc, lahoras tu coyta e deslia aquela e erradica le emplastre e rectifique aquo que accideys per aquo am manieyra de curacio de lu; e aprop reduzeys le emplastre, si vezes ad aquo la facia; e ajusta a lu strictura entro que sia sanat.	And if necessity compels the removal of that which has been corroded or protruded due to pain, swelling, or abscess that occurred in the area, then you should cut and loosen it and remove the plaster and correct what happened according to this method of treatment; and afterwards apply the plaster again, if it is appropriate for the condition; and adjust the bandaging until it is healed.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter VIII.
De restauracio de las costas quan son trincadas.	On the restoration of ribs when they are broken.
Sapias que fractura de las costas no catz sino en locs grosses que siegon le dos; e de las extremitatz de lor de la partida denant no accideys ad aquelas contricio sino per aquo quar so cartillaginosas.	Know that a fracture of the ribs does not occur except in thick areas where they join; and at their extremities in front, such contusions do not happen to them because they are cartilaginous.
E cognicio de lu no es amaguada al sentiment deves la inquisicio de lu am les ditz.	And the knowledge of it is not hidden from the feeling, but the examination of it among those mentioned.
E la restauracio sia ayssi que enguales la fractura am les ditz segon la manieyra possibla, entro que sia engulhat segon que cove, e aprop emplastre e strenh le os trencat am stela, si indigeys de aquel.	And the restoration should be such that it equalizes the fracture among those mentioned according to the possible method, until it is set as needed, and then apply plaster and bind the broken bone with a splint if necessary.
E si la fractura de las costas es declinant a las partidas dedintz, lahoras accideys al malaute dolor vehement e punctura, ayssi cum punctura que accideys ad aquel que ha pleureci, e per aquo quar le os ponh le velament; e accideys a lu difficultat de hanelit, e tos, e vomit de mot sanc; e aquesta es de dificil curacio.	And if the fracture of the ribs inclines toward the inner parts, then severe pain and piercing occur, similar to the pain that happens when one weeps, because the bone pierces the membrane; and there is difficulty in breathing, coughing, and vomiting blood; and this is difficult to treat.
E ja les Antixs so engeniatz en aquela am motz engientz.	And the Ancients were skilled in that with powerful remedies.
E de lor so que diso: cove que pauses viandas del malaute que engendro imflacio e ventositat, per que le ventre sia imflat e sia extendut, e la fractura sia impellida a las partidas defora.	And what they say is: it is necessary to avoid foods that cause inflammation and gas, so that the abdomen becomes swollen and extended, and thus the fracture is pushed outward.
Mays nos avoreyssem aquo per so que no sia causa leugiera a generar apostema caut, si no accideys; e si ja accideys, lahoras ja ajuda ad aquo.	Let us proceed with this by which there will not be reason to cause an inflamed abscess through cauterization, if it does not occur; and if it has already occurred, now help is given for that.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia pausada desus ventoza e aprop que sucque am fortitut; e es semblant a ratiocinacio, mays empero es temut que la ventoza atire las superfluitatz al loc per la debilitat.	And some of them say it should be placed above the windpipe and near where it draws in strongly; but this is similar to reasoning, yet it is feared that the windpipe might carry the superfluities to the place due to its weakness.
E diyssero alcus de lor: cove que·l loc sia cubert am lana que ja es submersa en oli caut, e sian pausatz pulvils entre las costas entro que sia umplida, que sia la liadura engual quan envolopas aquela segon retonditat; e aprop sia curat le malaute am curacio de pleuresi de vianda e de medicina.	And some of them say: cover the place with wool that has already been submerged in hot oil, and place poultices between the ribs until it is filled, so that the bandaging follows the shape as when wrapping it according to its roundness; and nearby treat the ailment with the cure for pleurisy using food and medicine.
E si causa vehement constrenh le malaute la qual no sufferta, e le os punh le velament am punctura ledent, temem sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que fendam sobre le loc, descubram de la costa trencada, e aprop pausem desobre aquela instrument que conserve le ciphac, la rememoracio del qual es precedida, e que inscidam le os am facilitat, e extraguam aquel.	And if the cause of the ailment is violent constraint that cannot be endured, and the bone pierces through the membrane at a point, we fear for the ailment; now it should be that we cut above the location, expose the broken rib, and then place over it an instrument to hold the incision, the use of which was previously mentioned, and that they saw the bone with ease, and extract it.
E aprop que ajustem las doas labias de la plagua, si es gran, am cozidura, e curem aquela am emplastres entro que sia sanada.	And then we adjust the two edges of the wound, if it is large, by stitching, and treat it with plasters until it heals.
E si accideys dedintz apostema, lahoras tu coyta e enfon pulvils en oli rozat e pausa sobre le loc, e que sia curat le malaute am aquo que cove a la apostema dedintz.	And if an abscess occurs internally, now you should apply heat and press poultices in rose oil onto the area, and treat the ailment with what is appropriate for an internal abscess.
E sia ressupinat sobre le latz sobre le qual dorm, entro que sia sanat.	And he should lie on his side on the bed until he is healed.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter IX.
De restauracio de fractura del spondil del dos e del col.	On the restoration of fractures of the thoracic and cervical spine.
Alcunas veguadas endeve fractura als osses del col, e tart endeve a lor atricio, e semblantment als spondils del dos.	In some cases, fractures occur in the cervical vertebrae, and they heal slowly, similarly to the thoracic spine.
E cum aquo accideys ad alcu e voles saber si sara sanat o no, lahoras considera, quar si vezes las sieuas mas ja mollificadas e stupefaytas e mortas e no pot maure aquelas ni extendre ni strenher aquelas e quan constrenges aquelas am les tieus ditz o punges aquelas am agulha e no sent en aquelas dolor, lahoras sapias que no es sanat, e en las mes de disposicios es mortal.	And when this happens to someone and you want to know if they will recover or not, at that time consider whether their muscles are already softened, numb, and dead; if they cannot move or stretch them, and when you press on those areas with your fingers or pierce them with a needle and no pain is felt there, then you know that they will not recover, and in such cases it is fatal.
E si mau aquelas e sent en aquelas constriccio am les ditz e punctura, lahoras sapias que la nucha de l’os es salva e que le malaute guereys am curacio.	And if you move those areas and feel constriction with the fingers and pain upon piercing them, then you know that the vertebra is safe and that the injury will heal with treatment.
E si ve als spondils del col le semblant ad aquo e voles saber si sira sanat o no, lahoras considera als pes de lu.	And if the cervical vertebrae show similar symptoms and you want to know if they will recover or not, at that time consider the condition of their legs.
Lahoras si tu vezes que so ja mollificatz, accideys ad aquels aquo que es accidit en las mas, e aprop quan jatz sobre le sieu dos, yeys ventozitat e egestio ses la sua volontat, e alcunas veguadas es resupinat sobre le sieu dos e vol urinar e no pot, lahoras sapias que es mortal, e adonc no trebales en la curacio de lu.	If you see that the legs are already softened and observe similar symptoms in them as those affecting the upper body, and shortly after lying on their back they experience vomiting and involuntary evacuation, and sometimes when lying on their back they want to urinate but cannot, then you know it is fatal, and at that point there is no need for treatment.
Mays si no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, la causa es milhor e pus leugiera.	But if none of those symptoms occur, the cause is better and more remote.
E la curacio de lu es que te perforses a la sedacio del apostema caut que pauses sobre le spondil atrissat oli rozat sol, o am mugols de huous asatz; pausa sobre aquela aquel alcunas veguadas le dia entro que sia sedat le apostema caut.	And the treatment for them is to apply a poultice to reduce the swelling over the fractured vertebra using raw oil or boiled honey mixed with flour; place this on the affected area until the swelling subsides.
E lahoras pausa un dels emplastres confortantz e exsitans, e strenh sobre aquel am liament; e comanda al malaute que use de repaus e de tranquillitat e que no dorme sobre la partida am la qual atroba dolor entro que sia sanat.	During the hours of rest, apply one of the comforting and stimulating plasters, and bind it over that part; and command the patient to use repose and tranquility and not to sleep on the side where pain is felt until it is healed.
E si accideys deves la atricio del os satagias o alcuna causa que ja es seperada de lu, lahoras cove que secces sobre la codena e que ostes aquel os; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua, am sutura si es gran; e aprop cura aquela am alcu encarnatiu dels enguentz, entro que sia sanat.	And if it happens that the marrow of the bone is exposed or any cause has separated it from its place, then cover it with a plaster and place that bone; then bring together the two lips of the wound, using sutures if it is large; and thereafter treat it with one of the incarnative ointments until it is healed.
Mays si es trencat le derier del os alhoses, e es la fi de la coeta, lahoras cove que tu entrometas le dit pous de la ma senestra en le cul, e que enguales le os trencat am l’autra ma segon que es possible per equacio segonda; e aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e astelha, si indigeysses de aquels, e aprop strenh aquel.	But if the end of the bone is broken and it is the tip of the limb, then cover it with the fingers of your left hand in the buttocks, and align the broken bone with the other hand as much as possible by second-degree reduction; and thereafter apply a plaster and splint, if you need them, and bind it.
E si sentes satagias trencadas en lu, lahoras tu fen sobre aquela, e osta aquel, e cura la plagua am la curacio que es precedida entro que sia sanada.	And if you feel exposed fractures in it, then act on that, remove them, and treat the wound with the treatment that has been prescribed until it is healed.
Capitol .x.	Chapter 10.
De restauracio de la ancha.	On the restoration of the broad [structure].
Les osses de las anchas tart so trencats, e si trencan, lahoras la fractura de lor no es sino communicio en las extremitatz de aquelas e son inscidas en la longitut e declinan a las partidas dedintz; e accideys al malaute dolor en le loc e punctura, e la camba es stupefacta quan es fractura.	The bones of the broad structures are often broken, and when they break, the fracture in them is not a complete break at their extremities but rather a split along their length and a displacement to the sides; and as a result, the patient experiences pain in the location and puncture sensation, and movement is restricted when it is fractured.
E la restauracio de lu es que tu extendas la tua ma sobre aquel entro que sia sobre la fractura qual es la figura de lu.	And the restoration of it is that you extend your hand over it until the fracture assumes the figure of its natural position.
E si fractura es en la extremitat de lu tant solament, lahoras tu enguala aquela segon que a tu es apparelhat per equacio engual entro que sia asemblat a la sua figura natural.	And if the fracture is at the extremity of the limb, then adjust it as suits you by reduction so that it resembles its natural shape.
Mays si la fractura es en le lonc o que ja declina a las partidas dejos, lahoras tu fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu ventre entro que sia preparada a tu la restauracio de aquela fractura.	And if the fracture is in the long bone that inclines toward the lower parts, then make the patient lie on their belly so that you can prepare the restoration of that fracture.
E donc quan auras engualada aquela, pausa sobre lu emplastre, e aprop pausa sobre aquel astela de fust o de codena, e strenh per strictura sobre la qual no temas punctacio de fractura ni remocio de la stelha.	And when you have adjusted it, apply a plaster over it, and then place a splint of wood or cane beside it, and bind it firmly with bandages in such a way that you do not fear any puncture of the fracture or movement of the splint.
E enguala la concavitat am aquo que uempla aquela entro que aquela prengua la strictura segon equalitat, e comanda al malaute que dorma sobre le sieu dos o desobre le sieu costat sa.	And adjust the concavity by filling it so that it conforms to equality, and instruct the patient to sleep on their back or on their side.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu cessa de extencio de lu e de la sua restauracio entro que sia sedat le apostema caut, e pausa sobre lu aquo que sede aquel segon que es precedit; e aprop retorna a la restauracio de lu, e strenh aquel ayssi cum cove.	And if an acute abscess occurs, then stop the extension and restoration of it until the abscess is brought to a head, and apply what is appropriate for that condition as it has developed; and then return to the restoration of it, and bind it as is necessary.
E si accideysso en le os satagias o son comminuidas, lahoras tu las tratz.	And if the bones are displaced or crushed, then you must treat them.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter XI.
De restauracio de la fractura del adjutori.	On the restoration of the fracture of the adjunct bone.
Adjutori es aquo que es entre le coyde entro al cap de la spalla.	The adjunct is what is located between the spine and the top of the shoulder.
E si es trencat, lahoras la restauracio de lu es en una de doas manieyras, de las quals es la una que tu prenguas fust pla de migiera groceza segon aquesta forma:	And if it is fractured, then the restoration of it is in one of two ways, one of which is that you take a flat piece of wood of moderate thickness in this form:
E sian liatz en doas extremitatz dos liamentz, e aprop sia suspendut del loc elevat.	Let there be two ends of bandages, and let it be suspended from a high place.
E segua le malaute sobre una sezela; e aprop gieta fora le sieu bras trencat sobre le fust entro que pervengua al titillic de lu en le mieg loc del qual sia annexa la curvitat del fust.	Lay the patient on a chair; then place the broken arm outside onto the stick until it reaches the midpoint where the curvature of the stick is attached.
E aprop suspen sobre aquel alcuna causa greu, o·l minestre extenda aquel a las partidas dejos; e aprop le metge eque la fractura am las sieuas mas ensemps, entro que la fractura retorne segon que cove.	Then suspend something heavy from it, or have the patient extend it downward with their hands; and then the physician should place the fracture along its natural lines until the fracture returns to its proper position.
E l’autra manieyra es que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sieua cervitz e suspen la ma del col de lu am liament; e aprop comanda a dos ministres que la un de lor tengua aquo que es desobre la fractura am las suas mas; e l’autre tengua le pus dejos de lu; e quascu de lor extenda a la sua partida.	Another method is to have the patient lie on their back with their neck raised and suspend the hand of the neck with bandages; then instruct two assistants that one should hold what is above the fracture by its ends, and the other should hold below him; and each should pull in their respective directions.
E si voles que la extencio sia pus fort, lahoras tu strenh sobre la fractura am liament e sobre aquela am autre liament, e quascu dels dos ministres extendan a doas suas partidas.	And if you want the extension to be stronger, then wrap bandages over the fracture on one side and over it again on the other side, and have each of the two assistants pull in their respective directions.
E donc si la fractura es propinquada a la extremitat del muscle, lahoras cove que sia pausat la mitat del liament sobre le citillic e l’autre dejos la fractura deves le coyde.	And if the fracture is close to the end of the muscle, then it is necessary to place half of the bandage over the knot and the other part below the fracture towards the joint.
E semblantment si la fractura es propdana al coyde, lahoras cove que sia pausat le liament sobre aquel loc e sobre aquel coyde.	And similarly, if the fracture is close to the joint, then it is necessary to place the bandage over that location and around that joint.
Enguala aquela am facilitat e ses trebal, e aprop quant sira engualada segon que cove e es applicada per bona applicacio, lahoras strenh aquela si no accideys apostema caut.	Tie it in this manner with ease and effort, and then when it is tied properly as needed and applied well, secure it tightly unless an abscess occurs.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras layssa la strictura entro al vii dia, e pausa sobre lu lana sutza enbeguda en vi agre e oli rozat entro que repause le apostema, e lahoras tu stren aquela.	If pus forms in an abscess and is drained, within seven days there should be no stricture; then pause on placing linen strips soaked in vinegar and rose oil until the abscess rests, and thereafter strengthen it.
E la manieyra de strenher aquela es que pauses emplastre sobre la fractura, e aprop pausa envolopament de drap nau sobre le emplastre; e aprop ajuste le bras sobre aquel adjutori, e pause la sua ma uberta sobre le sieu muscle.	And the method to strengthen it is to apply a plaster over the fracture, and then wrap it with wet cloth over the plaster; then adjust the arm on that support, and place its hand over its own muscle.
E pausa le drap e strenh sobre le adjutori le bras per so que·l bras sia en loc de stelhas, si no prohibeys de aquo alcuna causa del os trencat.	And place the cloth and strengthen over the support for the arm so that the arm is in a fixed position, unless some cause of the broken bone prohibits this.
E lahoras usa de stelhas.	And now use splints.
E es que pauses sobre la fractura aquela stela que sia pus lada e pus fort de las autras stelas; e pausa entre quascuna stela la latitut del dit, e sia la longitut de las stelas segon la trencadura am addicio de tres ditz de tota partida.	And it is that you place on the fracture that splint which is the widest and strongest of the other splints; and place between each splint the width of a finger, and let the length of the splints be according to the break plus three fingers in total from all sides.
E aprop strenh sobre las stelas am la strictura la qual he dita al comensament del capitol.	And then strengthen over the splints with the support which I mentioned at the beginning of the chapter.
E es que la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura sia pus streyt.	And it is that your support over the site of the fracture should be tighter.
E quant pus es alonguada la fractura sia la strictura menor.	And the farther the fracture is from the joint, the smaller the support should be.
E donc si vezes le situament de las stelas e la strictura ayssi cum havem dit en la hora en la qual restauras le membre al sieu assituament, lahoras tu fay.	And thus, when you position the splints and the support as we have said at the time when you restore the limb to its proper position, then do so.
E si temes apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la strictura e las stelas entro al dia vii ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you fear that pus will form in the abscess, then leave the support and the splints for seven days as we have said.
E aprop considera le liament en totas partidas per tres dias per so que no accida en le loc pruziment o imflacio; o es prohibida la vianda pervenir al membre per disposicio de superfluitat de strictura; e donc rectifiqua tot aquo segon que havem dit.	Then consider the bandage in all parts for three days so that inflammation or pus does not occur properly or by swelling; or it is forbidden for food to reach the member due to excess or constriction; and thus correct everything as we have said.
Mays si tu yest sobre confizanssa que no accida alcuna causa de aquo, lahoras no deslias la liguadura sino aprop tres dias o mays.	If you are confident that no cause of this will occur, then do not loosen the bandage for at least three days or more.
E sia la sua dormicio del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e las sieuas mas sian sobre le stomac.	And let the patient sleep on their back, and place their hands on their stomach.
E pausa sobre le adjutori cocena plena de lana engualment, e considera en tota hora de la nueyt o del dia que no sia deliada ni dissolta la figura del membre trencat, o que sia le liament mollificat, donc rectifica aquo tot am la tua vertut.	And place a pad filled with wool on the helper, and at all times of the night or day, ensure that the shape of the broken limb is not loosened or dissolved, or that the bandage is too loose; thus, correct this with your skill.
E pausa la vianda del malaute segon le orde le qual havem denant mes, enayssi que la vianda sia subtil en le comensament entro que es comensat strenher; e lahoras cove que egrossas la vianda de lu.	And give the patient food according to the order we mentioned before, such that the food is light at first until healing begins; then it is appropriate to make the diet richer.
Quar de constuma del adjutori e de la camba de lu es que sian strengutz en xl dias; e lahoras cove que sian desliatz e sia administrat banh e sia medicat am enguentz los quals rectifican aquel.	For the custom of the splint and cast is to be tight for forty days; then it should be loosened, a bath administered, and treated with ointments that correct this.
E si la fractura es layha atrita, lahoras tu no deslies de aquela le liament e las stelhas entro a l dias o entro a dos meses.	And if the fracture is healing by rubbing together, then do not loosen the bandage and the splints for one day or even two months.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter XII.
De restauracio de fractura del bras.	On the restoration of a fracture of the arm.
Bras es compost de dos osses les quals so appelatz dos focils; dels quals la un es petit, e es aquel que siec le dit pous, e l’autre es gran e es aquel le qual es pausat dejos le petit dit, de la partida pus dejus.	The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the ulna and radius; one of which is small and is that which lies under the little finger, and the other is larger and is placed below the smaller one, towards the lower part.
E fort leu es trencat le focil major solament, o le petit, e fort leu son trincatz ensemps.	If only the larger bone or the smaller one is broken, and if they are disjointed.
E quan es trencat le focil petit desus, lahoras la restauracio de lu es leugiera, e la sanacio de lu es pus leugiera.	And when the smaller bone is broken above, then its restoration is easy, and its healing is quicker.
E quan es trencat le focil de lu dejos la fractura de lu es mala, e la sanacio de lu es dificil.	And when the bone below is broken, the fracture is severe, and its healing is difficult.
E pus mala de aquela es quan son trencatz dos osses essemps.	And worse than that is when two bones are broken at once.
Donc si l’os le qual es trencat es le focil petit desus, lahoras es convenient al metge, deves la restauracio de lu, que pauze petita extencio am facilitat entro que aquel sia engualhat.	Therefore, if the bone that is broken is the smaller one above, then it is appropriate for the physician, due to its easy restoration, to allow a small extension with ease until it is aligned.
Mays si le focil gran es aquo que es trincat, lahoras cove que pause extencio pus vehement.	But if the larger bone is the one that is broken, then it is necessary to allow a more vigorous extension.
E si les dos focils so ensemps trincatz, lahoras cove que tu pauses la extritura mot pus fort.	And if both bones are broken at once, then it is necessary to allow the most vigorous extension.
E cove que pauses la figura de la ma deves la restauracio de lu e la extencio de lu estenduda sobre un coyssi, e sia le pols de la ma a las partidas desus, pus aut que totz les autres ditz, e le dit auricular sia pus bas dels autres ditz, e le malaute sia cezent sobre una cezela cayrada.	And it is necessary to place the hand in position for its restoration and extension stretched out on a board, with the wrist above all the fingers, except that the thumb should be lower than the other fingers, and the patient should lie on a cushioned bed.
E sia un coyssi denant lu en la altetut o endreyt de lu, per so que·l malaute no encorra trebalh.	And there should be a board in front of it at the height or directly in line with it, so that the patient does not have to strain.
E aprop le ministre extenda le bras de la partida pus dejos am la sieua ma o am liament, e autre ministre extenda desus semblantment.	And the attendant should extend the arm from below with his hand or bandage, and another attendant should extend it similarly from above.
E aprop le metge engualhe le os entro que redugua aquel segon la milhor figura que pot.	And the physician should align the bone so that it is set in the best position possible.
E si en la factura del os so satagias, lahoras te perforsa raduzir tota pessa en le sieu loc am la tua vertut.	And if in the setting of the bone you stagger, then at that hour reduce all parts to their place with your skill.
E si appar en lu satagia separada que punh la codena e no es a tu speransa en la restauracio de lu, lahoras tu fen sobre lu e osta aquela segon la manieyra la qual havem dita desus.	And if it appears in the injury separately that the bone is displaced and it is not to your hope for its restoration, then at that hour you act upon it and remove it according to the method which we have said above.
Mays si la fractura es am plagua, yeu ja he fayt ad aquo capitol singular, e donc pren la curacio de aquel.	But if the fracture is with infection, I have already made a separate chapter for that, and so take the treatment of it.
E si accideys apostema caut al comensament de la tua restauracio, lahoras tu lineys un drap am cerot fayt de oli rozat e cera blanca, e sia migier entre specitut e subtilitat, e strenh drap sobre aquel am strictura subtil entro que le apostema sia cedat; e lahoras remau le cerot e pausa emplastre preparat de polvera de moli am clayre de huou, e aprop pausa stelhas; e sia la stela la qual es pauzada sobre aquela fractura pus lada e pus fort.	And if an abscess occurs at the beginning of your restoration, then you apply a cloth with cerot made of rose oil and white wax, and it should be between thickness and fineness, and place a bandage over it with gentle pressure so that the abscess subsides; and then remove the cerot and apply a plaster prepared from ground powder mixed with egg whites, and afterward place poultices; and let the poultice placed over that fracture be wider and firmer.
E sapias que·l nombre de las stelas del bras so vi en las majors disposicios, o sia la fractura en un focil o en dos focils ensemps.	And know that the number of poultices for the arm varies in major dispositions, or it is a fracture in one joint or in two joints together.
E aprop pausa la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura pus fort e pus vehement, e quan mays sira la extrictura a las partidas desus de la fractura o a las partidas pus bassas de lu, pausa la strictura un pauc pus molh segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu en le comensament del capitol.	And then place your bandage over the location of the fracture more firmly and vigorously, and when it is necessary to loosen the bandaging on the parts above the fracture or on the parts below it, place the bandage a bit looser according to how it was described at the beginning of the chapter.
E les draps que so envolopatz sobre la fractura sian draps mols humitz, e no sian durs ni aspres, e·l fiel am le qual es strenhut sia de li propriament migier entre subtil e gros, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And the cloths that you wrap around the fracture should be soft and moistened cloths, not hard or rough, and the bandage with which it is wrapped should be of a proper medium between fine and thick, as we have recommended.
E considera le membre e·l liament aprop alcus dias.	And consider the limb and the bandaging for some days.
E si accideys alcuna causa de la qual rectificacio es necessaria, ayssi cum prusiment le qual accideys al membre, e lahoras cove que tu enbroques le membre am aygua cauda entro que cesse aquel pruziment.	And if any cause arises for which correction is necessary, such as when inflammation occurs in the limb, you should immerse the limb in hot water until that inflammation subsides.
E leysses le membre no costreyt entro que repause, e aprop torna la strictura.	And do not force the limb until it rests, and then return to the bandaging.
E si la extrictura ja es mollificada e l’os ja es remaugut e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras rectifiqua tot aquo am la tua vertut.	And if the dislocation has already been reduced and the bone is already in place and appears to be so, then correct all of this with your skill.
E considera mays si le nutriment es prohibit pervenir al membre per superfluitat de strictura, quar lahoras cove que mollifiques aquel un petit e laysses aquel per alcus dias entro que corra ad aquel le nutriment, e aprop strenh aquel.	And consider whether the nutrition is prevented from reaching the limb due to excessive bandaging, for then you should loosen that slightly and leave it for some days until nutrition reaches it, and then strengthen that.
Mays si al malaute no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no cove que sia desliat entro aprop xx dias o enviro de aquels.	But if the patient does not experience any of the causes we have mentioned, then it is not necessary to remove the bandage for about twenty days or thereabouts.
E aprop sia suspenduda la ma del malaute per la sua vertut de movement agitatius, e fay aquel dormir sobre le sieu dos.	And then have the patient's arm suspended by their own skill of agitated movements, and make them lie down to sleep on their back.
E sapias que aquesta fractura es restaurada en xxx dias o en xxxii dias, o fort leu es restaurada en xxviii dias, e tot aquo es segon la disposicio de las compleccios e las disposicios de la vertut.	And know that this fracture is restored in thirty days or thirty-two days, or sometimes it may be restored in twenty-eight days, and all of this depends on the condition of the tissues and the strength of the patient.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter XIII.
De restauracio de fractura de la pinche de la ma e dels ditz.	On the restoration of a fracture of the thumb and of the fingers.
Sapias que a la pinche de la ma e als nuzes dels ditz tart endeve fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio motas veguadas.	Know that at the base of the thumb and at the joints of the fingers, when there is a fracture, it rarely leads to severe complications.
E quan accideys a la ma fractura o atrissio, lahoras cove que·l malaute segua cayrat e denant lu lies cezent segon equalitat, e aprop pausa la ma de lu sobre aquela extenduda.	When it happens that the bone is fractured or dislocated, at once it is necessary that the patient lie still and face up on the bed according to equality, and place the arm on top of that extended.
E aprop le ministre extenda les osses trencatz e·l metge engualhe aquels entro que sian congongitz am bona congoncio.	And then the minister should extend the broken bones and the surgeon should adjust them until they are properly set.
E lahoras cove que pause emplastre e estopa, si no accideys apostema caut; e aprop pausa stela desus segon la quantitat del loc, e tu ja has envolopada aquela en drap de li.	And now it is necessary to apply a plaster and cotton, unless an abscess occurs which requires cauterization; and then place a piece of wood above according to the size of the area, and you have already wrapped that in linen.
Mays si la trincadura es en las partidas dedintz deves le ventre de la palma, e lahoras fay semblant de spera de drap, e comanda al malaute que strenha aquela am la sua palma trincada; aprop sia strenguda am drap lonc.	But if the fracture is in the parts inside the palm of the hand, and now make it appear as a sphere of cloth, and command the patient to hold that with their fractured palm; then bind it with cloth.
E sia la stelha de cuer am drap en le qual sia levitat, per so que le cuer sia aplicat a la palma; e strenh aquela segon que cove.	And let the piece of wood be curved with cloth in which it is elevated, so that the curve is applied to the palm; and hold that as necessary.
Mays si la fractura es a las partidas defora, lahoras cove que pauses desus stela e autre estela de la partida dejos en la palma, per so que la ma sia uberta e dreyta; e aprop pausa la strictura, ayssi cum es revolvuda la ma a la rateta entre les ditz am liamentz.	But if the fracture is in the parts outside, now it is necessary to place a piece of wood above and another piece below on the palm, so that the hand is supported and straight; and then bind it, as you would wrap the fingers with bandages.
E si accideys fractura a alcu dels nozes dels ditz, lahoras si es le dit pous, sia engualat segon que cove e aprop sia strenhut am la palma e si·t voles, pausa a lu astela petita dreyta per so que sia elevada la fractura e no sia mauguda.	And if there is a fracture in one of the bones of the fingers, now if it is the thumb, adjust it as necessary and then bind it to the palm; and if you wish, place a small straight splint so that the fracture is elevated and not injured.
Mays si la fractura es en les autres ditz, ayssi cum en aquel del mieg loc, o en le indic, o en le auricular, o en le anular, lahoras sia engualhat e liat am le dit sa le qual siec aquel; o sian totz liatz segon continuacio, e es milhor; o pausa sobre aquel stela petita, ayssi cum havem dit en le pous.	But if the fracture is in the other fingers, such as in the middle finger, or in the ring finger, or in the little finger, now it should be adjusted and wrapped to the adjacent finger; or all of them should be wrapped together continuously, which is better; or place a small splint over it, as we have said for the thumb.
E considera, en la tua restauracio, e aprop aquela, la disposicio de apostema caut e oppose — am la tieua operacio — am aquo que cove quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, segon que es iterada la narracio de lu.	And consider, in your restoration, and approach that, the disposition of an abscess cut and opposed — both the cold operation — both with what is needed when some cause of those occurs, as it is repeated the narration of them.
Capitol .xiv.	Chapter XIV.
De restauracio de fractura del os de la coyssa.	On the restoration of a fracture of the bone in the forearm.
Le os de la cueyssa motas veguadas es trencat e es declarat al sentiment segon que es convertit a la partida denant e a la pus sobirana.	The bone of the forearm is mostly broken and is evident to the touch according to how it has shifted forward and upward.
E la restauracio de lu se fa enayssi que·l liament es strenhut sobre la fractura e autre liament dejos la fractura, e le malaute sia prostrat sobre le sieu ventre e sobre la cara.	And the restoration of it is done in such a way that one bandage is stretched over the fracture and another bandage below the fracture, and the patient lies prone on their stomach and face.
E aprop le ministre extenda tot le liament a la sua partida segon la qualitat, quan la fractura es en le mieg loc del os.	And the attendant should extend all the bandages to their proper place according to the quality when the fracture is in the middle of the bone.
Mays si es propdana a la razitz de la cueyssa, lahoras sia le liament propda al denolh a la partida del pentenilh, per so que la extencio caja en sus, e le autre liament dejos la fractura.	But if it is closer to the elbow of the forearm, then the bandage should be placed toward the back at the part of the elbow, so that the extension stops there, and the other bandage below the fracture.
E semblantment si la trencadura es propdana al denolh, lahoras sia fayt le liament propda al denol, e sia la extencio a las partidas dejos.	And similarly, if the fracture is closer to the back, then the bandage should be placed toward the back, and the extension should be made at the parts below.
E aprop le metge enguale le os am amduas las sieuas mas entro que reduzesca aquel segon la semblansa natural e l’os es conjungit per bona conjunccio; lahoras cove que pauses emplastre e strictura, si no accideys al membre apostema.	And then the physician should equalize the bone on both sides as much as possible so that it is reduced according to its natural appearance and the bone is joined by good union; now it is necessary to apply plaster and bandaging, if an abscess does not occur in the limb.
Mays si accideys en lu apostema, lahoras tu layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que l’apostema caut sia cedat, e aprop retorna a la tua curacio.	But if an abscess does occur, then you should leave it for several days until the cold abscess subsides, and then return to your treatment.
La strictura de lu sia ayssi fayta: cove que envolopes sobre la fractura una benda dura, e dobla aquela dos o tres veguadas, e remaugua de lu superfluitat; e aprop envolopa la camba entro que pervengua al talo e a la razitz de la cueyssa.	The binding of the splint should be done as follows: wrap around the fracture a hard bandage, and fold it two or three times, and trim off the excess; then wrap the limb up to the ankle and the root of the thigh.
E intromet lonc fiel entre la cueyssa e la camba prop del denol a las partidas dejos, e venguan las extremitatz del fiel de la partida pus sobirana de las doas partz, e aprop revolveys sobre la camba e la cueyssa aquo que superflueys de la benda.	And insert a long strip of cloth between the flesh and the splint near the end towards the lower parts, and let the ends of the cloth extend from the upper part of both sections, and then wrap around the splint and the limb whatever excess remains of the bandage.
E aprop pausa sobre la cueyssa en le loc de aquela fractura astelhas, e pausa de aquelas una stela sobre le os de la camba.	And then place over the limb at the site of the fracture splints, and lay one strip over the bone of the splint.
E aprop uempli las vacuitatz entre la camba e la cuoyssa am draps mols, per so que sia coagulada la extrictura.	And then fill the spaces between the splint and the limb with soft cloths, so that the binding is well padded.
E aprop comensa am strictura fort del mieg sobre le loc de la fractura am tres envolucios o quatre, e quant mays tu te alonhas am liament del loc de la fractura, la tua strictura sia menor e pus leugiera e pus molha.	And then begin a strong binding directly over the fracture with three or four turns, and as you move away from the site of the fracture using the bandage, your binding should become looser, lighter, and softer.
E aprop exten a doas extremitatz del fiel a las partidas dejos entro que pervengua a la cavilha del pe, e strenh amdoas las extremitatz de las stelhas del autra part per so que·l liament no sia remaugut del sieu loc.	And then extend the two ends of the cloth towards the lower parts until it reaches the ankle, and tie both ends of the strips from the other side so that the bandage does not become loose from its place.
E aprop leyssa la strectura sobre aquel, don esta ayssi que no accideys al membre corrosio ni apostema caut ni emflacio e semblantz ad aquels; e si accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, adonc cueta te am desliament de lu, e rectifica aquo que accideys tot aprop, segon que havem dit motas veguadas.	And then leave the binding in place as it is, so that no corrosion, abscess, swelling, or similar conditions occur on the limb; and if any such cause should arise, cut through the bandage at that point and correct what has occurred as soon as possible, as we have said before.
Mays si en le os es pessa del os la qual pongua, lahoras cove que tu engualhes aquel segon que a tu es possibla; e sino, fen sobre lu e remau aquel, e cura am aquo del qual es precedida la rememoracio entro que sia sanat.	If there is in the bone pus of the bone which must be evacuated, then you should open it as soon as possible; and if not, place a poultice on it and incise that, and treat with whatever preceded the recall until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es strenhuda aquesta fractura de la coyssa otra aquo que sian ajustadas a lu stelhas, ayssi cum havem dit en le adjutori e·n le bras.	And in some cases, this fracture of the skull is strengthened by other things that are attached to it, as we have said about auxiliary plates and in the arm.
Mays empero en la restauracio de lu en tal manieyra fayta no accideys al malaute claudicacio; e si es restaurada sola, otra aquo que li sia applicada l’autra camba, lahoras es necessari que claudique aquel del qual es tostemps.	However, in the restoration of the limb in such a manner made, a bad limp does not occur; and if it is restored alone, or something else applied to the other side, then it is necessary that the person limps forever.
E sapias que la coyssa es strenhuda en xl dias o un pauc mes o un pauc mens, e tot aquo es segon la diversitat de las compleccios e de las autras dispozicios.	And know that the skull is strengthened in forty days or a few more days, and all this depends on the diversity of complexions and other conditions.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter XV.
De restauracio de la fractura de la rodela del denolh.	On the restoration of the fracture of the kneecap.
Sapias que fractura de la rodela del denol tart endeve, mays accideys a lu motas veguadas atrissio.	Know that the fracture of the kneecap often occurs in this manner, but it also happens due to various other causes.
Mays si accideys a lu fractura, lahoras no es sino fissura o trauc en las suas partidas, e aquo es am plagua o ses plagua, e sobre aquo tot es estat am le sentiment.	However, if it is a fracture, then it is merely a crack or bruise in its parts, and this is either one injury or several injuries, and everything about this has been stated concerning the sensation.
E la restauracio de lu es enayssi que sia engualat aquo que es romput de las partidas de lu am les ditz entro que sia agreguat e conjongit segon que es possible per equacio e facilitat e fabricacio.	And the restoration of it is such that what is broken in its parts and among the aforementioned should be opened so that it may be joined and conjoined as much as possible by equalization, facilitation, and fabrication.
E aprop pausa emplastre e pausa sobre aquel stela redonda, si indigeysses de aquela; e strenh desus am strictura ad aquo convenient.	Apply the plaster and place it on that round bandage if you need one; then stretch it above tightly to fit appropriately.
E aprop considera totas las disposicios las quals havem recomtadas en las autras fracturas, ayssi cum es apostema caut e semblant ad aquels enaissi que se oppause a tot accident am aquo que a lu es convenient entro que sia sanat.	And consider all the positions that we have recommended for other fractures, as well as abscesses and similar conditions. Apply these instructions according to what is appropriate until the injury is healed.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter XVI.
De restauracio de la fractura de la camba.	On the restoration of a hip fracture.
Sapias que en la camba so dos osses dels quals la un es gros, e es le nompnat per nom de la camba; e l’autra es subtil, e es nompnat focil.	Know that in the hip there are two bones, one of which is thick and is called the hip bone; the other is slender and is called the femur.
E accideys a quascus de las specias de fractura aquo que accideys als dos osses del bras, e per aquo es fayta restauracio de lu ayssi cum restauracio del bras engualment, e la operacio de lu es una.	And when any of the types of fracture occur to both bones as happens with the two bones of the arm, then the restoration is done in the same way as for the arm, and the operation is the same.
E si so trincatz dos osses ensemps, la camba es convertida a totas partidas.	And if you join the two bones together, the hip is stabilized in all directions.
E si es trinquat le os pus subtil, la camba es convertida a las partidas Denant.	And if the more slender bone is fractured, the hip is stabilized in the forward directions.
E si es trincat le os pus gros, atrobas aquel dejos, e es de aquelas causas que no so a tu ameguadas.	And if the thicker bone is fractured, you will find it below, and these are causes that are not within your control.
E aprop aministra extencio e equacio e liguacio de las astelas segon aquel engualment.	And then administer extension, alignment, and binding of the fragments accordingly.
Mays empero cove, si la fractura de la camba es laja havent motas satagias, que la extencio sia mendre e pus leugiera, e alleuja am la tua vertut.	However, be careful if the hip fracture is jagged with multiple fragments; then the extension should be gentle and done with great caution.
E en la camba es alcuna causa de operacio sobre le bras, e es quan tu engualas las stelhas e que comples tota la tieua operacio, lahoras tu prendras pessas de fustz de pi le qual es pausat dejos las cauzas las quals so pausades en solies, e so faytas eyssament de brancas de palma; aligeys de aquelas a las quals es petita groceza, e no sia ges de las manudas, e sia la longuesa de aquelas segon la longuesa de la camba, e del denol entro al pus dejos.	And when there is any cause for surgery on the arm, and you have aligned the bones and completed all of the necessary operation, then you will take pieces of wood from trees that are peeled below their bases, and those which are made similarly to palm branches; choose among these those with slight grooves, and not those with ridges like fingers, and make their length according to the length of the arm, and insert them deep into the pus beneath.
E aprop envolopa sobre quascuna drap en doas envolucios segon la longitut de lu, e pausa la una sobre la partida de la camba de la una part e l’autra del autra part, e sian del denol entro al pus bas loc del pe.	And then wrap around each one a cloth in two layers according to its length, and place one at the end of the arm on one side and the other on the opposite side, and they should be inserted deep into the pus at the proper location.
E aprop lias las doas stelhas en tres locs de doas extremitatz e al mieg loc, quar am aquesta strectura la camba es prohibida de clinar a la partida dextra e sinistra, e sta per bona stacio.	And then bind the two bones in three places at both ends and in the middle, for with this structure the arm is prevented from tilting to either the right or left side, and thus remains in proper position.
E ja es aministrat un brasset de fust segon la longuesa de la camba; e sia pausada en lu la camba per so que conserve aquel de movement.	And now a wooden brace has been applied according to the length of the arm; and it should be placed such that the arm can still move appropriately.
E majorment cove que tu fassas aquo en fractura, e quan am aquela es plagua propriament.	And especially do this in the case of a fracture, and when it is properly a case of bruising as well.
E aprop considera en quascun jorn la camba e studia am aquel per derier studi, e tu le guardes de apostema e de imflacio o de autres causas semblantz; e cum accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, lahoras opausa te a lu am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	And then consider each day the arm and study it carefully based on previous observations, and you should guard against abscesses and inflammation or other similar causes; and when any of these causes occur, then act upon them appropriately until it is healed.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter XVII.
De la fractura del talo e dels osses del pe e dels ditz.	Of the fracture of the heel and of the bones of the foot and of the aforementioned.
Al talo no accideys fractura de tot; mays als osses del pe accideys fractura alcunas veguadas; e als ditz del pe pauc accideys fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio en las mes de disposicio.	To the scalp does not happen a fracture entirely; but to the bones of the foot happens some fractures; and to the said bones of the foot few happens a fracture, and does not happen to them except healing in the manner of disposition.
E si als osses del pe endeve fractura e vezes aquels osses esser elevatz sobre si entre lor, lahoras le malaute pause le sieu pe sobre la terra preparat ayssi cum anant.	And if to the bones of the foot happens a fracture and times those bones be raised up above themselves between them, then the patient should rest his foot on the ground prepared thusly as mentioned.
E aprop pausa la un pe sobre aquo que es elevat de aquels osses, e aprop calca aquels, e prem, e engualha aquels entro que torno en los locs.	And place one foot on what is raised by those bones, and then press on them, and compress them, and bind them until they return to their places.
E aprop pausa emplastre e stopa desus, e pausa dejos le ventre del pe una petita taula a la qual sian dos caps plas.	And then apply a plaster and place it above, and below the arch of the foot place a small board with two padded ends.
E aprop strenh aquela am le pe am strectura descent, pus que tu has envolopada aquela am draps e am autres causes de las quals indigeys.	And then strengthen that with the foot in a proper position, since you have wrapped it with cloth and other materials as needed.
E cum a lu passan tres dias o quatre, lahoras tu deslia le liament, quar tu atrobaras les osses engualatz, o sian trincatz o sian dislocatz, e la operacio en aquels es ayssi co coneysses.	And as three or four days pass, then you loosen the bandage, for you will find the bones compressed, or broken or dislocated, and the treatment for these conditions is as you know.
Mays si alcus ditz son trincatz, lahoras restaura aquels, e enguala aquels ayssi cum yeu e recomtat a tu en la restauracio dels ditz de la ma.	But if any of them are broken, then restore those, and compress them as I have recommended to you in the restoration of the bones of the hand.
E aprop pausa al dit trincat stela segon la longitut del dit, e sia pus lada de lu un pauc; e aprop dejos le pe aquesta taula la qual e a tu recomtada, e strenh aquela am strictura decent.	And then place the broken bone in a splint according to the length of the finger, and make it somewhat wider; and below the foot place the board as recommended to you, and strengthen that with proper positioning.
Mays si aquo que es trincat dels osses so dos o tres o mays, lahoras tu pausa sobre quascun dit astela de la sua quantitat envolopada en drap leon, e strenh la taula en le pus bas del pe, e sia stant sobre la un dels caps de la taula foro le ventre del pe per que la tengua am bona retencio.	But if what is broken are two or three or more of the bones, then you place on each finger a splint of its appropriate length wrapped in soft cloth, and secure the board at the bottom of the foot so that it rests on one end of the board under the arch of the foot for proper support.
E es convenient a tu que no oblides que no consideres totas las causas las quals que e ditas a tu en las autras fracturas dels accidentz que havem dit; e opausa te a tot accident am aquo que cove.	It is fitting for you not to forget that you should not disregard all the causes which are mentioned to you in the other fractures of the accidents we have spoken about; and pay attention to each incident concerning this as well.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter XVIII.
De fractura del conh de la femna e del os del pentenilh e de la vergua del home.	On the fracture of the bone of the female pelvis and of the bone of the penis and of the shaft of the male.
Quan le conh de la femna es trincat, lahoras fay aquela ceser en cezela cayrada, e aprop enclina aquela a la partida del dos un petit, e sia tenguda detras.	When the bone of the female pelvis is fractured, at that moment perform the caesarean section while she lies flat, and then slightly incline her to the side on one side, and have someone hold her from behind.
E aprop la matrona umpla le conh de coto, e sia fayt en le conh de lu ayssi cum spera; e aprop la femna sia concutida, e eleva le dos de lu petit a petit, quar tot aquo es fora-getat entro que sia denant la partida del conh ayssi cum spera e l’os trincat retorna.	And then the midwife fills the pelvis with cotton, and it should be done in the pelvis as if for a regular delivery; and then the woman should be urged to push, elevating the buttocks little by little, because all of this is intended so that she faces the opening of the pelvis as if for a normal delivery and the fractured bone returns.
E aprop pausa pulvils sobre le dos de lu, e quan vol urinar remaugua le coto am facilitat e aprop urine, e reduzeys e retorna aquel segon la manieyra segon la qual mezist aquel al comensament, e aprop retorne al sieu pulvil primier.	And then place poultices on her buttocks, and when she wants to urinate, remove the cotton to facilitate it, and after urination reduce and return that according to the method by which you managed it at the beginning, and then return to her original poultice.
E fassa ayssi per vii dias o enviro aquels, quar aquel es restaurat.	And do this for seven days or around that time, because it takes that long to restore.
E si voles, pren una vezica de ovela e strenh sobre le trauc de lu una canula de canavera; e entromet tota la vesica en le conh de lu, e aprop ensuffla en la canula am vertut entro que la vesica sia imflada dedintz le conh, quar la fractura retorna.	And if you wish, take a sheep's bladder and tie one end of a reed to it; then insert the entire bladder into her pelvis, and then blow air through the reed until the bladder is inflated inside the pelvis, because this helps the fracture to return.
E aprop sia umplida de coto e estia per alcus dias segon que havem recomtat, entro que sia sanat.	Let it be filled with cotton and dressed for several days as we have recommended, until it is healed.
E quan le os del pentenil de home o de femna es trincat, lahoras aministra en la restauracio e agulacio de lu aquo que havem recomtat en l’os del anca.	And when the bone of the thumb of a man or woman is broken, immediately administer for its restoration and alignment what we have recommended for the thigh bone.
E aquo que es dreyt no es occultat en aquestas fracturas proprinquas e que pauc endeveno, majorment ad aquel al qual es alcun studi e us e enten aquest meu libre mot; quar aquela fractura significa a tu en las majors disposicios via dreyturiera en la restauracio e en la strictura de lu, e donc enten be.	And what is right is not concealed in these nearby fractures that rarely occur, especially for one who has some study and use of this my book; for such a fracture signifies to you in the major dispositions via directness in its restoration and alignment, and thus you understand well.
Mays en la vergua del home quan es trincada, pren guarguamela de auca, e met la vergua en aquela; e aprop pausa sobre lu envolucio de drap, e sia envolopada, e aprop sia layssada per tres dias o enviro aquels, e sia sanada.	But in the arm of a man when it is broken, take a sling made of leather, and put the arm in that; then place it on padding of cloth, and wrap it up, and afterwards leave it for three days or about that, until it is healed.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XIX.
De restauracio de fractura dels osses quan es am plagua.	On the restoration of bone fractures when there is swelling.
Convenient es ad aquel al qual accideys fractura am plagua, e majorment si le os es gran ayssi cum es le os de la cuoyssa o de l’adjutori, o semblant ad aquel, que tu te cuoytes e fleubotomes aquel tantost si las condicios de fleubotomia a tu o testifican ayssi cum desus havem dit.	It is convenient for one who suffers a fracture with swelling, and especially if the bone is large such as the femur or the humerus, or similar to these, that you apply cupping and incise it immediately if the conditions for incising indicate this to you as we have said above.
E si la plagua eflueys sanc, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la retencio de lu enayssi que tu polverizes sobre lu zegi trissat, si a tu autra causa no es present.	And if the swelling emits blood, then it is necessary that you apply cupping to retain it in such a way that you powder on it powdered eggshell, unless another cause is present.
E aprop comensa restaurar la fractura en aquel meteys dia, e no prolongues aquo, si no accideys apostema.	And then begin to restore the fracture on that same day, and do not delay this, unless an abscess occurs.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la restauracio de lu entro al ix dia, entro que sia cedat le apostema, e no apropinques a lu en le tertz dia e·l iiii de tot, quar tu faras accidir mals accidentz.	If an abscess is cauterized, then for seven days you must refrain from the restoration of its interior until it subsides, and do not approach it on the third day and the fourth, because you will cause harmful accidents.
Mays si le os trencat es eminent sobre la codena descubert, lahoras cove que te perforses reduzir aquel e engualar aquel am las tuas mas am facilitat e am pauca extencio.	If the broken bone protrudes above the skin, then you should attempt to reduce it and align it with ease and little extension.
Mays si extencio no es a tu preparada e la equacio de lu am las tieuas mas, lahoras tu reduzeys aquel am las tuas mas am aquest sturment; e es sturment le qual es fayt de ferr, la longitut del qual es de vii ditz o de viii e la latitut del qual es segon la quantitat de la plagua; e per aquo es necessari al metge que prengua de aquels tres o quatre segon la quantitat que indigeys ad aquo en la curacio en tota specia de fractura.	If extension is not possible with your hands and the alignment must be done with tools, then you reduce it using this instrument; and this instrument is made of iron, its length being seven or eight digits and its width according to the size of the wound; and therefore, it is necessary for the surgeon to take three or four of these, depending on what is needed for various types of fractures.
E sia redon, e sia en lu pauca groceza per so que no sia doblat deves la comprecio sobre aquel en la hora de la operacio.	And let it be round, and let it have little groove so that it does not bend due to the pressure upon it during the operation.
E sia de aguda extremitat al qual sia marge en las sieuas extremitatz; e sia le desus de lu a grossetut tendent, e de la maytat de lu entro a las partidas.	And let it have sharp ends with margins at its extremities; and let the top of it be thick, and from the middle inward to the parts.
E aquesta es la forma de lu:	And this is the form of it:
E es nompnat en grec “labre volentz atelarem”, so es paleta pauca.	And it is called in Greek "labrum voluntas atelarem," which means a small palette.
Per que cove que sia pausada la extremitat de lu acuda elevada sobre la extremitat del os eminent.	It is necessary for the extremity to be placed at rest with it elevated above the protruding end of the bone.
E inpelleys aquel en una veguada entro que retorne le os, e sia engualat am alcuna equacio.	And press it in one motion until the bone returns to its place and is aligned with some degree of alignment.
E donc esforsa te engualar las extremitatz de la fractura entre lor, e si la extremitat de lu trencada es subtil, e no pren aquela le sturment per bona axcepcio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas la extremitat de aquel os entro que l’insturment haja poder de aquo.	Therefore, try to align the ends of the broken bone between them, and if the end of the fractured part is slender, and you do not find that instrument suitable for it, then you should insert the end of that bone into where the instrument has power over it.
Mays si no podes reduzir le os de tot am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras enscideys aquel am aquo que coveneys a lu dels inscizoris les quals havem ditz; o serra aquel am una de las serras en qualque manieyra sia a tu possible.	If you cannot reduce the bone entirely as we have recommended, then insert that part with one of the saws which we have mentioned; or cut that part with one of the saws in whatever way is possible for you.
E aprop ratz aquel que roman en le os de asperitat e de scorsas menudas.	And smooth that which remains rough on the bone and small jagged parts.
E cum le os es reduzit, e aprop la reduccio le malaute atroba dolor vehement ledent, lahoras sapias que le os no es retornat al sieu loc natural; e adonc fay aquo quar tu confereyses al malaute gran juvament.	And when the bone is reduced, and after the reduction the patient feels intense pain in the tooth, then you know that the bone has not returned to its natural place; and then do what will be of great help to the patient.
Cum es complida la tua restauracio la qual fas al os, e lahoras submergeys drap en vi stiptic negre, e propriament si es en estiu, e no pauses sobre la plagua cerot ni autre causa en la qual sia oli, per so que no fassa en lu accidir poyredura e corropcio.	When your restoration of the bone is complete, then soak a cloth in black styptic wine, and if it is summer, do not apply cerotic or any other substance that contains oil on the wound, so that it does not cause putrefaction and corruption.
E aprop aministra stelas en la hora del tieu compliment de la restauracio de l’os, e layssa la plagua descuberta enayssi que inscidas le trauc am forfexs e uses de envolucios segon la quantitat de la plagua.	And then administer poultices during the appropriate time of your bone restoration, and leave the wound uncovered so that you can insert a probe with forceps and use bandages according to the size of the wound.
E guarda te am tota cautela que no strenhas la plagua am la fractura, quar motas veguadas an fayt aquo les fols metges, e fero accidir sobre les sieus malautes mort o malautia corrodent o zuthement, so es sania.	And be careful not to touch the wound near the fracture, for many times unskilled doctors have done this, and it has caused death or serious illness to their patients, which is harmful.
E si la tieua strictura leugiera, molli, diversa de la strictura de las autras fracturas.	And if the swelling is soft, flexible, different from the swelling of other fractures.
E si la plagua es gran o es plagua mala, e temes sobre aquel alcus accidentz mals les quals havem recomtatz, e atrobas dolor en le loc, lahoras no cove que pauses sobre aquel astelas, mays fay ad aquel envolucio de draps durs en loc de stelas e strenh lu am aquelas.	And if the swelling is large or is a bad swelling, and you fear some of the maladies that we have recounted, and you feel pain in the area, then it is not necessary to wait on those splints, but make an envelope of hard cloths instead of splints and bind them there.
E cum aprop un dia o dos vezes ja la plagua comensar, que en lu sia engendrat brac, lahoras tu osta desus le drap le qual havias pausat sobre aquel am vi, e aprop aministra calguas, enguentz am les quals de nostra constuma es que mediquem las plaguas, ayssi cum enguentz tetrafarmacon e semblantz ad aquel.	And when after one day or two the swelling begins to subside and it is evident that pus has formed, then you remove the cloth which you had placed over the bandage, and promptly apply poultices, such as those we customarily use for treating swellings, such as tetrafarmacum and similar remedies.
E conveneys a tu que deslias le liament e considera la plagua en quascun dia mati e vespre entro que sia consolidada e fermada, e cove que·l membre sia preparat en tal manieyra que la poyredura corra de lu a las partidas dejos am facilitat.	And it is necessary for you to loosen the bandage and examine the swelling every morning and evening until it is consolidated and firm, and it is important that the limb be prepared in such a way that the pus can drain from it downward with ease.
si a la plagua passan motz dias, e no es consolidada ni es abscindit de lu le brac, lahoras sapias que aqui so satagias de las petitas per que cove enquieras la plagua am tenta.	If several days have passed and the swelling has not consolidated nor has pus drained from it, then you should know that here there is a delay due to small particles that need to be removed from the swelling.
E de aquelas satagias aquelas que so separadas remau e extratz, aquelas que de lor no so separadas e pongen le membre e fan accidir dolor, perforsa te a inscidir aquelas segon que a tu aquo es possibla.	And of those delays, those that are separated should be removed and extracted. For those from which they cannot be separated and cause pain in the limb, perforate them as much as possible according to what is feasible for you.
E si accideys a la plagua zuchem o eluchen, so es stiomenios, o autra specia de corrupcio e de putrefaccio, lahoras cove que pauses a quada un de aquels am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio del qual es precedida narracio en le sieu capitol.	And if the swelling becomes inflamed or infected, which are signs of inflammation, or another form of corruption and putrefaction, then it is necessary to apply one of those remedies mentioned in the preceding chapter on the treatment of such conditions.
E de aquo en le qual cove que stia lo mieu sermo e tu fassas present la tua pessa: quan os gros es trincat, emineys sobre le membre ayssi cum le os de la coyssa e del ajutori e semblantz ad aquels dels membres grans, e que no presumas atraccio de lu, ni la extraccio de lu quar motas veguadas accideys per aquo la mort; habantz layssa aquel entro que poyresca, quar fort leu cayra per si aprop xx dias o xxx; e lahoras cura la plagua si a tu es vist, e si no layssa aquela.	And when the bone must be cut, it protrudes above the limb like the bones of the chest and shoulder and similar to those of larger limbs, and do not attempt traction on it, nor its extraction for fear that this might lead to death after four movements; wait until it softens inside, as it will easily fall out in about twenty or thirty days; and during this time care for the wound if it is visible, and otherwise leave it alone.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter XX.
De la curacio de nodacio que accideys en le vestigi de alcuna fractura.	On the treatment of knotting that occurs in the aftermath of some fracture.
Motas veguadas accideys aquesta nodacio en le vestigi de sanacio de fractura, e majorment que es prop de las juncturas, e es orrasada per lu la figura del membre; e fort leu prohibeys le membre de la sua operacio natural.	This knotting often occurs in the aftermath of the healing of a fracture, especially near the joints, and disfigures the shape of the limb; and it significantly impedes the normal function of the limb.
Adonc considera si la nodacio es recent e aministra en aquela medicinas que han stipticat ayssi co es aloen, e enses, e mira, e sercacollo, e acrassia, e semblantz ad aquels; enayssi que prenguas de aquela alcunas o totas, e comfesiys aquelas am vi stiptic, o am album de huou, o am vi agre, e pausa aquela sobre la nodacio en estopa, e constringeys aquelas sobre lu per bona constriccio.	Then consider whether the knotting is recent and administer medicines that have a styptic effect such as aloes, sesame, myrrh, saffron, and similar ones; take any of these or all of them, and mix them with vinegar to make them styptic, or with egg white, or with vinegar to make them astringent, and apply this over the knotting on cloth, and bind it tightly over it with proper compression.
E leyssa extrictura que no deslies aquela per motz dias; e aprop deslia aquela e itera autra, entro que sia remauguda la nodacio; o strenh sobre aquela lamina de plom descentment, quar plom ha proprietat de remaure tot aquo que es imflat en les membres.	And keep the compression on without loosening it for several days; then loosen it and reapply it until the knotting is softened; or apply a sheet of lead gently over it, as lead has the property of reducing swelling in limbs.
Mays si nodacio ja es en peyra convertida e streyta es e nessessitat provoca a ostar aquela coytadament, e lahoras scindeys aquela per la partida pus sobirana de lu, e inscideys la superfluitat e eminent, o ratz aquela am alcus rezoris entro que sia remauguda; e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But if the knotting has already turned to bone and is causing tightness and necessity demands that it be removed quickly, then cut it at its weakest point, and excise the excess or reduce it with some remedies until it softens; and treat it until it heals.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI.
De restauracio de fractura quan es restaurada e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul no segon la sieua natura.	On the restoration of fractures when they are set and the limb is restrained without conforming to its natural condition.
Quan fractura de os es restaurada, e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul, lahoras aquo no es fayt sino per motas causas: de las quals la una es multitut de solucio del liament e de la liguacio de lu fayta no segon que cove; o per superfluitat de strictura dels liamentz entro que·l nutriment sia prohibit correr al membre; o per multitut de embrocaccio superflua; o per movement superfluent no en la sua hora; o per pauquesa de sanc en le cors del malaute e per debelitat de lu.	When a fracture is restored and the limb is restrained, it is done for various reasons, among which one reason is excessive manipulation of the bandaging and binding not according to what is necessary; or by excess in constriction of the bandages preventing nourishment from reaching the member; or by excessive application of poultices; or by unnecessary movement at an inappropriate time; or due to a lack of blood in the patient's body and weakness.
E curacio de aquo es dar a mengar al malaute e far le cor de lu tendre entro que·l sanc sia multiplicat en lu; e aministra banh; e entromet gaug e leticia sobre lu.	And the treatment for this is to give food to the patient and make their body supple so that blood is multiplied in them; administer baths; and apply poultices and leeches to them.
E aprop pausa pegua sobre le membre, per so que la pegua atire a lu mot nutriment, o continua embrocacio de lu am aygua tebeza, entro que·l nutriment corr e retorne a la sua figura natural.	And apply plasters to the limb, so that the plaster attracts nourishment, or continue applying poultices with warm water, until nourishment flows and returns it to its natural form.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXII.
De curacio dels osses trincatz quan so restauratz tortuozament e prohibeys la operacio de lor de aquo que cove.	On the treatment of broken bones when they are restored incorrectly and prevent proper healing from taking place.
Quan accideys al membre ja restaurat aprop la sanacio de lu de tortuositat e eminencia al os trincat e nodacio, e es per aquo fededa de forma del membre, mays empero le membre no es prohibit de la sieua operacio natural, lahora no cove que tu recipias la paraula de aquel que exsistima aquel membre sia de novel trincat.	When it happens that a limb, already restored near healing, shows deformity of the broken bone with swelling and nodosity, and this is due to a change in the form of the limb, but the limb is not prevented from its natural function, then you should not heed the words of those who believe that the limb is newly fractured.
Mays ja so statz motz fols metges e restauradors les quals han fayt aquo en nostra tera; e aquesta operacio es mot vituperable perduzent a gran temor le senhal de la qual es mortal.	Let this be known to all doctors and restorers who have performed this in our land; and this operation is highly reprehensible, leading to great fear, the sign of which is fatal.
Mays si claudicacio e nodacio son recentz, lahoras cove que sian enbrocatz am aygua tebeza en la qual so coytas erbas mollificantz, ayssi cum son fuelas de altea e razitz de lu, e mellilot, e semblantz ad aquels; e sia fayt a lu emplastre am emplastre mollificatio ayssi cum dyallaquilon ben fayt; o que sia preza mucillage de razit de altea e sia contucida am gray de gualina o am oli de cirami, e sia emplastrat am aquel; o que sian prezes figuas grassas e sian trissadas am fems de colom, e semblantz ad aquels de las medicinas que son nompnadas amermans consolidacio.	If lameness and limping are recent, it is appropriate to bathe them in warm water containing certain soft herbs, such as althea roots, linden flowers, and melilot, or similar; and apply a soothing plaster or poultice properly prepared; or take mucilage made from althea root mixed with boiled linseed oil or olive oil, and apply it; or crush fatty figs in dove’s milk or something similar of the medicines known as consolidating remedies.
E alcunas vetz es dissolvuda am assidua fricacio leugiera que sia am las mas humidas, e sia administrat movement del membre a tota partida en totas horas.	And in some cases, it is dissolved through frequent gentle friction, which should be applied to the most humid areas, and movement of the limb should be administered to all parts at all times.
Mays si tortuositat ja es anada denant e es fayta fort e convertida es en peyra e provocada es necessitat a curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que sia le pus desus cecsat e la continuacio del os sia dissolvut, e sia inscidit aquo que superflueys de nodacio de aquel meteys am le os am inscissoris subtils, e sia aministrada facilitat en aquel am sollicitut e studi.	But if the tortuosity has already advanced and become hard and turned into bone, and there is a need for treatment with iron, then it must be ensured that the pus above is drained, and the continuation of the bone is dissolved, and what is superfluous from the nodules of that part with the bone should be cut using fine instruments, and ease in this should be provided through diligence and study.
Capitol .xxiii.	Chapter XXIII.
De sermo en dislocacio.	On Dislocation of Joints.
Dislocacio es eyssiment de alcuna de las juncturas del sieu loc, per que es prohibida de movement, e es orrezada la figura del membre, e fa venir sobre le malaute dolors e lesios grans.	Dislocation is the wrongful displacement of any of the joints from its proper place, which prohibits movement, distorts the figure of the limb, and causes severe pain and great injury.
Donc quan accideys ad alcu dislocacio, lahoras cove tantost perforsar que sia reduzit, e no tarde aquela reduzir, quar si es tardada, le loc es apostemat e fort leu am aquo es fayta dificil la reduccio de dislocaccio.	When a dislocation occurs, it must be immediately reduced without delay, for if reduction is delayed, the joint becomes inflamed and swollen, making the reduction of the dislocation difficult.
E per aysso no cove que sia maugut ni stendut en la hora de la apostemacio, quar motas veguadas fa venir spasme e dolors ledentz.	And for this reason it is not good to move or keep the patient standing during the inflammatory stage, as this often causes spasms and pain in the teeth.
Mays quan aquo accideys, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la flaubotomia del malaute, e aprop sia layssat entro que repause le apostema; e aprop le membre sia embrocat am aygua cauda e oli, e aprop sia reduzit am facilitat.	But when this happens, you must prepare for the incision of the patient, and then allow them to rest until the inflammation subsides; afterwards, apply warm water and oil to the limb, and then reduce it with ease.
E tot membre sia curat am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra en son loc.	And treat the entire limb with what will help its recovery and return to normal.
E yeu ja e ordenatz les capitols de dislocacio segon que es precedit en fractura; de la partida del cos pus sobirana entro a la partida pus dejos.	And now I will order the chapters on dislocation as they were preceded by fractures; starting from the upper part of the body and moving to the lower part.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter XXIIII.
De curacio de dislocacio de la mandibula dejos.	On the treatment of dislocation of the lower jaw.
So dislocadas las doas mandibulas si no tart; e la dislocacio de amdos es fayta segon una de dos manieyras: que o son remaugudas de lurs locs per pauca remocio, e so mollificadas un petit; o so dislocadas per entiera dislocacio e complida, entro que sian mollificadas a la partida de la junctura entro que corro saliva del malaute e que no puesca tenir aquela ni puesca claure la sua boca, e la lengua de lu sia envolopada en sa paraula.	When the two jaws are dislocated, they do not delay in treatment; and the dislocation of both can occur in one of two ways: either they are displaced from their positions by slight movement and slightly relaxed; or they are completely dislocated and fully out of place, to the point where they are relaxed at the joint where saliva flows from the patient's mouth and where they cannot close it, and the tongue is wrapped around its position.
Mays quan la dislocacio de lu es pauca, lahoras en las majors disposicios retorna per si an pauca causa.	But when the dislocation is slight, it often returns to its normal position on its own with little cause.
Mays si la dislocacio es entiera e complida, lahoras cove que sia administrada reduccio de lu leugierament, e no sia tardada de tot.	If the dislocation is complete and perfect, it must be reduced immediately, and not delayed at all.
E es que·l ministre tengua le cap del malaute, e entrometa lo metge le dit pous de la una sieua ma en la razit de la dislocacio de la mandibula dedintz la boca de lu, si la dislocacio es de la una part; o que entrometa les sieus dos pouzes ensemps, si la dislocacio es de doas partz, e les autres ditz de las mas de lu sian defora am les quals enguale; e comanda al malaute que cesse las suas mandibulas e absolva aquelas anar de quascuna partida; e le metge engualhe la mandibula e enpellisca la mandibula entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And it is that the minister hold the patient's head, and insert the doctor’s two fingers into the cavity of the dislocated jaw from inside the mouth if the dislocation is on one side; or insert both thumbs if the dislocation is on both sides, and the other fingers remain outside in a similar manner; and instructs the patient to cease moving their jaws and relax them entirely; and the doctor equalizes the jaw and pushes it back until it returns to its place.
E si dificil es la reducio de lu, e majorment si amdos las mandibulas so essemps dislocadas, lahoras aministra evoporacio am aygua cauda e oli, entro que sia fayta leugiera la reduccio de amdos e no tardes la reduccio de amdos de tot, ayssi quo havem dit.	And if the reduction is difficult, especially if both jaws are dislocated, then administer inhalation with hot water and oil until the reduction can be performed gently on both sides, and do not delay the reduction of both sides at all, as we have said.
E donc cum retornam e so engualadas, e es clausa la boca del malaute e no es mollificada, lahoras pausa sobre aquelas polvils de drap am cerot, e sia fayt de cera e oli rozat; e aprop sia liat am facilitat am liamens mols.	And when we return them and they are aligned, and the patient's mouth is closed and not relaxed, then place small pieces of cloth covered in wax on them, and make it from beeswax and oil softened; and afterward bind it with bandages gently.
E sia le dormir del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e·l cap de lu sia stant entre dos aurelhes, per so que no maugue aquel a la partida dreyta ni a la sinistra; e no li fassas per forsa masteguar alcuna causa; habans la sieua vianda sia forbicio leon, entro que quan las dolors sian remaugudas e las mandibulas so nozadas, lahoras maugue aquo que vol.	And let the patient sleep on their back, and their head be positioned between both ears, so that it does not turn to the right or left; and do not force them to chew for any reason; have their food cut up finely until such time as when the pains are relieved and the jaws are healed, then allow them to do what they wish.
E aquo sia aministrat am facilita, e no trebalhe sobre la apercio de la boca deves la comestio e beure e ocitatio, entro que la mandibula sia nozada e sanada.	And this should be administered with bandages, and do not work on the opening of the mouth for eating, drinking, or speaking until the jaw is healed and cured.
E si es dificil la reduccio de duas mandibulas quan so dislocadas en alcuna hora e no so convertidas als lors locs, lahoras motas veguadas accideysso febres e soda assidua, e fort leu es alerguat le ventre del malaute, e fort leu e vomeys colera pura.	And if the reduction of two dislocated jaws is difficult at any time and they are not returned to their places, fevers often occur frequently, and the patient's belly is easily distended, and he vomits pure bile.
E quan tu vezes aquo, lahoras sapias que es perdicio; e motas veguadas mor aquel al qual accideys aquo en x dias.	And when you see this, then you know it is lost; and most often that person dies from this in ten days.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter XXV.
De reduccio de la dislocacio de la furcula e de la extremitat del muscle.	On the reduction of the dislocation of the clavicle and the extremity of the muscle.
Furcula no es dislocada del latz dedintz per la sua continuacio am le pietz; e alcunas veguadas es dislocada a la partida defora, e aquo es declarat al sentiment.	The clavicle is not dislocated from the chest inside towards the hands; and sometimes it is dislocated outwardly, and this is apparent by feeling.
E la restauracio de lu es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos e extenda les sieus brasses.	And the restoration of it is that the patient lies on his back and extends his arms.
E aprop coarta le loc am la tua palma am fort coartacio, quar ela retornara.	And then press the area with your palm firmly, for it will return.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre e pulvils e strenh aquela.	And then apply a plaster and powder to that area.
Mays la extremitat de aquel que siec le coyde e·s continuat am aquel, no es dislocada en alcun dia; lahoras cove que sia reduzida e engualhada segon que havem dit e segon que es a tu aparelhat.	But the extremity of that which joins the collarbone is not dislocated on any day; therefore, it should be reduced and bandaged as we have said and as you are prepared.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre, e pulvils, e extrictura, e comanda al malaute adherir a trenquilitat e a repaus entro que sia sanat.	And then apply a plaster, powder, and bandaging to that area, and instruct the patient to adhere to tranquility and rest until he is healed.
E am aquesta meteyssa curacio es reduzida la extremita del muscle quan es separada del sieu loc.	And with this method of treatment, the extremity of the muscle is reduced when it is separated from its place.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter XXVI.
De la reduccio de la dislocacio del muscle.	On the reduction of the dislocation of the muscle.
Sapias que·l muscle no es dislocat sino segon tres manieras, de las quals es la una que sia dislocat a la partida del titillic a la partida dejos.	Know that the muscle is not dislocated except in three ways, one of which is when it is dislocated from the upper part to the lower part.
E la segonda es que sia dislocat a la partida desus del muscle, e aquo es fayt tart; e no es dislocat a las partidas detras per la spalla; e no es dislocat a las partidas denant per les nervis.	The second is when it is dislocated above the muscle, and this happens quickly; and it is not dislocated behind by the shoulder; and it is not dislocated in front by the nerves.
E majorment es dislocat e defora eyssit a las partidas dejos deves le titillic, e majorment en aquels dels quals las carns son paucas, leugierament es dislocat; mays en aquels en les quals so motas carns, es eyssit fora am dificultat.	It is most often dislocated outward below the tendon, and more particularly in those whose flesh is thin, it dislocates easily; but in those with thick flesh, it remains outside with difficulty.
E fort leu accideys ad alcus homes percussio o cazement, e le muscle de lu es apostemat de apostema caut, e es cujat per aquo que ja sia dislocat.	It often happens to some people due to a blow or a fall that the muscle becomes swollen and inflamed, and as a result, it is likely to become dislocated.
Adonc cove que tu sproes aquo entro que estias sobre-sertetut de lu, e lahoras procesiscas en la curacio de lu.	Then you should understand this before you start treating it, and proceed with its treatment.
E es conoguda la dislocacio de lu quan es a las partidas dejos deves le titillic; per so que distingescas entre le muscle dislocat e·l muscle sa, quar tu atrobas entre aquels diversitat manifesta; e atrobas en le cap del muscle concavitat e dejos le titillic deves le tocament del cap del muscle ayssi quo un huou, e al malaute no pot redusir la sua ma a la sieua aurelha, ni maure aquela per totz movementz.	And the dislocation is known when it is below the tendon; therefore, you should distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the normal one, as there is a clear difference between them; you will find a depression at the head of the muscle below the tendon upon touch, and the patient cannot move their hand to their ear, nor can they make any such movement.
Si es dislocat deves le pietz o ensus, e tu lahoras atrobas manifest tocament, e no es amaguat.	If it is dislocated below the foot or above, you will clearly feel it upon touch, and it is not concealed.
E de aquesta dislocacio es fayta leugiera reduccio quan es fresca e le malaute es enfant.	And from this dislocation an easy reduction is made when it is fresh and the patient is a child.
E la reduccio de lu es que·l ministre eleva la ma de lu a las partidas desus; e aprop pause les tieus pouses dejos le titillic de lu, e eleva la junctura am fortaleza en sus al sieu loc, e·l ministre eleva la ma de lu, e extenda aquela en sus; e aprop pausa aquela dejos quar ela retorna leugierament.	And the reduction is that the surgeon lifts the hand of the patient to the upper parts; then he places his fingers below the tip of the finger and elevates the joint forcefully back to its proper place, and the surgeon raises the hand of the patient, and extends it as needed; then he holds it down until it returns easily.
Mays si per aquo que havem dit no retorna, e so del comensament que accidic la dislocacio, motz dias, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia banhat en aygua cauda e sia aministrada enbrocacio que mollifique e liniesca ayssi cum si so coytz razitz de altea, e fenugrec, e melillot en aygua, e sia administrada.	But if it does not return as we have said, and from the time of the initial dislocation for several days, baths in warm water should be given and an ointment should be administered to soften and line as if for rheumatism, using dittany, fenugreek, and melilot in water, and it should be applied.
E aprop le malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu dos e sia pausat dejos le titillic de lu espera de lana que sia engual entre levitat e strictura, e aprop le metge pause le sieu talo sobre la spera, e eleva le cap del muscle am vertut, e atire la ma del malaute per que no sia mauguda a las partidas dejos, e autre ministre tengua le cap del malaute, que no sia maugut a las partidas dejos, quar aquela tantost retorna al sieu loc.	And then the patient should be placed on their back and held below the tip of the finger in anticipation of it becoming equally between laxity and tension, and then the physician places his hand under the ball, elevates the muscle upwards, and pulls the patient's hand so that it is not injured below, while another assistant holds the head of the patient to prevent injury below, for it will quickly return to its place.
E si voles, reduzeys aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu fassas esser prezent un home le qual sia pus lonc que·l malaute, e estia de la part de aquel latz, e entrometa le sieu muscle dejos le titillic del malaute e eleve le titillic de lu a las partidas desus entro que·l malaute sia suspendut en ayre, e autre ministre tire la ma del malaute de las partidas dejos del sieu ventre.	And if you wish, reduce it in this manner: have present a man who is taller than the patient, and let him stand on that side, and insert his arm below the tip of the patient's finger and elevate the tip upwards while the patient hangs in the air, and another assistant pulls the patient’s hand from below their abdomen.
Mays si le malaute es leugier, lahoras cove que am lu que autre causa sia suspenduda, per so que grave aquel, quar la dislocacio retorna tantost.	But if the patient is light, then it is necessary to have something else suspended for them to hang from, so that they can be properly supported, because the dislocation will quickly return.
E es reduzit eysament segon autra manieyra: e es que sia ficat en terra un fust lonc le cap del qual sia redon de figura, ayssi cum pilo de mortier, que no sia gros ni subtil, e aprop sia pausat dejos le malaute; pus que so pausatz sobre·l cap del fust draps leons, e·l malaute sia stant segon la longitut del fust, e aprop sia extenduda la ma de lu a las partidas dejos del autra part; e sia extendut le cos de lu del autre part am fortaleza, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And it is reduced in this other way: which is that a long pole be stuck into the ground with its top being round like a pestle, neither thick nor thin, and nearby it should be placed below the patient; then when you place over the top of the pole lion’s skins, and the patient stands according to the length of the pole, and then his hand is stretched out behind at the sides; and his body from the other side is extended with strength, for the joint returns to its place quickly.
E si es dificil reduccio de lu per totas las causas que havem ditas, lahoras usa de aquesta cura: e es que tu prenguas un fust la quantitat del qual sia en le lonc de dos brasses, e latitut de aquel sia de quatre ditz, e la grossetut de lu sia aleujat en le preon del tittilic segon aquesta forma:	And if the reduction of it is difficult due to all the causes we have mentioned, then use this treatment: which is that you take a pole whose length is two cubits, and its width is four fingers, and the thickness of it should be proportioned according to the size of the thimble, as follows:
E aprop sobre le cap redon sian liatz drap leons per so que·l fust no ledesca le malaute.	And then over the round top place lion’s skins so that the pole does not hurt the patient.
E aprop sia pausat dejos le titillic del malaute, e sia extenduda la ma o le bras sobre·l fust entro a las partidas dejos, e sia liat le fust sobre le adjutori e le bras e la extremitat de la ma.	And then it should be placed below the joint of the patient, and his hand or arm should be stretched over the pole behind at the sides, and the pole should be wrapped around the helper’s arms and the extremity of the hand.
Aprop sia pausat le bras sobre un scalo de scala segon la latitut, e la ma sia extenduda a las partidas dejos, e l’autre cos sia suspendut de l’autre part, quar la junctura intra tantost.	Then place the arm on a step of a ladder according to its width, and the hand should be stretched out behind at the sides, and the other body part should be suspended from the other side, for the joint will return quickly.
E cum le intrament de lu es complit segon quascuna maniera que es a tu possibla, e lahoras cove que tu pauses dejos le titillic spera de lana de engual quantitat; e aprop pauza emplastre perparat de polvera de moli am enses e album de huou sobre tot le muscle, ayssi quo es revolvut desus, e aprop strenh dejos le titillic am strictura decent; e le liament sia revolvut sobre le emplastre, e la ma de lu sia annectida al col de lu, e sia leyssat, e no sia mauguda la ma de lu per vii dias.	And when the instrument of it is completed according to each way that is possible for you, then place below the joint a pad of wool of equal thickness; and then apply a plaster prepared from powdered myrrh and egg white over all the muscle, as mentioned above, and then bind tightly below the joint with proper pressure; and the bandage should be wrapped around the plaster, and his hand should be attached to his neck, and left alone, and do not disturb his hand for seven days.
E cove que sia pausada la vianda del malaute pauca, entro que·l membre sia confortat, quar es pus leugier a la sanacio de lu.	When the patient's food has been restricted for a short time, so that the limb is strengthened, it is easier for recovery to occur.
E aprop la vianda sia donada major aprop vii o v e sia exercitat un movement; e donc si es fermat e no es mollificat, lahoras ja es sanat.	And when the food is given more frequently, every seven or five days, and one movement is exercised; and thus if it is fixed and not softened, then it is healed.
Mays si la junctura es dislocada motas veguadas per humiditat que accideys a lu o per autra causa, lahoras cove que en aquela sia administrat cauteri am tres traucs, segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri.	If the joint is dislocated due to swelling that occurs because of moisture or for some other reason, then it should be treated with cautery three times, as was stated earlier in the chapter on cautery.
E si tot aysso es fayt e aprop vii dias es desliat le liament e la junctura no es fermada, e le emplastre e la strictura son reduzitz sobre lu alcunas veguadas, e no es fermada e catz e no pot elevar aquel bras a las partidas desus, lahoras sapias que·ls nervis de lu, les quals so al cap del muscle, ja so inscizes o extendutz o mollificatz, e sapia que la junctura nul temps no sira ficada en loc sieu.	And if all this is done and after seven days the bandage is removed and the joint is not fixed, and the plaster and the ligature are reduced several times, but it is not fixed and the hand cannot raise that arm to its usual position, then you will know that the nerves of it, which run alongside the muscle, have been cut or stretched or softened, and understand that the joint will never be set in place again.
De la dislocacio de aquela qu’es fayta deves le pietz e la mamilha o las partidas detras, la reduccio es fayta am impulcio e extencio am las mas, entro que retorne.	Regarding the dislocation that occurs due to the feet and the heel or the rear parts, the reduction is done with impulse and extension as much as necessary until it returns to place.
E sia administrada en aquela l’autra strictura, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And the other ligature should be applied to it, and care for it until it is healed.
E si accideys aprop la sanacio gravitat en le membre e tarditat en le movement de lu, lahoras le malaute uze de banh motas veguadas entro que aquela gravitat sia alleujada e que retorne a la natura de lu primiera.	And if there is stiffness and delay in the movement of the limb as it recovers, then the patient should use baths several times until that stiffness is alleviated and returns to its original nature.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter XXVII.
De curacio de dislocacio del coyde.	On the treatment of dislocation of the collarbone.
Sapias que la junctura del coyde es dislocada am difficultat e semblantment retorna am difficultat; e aquela es dislocada a totas partidas, e majorment a la partida denant a la partida detras, e la dislocacio de lu no es amaguada a tu quar es cazent dejos le vezement o dejos le tocament segon qualque figura sia dislocat, e quan ajustes le coyde disloguat am le sa, aquo es a tu declarat manifestament, quar la junctura es concavada e no pot doblar le bras, ni tocar am aquel le sieu muscle.	Know that the joint of the collarbone is dislocated with difficulty and similarly returns with difficulty; and it is dislocated in all directions, but more so towards the front than behind. And this dislocation does not hide from you as it appears below either through vision or touch according to its figure, and when you adjust the dislocated bone, that is clearly declared to you, for the joint is concave and cannot bend the arm nor reach the shoulder muscle.
E cove que·t coytes, e reduzescas la dislocacio tantost denant que vengua a lu apostema caut, quar si ve a lu apostema caut, dificil es la reduccio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot; e majorment quan es a las partidas detras, quar pus mala es de totas las autras specias de dislocacio, e de major dolor, e motas veguadas deyssen am aquela la mort.	And you should treat it, and reduce the dislocation as soon as possible before it becomes infected, for if it becomes infected, the reduction of the bone is difficult, and even then it may not heal completely; especially when it is in the rear positions, for they are worse than all other types of dislocations, more painful, and many people have died because of them.
E la restauracio de lu, quan es aquela que es possibla reduzir, es que la ma de lu sia extenduda am doas mas, e le bras de lu sia expandut, e las mas del metge sian sobre le coyde e dejos lu, e el empellisca la junctura am les pouzes de las suas mas ensemps, o am la razit de la sua palma entro que torne en son loc.	And the restoration of it, when it is possible to reduce it, is that the hand be extended towards the two sides, and the arm be expanded, and the physician's hands should be over the collarbone behind it, and he should push the joint with his fingers together or with the heel of his palm until it returns to its place.
Mays si la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras retorna ayssi que dobla la ma am la sua ma, entro que percuta le coyde am la razit de la sua palma.	But if the dislocation is towards the front, then it returns as he bends his hand with his other hand, until he strikes the collarbone with the heel of his palm.
E si la dislocacio no obezeys a la reduccio, lahoras aministra vehement extencio e mot fort.	And if the dislocation does not yield to reduction, then administer vigorous extension and strong movement.
E es que dos ministres extendan le bras, e tenguan aquel eyssament dos ministres per so que no sia remaugut deves la extencio.	And it is that two assistants extend the arm, and hold it firmly by two ministers so that it does not move during the extension.
E aprop sia revolvut le bras deves tota part, pus que es envolopat drap doblat lonc sobre la ma de lu, o liament.	After you have turned the arm completely around, since it is wrapped in a long doubled cloth over the hand, or bandage.
E quant le metge toca la junctura am la sua ma, unte aquela am alcun oli per so que aquo sia aquelas causas las quals ajudan en lubricitat de la junctura am facilitat; e aprop empellesca la junctura am empulcio vehement entro que retorne.	And when the surgeon touches the joint with his hand, anoint it with some oil so that this may be those causes which help in the lubricity of the joint and ease; and then press the joint firmly inward until it returns.
E aprop la reduccio de lu cove que sia pausat sobre aquela empastre en le qual sia stipticitat e excequacio am album de huou, e sia extrenhut am strictura descent, e·l bras sia suspendut del col, e sia layssat per alcus dias.	And after the reduction of the shoulder, place it on a plaster which has styptic and protective properties over an egg membrane, and bind it with moderate tightness, and hang the arm from the neck, and leave it like this for several days.
E aprop sia desliat; e donc si la junctura es formada en le sieu loc, lahoras tu deslia le liament de lu e layssa aquela.	And then it should be loosened; and if the joint is formed in its proper place, now you undo the bandage of it and leave it.
E si vezas la junctura no be strenher, lahoras tu itera le emplastre e·l liament, e layssa aquela per alcus dias entro que sia extrenhuda; e aprop deslia aquela.	And if you see the joint not properly strengthened, then replace the plaster and bandage, and leave it like this for several days until it is healed; and then loosen it.
Mays si accideys a lu gravitat aprop la reduccio de la junctura, e la disposicio de lu es en movement, lahoras aministra humectacio en banh e fricacio subtil, e comprecio, entro que sia aleujat; o pausa sobre la junctura aleliati, so es coyssa de moto grassa; e aprop sia liada, e layssa aquela sobre le os le dia e la nueyt.	But if it happens that there is swelling around the reduction of the joint, and its position is in movement, then administer moistening by bath and gentle friction, and compression until it is calmed; or place cold applications on the joint, which are suitable for excessive motion; and then bind it, and leave it on the bone day and night.
E aprop osta aquela, e met aquel en banh; e quan suza, lahoras tu fregua la junctura am fricacio temprada, e aprop itera sobre aquela aleliati, so es ronhonal de moto, una veguada, e la segonda, e la .iii.a.,	And then remove that and put it in water; when dry, now rub the joint with moderate friction, and then apply cold applications again, which are suitable for excessive motion, once, and the second time, and the third time.
am intrament de banh, entro que sia linit.	Take an instrument for bathing, ensure that it is clean.
E si voles, pausa sobre aquela fenda de vaca humida e scalfada am boder e stren sobre aquel; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas, quar aquela es humida e reduzeys a la sua disposicio.	And if you wish, place a dressing over that moist and inflamed wound, and apply it several times, since it is moist, and reduce it to its proper condition.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter XXVIII.
De curacio de dislocacio de malassen, so es de la junctura que es entre·l bras e la ma.	On the treatment of dislocation of the elbow joint, which is between the arm and the hand. Note that there seems to be a minor error or inconsistency in the phrase "between the arm and the hand," as typically the elbow joint is between the upper arm and the forearm. However, I have translated it as closely as possible to the original text.
Malassen de la ma alcunas vetz es deslocada, e la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es leugiera, e·l contrari es de las autras juncturas, mays empero cove que sia velocitat en la reduccio de lu en la hora en la qual es deslocada, denant que le loc sia apostemat o que accida en lu apostema caut.	When the hand is dislocated in some cases, the reduction of this dislocation is easy, but the opposite is true for other joints. However, it is important that there be speed in reducing it at the moment when it is dislocated, before swelling occurs or an abscess forms.
E la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es que tu pauses la junctura de la ma del malaute sobre una taula e le ministre extenda la ma de aquel, e le metge pause la sua ma o o la sua palma sobre la iminencia de la junctura, e empellisca aquela entro que retorne al sieu loc.	The reduction of this dislocation is done by placing the joint of the hand of the injured person on a table and having an assistant extend the hand. The surgeon then places their hand or palm over the vicinity of the joint and presses it until it returns to its proper place.
Mays empero cove que sia considerat si la palma ja es ostada al ventre de la ma, lahoras le malaute pause le dos de la sua ma sobre una taula deves la extencio e la reduccio; e si la dislocacio es precedent deves le dos de la ma, lahoras sia la posicio de la ma de aquel intrinicequement sobre la taula, per so que la ma del metge caja sobre aquela iminencia de la junctura.	However, it is important to consider whether the palm is already displaced towards the back of the hand. If this is the case, the injured person should place the back of their hand on a table during extension and reduction. If the dislocation is towards the back of the hand, then the position of the hand should be directly on the table so that the surgeon's hand can press over the vicinity of the joint.
E donc si retorna tantost, bon es; e sino, lahoras strenh aquela am empastre cedant le apostema e layssa aquel; e no iteres aquo, quar sino, no soferta ni no podes sobre la reduccio de lu pus que passan a lu dias.	And if it returns quickly, that is good; but if not, then dress it with a bandage to allow for swelling and leave it as such. Do not repeat this, because otherwise, the patient will suffer and you cannot proceed with the reduction until more days have passed.
Mays empero la junctura roman segon la sua tortuositat; e no notz al malaute alcuna causa, sino que la ma es mollificada e no pot strenher alcuna causa; lahoras sapias que les nervis son trincatz o trissatz, e lahoras no es engen en lu sino que sia strenhuda am cauteri prop le cazament de lu e fort leu aquo confereys alcuna causa.	However, the joint remains stiff according to its curvature; and you find in the patient no other cause, except that the muscle is softened and cannot be strengthened by any means; now you know that the nerves are cut or torn, and now it does not heal there unless it is made firm with cauterization and then some cause is conferred upon it.
Donc cum malassem es retornada, lahoras pausa sobre lu empastre le qual havem recomtat, e sia layssat e strenhut per v dias; e aprop sia desliat e sia layssat e la ma de lu sia excercitada.	Then when the inflammation has subsided, now pause on the bandage which we have recommended, and let it be left and strengthened for five days; and afterwards let it be loosened and left, and let the arm be exercised.
Mays si le movement de lu es ostat e accideys en lu alcuna gravitat, lahoras leniys aquela am aygua cauda e am fricacio alcunas veguadas, entro que sia alleujat.	However, if the movement of it remains and you encounter any gravity in it, now treat that with warm water and some friction several times, until it is alleviated.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter XXIX.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels ditz.	On the treatment of the dislocation of the said joints.
Alcunas veguadas so dislocatz les ditz a tota partida.	In some cases, the said joints are dislocated completely.
E quan es dislocat alcun dit de aquels al dos de la palma o al ventre de lu, lahoras sten le dit e impelleys la dislocacio de lu am les tieus pouses, entro que retorne.	And when any of them is dislocated towards the thumb or to the palm side, now press the finger and push the dislocation with your fingers until it returns.
E aprop sostenta le cap del dit, e suspen aquel deves la part a la qual es dislocat, e layssa aquel per dos dias.	And then support the tip of the finger, and suspend that from the part to which it is dislocated, and leave it for two days.
E aprop suspen aquel e exten aquel entro que dreyt sia engualhat en aquel sieu dia.	And then suspend that and extend it until it is properly healed on its own.
E quan sira noyt, lia aquel segon aquela narracio, e no cesses desliar aquel en le dia e exercitar am movement, e lia aquel en la noyt; e fay aquo per alcus dias entro que sia streyt.	And when it is night, wrap that according to the mentioned narration, and do not stop loosening it during the day and exercising with movement, and wrap it at night; and do this for several days until it is strong.
E fay semblant am aquo, si es dislocat al ventre de la ma, e lia aquel ad aquela partida e fay am aquo la tieua primiera operacio, entro que sia sanat.	If it appears that the joint is dislocated at the elbow, and he ties it to that part and does with it the first operation, until it is healed.
E semblantment fay am aquo quan es dislocat a las autres partidas.	And similarly do this when it is dislocated in other parts.
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter XXX.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels spondils del dos.	On the treatment of the dislocation of the vertebrae of the back.
Quan accideys ad alcun dels spondils del dos o del col dislocacio complida, e so remaugutz motz spondils de lors locs, lahoras en aquela no es curacio, quar la mort se coyta al malaute.	When a complete dislocation occurs in any of the vertebrae of the back or neck and the vertebrae are moved from their places, there is no treatment at that moment, for death is expected by the patient.
E senhal de aquo es que la egestio del malaute es fora-eyssida ses voluntat, e no pot retenir aquela; e motas veguadas so mollificatz alcus membres de lu o doas cambas de lu o dos brasses de lu, o un de aquels; o es remaugut un spondil de son loc, quar motas veguadas es remaugut e motas veguadas es fayta la remocio de aquels a quatre partidas.	The sign of this is that the excretion from the patient occurs without their will and they cannot retain it; often some parts of them or both legs or arms, or one of them are weakened; or a vertebra is moved from its place, as sometimes it moves and at other times the displacement goes to four directions.
Donc aquela ja es remauguda a las partidas detras e es nompnada gelbozitat.	When it is displaced towards the rear parts, it is called retrolisthesis.
Mays la curacio de lu es que lahoras consideras si la gelbozitat accidey de puerissia, quar lahoras en aquela no es curacio ni de aquela no es sanacio de tot.	However, the treatment for this is to determine whether the retrolisthesis occurs due to weakness, because in that case there is no cure and it will not heal completely.
Mays en aquela que ve per cazement o per percussio o per semblant ad aquels, ja diyssero les Antics las manieras de curacio am sermo prolixs, del qual lo mays retorna am profieyt; mays yeu ja e abreujat de aquel del qual lo pauc escusa del trop de lu, per la mieua propinquitat a la entencio mieua exposicio, am la qual he aquo expausat et format ex instrument divers de aquel am le qual mostrero aquo e espausero aquel.	But in the case where it occurs due to falling or impact or something similar to these, the Ancients described the methods of treatment at length, which I have summarized for brevity; however, little excuses the excess with my proximity to understanding and exposition, in which I have laid out this and formed it from various instruments different from those used to demonstrate this and explain that.
E dic que en gelbosita que accideys de la partida denant en le pietz, no es engen ni sanacio de aquela; e semblantment en aquela que es fayta a dos latz.	And he says that in gellbosity which occurs from the division in front on the feet, there is neither origin nor healing of that; and similarly with that which is made on two sides.
E de aquelas no es curada sino aquela que accideys en le dos propriament am aquo que yeu recomti.	And of those, it is not cured except that which occurs in the two properly as I recount.
E es que·l malaute sia extendut sobre la sua cara sobre pug engual prop de paret, e sia extendut dejos lu esturment molh per so que no sia lidit le pietz de lu.	And it is that the patient lie extended on his face upon a level surface near a wall, and be stretched out below the bed moistened with something so that the feet are not lifted.
E aprop un fust dreyt sia pausat, ficat en la terra en la extremitat del pug entorn le cap de lu, e autra fust en aviro les pes de lu en l’autra extremitat del pueg.	And nearby a straight post should be placed, inserted into the ground at the end of the level surface near his head, and another post around his feet at the other end of the level surface.
E·l ministre tengua le fust, e no sia fermat en fossa; e autre ministre tengua l’autre segon aquela forma.	And the minister hold the post, and it should not be fixed in a hole; and another minister hold the other according to that form.
E aprop envolopa sobre le cap del malaute e dejos les titillic liamen leon ferm; e exten la extremitat del liamel al fust le qual es deves le cap de lu, e lia aquel en lu; e aprop strenh l’autre liament sobre las ancas de lu les denols de lu, e deves las cambas de lu; e aprop ajusta totz les liamentz e lia aquels en l’autre fust le qual es deves les pes de lu.	And nearby wrap around the head of the patient and below the shoulders tie a firm bandage; and extend the end of the bandage to the post which is behind his head, and tie that to it; and then stretch the other bandage over the hips of the patient with the knees, and behind the buttocks; and then adjust all the bandages and tie those to the other post which is behind his feet.
E aprop le ministre cascu extenda le liament a la partida del fust, e no sian remaugutz les dos fustz e les liamentz dels sieus locs en les quals son ficatz, mays empero no so fermatz ayssi cum havem dit.	And the minister should extend the bandage to the side of the post, and do not move the two posts and the bandages from their places in which they are fixed, but rather ensure they are not moved as we have said.
E le metge pause las suas palmas sobre le spondil am fortaleza entro que retorne, o que pause sobre aquela una taula, e aprop que ajuste sobre la taula les sieus pes entro que retorne.	And the physician should place his palms on the spine with strength until it returns, or he places upon that a table, and then adjust the patient's feet on the table until it returns.
Mays si no retorna per aquesta forma, lahoras pren una taula de la qual la latitut o la longitut sia en aviro de tres brassas, e cava en la paret de la qual havem dit que es prop le malaute un loc en le qual intre la extremitat de la taula.	If this method does not return the desired result, take a table whose width or length is about three cubits and dig near where we said the patient should be a place into which the end of the table can fit.
E aprop pausa la maytat de la taula sobre le spondilh, e·l metge pause les sieus pes sobre l’autre extremitat, e estrenha be entro que le spondil sia coartat e que retorne al sieu loc.	And then place the middle of the table over the spine, and the surgeon places his feet on the other end, and gently presses until the spine is compressed and returns to its proper place.
E si tu voles, obre am torn le qual es revolvut am la ma; e es que tu fiques en terra deves le cap del malaute en le derier del pug dos fustz, la longitut dels quals sia d’un bras, e deves le cap de lu en le derier del pug eyssament dos fustz; e sia la longitut que es entre quascun fust un palm, e ja es fayt en quascun fust trauc en le qual corr torn, e quascun sia mot fermat en terra per so que no sia maugut.	And if you wish, open again the one that is wrapped around the hand; and place the patient's head at the end of two poles, the length of which is one arm, and behind his head place another pair of poles in the same manner; and the distance between each pole should be a palm, and attach ropes to each pole through which they are firmly secured to the ground so that they do not move.
E sia mes un fust redon en le qual es le torn, e sia revolvut en les dos traucs dels dos fustz.	And place one round pole in which is the rope, and let it be wrapped around the two ropes of the two poles.
E en la extremitat de lu es un trauc en le qual es format le fust, la longueza del qual es un palm am aquo que es revolvut; e en les dos autres fustz es semblant de aquel.	And at the end of it is a rope in which the pole is attached, its length being one palm including what is wrapped around; and on the other two poles there is something similar to that.
E aprop strenh les liamentz que has streyt en le pietz del malaute en le trau le qual es deves le cap de lu, e les liamentz que has streyts en las coyssas de lu en le torn le qual es deves les pes de lu.	And then pull the ropes that you have tied to the patient's feet at the rope behind his head, and the ropes that you have tied to the patient’s waist at the rope behind his legs.
E aprop deves quascun torn e stia un ministre que torssa le torn am la sua ma, e le metge engualhe le spondil segon que havem dit.	And then place someone behind each rope who will turn the rope with their hand, and the surgeon will adjust the spine as we have said.
E aquesta es la forma del torn:	And this is the form of the turn:
E aprop pus que le spondil es retornat, e le loc es engualhat, lahoras cove que pauses empastre exciccatiu am album de huou, e aprop estopa; e aprop pause sobre le empastre astela de taula de la qual la latitut sia de tres ditz o enviro aquels, e la longitut de lu sia quantitat que prengua le loc de la gelbositat, e sobre la partida del spondil sa.	And after the spine is returned to its place and the area is leveled, it is necessary to apply an excrescent plaster with honey on alum, and then cover it with wool; and afterwards place over the plaster a strip of wood whose width is three fingers or around that size, and the length should be as much as is needed for the diseased area, and on both sides of the spine.
E aprop sia liat am liament le qual havem dit, e uze le malaute de nutriment subtil entro que sia sanat.	And afterwards apply the bandage we have mentioned, and use a mild diet until he is healed.
E si roman alcuna iminencia en le loc en la fi de la sanacio, lahoras cove que sian aministradas medicinas que moilifico e liniscan am aministracio de la taula per lonc temps, la qual havem recomtada; e ja es aministrada en aquel loc lamina de plom.	And if there is any inflammation in the area at the end of the healing process, it is necessary to administer medicines that reduce and soothe, along with prolonged application of the board we have recommended; and already a lead plate should be applied to that location.
E alcunas veguadas accideys imminencia en le derier dels spondils del dos, e es cujat per aquela dislocacio; e es aquel os le qual ja imineys per que no cove que sia fayta prosompcio a lu am aquesta medicina, quar fort leu fara a tu accidir mort.	And at times inflammation occurs in the lower part of the spine, and it is caused by that dislocation; and that bone is one where excessive inflammation can lead to death if too much precaution is not taken with this medicine.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter XXXI.
De curacio de anca dislocada.	On the treatment of a dislocated hip.
Sapias que la junctura del ancha e la junctura del muscle no endeve sino dislocacio tant solament, e no accideys ad aquelas aquo que accideys a las autras juncturas de petita remocio e concavitat.	Know that the joint of the hip and the muscle attachment are subject only to dislocation, and do not suffer what happens to other joints with slight movement and concavity.
E la junctura de la ancha es dislocada segon quatre manieyras, quar es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, o a las partidas defora, o a las partidas denant, o a las partidas detras.	And the joint of the hip can be dislocated in four ways, as it can be dislocated inward, outward, forward, or backward.
E majorment es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, e pauc a las partidas denant o a las partidas detras.	And it is more severely displaced towards the interior parts, and somewhat towards the anterior or posterior parts.
E senhal de la dislocacio de lu a las partidas de dintz es quar, quan tu ajustas la camba del malaute sana am la malaute, es pus longua e·l denolh es pus heminent que de la sana, e·l malaute no pot doblar le sieu pe deves le lenguonar, e es le loc que siec le lengonar apostemat de apostema caut, per so que·l cap de la coyssa ja es pervengut aqui.	The sign of the dislocation towards the interior parts is that when you adjust the limb of the healthy person next to the affected one, it appears longer and the knuckle more prominent than in the healthy side, and the patient cannot bend their leg even slightly, as this location where bending occurs is obstructed by inflammation or abscess due to cautery, so the head of the bone has already reached here.
E·l senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio es a las partidas defora, es que les accidentz de lu so contraris ad aquest accident.	The sign of the one to whom dislocation occurs towards the exterior parts is that the symptoms are contrary to those described for this condition.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas denant es quar expan la camba sieua segon compliment, mays empero no dobla aquela ses dolor que es en le denol, e si se perforsa ad anar e no pot sobre aquo a las partidas denant; e la urina de lu es retenguda e l’engonar de lu es apostemat, e deves la ambulacio de lu sobre le talo.	The sign of the one to whom dislocation occurs towards the anterior parts is that the limb is extended but cannot be bent without pain in the joint, and if they attempt to walk, they are unable to do so towards the front; and their urine is retained and their swallowing is obstructed by an abscess, and they must walk on their heel.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas detras es que no expande le denol, ni no puesca doblar aquel denant que doble le engonar, e la camba de lu es pus breva que l’autra, e l’engonar es mollificat, e·l cap de la coyssa es deves aquel loc.	The sign of the one to whom dislocation occurs towards the posterior parts is that they cannot extend the joint, nor can they bend it forward as they would normally bend their neck, and the limb is shorter than the other, and the throat is softened, and the head of the bone is in that location.
Mays reduccio de las specias de aquesta dislocacio es que tu consideras, lahoras, si la dislocacio es vetusta et antiqua, que ja es anticada am le havent aquela aprop tu aministras reduccio de lu e roman segon la sua disposicio, lahoras no es en aquela curacio de tot; e adonc no cove que en aquela sia fayta prosompcio.	However, the reduction of these types of dislocation is that you consider whether the dislocation is old and ancient, in which case it has already settled in its position, so you administer reduction according to its disposition, but at this point it is not a complete cure; therefore, there should be no expectation for an immediate recovery.
Mays en aquel del qual la dislocacio es recent, e es una de las quatre specias de dislocacio, lahoras te coyta ad aquo que volvas la junctura e extendas aquela a las partidas dedintz e a las partidas defora, e mau aquela a la dextra e sinistra, quar fort leu retorna e no indigeys de autra cura.	In the case of the one in which the dislocation is recent, and it is one of the four species of dislocation, place your hand so that you turn the joint and extend it to the spaces within and to the spaces without, and move it to the right and left, for it easily returns and does not require other treatment.
Mays, si no retorna en aquesta manieyra, lahoras cove que tu prepares ministre fort e extendas la camba de lu de la partida pus dejos, o am las suas mas, o am liament lo qual es liat sobre la camba desus le denol; e autre ministre extenda la ma de aquel desus enayssi que meta las suas mas dejos les titillics de lu; e aprop strenha am liament leon sobre la razit de la coyssa, e tengua autre ministre ters le extremitat del liament.	If it does not return in this manner, then you must prepare a strong minister and extend the hollow from beneath the part below, or insert your fingers there, or apply a bandage that lies over the hollow above the denol; and another minister should extend the hand from above such that he places his fingers underneath the tubercles of it; and immediately bind with a lion bandage over the root of the joint, and have another minister hold the extremity of the bandage.
E sia extencio de lu o de la partida dedintz a l’angonar a la partida de la furcula, o de la partida detras a la partida del dos.	And this extension of it or of the part within to the angle of the shoulder blade, or of the posterior part to the part of the back.
E sia la extencio de totz aquels en una veguada entro que·l malaute sia elevat am le sieu cos de terra e que romangua pendent.	And this extension of all those at once within, while the patient is raised upon his body from the ground and remains hanging.
E aquesta specia de extencio es specia cominal a totas quatre.	And this species of extension is common to all four.
E donc si la dislocacio retorna am aquo que havem dit, sira bo; e sino, lahoras es necessari a tota specia aquo que dire de la propria curacio.	And thus if the dislocation returns as we have said, it is good; and if not, then it is necessary for all species what I shall say about its proper treatment.
En la reduccio de lu propria, quan es dislocada, e la dislocacio es a las partidas dedintz, cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu latz sa; e aprop pausa les liamentz sobre la razit de la coyssa en aquel loc le qual entre le cap de la coyssa e·l loc que es dejos le langonar; e aprop exten le liament en sus de la part del angonar a la pus auta partida de la furcula.	In the reduction of it when it is dislocated, and the dislocation is to the inner parts, the patient should be reclined on his side; then place the bandages over the root of the joint at the location where the head of the joint and the place behind the angle meet; then extend the bandage from above the part of the angle to the most posterior part of the shoulder blade.
E aprop autre ministre fort prengua les brasses de lu, e amerme le loc gros de la coyssa malaute e extenda a las partidas deforo per extencio vehement, quar aquela retorna en le sieu loc.	Let another strong minister take the arms of the patient and pull the place around the diseased bone strongly to the sides through extension, for that will return it to its proper place.
E aquesta specia es de pus leugiera curacio am la qual aquest membre es reduzit que las autres specias.	And this species is the one that heals most quickly among those to which this member is reduced compared to the others.
Mays si es excusat sobre tu e no obezeys al entrament am aquesta specia de curacio de tot, lahoras cove que sian liatz les dos pes del malaute ensemps am liament fort, leugier, sobre amdos les talos e amdos les denols.	But if it swells up on you and does not obey the treatment in this species of healing for a long time, then now it is necessary to bind both sides of the patient together with strong, quick bandages over both heels and both toes.
E sia la longitut de quascun de son par la quantitat de quatre ditz, e sia la camba malaute extenduda mays que l’autre per quantitat de dos ditz.	And let the length of each band be the quantity of four fingers, and let the diseased limb be extended more than the other by a quantity of two fingers.
E aprop le malaute sia suspendut sobre le cap del fust, e que sia en la mayso; e sia la longitut de lu de la terra la quantitat de dos brasses.	And let the patient be suspended at the top of the post, and hold it in their hand; and let the distance from the ground be the length of two arms.
E aprop comanda a un jove fort que minuesca le cap de la coyssa, e sia suspendut am le malaute autre jove, e l’autre jove minuent la coysa am fortaleza empellesca, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And then command a strong youth to pull the head of the bone, and let another youth hold the patient, while this other youth pulls the limb with great force, for the joint will return to its place quickly.
Mays en la reducio propria, quan es dislocacio a la partida defora, cove que·l malaute jaga sobre pug segon que havem recomtat en le havent gelbozitat; e sia strenhut le liament sobre la camba malauta propriament e sobre le pietz de lu.	But in the proper reduction, when it is dislocated to the outer part, let the patient lie on a bench as we have recommended for the yellow jaundice; and bind the bandage tightly around the affected limb and the feet.
E aprop dos fustz sian pausatz, la un als pes de lu, e l’autre al cap; e aprop sian pausatz fustz ajustatz al mieg del pueg ficat sobre·l qual draps humitz sian envolopatz, per so que·l malaute no sia dampnajat per que·l fust sia entre las coyssas de lu, per que deves la extencio a las partidas dejos no sia atirat.	And then place two posts, one at the foot of the patient and the other at the head; and then place adjusted posts on each side of the pillar on which damp cloths are wrapped, so that the patient is not damaged by the post being between his limbs, to prevent the extension downward from being pulled.
E aprop quascun ministre extenda a la sua part, e·l metge am la sua ma enguala la reduccio segon l’art.	Let each servant extend his part, and the physician apply his skill to reduce it according to art.
Donc, si obezeys a revercio, sira bo grandament; e sino, pausa sobre aquela diligentment e ayssi quo havem dit en gelbozitat per aquela engualment.	Therefore, if you obey the reversal, it will be very beneficial; and otherwise, apply it carefully as we have said regarding jaundice for that treatment.
Mays cove que·l malaute jagua sobre les sieus latz sa quetament.	But it is necessary that the patient lie on his back quietly.
E quan la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras cove que la camba sia extenduda leugierament, e es segon aquesta meteyssa narracio sobre pueg; e le metge pause la palma de la sua ma dreyta sobre·l langonar malaute, e aprop coarte aquel am l’autra ma, e am aquela coartacio pausa aquel extendut a las partidas dejos a la partida del denol.	And when the dislocation is to the front parts, then it is necessary that the limb be extended quickly, and according to this narration mentioned above for the back; and the physician places the palm of his right hand on the affected area, and with one hand pulls that tight, and while pulling tightly extends that towards the lower part from the front.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas detras, lahoras no cove que·l malaute sia extendut a las partidas dejos, e es elevat sobre la terra; habantz cove que sia pausat sobre causa dura, ayssi cum cove le eyssament si l’ancha de lu es dislocada a las partidas defora, segon aquo que havem dit del jasement de lu sobre dos anchas; e es sobre la sua cara e les liamentz sian extendutz, segon que havem dit, no ha guayre.	And if the dislocation is to the rear parts, then it is necessary that the patient be extended towards the lower part and raised off the ground; however, it is necessary that he be paused on a hard surface, just as it is necessary for the same thing if the hip joint is dislocated outward, according to what we have said about the positioning of the body over two supports; and it is on his face with the limbs extended, as we have said, there is no harm.
E cove que sia aministrada compressio am taula sobre le loc al qual yeys la junctura.	And it is necessary to apply compression to the table at the location of the joint.
Donc cum la reducio es complida segon que cove — e·l senhal de la reduccio de lu no es amaguat a tu, e es que tu extendas del malaute doas cambas, e quan tu vezes aquelas enguals e le malaute extrenh la sieua camba e expandeys aquela ses excusacio, lahoras sapias que·l membre segon que cove es retornat — e lahoras tu ajusta doas coyssas e pausa empastre e extrenh am benda ayssi que la ancha no sia mauguda en alcuna de las partidas; e adheresca le malaute a repaus per tres dias o per quatre.	Therefore, when the reduction is completed as necessary — and the sign of hip joint reduction is not hidden from you, which is that you extend both legs of the patient, and when you see them equal and the patient extends his leg freely without discomfort, then you know that the limb has returned to its proper place — and now you must adjust two things: apply a bandage and wrap it so that the hip joint is not moved in any direction; and instruct the patient to rest for three or four days.
E aprop deslia le liament e l’empastre, e compara la una camba am l’autra.	Then undo the bandage and the dressing, and compare one side with the other.
Lahoras, si vezas aquelas enguals en vustament, lahoras sapias que la dislocacio ja es fermada, e adonc layssa le malaute anar.	Now, if you see those marks on the body, now you know that the dislocation has been fixed, and then let the patient go.
E si vezas alcuna causa de mollificacio, lahoras tu retorna e emplastra aquel, e extrenh aquel segon la tua primiera strectura, e layssa aquel en tres dias.	And if you see any sign of inflammation, now you return and apply a plaster to it, and treat it according to your initial structure, and let it be for three days.
E aprop deslia aquel, e fay aquel tardar en ambulacio sobre quascu per alcus dias, entro que sia confortat.	Then undo that [treatment], and have the patient delay in walking on each [limb] for several days, until they are comfortable.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter XXXII.
De curacio de dislocacio del denolh.	On the treatment of dislocation of the joint.
Le denolh es dislocat segon tres manieyras, quar es dislocat a las partidas defora, e a las partidas dedintz, e a las partidas dejos mays a las partidas detras; e a las partidas denant no es dislocat.	The joint can be dislocated in three ways, as it can be dislocated outward, inward, and to the rear rather than forward; it cannot be dislocated forward.
E le senhal de dislocacio de lu es que comandes al malaute que aplique la sua camba am la coyssa; lahoras sapias que·l denol es dislocat.	And the sign of dislocation is that you command the patient to apply their hand to the chest; now you know that the joint is dislocated.
E la restauracio de totas las manieyras de lu es que fassas cezer le malaute dreyt, enayssi que ja extenda la sieua camba, si pot sobre aquo; adherir le tieu dos a la cara de lu, e pausa le pe de lu entre les tieus pes; e aprop fay adherir le denol de lu am las tuas palmas, e rete aquelas entre les tieus ditz sobre le denolh de lu am fortaleza, e autre ministre extenda le sieu pe entro que·l denol retorne a son loc.	And the restoration of all types of dislocation is to instruct the patient to straighten their limb as much as possible; then place your hand against the side of it, and put your feet between his foot; then attach the joint with both your palms, and hold them firmly over the joint with strength, and another assistant should extend the leg until the joint returns to its proper place.
E senhal de reddicio de lu es que la sua camba adharesca am la coyssa am levitat no-laboroza.	And the sign of successful reduction is that the patient's hand adheres to the chest effortlessly and naturally.
E aprop emplastra aquel e fay adhirir la camba am la coyssa, e aprop lia aquelas emsemps am una benda per tres dias o per quatre, e aprop deslia aquelas.	Apply the plaster to it and make the cup adhere to the wound, then bind those with a bandage for three days or four, and afterward loosen them.
E no uze le malaute de ambulacio per alcus dias, entro que sia sanat e cofortat.	And do not use the limb for walking for several days until it is healed and comfortable.
Mays si la reduccio de lu a tu es excusada, lahoras aministra fort extencio am liamentz dels quals en la curacio de la hancha precedit narracio.	But if the reduction of it to you is unnecessary, now administer a wide extension with bandages, as previously described in the treatment of the hip.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter XXXIII.
De la curacio de la dislocacio del talo.	On the treatment of talus dislocation.
Le talo alcunas veguadas es remaugut per petita remocio, e alcunas veguadas es dislocat segon compliment, e la dislocacio de lu es fayta o a las partidas dedintz o a las partidas deforo.	The talus sometimes is displaced by slight movement, and sometimes it is dislocated completely, and the dislocation of it occurs either towards the interior parts or towards the exterior parts.
E le senhal de la dislocacio de lu es que vezes le talo imflat procedent a la partida a la qual es dislocat.	And the sign of its dislocation is that the talus becomes inflamed towards the part to which it is dislocated.
Mays la curacio de la remocio de lu es de leugiera reddicio, e es que sia extendut am facilitat am las mas e sia engualhat entro que retorne.	But the treatment for its displacement is gentle reduction, and it should be extended with ease using bandages until it returns to its normal position.
Mays en la curacio de lu quan es dislocat segon compliment, cove que fasses cezer le malaute dreyt, e tengua aquel un ministre fort e valent de la partida detras del dos de aquel en le mieg loc de lu.	But in the treatment when it is completely dislocated, ensure that the limb is straight, and have a strong and capable assistant hold it behind both of them at the midpoint.
E aprop te tu am la tieua ma dreyta le pe de la pus sobirana part, e am la tua ma sinistra de la part pus dejos del pe en le loc de la cavilha.	And you should hold with your right hand the most superior part of the foot, and with your left hand the part below the heel at the location of the ankle.
E aprop atira le pe a tu am la tua ma dreyta, e aprop am la sinistra per dos veguadas, e aprop exten am la sinistra; e empelleys le pietz del pe am la dreyta deves la camba ses trebalh.	And then pull the foot towards you with your right hand, and with your left hand do it twice, and then extend with your left; and press the toes of the foot with your right hand around the cup with effort.
E fay aquo doas veguadas segon que havem comtat.	In this place two incisions as we have counted.
E aprop empelleys le pietz del pe a la camba la tersa veguada, e tu es a la cavilha.	And then press the feet of the patient to the third incision, and you will be at the nail.
Donc si retorna en una veguada o en dos segon aquesta manieyra, e si vezes le pe engualhat, es bo; e sino, lahoras sobre lu itera la operacio, quar aquel retorna.	Therefore, if it returns in one incision or in two according to this method, and if the foot heals properly, it is good; and if not, then repeat the operation, for that is what happens.
Mays si a tu es prohibida la reduccio de lu am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu dos sobre terra, e estrenh un paysel mot en terra fermat, e que caja entre las coyssas de lu, e tu ja has envolopat sobre lu drap per so que no ledesca le malaute.	But if you are prohibited from reducing the deformity as we have recommended, then lay the patient on their back on the ground, and place a board firmly on the ground under them, so that it fits between their thighs, and you should wrap a cloth around them so that they do not displace the injury.
E aprop le ministre de lu tengua las suas coyssas, e aprop autre ministre extenda le pe am las suas mas o am liament que lie sobre le col del pe; e aprop extenda aquel quascun ministre contre extencio del sieu par, e le payssel sia extant entre las coyssas del malaute retinent aquel, per so que·l cos de lu no sia atirat a las partidas dejos deves la sua extencio.	And then the attendant should hold the patient's thighs, and another attendant should extend the injured foot with their hands or with bandages around the neck of the foot; and then each attendant should pull against the extension as instructed by them, and the board should be placed between the patient’s thighs to retain it, so that the body does not be drawn towards parts below the desired extension.
E aprop le metge enguala la dislocacio am las sieuas mas, e autre ministre tengua la coyssa sana a las partidas dejos, quar la dislocacio retorna am la facilitat.	And then the surgeon should heal the dislocation with his hands, and another attendant should hold the healthy thigh below, as the dislocation will return with ease.
E donc cum retorna la dislocacio e es declarada a tu la sanetat de la reduccio de lu, lahoras pausa emplastre e extrenh aquela am liamentz fortment, e ligua le pe am liament a la camba.	And when the dislocation returns and you are assured of the successful reduction, now apply a plaster and bind it firmly with bandages, and secure the foot with bandages to the board.
E cove que temes o te guardes dels nervis les quals so detras sobre le talo, per que le liament sobre aquel no sia vehement e leda aquel fortment.	And be careful to avoid the nerves which are located behind the heel, so that the bandage over them is not too tight and does not injure them severely.
E aprop layssa aquel per dos dias o per tres; e si le liament es mollificat, extrenh aquel.	Let it remain like that for two days or three; and if the dressing is softened, remove it.
E aprop deslia aquel en le ters dia o en le quart, e prohibeys le malaute de anament per xl dias.	Then untie that on the third day or on the fourth, and prohibit the patient from moving for forty days.
Mays si es forsat de anar denant aquel spazi, no es fayta segurtat que la dislocacio no sia sobre lu dissolvuda e corrumpuda, e aprop aquo que no recipia curacio.	But if he is forced to move before that time, there is no assurance that the dislocation will not be dissolved and corrupted, and then it will not admit of cure.
E si accideys a lu apostema caut, lahoras cove que tu aministre en la cedacio de lu aquo en lo qual precedic la nostra narracio, en autre loc de curacio e de embrocacio, entro que sia remauguda.	And if it happens that the abscess is cauterized, you should now apply what we have previously described concerning the administration of the liquid for treatment and application in another place until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxiiii.	Chapter XXXIV.
De curacio de dislocacio dels ditz dels pes.	On the treatment of the dislocation of the said limbs.
Cove que aquel qu’es dislocat sia engualhat am pauca extencio ses trebal; e aquo que no es dificil, abantz es leugier.	It is necessary that the one who is dislocated be kept at rest for a short period without work; and what is not difficult is quickly accomplished.
Mays si la dislocacio es en alcus nozes del dos del pe, lahoras cove que fassas cezer le malaute le sieu pe sobre loc engual de la terra o sobre taula, e sia estant ayssi cum si anava.	But if the dislocation is in some joints of the leg, then you should have the patient lie on his back on a level surface of the ground or on a table, and let him be positioned as if he were sitting.
E aprop tu sta de pes, e pausa le tieu pe sobre aquo que imineys de las juncturas, e aprop calca aquel am le tieu pe am vertut entro que retorne, e que vejas aquel ja engualhat e no aparesca en le loc eminencia.	Then stand on your foot, and place your other foot above the joint you intend to treat, and then step down with force until it returns to its normal position, so that you see it become aligned and no longer protrude in an elevated location.
E aprop pausa dejos le ventre del pe de lu una taula que prengua tot le pe, a la qual sian dos caps, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent e ferma per tres dias; e aprop deslia aquel e fay aquel repausar de ambulacio per motz dias, entro que sia estrenhut e de reddicio sia assegurat.	Then place the bottom of the foot on a board that covers the entire foot, which has two ends, and then bind it securely with proper bandaging for three days; then untie it and allow the patient to rest from walking for ten days until it is healed and recovery is assured.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter XXXV.
De las specias de dislocacio que sian faytas am plagua o am fractura o am quascuna ensemps.	Concerning the kinds of dislocations that are made due to plague or fracture or any such conditions.
Quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, e tu te perforssas en la curacio de aquela e en la restauracio de lu, motas veguadas succezeys la mort.	When any cause of those occurs, and you proceed with the treatment of it and the restoration of it, several times death may succeed.
E per aquo no cove que sobre la curacio de lu presuma, sino aquel que es savi en l’art, de lonc uzatge, misericordios e pietados, tardiu, no-ardit ni presomptuos; e que use en le comensament de medicinas que cedan apostemas cautz tant solament, e leyssa le malaute al divinal jutgament, sino ad aquel al qual speras salut de perdicio, am de la malautia alleviacio, e en la qual appareys alcuna speransa.	And because of this, one should not presume to treat it unless they are wise in the art, experienced for a long time, merciful and pious, neither hasty nor presumptuous; and at the beginning use medicines that only reduce swellings, and leave the patient to divine judgment, but rather to whom you hope will bring salvation from destruction, or relief from illness, where some hope appears.
E adonc esforsa te tantost far de lu la reduccio en le comensament de la causa, denant que endevengua apostema caut.	And then strive to immediately perform the reduction of it at the beginning of the cause, before it becomes a swollen abscess.
E adonc si le membre retorna segon que volem, lahoras aministra regiment le qual ceda apostema caut e cura la plagua am aquo que conveneys a lu dels enguentz desiccatius.	And then if the member returns as we want, immediately administer a regimen that reduces swelling and treats the injury with what is appropriate from among dry ointments.
E si dislocacio es am fractura e accideys en le os satagias separadas, lahoras tu perforsa le stement de lor, e fay en aquo so que havem dit en las malautias simplas de aquo que es precedit en les locz de aquels.	And if the dislocation is with a fracture and occurs in the bones that are separated, then you proceed to set them, and do as we have said regarding simple injuries in the places where those bones are located.
E guarda e esquiva segon la tua vertut aquel del intrament en las vias de temor segon que a tu es precedida la mia predicacio; quar aquo es milhor a tu deves le tieu Creator, e mays permanent a la tua gloria, e mays saludos al tieu cos verays aquels en le tieu temps.	And guard and avoid, according to your virtue, the use of instruments in ways that cause fear as my teachings have instructed you; for this is better for you to serve your Creator, and more permanent for your glory, and safer for your true body, which you will experience in your time.
Ayssi fineysso las paraulas de Albucasim perfieytament de las quals Dieus ne sia benezeyt.	Thus finely are the words of Albucasis perfectly translated from which God be blessed.
Amen.	Amen.
